[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw06)  [Next](trw08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

faculty, spiritual--An individualized center of God consciousness. The
twelve faculties or ideas in Divine Mind are: faith, strength, wisdom or
judgment, love, power, imagination, understanding, will, order or law,
zeal, renunciation, and life. Man takes control of his faculties through
exercising the will.

There are two ways to develop the spiritual faculties: through the
evolutionary law of experience and trial (the school of the twelve sons
of Jacob); or by the direct power of the Word, or the I AM (the
purifying of the twelve apostles of Jesus). The law of Moses and the
experiences of the Children of Israel under the old dispensation
represent the first; and the transforming power of the true Word, or
gospel of Jesus Christ, as set forth in the New Testament, is the
second. When Divine Mind is looked to as the one and only guide, the
faculties of man are developed in an orderly manner through the power of
the Word. "For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not
under law, but under grace" (Rom. 6:14).

faculties, awakened--Faculties of mind that have been expanded until
they function in harmony with Divine Mind.

failure--Inability, through a lack of power, to make a demonstration.
Seeming failure is often a steppingstone to something higher.

faintheartedness--Uncourageous thoughts, lacking ability and efficiency.

faith--The perceiving power of the mind linked with the power to shape
substance. Spiritual assurance; the power to do the seemingly
impossible. It is a magnetic power that draws unto us our heart's desire
from the invisible spiritual substance. Faith is a deep inner knowing
that that which is sought is already ours for the taking.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

"Now faith is assurance of things hoped for" (Heb. 11:1).

A close analysis shows that faith is the foundation of all that man
does. Jesus spoke of a new condition for the upliftment of the race. He
called it the "kingdom of the heavens." He said it must be built upon
the foundation typified by Peter (rock), who represents faith. This is
proof that faith is closely related to the enduring, firm. unyielding
forms of substance. The development of the faith faculty is a key to
spiritual realization. "According to your faith be it done unto you"
(Matt. 9:29).

Faith in God is the substance of existence. To have faith in God is to
have the faith of God. We must have faith in God as our Father and
source of all the good we desire.

Faith is more than mere belief. It is the very substance of that which
is believed. It works by love. Thoughts of condemnation, enmity, and
resistance must be released and divine love declared; then faith will
work unhindered.

Faith working in spiritual substance accomplishes all things. This is
the faith that co-operates with creative law. When faith is exercised
deep in spiritual consciousness, it finds its abode; and under divine
law, without variation or disappointment, it brings results that are
seemingly miraculous.

faith, blind--An instinctive trust in a power higher than ourselves.
Because blind faith does not understand the principles of Being, it is
liable to discouragement and disappointment.

faith, center of--The pineal gland, located in the middle of the brain,
is the center of faith in the body of man. Concentration of thought on
this center opens the mind of man to spiritual faith.

faith compared with trust--Trust is a weaker brand of faith, but better
than mistrust. As a rule, persons who merely trust the Lord do not
understand divine law. If they had understanding, they would affirm the
presence

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and power of God until the very substance of Spirit would appear in
manifestation.

faith cure--Another name for spiritual healing.

faith, how cultivated--By studying the experiences of Peter (the apostle
representing faith), we obtain suggestions on the development of this
faculty. The vacillating allegiance of Peter to Jesus illustrates the
growth of faith in one who has not developed this faculty. Faith is
built up through denial of all doubt and fear and continuous
affirmations of loyalty to the divine idea, the higher self. One must
have faith in one's spiritual capacity and depend on it in the face of
adverse appearances.

faith in oneself--The ground for man's faith in himself is the truth
that he is a son of God and, as such, he inherits the divine nature. Man
should have faith in himself because he cannot be successful in any line
without such faith.

faith, intellectual--The faith that has its seat of action in the
intellect only. Intellectual man has faith in his art, in his science,
or in his philosophy, which answers his purpose for the time being.

faith of Jesus--Jesus did not claim an exclusive supernatural power,
which we usually accredit to Him. He had explored the ether energy,
which He called the "kingdom of the heavens"; His understanding was
beyond that of the average man. However, He knew and said that other men
could do what He did if they would only have faith. He encouraged His
followers to take Him as a pattern for faith and to use the power of
thought and word. Divine healing is due to the application of the same
law that Jesus used. In most instances, He demanded faith on the part of
those He healed; and with this faith as a point of mental and spiritual
contact, He released the latent energy in the atomic structure of the
ones in need of healing, and they were restored to life and health. "He
that believeth

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than
these shall he do" (John 14:12).

faith, prayer of--The act of mentally taking that which is desired.
Jesus said, "All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye
receive them, and ye shall have them" (Mark 11:24).

faith thinking--The most important power of man is the original
faith-thinking faculty. All of us have the thinking faculty located in
the head, from which we send forth good, bad, and indifferent thoughts.
If we are educated and molded after the average pattern of the human
family, we may live a lifetime and never have an original thought. The
thinking faculty is supplied with the second-hand ideas of our
ancestors, the dominant beliefs of the race, or the threadbare stock of
the ordinary social swim. This is not faith thinking. Faith thinking is
done only by one who has caught sight of the Truth of Being and who
feeds his thinking faculty on images generated in the faith center.
Faith thinking is not merely an intellectual process based on reasoning.
The faith thinker does not compare, analyze, or draw conclusions from
known premises. He does not take appearances into consideration; he is
not biased by precedent. His thinking gives form, without cavil or
question, to ideas that come straight from the eternal fount of wisdom.
His perception impinges on the spiritual, and he knows.

faith, understanding--Faith that functions from Principle. It is based
on knowledge of Truth. It understands the law of mind action; therefore,
it has great strength. To know that certain causes produce certain
results gives a bedrock foundation for faith.

faithless generation--A generation that lacks the spiritual faith and
power to do the works Jesus would have it do, such as healing the sick
and making the blind to see.

fall--A retrogression in consciousness from the pristine

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Christ Mind to the personal and sense mind of the Adam man.

false claims--Those who make the indwelling Spirit of truth their guide
and authority will not be deceived by false claims made either by other
persons or by institutions. The safe way is to trust the Spirit of truth
continually for protection from false beliefs.

family, the Christ--Jesus said: "Who is my mother and my brethren? And
looking round on them that sat round about him, he saith, Behold my
mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same
is my brother, and sister, and mother" (Mark 3:33-35).

family, the universal--If God is the Father of all, then all men and
women are brothers and sisters in a universal family. In the Christ
consciousness we are all one.

famine--Lack of faith in God's power to prosper.

fasting--Denial; abstinence from error thoughts, to the end that we may
meditate on Truth and incorporate it into our consciousness of oneness
with the Father.

fate--"That which is destined or decreed; appointed lot. Fate suggests
inevitability and immutability in strict use, but usually carries no
clear implication of whether it is good or evil" (Webster). Man, through
his thought, is working out his own salvation; he is created in the
image and likeness of God and is finally to reach "the goal unto the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 3:14).

Father--God through His Holy Spirit is the Father.

Father and Son--The Father-Mind is the living Principle, the Absolute,
the Great Unlimited. The Son is the living Word.

Father and Son, result of knowing both--When we are quickened in
spiritual understanding, we experience a renewal of mind and a
transformation of body. The

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

mortal becomes immortal, the corruptible becomes incorruptible. It is
the resurrection into eternal life.

Father of lights--Source of profound understanding, illumination,
wisdom. Through our realization of and meditation on spiritual
illumination, we open the way for these spiritual gifts to be showered
upon us.

Father-Principle--The exact and immutable Principle of Being, lying back
of all existence as cause, and approachable only along lines of perfect
law. It is omnipresent and is not subject to change or open to argument.

Father's house, the--The Christ consciousness. It is the center of man's
consciousness and is made manifest to him by mind processes alone.

favor of God--Good realized through faithful obedience; the orderly
unfoldment in mind and body that results from meditation and prayer; a
blessing that comes to us through obedience to Spirit. The bringing
about of an inner spiritual strength, resulting in the development of
all parts of mind and body.

fear--"Painful emotion marked by alarm; dread; disquiet" (Webster). Fear
is one of the most subtle and destructive errors that the carnal mind in
man experiences. Fear is a paralyzer of mental action; it weakens both
mind and body. Fear throws dust in our eyes and hides the mighty
spiritual forces that are always with us. Blessed are those who deny
ignorance and fear and affirm the presence and power of Spirit.

fear, how to overcome--Fear is cast out by perfect love. To know divine
love is to be selfless, and to be selfless is to be without fear. The
God-conscious person is filled with quietness and confidence.

fear of God--"Only fear Jehovah, and serve him in truth with all your
heart" (I Sam. 12:24). In this scriptural passage the word fear is used
with Webster's meaning: "Awe; profound reverence, especially for the
Supreme Being."

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

fearfulness--State of mind that is full of fear. Fearfulness is a
parasite; it drives away divine guidance and produces weakness of the
heart.

feast--Appropriation in a large measure; that is, laying hold of divine
potentialities.

feast in Jerusalem--A receptive state of mind toward all spiritual good.
It is the realization of the unfailing substance of Divine Mind. A great
peace is there--"the peace of God, which passeth all understanding
(Phil. 4:7)--and a welling up of an indescribable substance that fills
the whole being with satisfaction.

feast, marriage--Conscious union between spirit or mind and body in the
silent influx of substance; the union of man with Spirit. A thirsting
for things of Spirit is necessary before one can come to the spiritual
marriage feast. Great desire for the light and purity of Spirit is the
power that prepares man for this greatest of feasts. (see Matt. 22:1-15)

feast, Sabbath--The inflow of spiritual substance that we realize when
we enter the silence.

feeding the five thousand--In the universal Mind is a substance that
Jesus called the "Father," which is also the seed of all visible
substance. It is the only real substance because it is unchangeable,
while visible substance is in constant transition.

An idea is purely spiritual and can be apprehended only by the mind. It
is never visible to the eye but can be sensed by man through any of his
spiritual functions. When the attention has been centered on the idea of
substance long enough and strongly enough, a consciousness of substance
is generated; and, by the powers of the various faculties of the mind in
right relation, visible substance is formed. In this way, Jesus brought
into visibility the loaves and fishes to feed the five thousand.

feeling--Feeling is external to thought; behind every feeling or emotion
there lies thought, which is its direct

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

cause. To erase a feeling, a change of thought is required.

feet--Represent the phase of the understanding that connects us with the
outer or manifest world and reveals the right relationship toward
worldly conditions in general. We can take possession of all substance
that we comprehend and understand, in the name of I AM. This is the
meaning of Josh. 1:3: "Every place that the sole of your foot shall
tread upon, to you have I given it, as I spake unto Moses."

feet, washing of--The denial of materiality is illustrated in Jesus'
washing of the apostles' feet (John 13:5-10). Even Peter (who represents
faith) must be cleansed from belief in the reality of material
conditions. To wash another's feet seems a menial thing, but in this
humble way Jesus taught and exemplified the willingness of divine love
to serve, so that man may be redeemed from the pride of the flesh.

feminine--The divine feminine in man is the mother phase of Being. God,
through His Holy Spirit, is the Father.

field--Outside the house of God. "He that soweth the good seed is the
Son of man; and the field is the world" (Matt. 13:37-38).

fiery furnace--A state of mind in which one goes through a purifying
process, and evil and error are destroyed.

fire--Symbolizes cleansing and purification, but it is more than a
symbol. Material fire is the symbol, and the fire of Spirit is the
reality. The whole universe is alive with a divine, living, spiritual
energy that consumes all the dross of sense and materiality. It is a
fire that burns eternally. Because this is true, some have assumed that
disobedient, sinful persons are to live forever in everlasting torment.
But if the fire is eternal, the dross is not, and when the error is
consumed the burning stops. The fire consumes only when it meets
anything unlike

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

itself. In purified man it is manifested as his eternal life.

fire of God--The Word of God in action. It burns out the dross of
negative consciousness and reveals the Christ.

fire, tongues of--Illumination of thought, in demonstration of Spirit's
presence and power.

firmament--Faith in mind power, a firm, unwavering place in
consciousness. The firmament in the midst of the waters is an idea of
confidence or faith in the invisible.

first-born--The "first-born" of every state of consciousness is the
personal I. When the flood of light from the universal is let in through
our declaration of the one wisdom and one love, this I of every mortal
state of consciousness is slain, and there is a "great cry in Egypt; for
there was not a house where there was not one dead" (Exod. 12:30).

fish--Represent ideas of multiplication and fecundity. Accounts in which
Jesus figures as a party to fish eating are symbolical of the mental
side of eating, which is the appropriation of ideas.

The reason Jesus so often used fish to illustrate His teaching is that
He was a living demonstration of ideas, and all that He did was in the
realm of ideas rather than in the realm of effects. Fish represent ideas
in which there is great possibility of increase; Jesus used these ideas
to represent the inexhaustible, everywhere present abundance.

fishers of men--Spiritually quickened men who are strongly fortified in
Truth and able to help others to find the light.

flame of fire--Light of understanding that flames up in the heart, yet
does not consume substance. (see burning bush)

flash of intelligence--The musical genius says he hears

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the music in a flash and is often at his wit's end to transcribe it fast
enough. Many an immortal poem or prose work has been flashed from the
mind of the author without any apparent effort on his part. But if all
the prayers and mind efforts of literary geniuses were inquired into, it
would be found that there had been heroic mental effort somewhere at
some time. The realization of perfection takes root in the mind and may
come forth in a flash.

flesh--Mortal consciousness expressing itself through appetite. It is
overcome by denying that appetite is physical and by affirming it to be
spiritual.

flesh, carnal or sensual--A malformation of the substance idea of Being.
It must be transformed by right conception of divine perfection before
the mortal can put on the immortal.

fleshpots of Egypt--The pleasures of sense.

flocks--Symbolical of thoughts. "Tend the flock of God which is among
you" (I Pet. 5:2).

food--A symbol of appropriation. Bread represents the flesh; it is an
outer form of the inner substance. (see drink of the cup)

All food is primarily mental, and in the process of digestion and
assimilation it becomes part of the body structure, making cells like
itself in character. If we wish to bring into manifestation the perfect
spiritual body, we should feed on words of Truth--foods that are
spiritual in character--avoiding all that carry with them into the
system a mental atmosphere of sensuality, fear, or any other discord.

foods, solid--The deeper truths that require much study, meditation,
prayer, and concentration in order that they may be appropriated and
assimilated by the mind.

food, spiritual--Thoughts and words of Truth; the word of God.

"food which perisheth"--The race consciousness

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

strives for the things of sense, but one who has found the real
substance and source of supply proclaims, "Work not for the food which
perisheth, but for the food which abideth unto eternal life" (John
6:27).

forces, creative--Active physical or mental forces, having the capacity
to produce or to create.

forehead--The seat of perception. The forehead is the center of
consciousness, which the understanding of Truth seals; that is, it
secretly unites the consciousness with Christ.

forerunner of Spirit--As symbolized by John the Baptist, the perception
of Truth that prepares the way for Spirit through a letting go of old
concepts and beliefs.

forgiveness--A process of giving up the false for the true; erasing sin
and error from the mind and body. It is closely related to repentance,
which is a turning from belief in sin to belief in God and
righteousness. A sin is forgiven when one ceases to sin, and true
forgiveness is only established through renewing the mind and body with
thoughts and words of Truth.

Forgiveness really means the giving up of something. When you forgive
yourself, you cease doing the things that you should not do. Jesus said
that man has power to forgive sin. Sin is the falling short of divine
law, and repentance and forgiveness are the only means that man has of
getting out of sin and its effect and coming into harmony with the law.

It is through forgiveness that true spiritual healing is accomplished.
Forgiveness removes the errors of the mind, and bodily harmony results
in consonance with divine law.

The law is Truth, and Truth is all that is good. There is no power or no
reality in sin. If sin were real and enduring, like goodness and Truth,
it could not be forgiven but would hold its victim forever. When we
enter into the understanding of the real and the unreal, a great light
dawns on us, and we see what Jesus meant when He

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

said, "The Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins."

forgiveness, necessity of--Our first work in any demonstration is to
contact God; therefore, we must forgive all men their transgressions.
Through the divine law of forgiveness we cleanse our mind so that the
Father can forgive us.

form--"The shape and structure of anything" (Webster). All forms are
manifestations of ideas. Back of the universe are both the original
creative idea and the cosmic rays that form into earthly things.

fornication--Debasement of the spiritual nature, caused by functioning
in carnal consciousness.

fornication, abstaining from--Refusing to entertain mortal tendencies
and dwelling in spiritual consciousness.

forsaking all for Christ--Giving up everything pertaining to the
personal man, so that the Mind of Christ may be perfectly incorporated
into consciousness.

fourth dimension--A transcendent realm that Jesus called the "kingdom of
the heavens." Here one can discern the trend of spiritual forces and see
with the spiritual vision of the Christ Mind.

The fourth dimension (which embraces and encompasses the other three
dimensions) is also realization, the doing away with time and space and
all conditions. The human mind, with its limited reasoning faculties, is
bound by time, space, and conditions and can get no farther into the
spiritual than reason will take it, but when we go beyond reason into
the realm of realization, then we have attained the consciousness of
pure being, the fourth-dimension mind.

frankincense--"A fragrant gum resin" (Webster). Metaphysically, it
represents in man the transmutation of the material consciousness into
the spiritual.

freedom--The quality or state of being without thought or restraint,
bondage, limitation, or repression; having

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

a sense of complete well-being. It is a result of regulating one's life
according to Principle, not according to what anyone else may think or
say.

We can never know the full meaning of freedom until we abide in the
Christ consciousness. Without prayer and spiritual meditation there can
be no concept of spiritual freedom and, therefore, no demonstration of
it. It is gained only through spiritual development gained in long hours
of communion with God in the silence. Liberation from bondage comes as
we seek first the perfect Mind of Christ. "If therefore the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed" (John 8:36).

free will--Man's inherent freedom to act as he determines. There can be
no perfect expression without perfect freedom of will. If man determines
to act in accord with divine law, he builds harmony, health, happiness,
and eternal life, which is heaven.

fruitfulness--The rich consciousness man develops as the result of high
realizations of Truth.

fruit of the vine--The "fruit of the vine," which man drinks anew in the
Father's kingdom, is the consciousness of spiritual life direct from the
Fountainhead. (see Matt. 26:29)

fulfill--"To carry into effect; to realize or manifest completely"
(Webster). To fulfill the law of his being, man must proclaim the true
word and thought of unity with God.

fulfillment of righteousness--Attained through affirmation of Truth and
denial of error. As man dwells "in the secret place of the Most High,"
"under the shadow of the Almighty" (Psalms 91:1, 2), he will fulfill all
righteousness.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: G](trw08)
