[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw11)  [Next](trw13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

karma--"The whole ethical consequence of one's acts considered as fixing
one's lot in the future existence" (Webster). The accumulated effects of
the sins of past lives; the burden that those who believe in karma
expect to carry for ages, or until they work out of it. They are weary
treadmill travelers from birth to death, and from death to birth. There
is no such hopeless note in the teachings of Jesus. He came to bring a
full consciousness of abundant life, complete forgiveness, redemption
from all sin, and victory over death and the grave, thus delivering

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

man from any occasion for re-embodiment and from all bondage to karma.

"keep my word"--(John 8:51). Treasure the words of Jesus as a saving
balm in time of need.

"keys of the kingdom of heaven"--(Matt. 16:19). Affirmation and denial.
(see affirmation; denial)

king (righteous)--The executive faculty in every man whose life is
guided, governed, and directed by Spirit.

"king of the Jews, this is the"--(Luke 23:38). This means that the word
of the I AM goes forth as a ruling suggestion in the spiritual and
intellectual. In the physical is goes forth in the individual
consciousness, but the doing away with the limitations of mortal mind
pulls down all walls of partition, and the whole man accepts the word of
Truth.

kingdom of God--The Christ consciousness, kingdom of heaven.

kingdom of heaven--The kingdom of heaven is the realm of divine ideas,
producing their expression, perfect harmony. It is within man.

kingdom within--That realm in man's consciousness where he knows and
understands God.

knowing--There is in man a knowing capacity transcending intellectual
knowledge. Nearly everyone has at some time touched this hidden wisdom
and has been more or less astonished at its revelations. The knowing
that man receives from the direct fusion of the Mind of God with his
mind is real spiritual knowing.

knowledge--"Acquaintance with fact; hence, scope of information"
(Webster). Intellectual knowledge is independent of feeling; it is
literal knowledge without consideration of the Spirit. Man can store up
a great fund of knowledge gleaned from books and teachers, but the most
unlettered man who sits at the feet of his Lord in the silence comes
forth radiant with the true knowledge, that of Spirit.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L](trw13)
