[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw18)  [Next](trw20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

race consciousness--The human race has formed laws of physical birth and
death, laws of sickness and physical inability, laws making food the
source of bodily existence, laws of mind that recognize no other source
of existence except the physical. The sum total of these laws forms a
race consciousness separate from and independent of creative Mind. When
creative Mind sought to help men spiritually, the mind of the flesh
opposed it and made every effort to solve its problems in its own way.
The great need of the human family is mind control. Jesus showed us that
mastery is attained through realization of the power of Spirit.

race errors--Erroneous race thoughts that bind mankind to sin, disease,
poverty, war, calamity, and death.

race mind--Totality of beliefs, thoughts, memories, feelings, and
experiences of the race. Man has built into the race mind a
consciousness of corruptible flesh instead of the inherent incorruptible
substance of God-Mind.

radiation--An extension of consciousness. Jesus' soul radiation or aura
was so powerful that it perpetually stimulates to greater achievement,
and thrills with new life all who enter its sphere of influence. (see
aura)

rain--Metaphysically, an outpouring of Spirit that constantly

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

refreshes and enriches man's developing thoughts. The descent of
potential ideas into substance. The rain that "watereth the earth"
represents the love of God, which comes into mind when summoned and
needed.

raising of Lazarus--The restoration in consciousness of the idea of
youth, which is asleep in the subconsciousness.

rats--Represent destructive, undermining, gnawing thoughts.

raven, going forth of a--The raven's going forth represents the reaching
out of the thought from within to connect with the outer world. There is
an individual consciousness, which is the ark, and a universal
consciousness, which is the heavens and the earth.

rays--All mental action radiates rays of light. Clairvoyants and
psychics have long claimed that they can see these rays surrounding not
only human beings, but animals, plants, and even stones. Their claims
have been considered chimerical until in the last few years, when
science found that it can measure the force of these invisible rays. The
character of the thoughts colors the emanations of these rays. If the
thoughts pertain to the things of sense, the rays are dark and weak; if
the affectional and intellectual nature is active, they become highly
colored and forceful. When the mind is exalted in prayer, a dazzling
light radiates from all parts of the body, but especially from the head.

rays, healing--Spiritual rays superior to the ultraviolet rays that come
from the sun. They heal both mind and body.

reality--That which is abiding, eternal, and unchangeable, the same
"yesterday and to-day, yea and for ever" (Heb. 13:8). The basic
principles of mathematics and music are real, because they are not
subject to change. A wrong application of their principles may produce
discord, but the principles are not disturbed. God is the one harmonious

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Principle underlying all being and the reality out of which all that is
eternal comes.

All causes are in mind. Error thoughts produce the mental and physical
inharmonies called disease. These effects are not enduring and eternal.
Error can be erased from the mind and be made to disappear from the
body.

realization--The deep inner conviction and assurance of the fulfillment
of an ideal. It means at-one-ment, completion, perfection, wholeness,
repose, resting in God. It is the dawning of Truth in the consciousness.
When realization takes place, one abides in the light of God-Mind. It is
the inner conviction that prayer has been answered, although there is as
yet no outer manifestation.

The supreme realization is unity with God-Mind, complete oneness with
the Christ consciousness. This highest realization is taking place more
widely today among men than at any time in all history. Jesus fully
attained this supreme realization.

realm, spiritual--The higher realm of consciousness built in accordance
with the Christ ideal. The realm of Spirit is wherever God is working to
express Himself. When man as principle becomes the perfect image and
likeness of God, no other realm will appear to have being.

rebellion--Open defiance and resistance to an authority to which one
owes allegiance. One rebels because he believes he is not being rightly
governed, his conditions are not satisfactory. Man has been taught that
God brought on him sickness, poverty, inharmony, and that these
conditions are the will of God. While he recognizes that God is supreme
ruler and governor of all things, man rebells at such conditions being
imposed on him. As soon as a man comes into the understanding that his
own thoughts and words are the cause of the conditions in his life, he
no longer rebels and blames God. He uses his creative thought power, he
sets the Word into right activity, and good comes into his life.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

receiving--(see giving)

receptivity, spiritual--The attitude of mind that awaits the higher way
as a little child awaits the helping hand of a parent. It is not the
arbitrary disciplinarian, but the loving, tender, understanding heart
that in visible life lightens the intricate problems that perplex the
mind. When one who is receptive and obedient gives himself unreservedly
to Spirit and receives without antagonism its guidance, he is delighted
with the possibilities that are disclosed to him in caring for his
physical and spiritual needs. He then begins to realize what Jesus meant
when He said, "If any man would come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross, and follow me" (Matt. 16:24).

recompense--The satisfaction and uplift that one feels after a
realization of Truth.

re-creation--The process of redemption; a gradual transformation that
takes place as man pays the price, gives up self, and allows Spirit to
work in mind and body.

redemption--The process by which the life and substance of man's lesser
self are brought to conform to the standards of his spiritual self. The
body is redeemed from destruction by attaining spiritual consciousness
on earth. "For this corruptible must put on incorruption" (I Cor.
15:53).

regeneration--A change in which abundant spiritual life, even eternal
life, is incorporated into the body. The transformation that takes place
through bringing all the forces of mind and body to the support of the
Christ ideal. The unification of Spirit, soul, and body in spiritual
oneness.

Regeneration begins its work in the conscious mind and completes it in
the subconsciousness. The first step is cleansing or denial in which all
error thoughts are renounced. This includes forgiveness for sins
committed and a general clearing of the whole consciousness. After

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the way has been prepared, the second step takes place. This is the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit.

reincarnation--When a soul leaves the body, it rests for a season. Then
innate desire for material expression asserts itself, and the ego seeks
the primal cell and builds another body. This is reincarnation.
Reincarnation will continue until the ego awakens to the Christ Mind and
through it builds an imperishable body.

The law of Being is broken by sin and death. Resurrection or
regeneration in this body here and now--not reincarnation--is the aim of
overcomers. Reincarnation is the result of man's use of the great forces
of Mind, enabling an ego or soul that has been separated from the
vehicle of expression (the body) again to attract to it the necessary
substance to reconstruct the body-consciousness and to have another
opportunity for the demonstration of the Truth of Being, but
reincarnation is not a part of the divine plan and does not lift man out
of mortal limitations. It is not an aid to spiritual growth, but merely
a makeshift until full Truth is discerned.

relaxation--A letting go of tenseness in mind and body. Abatement of
strain. Loosening the tight mental grip we have on ourselves in order
that the healing Christ life may flow freely through our being. "Come
unto me . . . and I will give you rest" (Matt. 11:28).

religion--A systematic exposition on the awareness of a deity who is the
supreme ruler of heaven and earth; that which arouses reverence and love
for a supreme being. There is a wide range of religious experience
between the blindly groping faith that caused men to pass their children
through the fire as sacrifice to their deities, and the divine
consciousness of Jesus, who submitted His body to the purifying fire of
the Spirit and came forth alive with a life that never dies.

In the study of things pertaining to religion we should keep in mind the
three activities of consciousness: spiritual,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

psychical, and physical. The spiritual is the realm of absolute
principles; the psychical is the realm of thought images; the physical
is the realm of manifestation. The well-balanced, thoroughly developed
man, of which Jesus is the type, comprehends and consciously adjusts his
spirit, soul, and body as a whole, and thereby fulfills the law of his
being. Those who are on the way to this attainment have various
experiences, which are symbolically set forth in the Scriptures.

renunciation--A letting go of old thoughts in order that new thoughts
may find place in consciousness. A healthy state of mind is attained
when the thinker willingly lets go the old thoughts and takes on the
new. This is illustrated by the inlet and outlet of a pool of water. The
center of renunciation, sometimes called elimination, in the lower part
of the abdomen, carries forward the work of elimination of error
thoughts from the mind and waste from the body.

repentance--A turning from a belief in sin and error to a belief in God
and righteousness; a reversal of mind and heart in the direction of the
All-Good. When we repent, we break with mortal thought and ascend into a
spiritual thought realm, the kingdom of God.

The Greek word metanoia is translated "repentance," which has been
interpreted to mean an admission to God of sorrow for past sin and a
resolve to be good in the future. The field of action for that which has
been assumed to be goodness in the sight of God has nearly always been
in conduct.

There is always hope for the repentant sinner. A repentant state of mind
is an exceedingly good state for one who has been on the error side. If
you find yourself suffering the result of transgressed law, begin at
once a righteous repentance. As soon as you repent and recognize that
the way of Spirit is the way of pleasantness, your sins are forgiven
you, and you are made whole and well.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

repetitions, vain--When we rehearse affirmations just because they are
given to us to hold, with no thought of their inner reality, or if we
are in a doubtful state of mind, they become "vain repetitions." It is
true that a declaration of Truth may not at first repeating find
lodgment in consciousness and that we may repeat it over and over before
it becomes a living word, but the attitude of mind as we go through this
process is the seed that bears fruit, the assurance of the harvest.
Nothing outside of man can affect him when he is in contact with his
inner spiritual source.

resistance--The greatest disintegrating element in the human
consciousness is resistance. Beware of every form of fighting, and of
all thoughts of a destructive character. Thoughts build or destroy, and
they will work in your mind and body in an adverse way and tear down the
good you desire to build up if you do not form them with care.

A mental state of resistance indicates an unyielding personal will. Evil
has no power except that which man gives it by his thought. Resisting
evil is a way of affirming its power. A positive, fearless attitude in
facing the appearance of evil overcomes it, and this attitude comes from
the understanding that evil has no power.

restitution--The resurrection of man to the divine image and likeness in
mind and body and to the dominion that has been his from the beginning.
The restitution work also includes the earth, which is to be redeemed
from the curse that fell on it through sin. It is to blossom and bring
forth and be a paradise, a fitting home for redeemed man.

restlessness--The unsatisfied longing of a man for God. Restlessness
cannot be satisfied by change of climate or environment or by travel or
by any other outward change. Only by a man's finding his center in God
can restlessness and discontent be satisfied.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"For he satisfieth the longing soul,  
And the hungry soul he filleth with good"  
(Psalms 107:9).  
</span>

</div>

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

restorative power of nature--The term given by doctors to the Spirit of
health, which is always right at hand awaiting opportunity to enter in
to make whole and to harmonize all discord in the body.

resurrection--The restoring of mind and body to their original, undying
state. This is accomplished by the realization that God is Spirit and
that God created man with power like that which He Himself possesses.
When man realizes this, his mind and body automatically become immortal.
"If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in
you, he that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead shall give life also
to your mortal bodies through his Spirit that dwelleth in you" (Rom.
8:11). The word resurrection also suggests that there has been a falling
short of the divine standard; therefore, the necessity of being restored
and revived. Through resurrection man becomes an inhabitant here and now
of "a new heaven and a new earth" (Rev. 21:1).

Jesus was raised from the dead. He overcame death in the body. "For
since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead."
Physical death is not necessary. "We all shall not sleep, but we shall
all be changed" (I Cor. 15:21, 51).

The power of the resurrection is the Christ. "I am the resurrection, and
the life" (John 11:25). This resurrection is not of the future, "but
hath now been manifested by . . . our Saviour Christ Jesus, who
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light" (II Tim.
1:10).

Christ, absolute Principle, the God-idea man, is the true resurrecting
power and life in each of us here and now. Jesus resurrected His body
through the spiritual I AM dwelling in Him.

The resurrection takes place in us every time we rise to Jesus'
realization of the perpetual indwelling life that is connecting us with
the Father. A new flood of life comes

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

to all who open their minds and their bodies to the living word of God.

revelation--An unveiling, a disclosure of Truth, making known that which
is hidden. The revelation of Christ to all men is the ultimate
revelation.

Divine revelation is much more common than is understood. The Spirit of
truth is revealing the hidden wisdom to thousands on every hand. Poets
and writers of Truth are being inspired of the Most High. Quiet citizens
in every walk of life are the recipients of the divine word. Every man
who has earnestly asked for divine guidance, or who has earnestly
desired to do right in the sight of God and man, is being taught by the
Holy Spirit.

reverence--The attitude of reverence is an important feature in
developing the Christ consciousness. Without it the mind loses a certain
necessary connection with Spirit and lacks that central poise of faith
that gives a religious tenor to the process.

rich young man--(Mark 10:17-27). Personality; the state of consciousness
in man that lays hold of the world of form, seeking satisfaction in
personal possessions and in fulfilling the letter of the law.

righteousness--A state of harmony established in consciousness through
the right use of God-given attributes. It leads directly to eternal
life. Truth working in consciousness brings forth the perfect salvation
of the whole man--Spirit, soul, and body--and righteousness (right
relation) is expressed in all his affairs.

right side--The "right side" (John 21:6) is always on the side of Truth,
the side of power. Whenever you, the master, are there, the nets are
filled with ideas, because you are in touch with the infinite storehouse
of wisdom.

rites--The rites and ceremonies of the priests in the tabernacle or
temple represent the action of spiritual forces in developing the body.
The great object of man's existence in planetary consciousness is to
build a body after the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

ideals given by the Lord. The physical body is the tabernacle or
temporary structure in and through which the enduring body is formed,
and regeneration is a combination of chemical, mental, and spiritual
processes.

river of life--The source of the natural healing impulse that constantly
reconstructs the organism. When a man in faith makes intimate connection
between his mind and the Father's, he enters into the river of life. And
he has the ability to take others with him into the waters that cleanse,
purify, and vitalize.

rod--Metaphysically, the power of the I AM in spiritual consciousness; I
AM mastery and dominion.

roll, burning of--The burning of the roll (Jer. 36th chapter) represents
a denial by the spiritual thought working in consciousness. To go
forward to more advanced demonstrations, we must give up the present
ruling ideas.

When we reach a point in our ongoing where there is necessity of greater
spirituality, our own meditations reveal to us that the way is through
reforming our methods of thought and life. This is the intuitive
perception of the progressive trend of all things, which is symbolized
in the burning of the "roll" by the king. The lesson is that we shall
read out of the "roll" of the higher wisdom the new revelations of Truth
that are being constantly presented to us and be open and receptive to
divine evolution.

room, upper--The storehouse of ideas. The I AM center is in the crown of
the head and dispenses the substance and life and intelligence of
Spirit.

rulership--In personal rulership the great ones exercise authority; he
who rules lords it over his subjects. In spiritual rulership he who
serves best is greatest and is ruler through true merit. (see Matt.
20:25-28)

Jesus is the greatest ruler the world has ever known because He served
humanity best, even to overcoming death itself; through His
demonstration the way to eternal life was opened to humanity.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: S](trw20)
