[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw22)  [Next](trw24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

vegetarian--One who abstains from eating animal food or products. "And
God said, Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed, which is
upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in which is the fruit of
a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for food" (Gen. 1:29)

Vegetarianism is one of the ways to real health, because it requires, in
a measure, the keeping of the spiritual law

veil of the Temple--That in the body which has shut out the light of
Spirit and has hindered man from consciously standing in the presence of
God. The rending of the veil of the Temple pictures a letting go of the
belief in the reality of material consciousness. The relinquishment of
the soul to God is the final giving up of all human ambitions and aims.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

verities, eternal--The truths of Being, which are without beginning and
without end; facts of existence.

vessels, holy--(I Kings 8:4). The thoughts that lie back of and form the
various organs of the body. The vessels that had been taken from the
Temple by Nebuchadnezzar and returned by Cyrus (Ezra 16:8) represent our
capacity to comprehend and our ability to measure and appreciate life,
love, and Truth.

vessels of silver--Fruit of one's experience in the sense consciousness
added to one's innate spiritual consciousness.

vesture of Jesus--(John 19:23). Symbolizes the consciousness of unity,
which is the inner conviction of all things. (see coat without seam)

vibrations--The rate at which all forces move. One of the greatest
discoveries of all ages is that of physical science which shows that all
things have their source and being in vibrations. What Jesus taught so
profoundly in symbols about the riches of the kingdom of the heavens has
now been proved true.

The whole universe is in vibration, and that vibration is under law.
Chaos would result if the law were not supreme. Each particular thing
has its rate of vibration. Heat, light, and color are different rates of
vibration in one field of primal energy. Different colors are caused by
the different frequencies of the vibrations as they strike the eye. But
what causes vibration? We answer, mind.

vibrations, thought--Energies sent out by the force and power of
thought.

vine and branches--The I AM within us is the vine, our faculties are the
branches, and the perfect body is the fruit. The life current as it
comes from the universal source is combined in vine, branches, and
fruit, and it is on this free-flowing inner force that we fix our
attention when we demonstrate the power of Spirit. Material symbols are
likely to be misleading unless we remember always to get the spiritual
import of their I AM application.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

vineyard--The fruit of the vine is a symbol of life. Jesus said, "I am
the vine." The vineyard represents manifest man, or humanity which was
planted in perfection, and perfection is its destiny.

virgins--The ten virgins represent the senses. The senses are five. in
number but have a twofold action--five in the inner realm and five in
the outer world. The way to supply oil for the lamps of the virgins,
even of the foolish ones is to affirm that the life source, Spirit, from
which comes the power of hearing, smelling, seeing, feeling, and
tasting, is not material but spiritual. Each sense has an inner
counterpart, which is connected with the one life, from which it draws
its oil, or life current. There is a soul eye and a soul ear, and these
on their inner side are in direct contact with Spirit. But their outer
side is in touch with the intellect and through the intellect with the
formed organ of sense in the body. It is on this intellectual plane that
mortal mind has its citadel and causes so much trouble with the outer
organs.

vision, spiritual--Seeing God as the foundation of all, the sources of
all, and the substance of all. Seeing the good, the true, and the
beautiful everywhere. In this manner is the eye single and vision
perfected.

voice--"Faculty or power of utterance" (Webster). The power center in
the throat controls all the vibratory energies of this organism. It is
the open door between the formless and the formed worlds of vibrations
pertaining to the expression of sound. Every word that goes forth
receives its specific character from the power faculty. Therefore, the
voice is the most direct avenue of expression of consciousness.

Spirit is the "still small voice" in every man that hears and blesses
and uplifts. Spirit is made manifest as perfect wholeness through the
illumined mind.

The art of listening to the inner voice and obeying it is well-worth
developing. Then it is that the Christ of

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

one's life calls out, "Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for
a draught." When the thinking faculty is obedient and does as it is
told, it is always rewarded with a multitude of new ideas (fishes).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: W](trw24)
