[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070282)  [Next](0070284) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XX.—Of Offences, and the Mercy of God.

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p1"></span>If He is able to pardon, He is therefore
able also to be angry. Why, then, some one will say, does it often
occur, that they who sin are prosperous, and they who live piously are
wretched? Because fugitives and disinherited <span
id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) persons live without restraint, and
they who are under the discipline of a father or master live in a more
strict and frugal manner. For virtue is proved and fixed <span
id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) by means of ills; vices by means of
pleasure. Nor, however, ought he who sins to hope for lasting impunity,
because there is no lasting happiness.  

> <span id="iii.iii.xx-p3.2"></span> “But, in truth, the last day is
> always to be looked for by man and no one ought to be called happy
> before his death and last funeral rites,” <span
> id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769)  

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p5"></span>as the not inelegant poet says. It is
the end which proves happiness, and no one is able to escape the
judgment of God, either when alive or after death. For He has the power
both to cast down the living from on high, and to punish the dead with
eternal torments. Nay, he says, if God is angry, He ought to have
inflicted vengeance at once, and to have punished every one according to
his desert. But (it is replied) if He had done this, no one would
survive. For there is no one who offends in no respect, and there are
many things which excite to the commission of sin—age, intemperance,
want, opportunity, reward. To such an extent is the frailty of the flesh
with which we are clothed liable to sin, that unless God were indulgent
to this necessity, perhaps too few would live. On this account He is
most patient, and restrains His anger. For because there is in Him
perfect virtue, it follows of necessity that His patience also is
perfect, which is itself also a virtue. How many men, from having been
sinners, have afterwards become righteous; from being injurious, have
become good; from being wicked, have become temperate! How many who were
in early life base, and condemned by the judgment of all, afterwards
have turned out praiseworthy? But it is plain that this could not happen
if punishment followed every offence.  

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p6"></span><span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="iii.iii.xx-Page_277"></span>The public laws condemn those who are
manifestly guilty; but there are great numbers whose offences are
concealed, great numbers who restrain the accuser either by entreaties
or by reward, great numbers who elude justice by favour or influence.
But if the divine censure should condemn all those who escape the
punishment of men, there would be few or even no men on the earth. In
short, even that one reason for destroying the human race might have
been a just one, that men, despising the living God, pay divine honour
to earthly and frail images, as though they were of heaven, adoring
works made by human hands. And though God their Creator made them of
elevated countenance and upright figure, and raised them to the
contemplation of the heaven and the knowledge of God, they have
preferred, like cattle, to bend themselves to the earth. <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) For he is low, and curved, and bent
downward, who, turning away from the sight of heaven and God his Father,
worships things of the earth, which he ought to have trodden upon, that
is, things made and fashioned from earth. Therefore, amidst such great
impiety and such great sins of men, the forbearance of God attains this
object, that men, condemning the errors of their past life, correct
themselves. In short, there are many who are just and good; and these,
having laid aside the worship of earthly things, acknowledge the majesty
of the one and only God. But though the forbearance of God is very great
and most useful; yet, although late, He punishes the guilty, and does
not suffer them to proceed further, when He sees that they are
incorrigible.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[276:1768](0070283.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>Abdicati.  

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[276:1769](0070283.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>Constat.  

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[276:1770](0070283.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p4.1"></span>Ovid., <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p4.2"></span>Metam., iii. 153.  

> <span id="iii.iii.xx-p4.3"></span> <span
> id="iii.iii.xx-p4.5"></span> \[<span
> id="iii.iii.xx-p4.6"></span>“<span id="iii.iii.xx-p4.7"></span>Ultima
> semper   
> <span id="iii.iii.xx-p4.9"></span>Expectanda dies homini est; dicique
> beatus   
> <span id="iii.iii.xx-p4.11"></span>Ante obitum nemo,”<span
> id="iii.iii.xx-p4.12"></span> etc.\]   

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[277:1771](0070283.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="iii.iii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xx-p7"></span> \[The degradation of the mind of man to
the worship of stocks and stones impresses our author as against
nature.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXI.—Of the anger of God and man](0070284)
