[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070140)  [Next](0070142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Of the Ways, and of Vices and Virtues; And of the Rewards of Heaven and the Punishments of Hell.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p1"></span>There are two ways, <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) O Emperor <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p2.2"></span>Constantine, by which human life must
proceed—the one which leads to heaven, the other which sinks to hell;
and these <span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p2.3"></span>ways poets have
introduced in their poems, and philosophers in their disputations. And
indeed philosophers have represented the one as belonging to virtues,
the other to vices; and they have represented that which belongs to
virtues as steep and rugged at the first entrance, in which if any one,
having overcome the difficulty, has climbed to the summit, they say that
he afterwards has a level path, a bright and pleasant plain, and that he
enjoys abundant and delightful fruits of his labours; but that those
whom the difficulty of the first approach has deterred, glide and turn
aside into the way of vices, which at its first entrance appears to be
pleasant and much more beaten, but afterwards, when they have advanced
in it a little further, that the appearance of its pleasantness is
withdrawn, and that there arises a steep way, now rough with stones, now
overspread with thorns, now interrupted by deep waters or violent with
torrents, so that they must be in difficulty, hesitate, slip about, and
fall. And all these things are brought forward that it may appear that
there are very great labours in undertaking virtues, but that when they
are gained there are the greatest advantages, and firm and incorruptible
pleasures; but that vices ensnare the minds of men with certain natural
blandishments, and lead them captivated by the appearance of empty
pleasures to bitter griefs and miseries,—an altogether wise discussion,
if they knew the forms and limits of the virtues themselves. For they
had not learned either what they are, or what reward awaits them from
God: but this we will show in these two books.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p3"></span>But these men, because they were
ignorant or in doubt that the souls of men are immortal, estimated both
virtues and vices by earthly honours or punishments. Therefore all this
discussion respecting the two ways <span
id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) has reference to frugality and
luxury. For they say that the course of human life resembles the letter
Y, because every one of men, when he has reached the threshold of early
youth, and has arrived at the place “where the way divides itself into
two parts,” <span id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) is in doubt, and
hesitates, and does not know to which side he should rather turn
himself. If he shall meet with a guide who may direct him wavering to
better things—that is, if he shall learn philosophy or eloquence, or
some honourable arts by which he may turn to good conduct, <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) which cannot take place without
great labour—they say that he will lead a life of honour and abundance;
but if he shall not meet with a teacher of temperance, <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) that he falls into the way on the
left hand, which assumes the appearance of the better,—that is, he gives
himself up to idleness, sloth, and luxury, which seem pleasant for a
time to one who is ignorant of true goods, but that afterwards, having
lost all his dignity and property, he will live in all wretchedness and
ignominy. Therefore they referred the end of those ways <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) to the body, and to this life which
we lead on earth. The poets perhaps did better, who would have it that
this twofold way was in the lower regions; but they are deceived in
this, that they proposed these ways to the dead. Both therefore spoke
with truth, but yet both incorrectly; for the ways themselves ought to
have been referred to life, their ends to death. We therefore speak
better and more truly, who say that the two ways <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) belong to heaven and hell, because
immortality is promised to the righteous, and everlasting punishment is
threatened to the unrighteous.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p10"></span>But I will explain how these ways
either exalt to heaven or thrust down to hell, and I will set forth what
these virtues are of which the philosophers were ignorant; then I will
show what are their rewards, and also what are vices, and what their
punishments. For perhaps some one may expect that I shall speak
separately of vices and virtues; whereas, when we discuss the subject of
good or evil, that which is contrary may also <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-Page_165"></span>be understood. For,
whether you introduce virtues, vices will spontaneously depart; or if
you take away vices, virtues will of their own accord succeed. The
nature of good and evil things is so fixed, that they always oppose and
drive out one another: and thus it comes to pass that vices cannot be
removed without virtues, nor can virtues be introduced without the
removal of vices. Therefore we bring forward these ways in a very
different manner from that in which the philosophers are accustomed to
present them: first of all, because we say that a guide is proposed to
each, and in each case an immortal: but that the one is honoured who
presides over virtues and good qualities, the other condemned who
presides over vices and evils. But they place a guide only on the right
side, and that not one only, nor a lasting one; inasmuch as they
introduce any teacher of a good art, who may recall men from sloth, and
teach them to be temperate. But they do not represent any as entering
upon that way except boys and young men; for this reason, that the arts
are learned at these ages. We, on the other hand, lead those of each
sex, every age and race, into this heavenly path, because God, who is
the guide of that way, denies immortality to no human being. <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) The shape also of the ways
themselves is not as they supposed. For what need is there of the letter
Y in matters which are different and opposed to one another? But the one
which is better is turned towards the rising of the sun, the other which
is worse towards its setting: since he who follows truth and
righteousness, having received the reward of immortality, will enjoy
perpetual light; but he who, enticed by that evil guide, shall prefer
vices to virtues, falsehood to truth, must be borne to the setting of
the sun, and to darkness. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) I
will therefore describe each, and will point out their properties and
habits.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[164:1091](0070141.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p2"></span> \[One wonders whether the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>Duæ Viæ here be not a reference to the
“Apost. Constitutions” (book vii.), which, with the Bryennios discovery,
will receive attention hereafter.\]  

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[164:1092](0070141.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p4"></span> \[Again the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds.
Hitchcock and Brown) the Bryennios <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p4.2"></span>ms., pp. 3 and 13.\]  

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[164:1093](0070141.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>Æneid, vi. 540.  

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[164:1094](0070141.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>Evadat ad bonam frugem.  

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[164:1095](0070141.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>Frugalitatis.  

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[164:1096](0070141.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p8"></span> \[Again the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds.
Hitchcock and Brown) the Bryennios <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p8.2"></span>ms., pp. 3 and 13.\]  

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[164:1097](0070141.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p9"></span> \[Again the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds.
Hitchcock and Brown) the Bryennios <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p9.2"></span>ms., pp. 3 and 13.\]  

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[165:1098](0070141.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p11"></span> \[Universal redemption is lovingly
set forth by our author.\]  

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[165:1099](0070141.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.iii-p12"></span> \[A reference to the baptismal
rite; the catechumen renouncing the works of darkness with his face to
the west, and turning eastward to confess the Sun of Righteousness.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IV.—Of the ways of life, of pleasures, also of the
hardships of Christians](0070142)
