[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070302)  [Next](0070304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVI.—Of the Mind and Its Seat.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span>That the nature of the mind is also
incomprehensible, who can be ignorant, but he who is altogether
destitute of mind, since it is not known in what place the mind is
situated, or of what nature it is? Therefore various things have been
discussed by philosophers concerning its nature and place. But I will
not conceal what my own sentiments are: not that I should affirm that it
is so—for in a doubtful matter it is the part of a foolish person to do
this; but that when I have set forth the difficulty of the matter, you
may understand how great is the magnitude off the divine works. Some
would have it, that the seat of the mind is in the breast. But if this
is so, how wonderful is it, that a faculty which is situated in an
obscure and dark habitation should be employed in so great a light of
reason and intelligence; then that the senses from every part of the
body come together to it, so that it appears to be present in any
quarter of the limbs! Others have said that its seat is in the brain
and, indeed, they have used probable arguments, saying that it was
doubtless befitting that that which had the government of the whole body
should especially have its abode in the highest place, as though in the
citadel of the body; and that nothing should be in a more elevated
position than that which governs the whole by reason, just as the Lord
Himself, and Ruler of the universe, is in the highest place. Then they
say, that the organs which are the ministers of each sense, that is, of
hearing, and seeing, and smelling, are situated in the head, and that
the channels of all these lead not to the breast, but to the brain:
otherwise we must be more slow in the exercise of our senses, until the
power of sensation by a long course should descend through the neck even
to the breast. These, in truth, do not greatly err, or perchance not at
all. For the mind, which exercises control over the body, appears to be
placed in the highest part, the head, as God is in heaven; but when it
is engaged in any reflection, it appears to pass to the breast, and, as
it were, to withdraw to some secret recess, that it may elicit and draw
forth counsel, as it were, from a hidden treasury. And therefore, when
we are intent upon reflection, and when the mind, being occupied, has
withdrawn itself to the inner depth, <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915) we are accustomed neither to hear
the things which sound about us, nor to see the things which stand in
our way. But whether this is the case, it is assuredly a matter of
admiration how this takes place, since there is no passage from the
brain to the breast. But if it is not so, nevertheless it is no less a
matter of admiration that, by some divine plan or other, it is caused
that it appears to be so. Can any fail to admire that that living and
heavenly faculty which is called the mind or the soul, is of such
volubility <span id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916) that it does not
rest even then when it is asleep; of such rapidity, that it surveys the
whole heaven at one moment of time; and, if it wills, flies over seas,
traverses lands and cities,—in short, places in its own sight all things
which it pleases, however far and widely they are removed?  

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>And does any one wonder if the divine
mind of God, being extended <span id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917)
through all parts of the universe, runs to and fro, and rules all
things, governs all things, being everywhere present, everywhere
diffused; when the strength and power of the human mind, though enclosed
within a mortal body, is so great, that it can in no way be restrained
even by the barriers of this heavy and slothful body, to which it is
bound, from bestowing upon itself, in its impatience of rest, the power
of wandering without restraint? Whether, therefore, the mind has its
dwelling in the head or in the breast, can any one comprehend what power
of reason effects, that that incomprehensible faculty either remains
fixed in the marrow of the brain, or in that blood divided into two
parts <span id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918) which is enclosed in
the heart; and not infer from this very circumstance how great is the
power of God, because the soul does not see itself, or of what nature or
where it is; and if it did see, yet it would not be able to perceive in
what manner an incorporeal substance is united with one which is
corporeal? Or if the mind has no fixed locality, but runs here and there
scattered through the whole body,—which is possible, and was asserted by
<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p6.2"></span>Xenocrates, the disciple of <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p6.3"></span>Plato,—then, inasmuch as intelligence is
present in every part of <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-Page_297"></span>the body, it cannot be understood what
that mind is, or what its qualities are, since its nature is so subtle
and refined, that, though infused into solid organs by a living and, as
it were, ardent perception, it is mingled with all the members.  

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>But take care that you never think it
probable, as <span id="iii.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>Aristoxenus said, that
the mind has no existence, but that the power of perception exists from
the constitution of the body and the construction of the organs, as
harmony does in the case of the lyre. For musicians call the stretching
and sounding of the strings to entire strains, without any striking of
notes in agreement with them, harmony. They will have it, therefore,
that the soul in man exists in a manner like that by which harmonious
modulation exists on the lyre; namely, that the firm uniting of the
separate parts of the body and the vigour of all the limbs agreeing
together, makes that perceptible motion, and adjusts <span
id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) the mind, as well-stretched things
produce harmonious sound. And as, in the lyre, when anything has been
interrupted or relaxed, the whole method of the strain is disturbed and
destroyed; so in the body, when any part of the limbs receives an
injury, the whole are weakened, and all being corrupted and thrown into
confusion, the power of perception is destroyed: and this is called
death. But he, if he had possessed any mind, would never have
transferred harmony from the lyre to man. For the lyre cannot of its own
accord send forth a sound, so that there can be in this any comparison
and resemblance to a living person; but the soul both reflects and is
moved of its own accord. But if there were in us anything resembling
harmony, it would be moved by a blow from without, as the strings of the
lyre are by the hands; whereas without the handling of the artificer,
and the stroke of the fingers, they lie mute and motionless. But
doubtless he <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920) ought to have
beaten by the hand, that he might at length observe; for his mind, badly
compacted from his members, was in a state of torpor.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[296:1916](0070303.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span> <span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>In
altum se abdiderit. \[An interesting “evolution from
self-consciousness,” not altogether to be despised. In connection with
the tripartite nature of man (of which see vol. iii. p. 474), we may
well inquire as to the seat of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p2.3"></span>ψυχὴ</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2.4"></span>πνευ̑μα</span>,
severally, on this hint.\]  

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[296:1917](0070303.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>Mobilitatis.  

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[296:1918](0070303.htm#fr_1917) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>Intenta discurrit. \[[2 Chron. xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.2"></span>;
[Zech. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.3"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[296:1919](0070303.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>Bipartito.  

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[297:1920](0070303.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p8.1"></span>Concinnet.  

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[297:1921](0070303.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>Aristoxenus, whose opinion has been
mentioned above.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVII.—Of the soul, and the opinion of philosophers
concerning it](0070304)
