[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070115)  [Next](0070117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Of the Truth of the Christian Doctrine, and the Vanity of Its Adversaries; And that Christ Was Not a Magician.

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p1"></span>The desire of inventing, <span
id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937) therefore, and craftiness were absent
from these men, since they were unskilful. Or what unlearned man could
invent things adapted to one another, and coherent, when the most
learned of the philosophers, <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.2"></span>Plato
and <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.3"></span>Aristotle, and <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.4"></span>Epicurus and <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.5"></span>Zeno, themselves spoke things at variance
with one another, and contrary? For this is the nature of falsehoods,
that they cannot be coherent. But their teaching, because it is true,
everywhere agrees, <span id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) and is
altogether consistent with itself; and on this account it effects
persuasion, because it is based on a consistent plan. They did not
therefore devise that religion for the sake of gain and advantage,
inasmuch as both by their precepts and in reality they followed that
course of life which is without pleasures, and despised all things which
are reckoned among good things, and since they not only endured death
for their faith, but also both knew and foretold that they were about to
die, and afterwards that all who followed their system would suffer
cruel and impious things. But he <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939)
affirmed that Christ Himself was put to flight by the Jews, and having
collected a band of nine hundred men, committed robberies. Who would
venture to oppose so great an authority? We must certainly believe this,
for perchance some <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p4.2"></span>Apollo announced
it to him in his slumbers. So many robbers have at all times perished,
and do perish daily, and you yourself have certainly condemned many:
which of them after his crucifixion was called, I will not say a God,
but a man? But you perchance believed it from the circumstance of your
having consecrated the homicide <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p4.3"></span>Mars
as a god, though you would not have done this if the Areopagites had
crucified him.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p5"></span>The same man, when he endeavoured to
overthrow his wonderful deeds, and did not however deny them, wished to
show that <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p5.1"></span>Apollonius <span
id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) performed equal or even greater deeds.
It is strange that he omitted to mention <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.6"></span>Apuleius, <span
id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) of whom many and wonderful things are
accustomed to be related. Why therefore, O senseless one, does no one
worship <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.7"></span>Apollonius in the place of
God? unless by chance you alone do so, who are worthy forsooth of that
god, with whom the true God will punish you everlastingly. If Christ is
a magician because He performed wonderful deeds, it is plain that <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.8"></span>Apollonius, who, according to your
description, when <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.9"></span>Domitian wished to
punish him, suddenly disappeared on his trial, was more skilful than He
who was both arrested and crucified. But perhaps he wished from this
very thing to prove the arrogance of Christ, in that He made Himself
God, that the other may appear to have been more modest, who, though he
performed greater actions, as this one thinks, nevertheless did not
claim that for himself. I omit at present to compare the works
themselves, because in the second and preceding book I have spoken
respecting the fraud and tricks of the magic art. I say that there is no
one who would not wish that that should especially befall him after
death which even the greatest kings desire. For why do men prepare for
themselves magnificent sepulchres why statues and images? why by some
illustrious deeds, or even by death undergone in behalf of their
countrymen, do they endeavour <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-Page_139"></span>to deserve the good opinions of men?
Why, in short, have you yourself wished to raise a monument of your
talent, built with this detestable folly, as if with mud, except that
you hope for immortality from the remembrance of your name? It is
foolish, therefore, to imagine that <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.10"></span>Apollonius did not desire that which he
would plainly wish for if he were able to attain to it; because there is
no one who refuses immortality, and especially when you say that he was
both adored by some as a god, and that his image was set up under the
name of <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.11"></span>Hercules, the averter of
evil, and is even now honoured by the Ephesians.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p8"></span>He could not therefore after death be
believed to be a god, because it was evident that he was both a man and
a magician; and for this reason he affected <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942) divinity under the title of a name
belonging to another, for in his own name he was unable to attain it,
nor did he venture to make the attempt. But he of whom we speak <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) could both be believed to be a god,
because he was not a magician, and was believed to be such because he
was so in truth. I do not say this, he says, that <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p10.2"></span>Apollonius was not accounted a god,
because he did not wish it, but that it may be evident that we, who did
not at once connect a belief in his divinity with wonderful deeds, are
wiser than you, who on account of slight wonders believed that he was a
god. It is not wonderful if you, who are far removed from the wisdom of
God, understand nothing at all of those things which you have read,
since the Jews, who from the beginning had frequently read the prophets,
and to whom the mystery <span id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) of God
had been assigned, were nevertheless ignorant of what they read. Learn,
therefore, if you have any sense, that Christ was not believed by us to
be God on this account, because He did wonderful things, but because we
saw that all things were done in His case which were announced to us by
the prediction of the prophets. He performed wonderful deeds: we might
have supposed Him to be a magician, as you now suppose Him to be, and
the Jews then supposed Him, if all the prophets did not with one
accord <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945) proclaim that Christ
would do those very things. Therefore we believe Him to be God, not more
from His wonderful deeds and works, than from that very cross which you
as dogs lick, since that also was predicted at the same time. It was not
therefore on His own testimony (for who can be believed when he speaks
concerning himself?), but on the testimony of the prophets who long
before foretold all things which He did and suffered, that He gained a
belief in His divinity, which could have happened neither to <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p12.2"></span>Apollonius, <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) nor to <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p13.3"></span>Apuleius, nor to any of the magicians;
nor can it happen at any time. When, therefore, he had poured forth such
absurd ravings <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947) of his ignorance,
when he had eagerly endeavoured utterly to destroy the truth, he dared
to give to his books which were impious and the enemies of God the title
of “truth-loving.” O blind breast! O mind more black than Cimmerian
darkness, as they say! He may perhaps have been a disciple of <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p14.2"></span>Anaxagoras, <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) to whom snows were as black as ink.
But it is the same blindness, to give the name of falsehood to truth,
and of truth to falsehood. Doubtless the crafty man wished to conceal
the wolf under the skin of a sheep, <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) that he might ensnare the reader by a
deceitful title. Let it be true; grant that you did this from ignorance,
not from malice: what truth, however, have you brought to us, except
that, being a defender of the gods, you had at last betrayed those very
gods? For, having set forth the praises of the Supreme God, whom you
confessed to be king, most mighty, the maker of all things, the fountain
of honours, the parent of all, the creator and preserver of all living
creatures, you took away the kingdom from your own <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p16.2"></span>Jupiter; and when you had driven him from
the supreme power, you reduced him to the rank of servants. Thus your
own conclusion <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) convicts you of
folly, vanity, and error. For you affirm that the gods exist, and yet
you subject and enslave them to that God whose religion you attempt to
overturn.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_937"></span>[138:938](0070116.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.1"></span>Fingendi.  

<span id="fn_938"></span>[138:939](0070116.htm#fr_938) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p2.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p3.1"></span>Undique quadrat.  

<span id="fn_939"></span>[138:940](0070116.htm#fr_939) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p4.1"></span>Hierocles, referred to in chapter 2.  

<span id="fn_940"></span>[138:941](0070116.htm#fr_940) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.1"></span>Apollonius, a celebrated Pythagorean
philosopher of Tyana: his works and doctrines are recorded by <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.2"></span>Philostratus, from whom <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.3"></span>Lactantius appears to have derived his
account. The pagans compared his life and actions with those of Christ.
\[See <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.4"></span>Origen, vol. iv. p. 591, this
series.\]  

<span id="fn_941"></span>[138:942](0070116.htm#fr_941) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p6.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.1"></span>Apuleius, a native of Madaura, a city on
the borders of the province of Africa, he professed the Platonic
philosophy. He was reputed a magician by the Christian writers. \[Author
of <span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.2"></span>The Golden Ass, a most
entertaining but often indecent satire, which may have inspired <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.3"></span>Cervantes, and concerning which see <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.4"></span>Warburton, <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.5"></span>Div. Legat., vol. ii. p. 177 (<span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p7.6"></span>et alibi</span>),
ed. London, 1811.\]  

<span id="fn_942"></span>[139:943](0070116.htm#fr_942) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p9.1"></span>Affectavit divinitatem.  

<span id="fn_943"></span>[139:944](0070116.htm#fr_943) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p10.1"></span>Noster.  

<span id="fn_944"></span>[139:945](0070116.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p11.1"></span>Sacramentum.  

<span id="fn_945"></span>[139:946](0070116.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p12"></span> With one spirit, “<span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p12.1"></span>uno spiritu.”  

<span id="fn_946"></span>[139:947](0070116.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p13"></span> \[But <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p13.1"></span>Apollonius was set up as an Antichrist by
Philostratus as Cudworth supposes, and so other men of learning. But no
student should overlook l.ardner’s valuable commentary on this
character, and his quotations from Bishop Parker of Oxford, <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p13.2"></span>Credib., vol. vii. p. 486, and also p.
508, cap. 29, and appendix.\]  

<span id="fn_947"></span>[139:948](0070116.htm#fr_947) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p14.1"></span>Deliramenta.  

<span id="fn_948"></span>[139:949](0070116.htm#fr_948) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p15"></span> See book ii. ch. 23.  

<span id="fn_949"></span>[139:950](0070116.htm#fr_949) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p16"></span> Cf. [Matt. vii.
15.](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p16.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_950"></span>[139:951](0070116.htm#fr_950) <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.iii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>Epilogus.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IV.—Why this work was published, and again of Tertullian
and Cyprian](0070117)
