[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070094)  [Next](0070096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIII.—Of Jesus, God and Man; And the Testimonies of the Prophets Concerning Him.

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p1"></span>Therefore the Most High God, and
Parent of all, when He had purposed to transfer <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) His <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-Page_112"></span>religion, sent from heaven a
teacher of righteousness, that in Him or through Him He might give a new
law to new worshippers; not as He had before done, by the
instrumentality of man. Nevertheless it was His pleasure that He should
be born as a man, that in all things He might be like His supreme
Father. For God the Father Himself, who is the origin and source of all
things, inasmuch as He is without parents, is most truly named by <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>Trismegistus “fatherless” and
“motherless,” <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) because He was
born from no one. For which reason it was befitting that the Son also
should be twice born, that He also might become “fatherless” and
“motherless.” For in His first nativity, which was spiritual, He was
“motherless,” because He was begotten by God the Father alone, without
the office of a mother. But in His second, which was in the flesh, He
was born of a virgin’s womb without the office of a father, that,
bearing a middle substance between God and man, He might be able, as it
were, to take by the hand this frail and weak nature of ours, and raise
it to immortality. He became both the Son of God through the Spirit, and
the Son of man through the flesh,—that is, both God and man. The power
of God was displayed in Him, from the works which He performed; the
frailty of the man, from the passion which He endured: on what account
He undertook it I will mention a little later. In the meantime, we learn
from the predictions of the prophets that He was both God and
man—composed <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) of both natures.
Isaiah testifies that He was God in these words: <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) “Egypt is wearied, <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621) and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and
the Sabæans, men of stature, shall come over unto Thee, and shall be Thy
servants: and they shall walk behind Thee; in chains they shall fall
down unto Thee, and shall make supplication unto Thee, Since God is in
Thee, and there is no other God besides Thee. For Thou art God, and we
knew Thee not, the God of Israel, the Saviour. They shall all be
confounded and ashamed who oppose Thee, and shall fall into confusion.”
In like manner the prophet <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p6.2"></span>Jeremiah <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) thus speaks: “This is our God, and
there shall none other be compared unto Him. He hath found out all the
way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant, and to
Israel His beloved. Afterward He was seen upon earth, and dwelt among
men.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p8"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p8.1"></span>David also, in the forty-fourth
Psalm: <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) “Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy
kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness; therefore
God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness.” By which
word he also shows His name, since (as I have shown above) He was called
Christ from His anointing. Then, that He was also man, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p9.2"></span>Jeremiah teaches, saying: <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) “And He is a man, and who hath known
Him?” Also Isaiah: <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) “And God
shall send to them a man, who shall save them, shall save them by
judging.” But <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p11.2"></span>Moses also, in
Numbers, <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) thus speaks: “There
shall arise a star out of Jacob, and a man <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) shall spring forth from Israel.” On
which account the <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p13.3"></span>Milesian
Apollo, <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) being asked whether He
was God or man, replied in this manner: “He was mortal as to His body,
being wise with wondrous works; but being taken with arms under Chaldean
judges, with nails and the cross He endured a bitter end.” In the first
verse he spoke the truth, but he skilfully deceived him who asked the
question, who was entirely ignorant of the mystery of the truth. For he
appears to have denied that He was God. But when he acknowledges that He
was mortal as to the flesh, which we also declare, it follows that as to
the spirit He was God, which we affirm. For why would it have been
necessary to make mention of the flesh, since it was sufficient to say
that He was mortal? But being pressed by the truth, he could not deny
the real state of the case; as that which he says, that He was wise.  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p15"></span>What do you reply to this, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p15.1"></span>Apollo? If he is wise, then his system
of instruction is wisdom, and no other; and they are wise who follow it,
and no others. Why then are we commonly esteemed as foolish, and
visionary, and senseless, who follow a Master who is wise even by the
confession of the gods themselves? For in that he said that He wrought
wonderful deeds, by which He especially claimed faith is His divinity,
he now appears to assent to us, when he says the same things in which we
boast. But, however, he recovers himself, and again has recourse to
demoniacal frauds. For when he had been compelled to speak the truth, he
now appeared to be a betrayer of the gods and of himself, unless he had,
by a deceptive falsehood, concealed that which the truth had extorted
from him. He says, therefore, that He did indeed perform wonderful
works, <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-Page_113"></span>yet not by divine power, but by
magic. What wonder if <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p15.2"></span>Apollo thus
persuaded men ignorant of the truth, when the Jews also, worshippers (as
they seemed to be) of the Most High God, entertained the same opinion,
though they had every day before their eyes those miracles which the
prophets had foretold to them as about to happen, and yet they could not
be induced by the contemplation of such powers to believe that He whom
they saw was God? On this account, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p15.3"></span>David, whom they especially read above
the other prophets, in the twenty-seventh Psalm <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) thus condemns them: “Render to them
their desert, because they regard not the works of the Lord.” Both <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p16.2"></span>David himself and other prophets
announced that of the house of this very <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p16.3"></span>David, Christ should be born according
to the flesh. Thus it is written in Isaiah: <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) “And in that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, and He who shall arise to rule over the nations, in Him shall
the Gentiles trust; and His rest shall be glorious.” And in another
place: <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) “There shall come forth a
rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a blossom <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) shall grow out of his root; and the
Spirit of God shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the spirit of
knowledge and of piety; and He shall be filled <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) with the spirit of fear of the Lord.”
Now <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p20.2"></span>Jesse was the father of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p20.3"></span>David, from whose root he foretold that
a blossom would arise; namely him of whom the <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p20.4"></span>Sibyl speaks, “A pure blossom shall
spring forth.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p21"></span>Also in the second book of Kings,
the prophet <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p21.1"></span>Nathan was sent to
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p21.2"></span>David, who wished to build a
temple for God; and this was the word of the Lord to <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p21.3"></span>Nathan, saying: <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) “Go and tell my servant <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p22.2"></span>David, Thus saith the Lord Almighty,
Thou shall not build me a house for me to dwell in; but when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will raise up thy
seed after thee, and I will establish His kingdom. He shall build me a
house for my name, and I will set up His throne for ever; and I will be
to Him for a father, and He shall be to me for a son; and His house
shall be established, <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) and His
kingdom for ever.” But the reason why the Jews did not understand these
things was this, because <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23.3"></span>Solomon
the son of <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23.4"></span>David built a temple
for God, and the city which he called from his own name,
Jerusalem. <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) Therefore they
referred the predictions of the prophets to him. Now <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.12"></span>Solomon received the government of the
kingdom from his father himself. But the prophets spoke of Him who was
then born after that <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.13"></span>David had
slept with his fathers. Besides, the reign of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.14"></span>Solomon was not everlasting; for he
reigned forty years. In the next place, <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.15"></span>Solomon was never called the son of
God, but the son of <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.16"></span>David; and
the house which he built was not firmly established, <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) as the Church, which is the true
temple of God, which does not consist of walls, but of the heart <span
id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) and faith of the men who believe on
Him, and are called faithful. But that temple of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p26.2"></span>Solomon, inasmuch as it was built by
the hand, fell by the hand. Lastly, his father, in the cxxvith Psalm,
prophesied in this manner respecting the works of his son: <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) “Except the Lord build the house, they
have laboured in vain that built it; except the Lord keep the city, the
watchman hath waked but in vain.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_617"></span>[111:618](0070095.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p2"></span> From the Israelites, to whom He
first revealed Himself, to the Gentile world at large.  

<span id="fn_618"></span>[112:619](0070095.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>ἀπάτωρ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3.2"></span>ἀμήτωρ</span>. See
[Heb. vii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3.3"></span>, where <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3.4"></span>Melchisedec is a type of Christ.  

<span id="fn_619"></span>[112:620](0070095.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>Ex utroque genere permistum. Though the
Godhead and the manhood are joined together in one person in our Lord
<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4.2"></span>Jesus Christ, there is no
confounding of the two natures: each is whole and perfect. While <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4.3"></span>Nestorius held that there were two
persons in Christ, <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4.4"></span>Eutyches fell
into the opposite error, and taught that the two natures were so blended
together as to form one mixed nature. The expression in the text is not
very clear.  

<span id="fn_620"></span>[112:621](0070095.htm#fr_620) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p5"></span> [Isa. xlv.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_621"></span>[112:622](0070095.htm#fr_621) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p6.1"></span>Fatigata est Ægyptus. This is taken from
the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_622"></span>[112:623](0070095.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p7"></span> This quotation is from the
apocryphal book of [Baruch iii.
35-37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>, which is sometimes spoken of as the
book of Jeremiah Baruch.  

<span id="fn_623"></span>[112:624](0070095.htm#fr_623) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p9"></span> [Ps.
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_624"></span>[112:625](0070095.htm#fr_624) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p10"></span> [Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>. The passage is quoted from the
Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_625"></span>[112:626](0070095.htm#fr_625) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p11"></span> [Isa. xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p11.1"></span>, quoted from the Septuagint.  

<span id="fn_626"></span>[112:627](0070095.htm#fr_626) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12"></span> [Num. xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12.1"></span>. The well-known prophecy of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12.2"></span>Balaam is here spoken of as though
given by <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12.3"></span>Moses, who only records
it. \[In an elucidation touching the Sibyls, I shall recur to the case
of <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12.4"></span>Balaam.\]  

<span id="fn_627"></span>[112:628](0070095.htm#fr_627) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p13.1"></span>Exsurget homo ex <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p13.2"></span>Israel This is taken from the
Septuagint, instead of the ordinary reading, “A sceptre shall rise out
of Israel.”  

<span id="fn_628"></span>[112:629](0070095.htm#fr_628) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p14"></span> \[The oracle of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p14.1"></span>Apollo Didymæus; from the Milesian
temple burnt by <span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p14.2"></span>Xerxes. Readers
will remember the humour of <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p14.3"></span>Arnobius about these divers names, vol.
vi. p. 419, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_629"></span>[113:630](0070095.htm#fr_629) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p16"></span> [Ps.
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p16.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_630"></span>[113:631](0070095.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p17"></span> [Isa. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p17.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_631"></span>[113:632](0070095.htm#fr_631) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p18"></span> [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p18.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_632"></span>[113:633](0070095.htm#fr_632) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p19.1"></span>Flos. Quoted from the Septuagint, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p19.2"></span>ἄνθος</span>.  

<span id="fn_633"></span>[113:634](0070095.htm#fr_633) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p20.1"></span>Implebit eum spiritus timoris Dei.  

<span id="fn_634"></span>[113:635](0070095.htm#fr_634) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p22"></span> [2 Sam.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p22.1"></span>–14, 16.  

<span id="fn_635"></span>[113:636](0070095.htm#fr_635) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23.1"></span>Fidem consequetur, following the
Septuagint <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23.2"></span>πιστωθήσεται</span>.  

<span id="fn_636"></span>[113:637](0070095.htm#fr_636) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.1"></span>Hierosolyma. As though derived from
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.2"></span>ἰερο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.3"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.4"></span>ν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.5"></span>Σολ</span><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.6"></span>ο<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.7"></span>μω̑</span><span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.8"></span>ν. But <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.9"></span>Solomon was not the founder of the
city. The name is probably derived from Salem, of which city <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.10"></span>Melchisedec was king. Some derive it
from Jebus (the ancient name of the city) and Salem. \[See vol. ii. p.
107, note 3, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_637"></span>[113:638](0070095.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p24.17"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p25"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p25.1"></span>Non est fidem consecuta, as above.  

<span id="fn_638"></span>[113:639](0070095.htm#fr_638) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p26"></span> Thus <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p26.1"></span>Peter speaks, 1 Ep. ii. 5, “Ye are
built up a spiritual house.”  

<span id="fn_639"></span>[113:640](0070095.htm#fr_639) <span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p27"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ii.iv.xiii-p27.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIV.—Of the priesthood of Jesus foretold by the
prophets](0070096)
