[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070150)  [Next](0070152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIII.—Of Repentance, of Mercy, and the Forgiveness of Sins.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p1"></span>As often, therefore, as you are
asked for aid, believe that you are tried by God, that it may be seen
whether you are worthy of being heard. Examine your own conscience, and,
as far as you are able, heal your wounds. Nor, however, because offences
are removed by bounty, think that a licence is given you for sinning.
For they are done away with, if you are bountiful to God because you
have sinned; for if you sin through reliance on your bounty, they are
not done away with. For God especially desires that men shall be
cleansed from their sins, and therefore He commands them to repent. But
to repent is nothing else than to profess and to affirm that one will
sin no more. Therefore they are pardoned who unawares and incautiously
glide into sin; he who sins wilfully has no pardon. Nor, however, if any
one shall have been purified from all stain of sin, let him think that
he may abstain from the work of bounty because he has no faults to blot
out. Nay, in truth, he is then more bound to exercise justice when he is
become just, so that that which he had before done for the healing of
his wounds he may afterwards do for the praise and glory of virtue. To
this is added, that no one can be without fault as long as he is
burthened with a covering of flesh, the infirmity of which is subject to
the dominion of sin in a threefold manner—in deeds, in words, and
thoughts.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p2"></span>By these steps justice advances to
the greatest height. The first step of virtue is to abstain from evil
works; the second, to abstain also from evil words; the third, to
abstain even from the thoughts of evil things. He who ascends the first
step is sufficiently just; he who ascends the second is now of perfect
virtue, since he offends neither in deeds nor in conversation; <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) he who ascends the third appears
truly to have attained the likeness of God. For it is almost beyond the
measure of man not even to admit to the thought <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) that which is either bad in action
or improper in speech. Therefore even just men, who can refrain from
every unjust work, are sometimes, however, overcome by frailty itself,
so that they either speak evil in anger, or, at the sight of delightful
things, they desire them with silent thought. But if the condition of
mortality does not suffer a man to <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>
<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-Page_179"></span>be pure from every stain, the
faults of the flesh ought therefore to be done away with by continual
bounty. For it is the single work of a man who is wise, and just, and
worthy of life, to lay out his riches on justice alone; for assuredly he
who is without this, although he should surpass <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p4.3"></span>Crœsus or <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p4.4"></span>Crassus in riches, is to be esteemed as
poor, as naked, as a beggar. Therefore we must use our efforts that we
may be clothed with the garment of justice and piety, of which no one
may deprive us, which may furnish us with an everlasting ornament. For
if the worshippers of gods adore senseless images, and bestow upon them
whatever they have which is precious, though they can neither make use
of them nor give thanks because they have received them, how much more
just and true is it to reverence the living images of God, that you may
gain the favour of the living God! For as these make use of what they
have received, and give thanks, so God, in whose sight you shall have
done that which is good, will both approve of it and reward your piety.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[178:1190](0070151.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p3"></span> \[[Jas. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[178:1191](0070151.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>In cogitationem. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>cogitatione.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIV.—Of the affections, and the opinion of the Stoics
respecting them; and of virtue, the vices, and mercy](0070152)
