[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070185)  [Next](0070187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXII.—Of the Error of the Poets, and the Return of the Soul from the Lower Regions.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p1"></span>Some imagine that these things are
figments of the poets, not knowing whence the poets received them, and
they say that these things are impossible; and it is no wonder that it
so appears to them. For the matter is related by the poets in a manner
which is different from the truth; for although they are much more
ancient than the historians and orators, and other kinds of writers, yet
because they were ignorant of the secret of the divine mystery, and
mention of a future resurrection had reached them by an obscure rumour,
yet they handed it down, when carelessly and lightly heard, after the
manner of a feigned story. And yet they also testified that they did not
follow a sure authority, but mere opinion, as <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Maro, who says, <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415)  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p2.3"></span> “What ear has heard let tongue
> make known.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3"></span>Although, therefore, they have
partly corrupted the secrets of the truth, yet the matter itself is
found to be more true, because it partly agrees with the prophets: which
is sufficient for us as a proof of the matter. Yet some reason is
contained in their error. For when the prophets proclaimed with
continual announcements that the Son of God was about to judge the dead,
and this announcement did not escape their notice; inasmuch as they
supposed that there was no other ruler of heaven but <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>Jupiter, they reported that the son of
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.2"></span>Jupiter was king in the lower
regions, but not <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.3"></span>Apollo, or <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.4"></span>Liber, or <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.5"></span>Mercurius, who are supposed to be gods
of heaven, but one who was both mortal and just, either <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.6"></span>Minos, or <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.7"></span>Æacus, or <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.8"></span>Rhadamanthus. Therefore with poetic
licence they corrupted that which they had received; or, the opinion
being scattered through different mouths and various discourses, changed
the truth. For inasmuch as they foretold that, when a thousand years had
been passed in the lower regions, they should again be restored to life,
as <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.9"></span>Maro said: <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) —<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-Page_218"></span>  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p4.2"></span> “All these, when centuries ten
> times told  
> The wheel of destiny have rolled,  
> The voice divine from far and wide  
> Calls up to Lethe’s river side,  
> That earthward they may pass once more,  
> Remembering not the things before,  
> And with a blind propension yearn  
> To fleshly bodies to return:”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p5"></span>this matter escaped their notice,
that the dead will rise again, not after a thousand years from their
death, but that, when again restored to life, they may reign with God a
thousand years. For God will come, that, having cleansed the world from
all defilement, He may restore the souls of the righteous to their
renewed bodies, and raise them to everlasting blessedness. Therefore the
other things are true, except the water of oblivion, which they feigned
on this account, that no one might make this objection: why, therefore,
did they not remember that they were at one time alive, or who they
were, or what things they accomplished? But nevertheless it is not
thought probable, and the whole matter is rejected, as though
licentiously and fabulously invented. But when we affirm the doctrine of
the resurrection, and teach that souls will return to another life, not
forgetful of themselves, but possessed of the same perception and
figure, we are met with this objection: So many ages have now passed;
what individual ever arose from the dead, that through his example we
may believe it to be possible? But the resurrection cannot take place
while unrighteousness still prevails. For in this world men are slain by
violence, by the sword, by ambush, by poisons, and are visited with
injuries, with want, with imprisonment, with tortures, and with
proscriptions. Add to this that righteousness is hated, that all who
wish to follow God are not only held in hatred, but are harassed with
all reproaches, and are tormented by manifold kinds of punishments, and
are driven to the impious worship of gods made with hands, not by reason
or truth, but by dreadful laceration of their bodies.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p6"></span>Ought men therefore to rise again
to these same things, or to return to a life in which it is impossible
for them to be safe? Since the righteous, then, are so lightly esteemed,
and so easily taken away, what can we suppose would have happened if any
one returning from the dead had recovered life by a recovery <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) of his former condition? He would
assuredly be taken away from the eyes of men, lest, if he were seen or
heard, all men with one accord should leave the gods and betake
themselves to the worship and religion of the one God. Therefore it is
necessary that the resurrection should take place once only when evil
shall have been taken away, since it is befitting that those who have
risen again should neither die any more, nor be injured in any way, that
they may be able to pass a happy life whose death has been
annulled. <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) But the poets,
knowing that this life abounds with all evils, introduced the river of
oblivion, lest the souls, remembering their labours and evils, should
refuse to return to the upper regions; whence <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p8.2"></span>Virgil says: <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p9.3"></span> “O Father! and can thought
> conceive  
> That happy souls this realm would leave,  
> And seek the upper sky,  
> With sluggish clay to reunite?  
> This dreadful longing for the light,  
> Whence comes it, say, and why?”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p10"></span>For they did not know how or when
it must take place; and therefore they supposed that souls were born
again, and that they returned afresh to the womb, and went back to
infancy. Whence also <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p10.1"></span>Plato,
while discussing the nature of the soul, says that it may be known from
this that souls are immortal and divine, because in boys minds are
pliant, and easy of perception, and because they so quickly comprehend
the subjects which they learn, that they appear not then to be learning
for the first time, but to be recalling them to mind and recollecting
them: in which matter the wise man most foolishly believed the poets.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[217:1416](0070186.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p2.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p2.2"></span>Æn., vi. 266.  

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[217:1417](0070186.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p3.10"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p4.1"></span>Ibid., 748.  

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[218:1418](0070186.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p7.1"></span>Postliminio. For the uses of this word,
see <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p7.2"></span>Smith’s <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p7.3"></span>Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Antiquities  

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[218:1419](0070186.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p8.1"></span>Resignata est, properly “unsealed.”  

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[218:1420](0070186.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p9.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxii-p9.2"></span>Æn., vi. 719.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIII.—Of the resurrection of the soul, and the proofs of
this fact](0070187)
