[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070270)  [Next](0070272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VIII.—Of Religion.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span>But religion is overthrown if we
believe <span id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Epicurus speaking thus:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.viii-p1.2"></span> “For the nature of gods must ever
> in itself of necessity enjoy immortality together with supreme repose,
> far removed and withdrawn from our concerns; since, exempt from every
> pain, exempt from all dangers, strong in its own resources, not
> wanting aught of us, it is neither gained by favours nor moved by
> anger.” <span id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661)  

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p3"></span>Now, when he says these things, does
he think that any worship is to be paid to God, or does <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="iii.iii.viii-Page_264"></span>he
entirely overthrow religion? For if God confers nothing good on any one,
if He repays the obedience of His worshipper with no favour, what is so
senseless, what so foolish, as to build temples, to offer sacrifices, to
present gifts, to diminish our property, that we may obtain
nothing? <span id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) But (it will be
said) it is right that an excellent nature should be honoured. What
honour can be due to a being who pays no regard to us, and is
ungrateful? Can we be bound in any manner to him who has nothing in
common with us? “Farewell to God,” says <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>Cicero, <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663) “if He is such as to be influenced
by no favour, and by no affection of men. For why should I say ’may He
be propitious? ’ for He can be propitious to no one.” What can be spoken
more contemptible with respect to God? Farewell to Him, he says, that
is, let Him depart and retire, since He is able to profit no one. But if
God takes no trouble, nor occasions trouble to another, why then should
we not commit crimes as often as it shall be in our power to escape the
notice of men <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664) and to cheat
the public laws? Wherever we shall obtain a favourable opportunity of
escaping notice, let us take advantage of the occasion: let us take away
the property of others, either without bloodshed or even with blood, if
there is nothing else besides the laws to be reverenced.  

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p7"></span>While <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>Epicurus entertains these sentiments, he
altogether destroys religion; and when this is taken away, confusion and
perturbation of life will follow. But if religion cannot be taken away
without destroying our hold of wisdom, by which we are separated from
the brutes, and of justice, by which the public life may be more secure,
how can religion itself be maintained or guarded without fear? For that
which is not feared is despised, and that which is despised is plainly
not reverenced. Thus it comes to pass that religion, and majesty, and
honour exist together with fear; but there is no fear where no one is
angry. Whether, therefore, you take away from God kindness, or anger, or
both, religion must be taken away, without which the life of men is full
of folly, of wickedness, and enormity. For conscience greatly curbs men,
if we believe that we are living in the sight of God; if we imagine not
only that the actions which we perform are seen from above, but also
that our thoughts and our words are heard by God. But it is profitable
to believe this, as some imagine, not for the sake of the truth, but of
utility, since laws cannot punish conscience unless some terror from
above hangs over to restrain offences. Therefore religion is altogether
false, and there is no divinity; but all things are made up by skilful
men, in order that they may live more uprightly and innocently. This is
a great question, and foreign to the subject which we have proposed; but
because it necessarily occurs, it ought to be handled, however briefly.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[263:1662](0070271.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p2"></span> Lucret., ii. 646.  

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[264:1663](0070271.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p4"></span> i.e. without any result.  

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[264:1664](0070271.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>De Nat. Deor., i. 44.  

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[264:1665](0070271.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>Hominum conscientiam fallere.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—Of the providence of God, and of opinions opposed to
it](0070272)
