[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070448)  [Next](0070450) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.i"></span>

#### <span id="ix.vi.i-p0.1"></span>Sec. I.—Concerning the Martyrs.

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p0.2"></span>That It is Reasonable for the Faithful to Supply the Wants of Those Who are Afflicted for the Sake of Christ by the Unbelievers, According to the Constitution of the Lord.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p1.1"></span>I</span>. <span id="ix.vi.i-p1.2"></span>If any
Christian, on account of the name of Christ, and love and faith towards
God, be condemned by the ungodly to the games, to the beasts, or to the
mines, do not ye overlook him; but send to him from your labour and your
very sweat for his sustenance, and for a reward to the soldiers, that he
may be eased and be taken care of; that, as far as lies in your power,
your blessed brother may not be afflicted: for he that is condemned for
the name of the Lord God is an holy martyr, a brother of the Lord, the
son of the Highest, a receptacle of the Holy Spirit, by whom every one
of the faithful has received the illumination of the glory of the holy
Gospel, by being vouchsafed the incorruptible crown, and the testimony
of Christ’s sufferings, and the fellowship of His blood, to be made
conformable to the death of Christ for the adoption of children. For
this cause do you, all ye of the faithful, by your bishop, minister to
the saints of your substance and of your labour. But if any one has not,
let him fast a day, and set apart that, and order it for the saints. But
if any one has superfluities, let him minister more to them according to
the proportion of his ability. But if he can possibly sell all his
livelihood, and redeem them out of prison, he will be blessed, and a
friend of Christ. For if he that gives his goods to the poor be perfect,
supposing his knowledge of divine things, much more is he so that does
it on account of the martyrs. For such a one is worthy of God, and will
fulfil His will by supplying those who have confessed Him before nations
and kings, and the children of Israel; concerning whom our Lord
declared, saying: “Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I
also confess before my Father.” <span
id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971) And if these be such as to be
attested to by Christ before His Father, you ought not to be ashamed to
go to them in the prisons. For if you do this, it will be esteemed to
you for a testimony, because the real trial was to them a testimony; and
your readiness will be so to you, as being partakers of their combat:
for the Lord speaks somewhere to such as these, saying: “Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer, and say,
Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, and fed Thee? or thirsty, and gave
Thee drink? When saw we Thee naked, and clothed Thee? or sick, and
visited Thee? When saw we Thee a stranger, and took Thee in? or in
prison, and came unto Thee? And He will answer and say unto them,
Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me. And these shall go away into life everlasting.
Then shall He say unto them on His left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not;
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer
and say, Lord when saw we Thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto Thee? Then shall
He answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have
not done it unto one of the least of these, neither have ye done it unto
me. And these shall go away unto everlasting punishment.” <span
id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972) <span id="page_438">p. 438</span>
<span id="ix.vi.i-Page_438"></span>  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p3.4"></span>That We are to Avoid Intercourse with False Brethren When They Continue in Their Wickedness.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p4.1"></span>II</span>. But if any one who calls himself a
brother is seduced by the evil one, and acts wickedness, and is
convicted and condemned to death as an adulterer, or a murderer, depart
from him, that ye may be secure, and none of you may be suspected as a
partner in such an abominable practice; and that no evil report may be
spread abroad, as if all Christians took a pleasure in unlawful actions.
Wherefore keep far from them. But do you assist with all diligence those
that for the sake of Christ are abused by the ungodly and shut up in
prison, or who are given over to death, or bonds, or banishment, in
order to deliver your fellow-members from wicked hands. And if any one
who accompanies with them is caught, and falls into misfortune, he is
blessed, because he is partaker with the martyr, and is one that
imitates the sufferings of Christ; for we ourselves also, when we
oftentimes received stripes from <span
id="ix.vi.i-p4.2"></span>Caiaphas, and <span
id="ix.vi.i-p4.3"></span>Alexander, and <span
id="ix.vi.i-p4.4"></span>Annas, for Christ’s sake, “went out rejoicing
that we were counted worthy to suffer such things for our
Saviour.” <span id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973) Do you also rejoice
when ye suffer such things, for ye shall be blessed in that day. <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p6.3"></span>That We Ought to Afford an Helping Hand to Such as are Spoiled for the Sake of Christ, Although We Should Incur Danger Ourselves.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p7.1"></span>III</span>. Receive also those that are
persecuted on account of the faith, and who “fly from city to
city” <span id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975) on account of the
Lord’s commandment; and assist them as martyrs, rejoicing that ye are
made partakers of their persecution, as knowing that they are esteemed
blessed by the Lord; for Himself says: “Blessed are ye when men shall
reproach you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, because your
reward is great in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which
were before us.” <span id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976) And again:
“If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.” <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977) And afterwards: “If they persecute
you in this city, flee ye to another. For in the world ye have
tribulation: for they shall deliver you into the synagogues; and ye
shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, and for a
testimony to them.” <span id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978) And, “He
that endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979) For he that is persecuted for the
sake of the faith, and bears witness in regard to Him, <span
id="ix.vi.i-p12.2"></span>Christ, and endures, is truly a man of God.  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p12.3"></span>That It is an Horrible and Destructive Thing to Deny Christ.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p13.1"></span>IV.</span> But he that denies himself to be a
Christian, that he may not be hated of men, and so loves his own life
more than he does the Lord, in whose hand his breath is, is wretched and
miserable, as being detestable and abominable, who desires to be the
friend of men, but is the enemy of God, having no longer his portion
with the saints, but with those that are accursed; choosing instead of
the kingdom of the blessed, that eternal fire which is prepared for the
devil and his angels: not being any longer hated by men, but rejected by
God, and cast out from His presence. For of such a one our Lord
declared, saying: “Whosoever shall deny me before men, and shall be
ashamed of my name, I also will deny and be ashamed of him before my
Father which is in heaven.” <span id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980)
And again He speaks thus to us ourselves, His disciples: “He that loveth
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth
son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that taketh
not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. He that
findeth his life, shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my
sake, shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?” <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) And
afterwards: “Fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell.” <span id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p16.2"></span>That We Ought to Imitate Christ in Suffering, and with Zeal to Follow His Patience.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p17"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p17.1"></span>V.</span> Every one therefore who learns any
art, when he sees his master by his diligence and skill perfecting his
art, does himself earnestly endeavour to make what he takes in hand like
to it. If he is not able, he is not perfected in his work. We therefore
who have a Master, our Lord <span id="ix.vi.i-p17.2"></span>Jesus
Christ, why do we not follow His doctrine?—since He renounced repose,
pleasure, glory, riches, pride, the power of revenge, His mother and
brethren, nay, and moreover His own life, on account of His piety
towards His Father, and His love to us the race of mankind; and suffered
not only persecution and stripes, reproach and mockery, but also
crucifixion, that He might save the penitent, both Jews and Gentiles. If
therefore He for our sakes renounced His repose, was not ashamed <span
id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span id="ix.vi.i-Page_439"></span>of the
cross, and did not esteem death inglorious, why do not we imitate His
sufferings, and renounce on His account even our own life, with that
patience which He gives us? For He did all for our sakes, but we do it
for our own sakes: for He does not stand in need of us, but we stand in
need of His mercy. He only requires the sincerity and readiness of our
faith, as the Scripture says: “If thou beest righteous, what doest thou
give to Him? or what will He receive at thy hand? Thy wickedness is to a
man like thyself, and thy righteousness to a son of man.” <span
id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p18.3"></span>That a Believer Ought Neither Rashly to Run into Danger Through Security, Nor to Be Over-Timorous Through Pusillanimity, But to Fly Away for Fear; Yet that If He Does Fall into the Enemy’s Hand, to Strive Earnestly, Upon Account of the Crown that is Laid Up for Him.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p19.1"></span>VI.</span> Let us therefore renounce our
parents, and kinsmen, and friends, and wife, and children, and
possessions, and all the enjoyments of life, when any of these things
become an impediment to piety. For we ought to pray that we may not
enter into temptation; but if we be called to martyrdom, with constancy
to confess His precious name, and if on this account we be punished, let
us rejoice, as hastening to immortality. When we are persecuted, let us
not think it strange; let us not love the present world, nor the praises
which come from men, nor the glory and honour of rulers, according as
some of the Jews wondered at the mighty works of our Lord, yet did not
believe on Him, for fear of the high priests and the rest of the rulers:
“For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.” <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) But now, by confessing a good
confession, we not only save ourselves, but we confirm those who are
newly illuminated, and strengthen the faith of the catechumens. But if
we remit any part of our confession, and deny godliness by the faintness
of our persuasion, and the fear of a very short punishment, we not only
deprive ourselves of everlasting glory, but we shall also become the
causes of the perdition of others; and shall suffer double punishment,
as affording suspicion, by our denial that that truth which we gloried
in so much before is an erroneous doctrine. Wherefore neither let us be
rash and hasty to thrust ourselves into dangers, for the Lord says:
“Pray that ye fall not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing,
but the flesh is weak.” <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) Nor
let us, when we do fall into dangers, be fearful or ashamed of our
profession. For if a person, by the denial of his own hope, which is
<span id="ix.vi.i-p21.4"></span>Jesus the Son of God, should be
delivered from a temporary death, and the next day should fall
dangerously sick upon his bed, with a distemper in his bowels, his
stomach, or his head, or any of the incurable diseases, as a
consumption, or gangrene, or looseness, or iliac passion, or dropsy, or
colic, and has a sudden catastrophe, and departs this life; is not he
deprived of the things present, and loses those eternal? Or rather, he
is within the verge of eternal punishment, “and goes into outer
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.” <span
id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) But let him who is vouchsafed the
honour of martyrdom rejoice with joy in the Lord, as obtaining thereby
so great a crown, and departing out of this life by his confession. Nay,
though he be but a catechumen, let him depart without trouble; for his
suffering for Christ will be to him a more genuine baptism, because he
does really die with Christ, but the rest only in a figure. Let him
therefore rejoice in the imitation of his Master, since is it thus
ordained: “Let every one be perfect, as his Master is.” <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987) Now his and our Master, <span
id="ix.vi.i-p23.2"></span>Jesus the Lord, was smitten for our sake: He
underwent reproaches and revilings with long-suffering. He was spit
upon, He was smitten on the face, He was buffeted; and when He had been
scourged, He was nailed to the cross. He had vinegar and gall to drink;
and when He had fulfilled all things that were written, He said to His
God and Father, “Into Thy hands I commend my spirit.” <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) Wherefore let him that desires to
be His disciple earnestly follow His conflicts: let him imitate His
patience, knowing that, although he be burned in the fire by men, he
will suffer nothing, like the three children; <span
id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) or if he does suffer anything, he
shall receive a reward from the Lord, believing in the one and the only
true God and Father, through <span id="ix.vi.i-p25.2"></span>Jesus
Christ, the great High Priest, and Redeemer of our souls, and rewarder
of our sufferings. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p25.3"></span>Several Demonstrations Concerning the Resurrection, Concerning the Sibyl, and What the Stoics Say Concerning the Bird Called the Phoenix.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p26"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p26.1"></span>VII</span>. For the Almighty God Himself will
raise us up through our Lord <span id="ix.vi.i-p26.2"></span>Jesus
Christ, according to His infallible promise, and grant us a resurrection
with all those that have slept from the beginning of the world; and we
shall then be such as we now are in our present form, without any defect
or corruption. For we shall rise incorruptible: whether we die at sea,
or are scattered <span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="ix.vi.i-Page_440"></span>on the earth, or are torn to pieces by wild
beasts and birds, He will raise us by His own power; for the whole world
is held together by the hand of God. Now He says: “An hair of your head
shall not perish.” <span id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990) Wherefore
He exhorts us, saying: “In your patience possess ye your souls.” <span
id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991) But as concerning the resurrection
of the dead, and the recompense of reward for the martyrs, <span
id="ix.vi.i-p28.2"></span>Gabriel speaks to <span
id="ix.vi.i-p28.3"></span>Daniel: “And many of them that sleep shall
arise out of the dust of the earth, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that understand shall shine
as the sun, and as the firmament, and as the stars.” <span
id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992) Therefore the most holy <span
id="ix.vi.i-p29.2"></span>Gabriel foretold that the saints should shine
like the stars: for His sacred name did witness to them, that they might
understand the truth. Nor is a resurrection only declared for the
martyrs, but for all men, righteous and unrighteous, godly and ungodly,
that every one may receive according to his desert. For God, says the
Scripture, “will bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil.” <span
id="fr_2993"></span>[2994](#fn_2993) This resurrection was not believed
by the Jews, when of old they said, “Our bones are withered, and we are
gone.” <span id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) To whom God answered,
and said: “Behold, I open your graves, and will bring you out of them;
and I will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live: and ye shall know
that I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.” And He says by Isaiah:
“The dead shall rise, and those that are in the graves shall be raised
up. And those that rest in the earth shall rejoice, for the dew which is
from Thee shall be healing to them.” <span
id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995) There are indeed many and various
things said concerning the resurrection, and concerning the continuance
of the righteous in glory, and concerning the punishment of the ungodly,
their fall, rejection, condemnation, shame, “eternal fire, and endless
worm.” <span id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) Now that, if it had
pleased Him that all men should be immortal, it was in His power, He
showed in the examples of <span id="ix.vi.i-p33.2"></span>Enoch and
<span id="ix.vi.i-p33.3"></span>Elijah, while He did not suffer them to
have any experience of death. Or if it had pleased Him in every
generation to raise those that died, that this also He was able to do He
hath made manifest both by Himself and by others; as when He raised the
widow’s son <span id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) by <span
id="ix.vi.i-p34.2"></span>Elijah, and the Shunammite’s son <span
id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) by <span
id="ix.vi.i-p35.2"></span>Elisha. But we are persuaded that death is not
a retribution of punishment, because even the saints have undergone it;
nay, even the Lord of the saints, <span id="ix.vi.i-p35.3"></span>Jesus
Christ, the life of them that believe, and the resurrection of the dead.
Upon this account, therefore, according to the ancient practice, for
those who live in the great city, after the combats He brings a
dissolution for a while, that, when He raises up every one, He may
either reject him or crown him. For He that made the body of <span
id="ix.vi.i-p35.4"></span>Adam out of the earth will raise up the bodies
of the rest, and that of the first man, after their dissolution, (to pay
what is owing to the rational nature of man; we mean the continuance in
being through all ages. He, therefore, who brings on the dissolution,
will Himself procure the resurrection. And He that said, “The Lord took
dust from the ground, and formed man, and breathed into his face the
breath of life, and man became a living soul,” <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) added after the disobedience,
“Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou return;” <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000) the same promised us a resurrection
afterwards. <span id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) ) For says He:
“All that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live.” <span id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002)
Besides these arguments, we believe there is to be a resurrection also
from the resurrection of our Lord. For it is He that raised <span
id="ix.vi.i-p39.2"></span>Lazarus, when he had been in the grave four
days, <span id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) and <span
id="ix.vi.i-p40.2"></span>Jairus’ daughter, <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) and the widow’s son. <span
id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) It is He that raised Himself by the
command of the Father in the space of three days, who is the pledge of
our resurrection. For says He: “I am the resurrection and the
life.” <span id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006) Now He that brought
<span id="ix.vi.i-p43.2"></span>Jonas <span
id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) in the space of three days, alive
and unhurt, out of the belly of the whale, and the three children out of
the furnace of Babylon, and <span id="ix.vi.i-p44.2"></span>Daniel out
of the mouth of the lions, <span id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008)
does not want power to raise us up also. But if the Gentiles laugh at
us, and disbelieve our Scriptures, let at least their own prophetess
<span id="ix.vi.i-p45.2"></span>Sibylla <span
id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) oblige them to believe, who says
thus to them in express words:—  

> <span id="ix.vi.i-p46.3"></span> “But when all things shall be reduced
> to dust and ashes,  
> And the immortal God who kindled the fire shall have quenched it,  
> God shall form those bones and that ashes into a man again,  
> And shall place mortal men again as they were before.  
> And then shall be the judgment, wherein God will do justice,  
> And judge the world again. But as many mortals as have sinned through
> impiety  
> Shall again be covered under the earth;  
> But so many as have been pious shall live again in the world. <span
> id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span id="ix.vi.i-Page_441"></span>  
> When God puts His Spirit into them, and gives those at once that are
> godly both life and favour,  
> Then shall all see themselves.” <span
> id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010)  

<span id="ix.vi.i-p48"></span>If, therefore, this prophetess confesses
the resurrection, and does not deny the restoration of all things, and
distinguishes the godly from the ungodly, it is in vain for them to deny
our doctrine. Nay, indeed, they say they can show a resemblance of the
resurrection, while they do not themselves believe the things they
declare: for they say that there is a bird single in its kind which
affords a copious demonstration of the resurrection, which they say is
without a mate, and the only one in the creation. They call it a phœnix,
and relate that every five hundred years it comes into Egypt, to that
which is called the altar of the sun, and brings with it a great
quantity of cinnamon, and cassia, and balsam-wood, and standing towards
the east, as they say, and praying to the sun, of its own accord is
burnt, and becomes dust; but that a worm arises again out of those
ashes, and that when the same is warmed it is formed into a new-born
phoenix; and when it is able to fly, it goes to Arabia, which is beyond
the Egyptian countries. If, therefore, as even themselves say, a
resurrection is exhibited by the means of an irrational bird, wherefore
do they vainly disparage our accounts, when we profess that He who by
His power brings that into being which was not in being before, is able
to restore this body, and raise it up again after its dissolution? For
on account of this full assurance of hope we undergo stripes, and
persecutions, and deaths. Otherwise we should to no purpose undergo such
things if we had not a full assurance of these promises, whereof we
profess ourselves to be the preachers. As, therefore, we believe <span
id="ix.vi.i-p48.1"></span>Moses when he says, “In the beginning God made
the heaven and the earth;” <span id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011)
and we know that He did not want matter, but by His will alone brought
those things into being which Christ was commanded to make; we mean the
heaven, the earth, the sea, the light, the night, the day, the
luminaries, the stars, the fowls, the fishes, and four-footed beasts,
the creeping things, the plants, and the herbs; so also will He raise
all men up by His will, as not wanting any assistance. For it is the
work of the same power to create the world and to raise the dead. And
then He made man, who was not a man before, of different parts, giving
to him a soul made out of nothing. But now He will restore the bodies,
which have been dissolved, to the souls that are still in being: for the
rising again belongs to things laid down, not to things which have no
being. He therefore that made the original bodies out of nothing, and
fashioned various <span id="ix.vi.i-p49.2"></span>forms of them, will
also again revive and raise up those that are dead. For He that formed
man in the womb out of a little seed, and created in him a soul which
was not in being before,—as He Himself somewhere speaks to Jeremiah,
“Before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee;” <span
id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012) and elsewhere, “I am the Lord who
established the heaven, and laid the foundations of the earth, and
formed the spirit of man in him,” <span
id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) —will also raise up all men, as
being His workmanship; as also the divine Scripture testifies that God
said to Christ, His only-begotten, “Let us make man after our image, and
after our likeness. And God made man: after the image of God made He
him; male and female made He them.” <span
id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014) And the most divine and patient
<span id="ix.vi.i-p52.2"></span>Job, of whom the Scripture says that it
is written, that “he was to rise again with those whom the Lord raises
up,” <span id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015) speaks to God thus:
“Hast not Thou milked me like milk, and curdled me like cheese? Thou
hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and
sinews. Thou hast granted me life and favour, and Thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit. Having these things within me, I know that Thou
canst do all things, and that nothing is impossible with Thee.” <span
id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) Wherefore also <span
id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) our Saviour and Master <span
id="ix.vi.i-p55.2"></span>Jesus Christ says, that “what is impossible
with men is possible with God.” <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) And <span
id="ix.vi.i-p56.2"></span>David, the beloved of God, says: “Thine hands
have made me, and fashioned me.” <span
id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) And again: “Thou knowest my
frame.” <span id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) And afterward: “Thou
hast fashioned me, and laid Thine hand upon me. The knowledge of Thee is
declared to be too wonderful for me; it is very great, I cannot attain
unto it.” <span id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) “Thine eyes did see
my substance, being yet imperfect; and all men shall be written in Thy
book.” <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) Nay, and Isaiah says
in his prayer to Him: “We are the clay, and Thou art the framer of
us.” <span id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) If, therefore, man be
His workmanship, made by Christ, by Him most certainly will he after he
is dead be raised again, with intention either of being crowned for his
good actions or punished for his transgressions. But if He, being the
legislator, judges with righteousness; as He punishes the ungodly, so
does He do good to and saves the faithful. And those saints who for His
sake have been slain by men, “some of them He will make light as the
stars, and make others bright as the luminaries,” <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) as <span
id="ix.vi.i-p62.2"></span>Gabriel said to <span
id="ix.vi.i-p62.3"></span>Daniel. <span id="page_442">p. 442</span>
<span id="ix.vi.i-Page_442"></span>All we of the faithful, therefore,
who are the disciples of Christ, believe His promises. For He that has
promised it cannot lie; as says the blessed prophet <span
id="ix.vi.i-p62.4"></span>David: “The Lord is faithful in all His words,
and holy in all His works.” <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025)
For He that framed for Himself a body out of a virgin, is also the
Former of other men. And He that raised Himself from the dead, will also
raise again all that are laid down. He who raises wheat out of the
ground with many stalks from one grain, He who makes the tree that is
cut down send forth fresh branches, He that made Aaron’s dry rod put
forth buds, <span id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) will raise us up
in glory; He that raised Him up that had the palsy whole, <span
id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) and healed him that had the
withered hand, <span id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) He that
supplied a defective part to him that was born blind from clay and
spittle, <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) will raise us up; He
that satisfied five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, and
caused a remainder of twelve baskets, <span
id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) and out of water made wine, <span
id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) and sent a piece of money out of a
fish’s mouth <span id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) by me <span
id="ix.vi.i-p70.2"></span>Peter to those that demanded tribute, will
raise the dead. For we testify all these things concerning Him, and the
prophets testify the other. We who have eaten and drunk with Him, and
have been spectators of His wonderful works, and of His life, and of His
conduct, and of His words, and of His sufferings, and of His death, and
of His resurrection from the dead, and who associated with Him forty
days after His resurrection, <span id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033)
and who received a command from Him to preach the Gospel to all the
world, and to make disciples of all nations, <span
id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) and to baptize them into His death
by the authority of the God of the universe, who is His Father, and by
the testimony of the Spirit, who is His Comforter,—we teach you all
these things which He appointed us by His constitutions, before “He was
received up in our sight into heaven,” <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) to Him that sent Him. And if you
will believe, you shall be happy; but if you will not believe, we shall
be found innocent, and clear from your incredulity.  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p73.2"></span>Concerning James the Brother of the Lord, and Stephen the First Martyr.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p74"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p74.1"></span>VIII</span>. Now concerning the martyrs, we
say to you that they are to be had in all honour with you, as we honour
the blessed <span id="ix.vi.i-p74.2"></span>James the bishop, and the
holy <span id="ix.vi.i-p74.3"></span>Stephen our fellow-servant. For
these are reckoned blessed by God, and are honoured by holy men, who
were pure from all transgressions, immoveable when tempted to sin, or
persuaded from good works, without dispute deserving encomiums: of whom
also <span id="ix.vi.i-p74.4"></span>David speaks, “Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His holy ones;” <span
id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) and <span
id="ix.vi.i-p75.2"></span>Solomon says, “The memory of the just is with
encomiums:” <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037) of whom also the
prophet speaks, “Righteous men are taken away.” <span
id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.i-p77.2"></span>Concerning False Martyrs.

<span id="ix.vi.i-p78"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p78.1"></span>IX.</span> These things we have said
concerning those that in truth have been martyrs for Christ, but not
concerning false martyrs, concerning whom the oracle speaks, “The name
of the ungodly is extinguished.” <span
id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) For “a faithful witness will not
lie, but an unjust witness inflames lies.” <span
id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) For he that departs this life in
his testimony without lying, for the sake of the truth, is a faithful
martyr, worthy to be believed in such things wherein he strove for the
word of piety by his own blood.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[437:2972](0070449.htm#fr_2971) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p2"></span> [Matt. x.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032)<span id="ix.vi.i-p2.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[437:2973](0070449.htm#fr_2972) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p3"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="ix.vi.i-p3.1"></span>,
etc. Portions of the passage from Matthew are omitted in one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.i-p3.2"></span>ms</span>.; and the
conclusions beginning with “Then shall they also,” is entirely omitted.
\[The citation is quite accurate; [Matt. xxv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="ix.vi.i-p3.3"></span> is
divided, doubtless for the sake of emphasis, and slightly modified.—R.\]
 

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[438:2974](0070449.htm#fr_2973) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p4.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p5"></span> [Acts
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006), [Acts
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="ix.vi.i-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[438:2975](0070449.htm#fr_2974) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p6"></span> <span id="ix.vi.i-p6.1"></span>Vid. [Luke
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023)<span id="ix.vi.i-p6.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[438:2976](0070449.htm#fr_2975) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p8"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="ix.vi.i-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[438:2977](0070449.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p9"></span> [Matt.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.i-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[438:2978](0070449.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p10"></span> [John xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020)<span id="ix.vi.i-p10.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[438:2979](0070449.htm#fr_2978) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p11"></span> [Matt.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.i-p11.1"></span>;
[John xvi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span
id="ix.vi.i-p11.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[438:2980](0070449.htm#fr_2979) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p12"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.i-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[438:2981](0070449.htm#fr_2980) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p14"></span> [Matt. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033)<span id="ix.vi.i-p14.1"></span>;
[Luke ix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026)<span
id="ix.vi.i-p14.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[438:2982](0070449.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p15"></span> [Matt. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span id="ix.vi.i-p15.1"></span>,
[Matt. xvi. 26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span
id="ix.vi.i-p15.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[438:2983](0070449.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p16"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ix.vi.i-p16.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[439:2984](0070449.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p18"></span> [Job
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.i-p18.1"></span>.
One V. <span class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.i-p18.2"></span>ms</span>. reads
“piety,” instead of “wickedness,” in the last sentence.  

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[439:2985](0070449.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p20"></span> [John xii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span id="ix.vi.i-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[439:2986](0070449.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p21"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span id="ix.vi.i-p21.1"></span>.
\[See <span id="ix.vi.i-p21.2"></span>De Fuga, vol. iv. p. 119.\]  

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[439:2987](0070449.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p21.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p22"></span> [Matt. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.i-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[439:2988](0070449.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p23"></span> [Luke vi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040)<span id="ix.vi.i-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[439:2989](0070449.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p24"></span> [Luke xxiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span id="ix.vi.i-p24.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[439:2990](0070449.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p25"></span> [Dan.
iii](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p25.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[440:2991](0070449.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p27"></span> [Luke xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)<span id="ix.vi.i-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[440:2992](0070449.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p28"></span> [Luke xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span id="ix.vi.i-p28.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[440:2993](0070449.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p28.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p29"></span> [Dan.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.i-p29.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2993"></span>[440:2994](0070449.htm#fr_2993) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p29.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p30"></span> [Eccles. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.i-p30.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[440:2995](0070449.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p31"></span> [Ezek. xxxvii.
11,](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011)<span id="ix.vi.i-p31.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[440:2996](0070449.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p32"></span> [Isa.
xxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p32.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.i-p32.2"></span>19.  

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[440:2997](0070449.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p33"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span id="ix.vi.i-p33.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[440:2998](0070449.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p33.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p34"></span> [1 Kings
xvii](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p34.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[440:2999](0070449.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p35"></span> [2 Kings
iv](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p35.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[440:3000](0070449.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p35.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p36"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.i-p36.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[440:3001](0070449.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p37"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ix.vi.i-p37.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[440:3002](0070449.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p38"></span> The part within parentheses is not in one
of the V. <span class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.i-p38.1"></span>mss.</span>  

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[440:3003](0070449.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p39"></span> [John v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="ix.vi.i-p39.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[440:3004](0070449.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p40"></span> [John
xi](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p40.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[440:3005](0070449.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p40.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p41"></span> [Mark
v](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p41.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[440:3006](0070449.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p42"></span> [Luke
vii](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p42.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[440:3007](0070449.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p43"></span> [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="ix.vi.i-p43.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[440:3008](0070449.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p44"></span> [Jonah
ii](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.i-p44.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[440:3009](0070449.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p45"></span> <span id="ix.vi.i-p45.1"></span>Dan.
iii., vi  

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[440:3010](0070449.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p45.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p46"></span> \[Compare pp. 256, 257, <span
id="ix.vi.i-p46.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[441:3011](0070449.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p46.14"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p47"></span> <span id="ix.vi.i-p47.1"></span>Orac.
Sibyl., , l. iv. <span id="ix.vi.i-p47.2"></span>in fin. \[See p. 324,
<span id="ix.vi.i-p47.4"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[441:3012](0070449.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p49"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.i-p49.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[441:3013](0070449.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p50"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.i-p50.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[441:3014](0070449.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p51"></span> [Zech. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.i-p51.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[441:3015](0070449.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p52"></span> [Gen.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="ix.vi.i-p52.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[441:3016](0070449.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p52.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p53"></span> <span id="ix.vi.i-p53.1"></span>In fin.
<span id="ix.vi.i-p53.2"></span>Job in LXX.  

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[441:3017](0070449.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p54"></span> [Job x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.i-p54.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[441:3018](0070449.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p55"></span> The words from “Wherefore also” to
“possible with God” are omitted in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.i-p55.1"></span>ms</span>., and noticed as spurious in the
other.  

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[441:3019](0070449.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p55.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p56"></span> [Luke xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#027)<span id="ix.vi.i-p56.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[441:3020](0070449.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p56.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p57"></span> [Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073)<span id="ix.vi.i-p57.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[441:3021](0070449.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p58"></span> [Ps. ciii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.i-p58.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[441:3022](0070449.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p59"></span> [Ps.
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.i-p59.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[441:3023](0070449.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p60"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi.i-p60.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[441:3024](0070449.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p61"></span> [Isa. lxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.i-p61.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[441:3025](0070449.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p62"></span> [Dan. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.i-p62.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[442:3026](0070449.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p62.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p63"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.i-p63.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[442:3027](0070449.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p64"></span> [Num.
xvii.](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p64.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.i-p64.2"></span>8  

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[442:3028](0070449.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p64.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p65"></span> [Matt. ix.
2,](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.i-p65.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[442:3029](0070449.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p66"></span> [Mark iii.
1,](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.i-p66.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[442:3030](0070449.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p67"></span> [John ix.
1,](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.i-p67.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[442:3031](0070449.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p68"></span> [Matt. xiv.
17,](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.i-p68.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[442:3032](0070449.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p69"></span> [John ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.i-p69.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[442:3033](0070449.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p70"></span> [Matt. xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="ix.vi.i-p70.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[442:3034](0070449.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p71"></span> [Acts i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.i-p71.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[442:3035](0070449.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p72"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ix.vi.i-p72.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[442:3036](0070449.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p73"></span> [Acts i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.i-p73.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[442:3037](0070449.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p74.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p75"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi.i-p75.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[442:3038](0070449.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p75.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p76"></span> [Prov. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.i-p76.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[442:3039](0070449.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p77"></span> [Isa. lvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.i-p77.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[442:3040](0070449.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p79"></span> [Prov. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.i-p79.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[442:3041](0070449.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="ix.vi.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.i-p80"></span> [Prov. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.i-p80.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. II.—All Association with Idols is to Be Avoided](0070450)
