[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070023)  [Next](0070025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p0.1"></span>Chap. xviii.—on the consecration of gods, on account of the benefits which they conferred upon men.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1"></span>In this place also they are to be
refuted, who not only admit that gods have been made from men, but even
boast of it as a subject of praise, either on account of their valour,
as <span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.1"></span>Hercules, or of their gifts, as
<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.2"></span>Ceres and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.3"></span>Liber, or of the arts which they
discovered, as <span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.4"></span>Æsculapius or <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.5"></span>Minerva. But how foolish these things are,
and how unworthy of being the causes why men should contaminate
themselves with inexpiable guilt, and become enemies to God, in contempt
of whom they undertake offerings to the dead, I will show from
particular instances. They say that it is virtue <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) which exalts man to heaven,—not, however,
that concerning which philosophers discuss, which consists in goods of
the soul, but this connected with the body, which is called fortitude;
and since this was pre-eminent in <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p2.2"></span>Hercules, it is believed to have deserved
immortality. Who is so foolishly senseless as to judge strength of body
to be a divine or even a human good, when it has been assigned in
greater measure to cattle, and it is often impaired by one disease, or
is lessened by old age <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-Page_31"></span>itself, and altogether fails? And so
<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p2.3"></span>Hercules, when he perceived that his
muscles were disfigured by ulcers, neither wished to be healed nor to
grow old, that he might not at any time appear to have less strength or
comeliness than he once had. <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) They
supposed that he ascended into heaven from the funeral pile on which he
had burnt himself alive; and those very qualities which they most
foolishly admired, they expressed by statues and images, and
consecrated, so that they might for ever remain as memorials of the
folly of those who had believed that gods owed their origin to the
slaughter of beasts. But this, perchance, may be the fault of the
Greeks, who always esteemed most trifling things as of the greatest
consequence. What is the case of our own countrymen? Are they more wise?
For they despise valour in an athlete, because it produces no injury;
but in the case of a king, because it occasions widely-spread disasters,
they so admire it as to imagine that brave and warlike generals are
admitted to the assembly of the gods, and that there is no other way to
immortality than to lead armies, to lay waste the territory of others,
to destroy cities, to overthrow towns, to put to death or enslave free
peoples. Truly the greater number of men they have cast down, plundered,
and slain, so much the more noble and distinguished do they think
themselves; and ensnared by the show of empty glory, they give to their
crimes the name of virtue. I would rather that they should make to
themselves gods from the slaughter of wild beasts, than approve of an
immortality so stained with blood. If any one has slain a single man, he
is regarded as contaminated and wicked, nor do they think it lawful for
him to be admitted to this earthly abode of the gods. But he who has
slaughtered countless thousands of men, has inundated plains with blood,
and infected rivers, is not only admitted into the temple, but even into
heaven. In Ennius <span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p3.1"></span>Africanus thus
speaks: “If it is permitted any one to ascend to the regions of the gods
above, the greatest gate of heaven is open to me alone.” Because, in
truth, he extinguished and destroyed a great part of the human race. Oh
how great the darkness in which you were involved, O Africanus, or
rather O poet, in that you imagined the ascent to heaven to be open to
men through slaughters and bloodshed! And <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p3.2"></span>Cicero also assented to this delusion. It
is so in truth, he said, O Africanus, for the same gate was open to
<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p3.3"></span>Hercules; as though he himself had
been doorkeeper in heaven at the time when this took place. I indeed
cannot determine whether I should think it a subject of grief or of
ridicule, when I see grave and learned, and, as they appear to
themselves, wise men, involved in such miserable waves of errors. If
this is the virtue which renders us immortal, I for my part should
prefer to die, rather than to be the cause of destruction to as many as
possible. If immortality can be obtained in no other way than by
bloodshed, what will be the result if all shall agree to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p3.4"></span>live in harmony? And this may undoubtedly
be realized, if men would cast aside their pernicious and impious
madness, and live in innocence and justice. Shall no one, then, be
worthy of heaven? Shall virtue perish, because it will not be permitted
men to rage against their fellow-men? But they who reckon the overthrow
of cities and people as the greatest glory will not endure public
tranquillity: they will plunder and rage; and by the infliction of
outrageous injuries will disturb the compact of human society, that they
may have an enemy whom they may destroy with greater wickedness than
that with which they attacked.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4"></span>Now let us proceed to the remaining
subjects. The conferring of benefits gave the name of gods to <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.1"></span>Ceres and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.2"></span>Liber. I am able to prove from the sacred
writings that wine and corn were used by men before the offspring of
<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.3"></span>Cœlus and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.4"></span>Saturnus. But let us suppose that they
were introduced by these. Can it appear to be a greater thing to have
collected corn, and having bruised it, to have taught men to make bread;
or to have pressed grapes gathered from the vine, and to have made wine,
than to have produced and brought forth from the earth corn itself, or
the vine? God, indeed, may have left these things to be drawn out by the
ingenuity of man; yet all things must belong to Him, who gave to man
both wisdom to discover, and those very things which might be
discovered. The arts also are said to have gained immortality for their
inventors, as medicine for <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.5"></span>Æsculapius, the craft of the smith for
<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.6"></span>Vulcan. Therefore let us worship
those also who taught the art of the fuller and of the shoemaker. But
why is not honour paid to the discoverer of the potter’s art? Is it that
those rich men despise Samian vessels? There are also other arts, the
inventors of which greatly profited the life of man. Why have not
temples been assigned to them also? But doubtless it is <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.7"></span>Minerva who discovered all, and therefore
workmen offer prayers to her. Such, then, was the low condition <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) from which <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p5.1"></span>Minerva ascended to heaven. Is there truly
any reason why any one should leave the worship of Him who created <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) the earth with its living creatures, and
the heaven with its stars, for the adoration of her who taught men to
set up the woof? What place does he hold who taught the healing of
wounds in the <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-Page_32"></span>body? Can he be more excellent than Him
who formed the body itself, and the power of sensibility and of life?
Finally, did he contrive and bring to light the herbs themselves, and
the other things in which the healing art consists?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[30:81](0070024.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p1.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p2"></span> Virtus in its first meaning denotes
valour, the property of a man (<span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p2.1"></span>vir</span>); then it is used to signify
moral excellence.  

<span id="fn_81"></span>[31:82](0070024.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p3"></span> Lit., than himself.  

<span id="fn_82"></span>[31:83](0070024.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p4.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p5"></span> Ab his sordibus.  

<span id="fn_83"></span>[31:84](0070024.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xix-p6"></span> Exorsus est. The word properly
denotes to begin a web, to lay the warp; hence the use of “ordiri” In
the following clause.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—That it is impossible for any one to worship the true
God together with false deities](0070025)
