[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070174)  [Next](0070176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XI.—Of the Last Times, and of the Soul and Body.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p1"></span>Therefore, when the times which God
has appointed for death shall be completed, death itself shall be ended.
And because temporal death follows temporal life, it follows that souls
rise again to everlasting life, because temporal death has received an
end. Again, as the life of the soul is everlasting, in which it receives
the divine and unspeakable fruits of its immortality; also its death
must be eternal, in which it suffers perpetual punishments and infinite
torments for its faults. Therefore things are in this position, that
they who are happy in this life, pertaining to the body and the earth,
are about to be miserable for ever, because they have already enjoyed
the good things which they preferred, which happens to those who adore
false gods and neglect the true God. In the next place, they who,
following righteousness, have been miserable, and despised, and poor in
this life, and have often been harassed with insults and injuries on
account of righteousness itself, because virtue cannot otherwise be
attained, are about to be always happy, that since they have already
endured evils, they may also enjoy goods. Which plainly happens to those
who, having despised gods of the earth and frail goods, follow the
heavenly religion of God, whose goods are everlasting, as He Himself who
gave them. What shall I say of the works of the body and soul? Do not
they show that the soul is not subject to death? For, as to the body,
since it is itself frail and mortal, whatever works it contrives are
equally perishable. For <span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Tullius
says that there is nothing which is wrought by the hands of man which is
not at some time reduced to destruction, either through injury caused by
men, or through length of time, which is the destroyer of all things.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p2"></span>But truly we see that the productions
of the mind are immortal. For as many as, devoting themselves to the
contempt of present things, <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xi-Page_208"></span>have handed down to memory the
monuments of their genius and great deeds, have plainly gained by these
an imperishable name for their mind and virtue. Therefore, if the deeds
of the body are mortal for this reason, because the body itself is
mortal, it follows that the soul is shown to be immortal from this,
because we see that its productions are not mortal. In the same manner
also, the desires of the body and of the soul declare that the one is
mortal, the other everlasting. For the body desires nothing except what
is temporal, that is, food, drink, clothing, rest, and pleasure; and it
cannot desire or attain to these very things without the assent and
assistance <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368) of the soul. But
the soul of itself desires many things which do not extend <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) to the duty or enjoyment of the
body; and those are not frail, but eternal, as the fame of virtue, as
the remembrance of the name. For the soul even in opposition to the body
desires the worship of God, which consists in abstinence from desires
and lusts, in the enduring of pain, in the contempt of death. From which
it is credible that the soul does not perish, but is separated from the
body, because the body can do nothing without the soul, but the soul can
do many and great things without the body. Why should I mention that
those things which are visible to the eyes, and capable of being touched
by the hand, cannot be eternal, because they admit of external violence;
but those things which neither come under the touch nor under the sight,
but are apparent <span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p4.2"></span>only in their
force and method and effect, are eternal because they suffer no violence
from without? But if the body is mortal on this account, because it is
equally open to the sight and to the touch, therefore the soul is
immortal for this reason, because it can be neither touched nor seen.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[208:1369](0070175.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p3.1"></span>Sine nutu et adminiculo animi.  

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[208:1370](0070175.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xi-p4.1"></span>Redundent.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—Of the soul and the body, and of their union and
separation and return](0070176)
