[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070068)  [Next](0070070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.—The Pythagoreans and Stoics, While They Hold the Immortality of the Soul, Foolishly Persuade a Voluntary Death.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p1"></span>Others, again, discuss things
contrary to these, namely, that the soul survives after death; and these
are chiefly the Pythagoreans and Stoics. And although they are to be
treated with indulgence because they perceive the truth, yet I cannot
but blame them, because they fell upon the truth not by their opinion,
but by accident. And thus they erred in some degree even in that very
matter which they rightly perceived. For, since they feared the argument
by which it is inferred that the soul must necessarily die with the
body, because it is born with the body, they asserted that the soul is
not born with the body, but rather introduced into it, and that it
migrates from one body to another. They did not consider that it was
possible for the soul to survive the body, unless it should appear to
have existed previously to the body. There is therefore an equal and
almost similar error on each side. But the one side are deceived with
respect to the past, the other with respect to the future. For no one
saw that which is most true, that the soul is both created and does not
die, because they were ignorant why that came to pass, or what was the
nature of man. Many therefore of them, because they suspected that the
soul is immortal, laid violent hands upon themselves, as though they
were about to depart to heaven. Thus it was with <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Cleanthes <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p2.2"></span>Chrysippus, <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) with <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3.4"></span>Zeno, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p4.2"></span>Empedocles, <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) who in the dead of night cast himself
into a cavity of the burning Ætna, that when he had suddenly disappeared
it might be believed that he had departed to the gods; and thus also of
the Romans <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p5.2"></span>Cato died, who
through the whole of his life was an imitator of Socratic <span
id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-Page_89"></span>ostentation. For <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p5.3"></span>Democritus <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) was of another persuasion. But,
however,  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p6.2"></span> “By his own spontaneous act
> he offered up his head to death; “ <span
> id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445)  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p8"></span>and nothing can be more wicked
than this. For if a homicide is guilty because he is a destroyer of man,
he who puts himself to death is under the same guilt, because he puts to
death a man. Yea, that crime may be considered to be greater, the
punishment of which belongs to God alone. For as we did not come into
this life of our own accord; so, on the other hand, we can only withdraw
from this habitation of the body which has been appointed for us to
keep, by the command of Him who placed us in this body that we may
inhabit it, until He orders us to depart from it; and if any violence is
offered to us, we must endure it with equanimity, since the death of an
innocent person cannot be unavenged, and since we have a great Judge who
alone always has the power of taking vengeance in His hands.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p9"></span>All these philosophers, therefore,
were homicides; and <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>Cato
himself, the chief of Roman wisdom, who, before he put himself to death,
is said to have read through the treatise of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p9.2"></span>Plato which he wrote on the
immortality of the soul, and was led by the authority of the philosopher
to the commission of this great crime; yet he, however, appears to have
had some cause for death in his hatred of slavery. Why should I speak of
the <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p9.3"></span>Ambraciot, <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) who, having read the same treatise,
threw himself into the sea, for no other cause than that he believed
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.2"></span>Plato?—a doctrine altogether
detestable and to be avoided, if it drives men from life. But if <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.3"></span>Plato had known and taught by whom,
and how, and to whom, and on account of what actions, and at what time,
immortality is given, he would neither have driven <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.4"></span>Cleombrotus nor <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.5"></span>Cato to a voluntary death, but he
would have trained them to live with justice. For it appears to me that
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.6"></span>Cato sought a cause for death,
not so much that he might escape from Cæsar, as that he might obey the
decrees of the Stoics, whom he followed, and might make his name
distinguished by some great action; and I do not see what evil could
have happened to him if he had lived. For <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.7"></span>Caius Cæsar, such was his clemency,
had no other object, even in the very heat of civil war, than to appear
to deserve well of the state, by preserving two excellent citizens,
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.8"></span>Cicero and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.9"></span>Cato. But let us return to those who
praise death as a benefit. You complain of life as though you had lived,
or had ever settled with yourself why you were born at all. May not
therefore the true and common Father of all justly find fault with that
saying of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.10"></span>Terence: <span
id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p11.2"></span> “First, learn in what life
> consists; then, if you shall be dissatisfied with life, have recourse
> to death.”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p12"></span>You are indignant that you are
exposed to evils; as though you deserved anything good, who are ignorant
of your Father, Lord, and King; who, although you behold with your eyes
the bright light, are nevertheless blind in mind, and lie in the depths
of the darkness of ignorance. And this ignorance has caused that some
have not been ashamed to say, that we are born for this cause, that we
may suffer the punishment of our crimes; but I do not see what can be
more senseless than this. For where or what crimes could we have
committed when we did not even exist? Unless we shall happen to believe
that foolish old man, <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) who
falsely said <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.6"></span>that <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.7"></span>he had lived before, and that in his
former life he had been <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.8"></span>Euphorbus. He, I believe, because he
was born of an ignoble race, chose for himself a family from the poems
of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.9"></span>Homer. O wonderful and
remarkable memory of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.10"></span>Pythagoras! O miserable
forgetfulness on the part of us all, since we know not who we were in
our former life! But perhaps it was caused by some error, or favour,
that he alone did not touch the abyss of Lethe, or taste the water of
oblivion; doubtless the trifling old man (as is wont to be the case with
old women who are free from occupation) invented fables as it were for
credulous infants. But if he had thought well of those to whom he spoke
these things; if he had considered them to be men, he would never have
claimed to himself the liberty of uttering such perverse falsehoods. But
the folly of this most trifling man is deserving of ridicule. What shall
we do in the case of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.11"></span>Cicero,
who, having said in the beginning of his <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.12"></span>Consolation that men were born for
the sake of atoning for their crimes, afterwards repeated the assertion,
as though rebuking him who does not imagine that life is a punishment?
He was right, therefore, in saying beforehand that he was held by error
and wretched ignorance of the truth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_440"></span>[88:441](0070069.htm#fr_440) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>Cleanthes was a Stoic philosopher, who
used to draw water by night for his support, that he might devote
himself to the study of philosophy by day. He ended his life by refusing
to take food.  

<span id="fn_441"></span>[88:442](0070069.htm#fr_441) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>Chrysippus was a disciple of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3.2"></span>Zeno, and, after <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3.3"></span>Cleanthes, the chief of the Stoic
sect. According to some accounts, he died front an excessive draught of
wine; according to others, from excessive laughter.  

<span id="fn_442"></span>[88:443](0070069.htm#fr_442) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p4.1"></span>Zeno, the chief of the Stoic sect. He
is said to have died from suffocation.  

<span id="fn_443"></span>[88:444](0070069.htm#fr_443) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>Empedocles was a philosopher and poet.
There are various accounts of his death; that mentioned in the text is
usually received.  

<span id="fn_444"></span>[89:445](0070069.htm#fr_444) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p6"></span> There are various accounts
respecting the death of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>Democritus.  

<span id="fn_445"></span>[89:446](0070069.htm#fr_445) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>Lucretius, iii. 1041.  

<span id="fn_446"></span>[89:447](0070069.htm#fr_446) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.1"></span>Cleombrotus of Ambracia.  

<span id="fn_447"></span>[89:448](0070069.htm#fr_447) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p10.11"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p11.1"></span>Heautontim., v. 2, 18. This advice is
given to a young man, who, not knowing the value of life, is prepared
rashly to throw it away in consequence of some check to his plans.  

<span id="fn_448"></span>[89:449](0070069.htm#fr_448) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.1"></span>Pythagoras taught the doctrine of the
transmigration of souls, and affirmed that he had lived already as <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.2"></span>Euphorbus, one of the heroes of Troy,
who was slain by <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.3"></span>Menelaus in
the Trojan war. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.4"></span>Lactantius
again refers to this subject, book vii. ch. 23, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xviii-p13.5"></span>infra.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIX.—Cicero and others of the wisest men teach the
immortality of the soul, but in an unbelieving manner; and that a good
or an evil death must be weighed from the previous life](0070070)
