[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070254)  [Next](0070256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXVII.—Of Repentance, the Immortality of the Soul, and of Providence.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p1"></span>But it is true all these things
are difficult to man, nor does the condition of his frailty permit that
any one should be without blemish. Therefore the last remedy is this,
that we have recourse to repentance, which has not the least place among
the virtues, because it is a correction of oneself; that when we have
happened to fail either in deed or in word, we may immediately come to a
better mind, and confess that we have offended, and entreat pardon from
God, which according to His mercy He will not deny, except to those who
persist in their error. Great is the aid, great the solace of
repentance. That is the healing of wounds and offences, that hope, that
the harbour of safety; and he who takes away this cuts off from himself
the way of salvation, because no one can be so just that repentance is
never necessary for him. But we, even though there is no offence of
ours, yet ought to confess to God, and to entreat pardon for our faults,
and to give thanks even in evils. Let us always offer this obedience to
our Lord. For humility is dear and lovely in the sight of God; for since
He rather receives the sinner who confesses his fault, than the just man
who is haughty, how much more will He receive the just man who
confesses, and exalt him in His heavenly kingdom in proportion to his
humility! These are the things which the worshipper of God ought to hold
forth; these are the victims, this the sacrifice, which is acceptable;
this is true worship, when a man offers upon the altar of God the
pledges of his own mind. That supreme Majesty rejoices in such a
worshipper as this, as it takes him as a son and bestows upon him the
befitting reward of immortality, concerning which I must now speak, and
refute the persuasion of those who think that the soul is destroyed
together with the body. For inasmuch as they neither knew God nor were
able to perceive the mystery of the world, they did not even comprehend
the nature of man and of the soul. For how could they see the
consequences, who did not hold the main point? <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) Therefore, in denying the existence
of a providence, they plainly denied the existence of God, who is the
fountain and source of all things. It followed that they should either
affirm that those things which exist have always existed, or were
produced of their own accord, or arose from a meeting together of minute
seeds.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p3"></span>It cannot be said that that which
exists, and is visible, always existed; for it cannot exist of itself
without some beginning. But nothing can be produced of its own accord,
because there is no nature without one who generates it. But how could
there be original <span id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) seeds,
since both the seeds arise from objects, <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) and, in their turn, objects from
seeds? Therefore there is no seed which has not origin. Thus it came to
pass, that when they supposed that the world was produced by no
providence, they did not suppose that even man was produced by any
plan. <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593) But if no plan was made
use of in the creation of man, therefore the soul cannot be immortal.
But others, on the other hand, thought there was but one God, and that
the world was made by Him, and made for the sake of men, and that souls
are immortal. But though they entertained true sentiments, nevertheless
they did not perceive the causes, or reasons, or issues of this divine
work and design, so as to complete the whole mystery of the truth, and
to comprise it within some limit. But that which they were not able to
do, because they did not hold the truth in its integrity, <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594) must be done by us, who know it on
the announcement of God.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[251:1591](0070255.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p2.1"></span>Summam. <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p2.2"></span>Lactantius uses this word to express
a compendious summary of divine mysteries.  

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[251:1592](0070255.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p4.1"></span>Semina principalia.  

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[251:1593](0070255.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p5.1"></span>Ex rebus.  

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[251:1594](0070255.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p6.1"></span>Aliquâ ratione.  

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[251:1595](0070255.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxiii-p7.1"></span>Perpetuo, i.e., without intermission.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXVIII.—Of the world, man, and the providence of
God](0070256)
