[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070038)  [Next](0070040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. ix.—of the devil, the world, god, providence, man, and his wisdom.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p1"></span>I will therefore set forth the method
of all these things, that difficult and obscure subjects may be more
easily understood; and I will bring to light all these deceptions <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) of the pretended deity, led by which
men have departed very far from the way of truth. But I will retrace the
matter far back from its source; that if any, unacquainted with the
truth and ignorant, shall apply himself to the reading <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>of this book, he may be instructed, and
may understand what can in truth be “the source and origin of these
evils;” and having received light, may perceive his own errors and those
of the whole human race.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p3"></span>Since God was possessed <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) of the greatest foresight for
planning, and of the greatest skill for carrying out in action, before
He commenced this business of the world,—inasmuch as there was in Him,
and always is, the fountain of full and most complete goodness,—in order
that goodness might spring as a stream from Him, and might flow forth
afar, He produced a Spirit like to Himself, who might be endowed with
the perfections of God the Father. But how He willed that, I will
endeavour to show in the fourth book. <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) Then He made another being, in whom
the disposition of the divine origin did not remain. Therefore he was
infected with his own envy as with poison, and passed from good to evil;
and at his own will, which had been given to him by God
unfettered, <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) he acquired for
himself a contrary name. From which it appears that the source of all
evils is envy. For he envied his predecessor, <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) who through his stedfastness <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) is acceptable and dear to God the
Father. This being, who from good became <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>
<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-Page_53"></span>evil by his own act, is called by
the Greeks <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p8.1"></span>diabolus</span>: <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) we call him accuser, because he
reports to God the faults to which he himself entices us. God,
therefore, when He began the fabric of the world, set over the whole
work that first and greatest Son, and used Him at the same time as a
counsellor and artificer, in planning, arranging, and accomplishing,
since He is complete both in knowledge, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) and judgment, and power; concerning
whom I now speak more sparingly, because in another place <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) both His excellence, and His name, and
His nature must be related by us. Let no one inquire of what materials
God made these works so great and wonderful: for He made all things out
of nothing.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p12"></span>Nor are the poets to be listened to,
who say that in the beginning was a chaos, that is, a confusion of
matter and the elements; but that God afterwards divided all that mass,
and having separated each object from the confused heap, and arranged
them in order, He constructed and adorned the world. Now it is easy to
reply to these persons, who do not understand the power of God: for they
believe that He can produce nothing, except out of materials already
existing <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) and prepared; in which
error philosophers also were involved. For <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>Cicero, while discussing the nature of
the gods, <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) thus speaks: “First of
all, therefore, it is not probable <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) that the matter <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) from which all things arose was made
by divine providence, but that it has, and has had, a force and nature
of its own. As therefore the builder, when he is about to erect any
building, does not himself make the materials, but uses those which are
already prepared, and the statuary <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) also <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>uses the wax; so that divine providence
ought to have had materials at hand, not of its own production, but
already prepared for use. But if matter was not made by God, then
neither was the earth, and water, and air, and fire, made by God.” Oh,
how many faults there are in these ten lines! First, that he who in
almost all his other disputations and books was a maintainer of the
divine providence, and who used very acute arguments in assailing those
who denied the existence of a providence, now himself, as a traitor or
deserter, endeavoured to take away providence; in whose case, if you
wish to oppose <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) him, neither
consideration nor labour is required: it is only necessary to remind him
of his own words. For it will be impossible for <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>Cicero to be more strongly refuted by any
one than by <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p18.2"></span>Cicero himself. But let
us make this concession to the custom and practice of the
Academics, <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) that men are
permitted to speak with great freedom, and to entertain what sentiments
they may wish. Let us examine the sentiments themselves. It is not
probable, he says, that matter was made by God. By what arguments do you
prove this? For you gave no reason for its being improbable. Therefore,
on the contrary, it appears to me exceedingly probable; nor does it
appear so without reason, when I reflect that there is something more in
God, whom you verily reduce to the weakness of man, to whom you allow
nothing else but the mere workmanship. In what respect, then, will that
divine power differ from man, if God also, as man does, stands in need
of the assistance of another? But He does stand in need of it, if He can
construct nothing unless He is furnished with materials by another. But
if this is the case, it is plain that His power is imperfect, and he who
prepared the material <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) must be
judged more powerful. By what name, therefore, shall he be called who
excels God in power?—since it is greater to make that which is one’s
own, than to arrange those things which are another’s. But if it is
impossible that anything should be more powerful than God, who must
necessarily be of perfect strength, power, and intelligence, it follows
that He who made the things which are composed of matter, made matter
also. For it was neither possible nor befitting that anything should
exist without the exercise of God’s power, or against His will. But it
is probable, he says, that matter has, and always has had, a force and
nature of its own. <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) What force
could it have, without any one to give it? what nature, without any one
to produce it? If it had force, it took that force from some one. But
from whom could it take it, unless it were from God? Moreover, if it had
a nature, which plainly is so called from being produced, it must have
been produced. But from whom could it have derived its existence, except
God? For nature, from which you say that all things had their origin, if
it has no understanding, can make nothing. But if it has the power of
producing and making, then it has understanding, and must be God. For
that force can be called by no other name, in which there is both the
foresight <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) to plan, and the skill
and power to carry into effect. Therefore <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p22.2"></span>Seneca, the most intelligent of all the
Stoics, says better, who saw “that nature was nothing else but God.”
Therefore he <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-Page_54"></span>says, “Shall we not praise God, who
possesses natural excellence?” For He did not learn it from any one.
Yes, truly, we will praise Him; for although it is natural to Him, He
gave it to Himself, <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) since God
Himself is nature. When, therefore, you assign the origin of all things
to nature, and take it from God, you are in the same difficulty:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p23.3"></span> “You pay your debt by
> borrowing, <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) Geta.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p25"></span>For while simply changing the name,
you clearly admit that it was made by the same person by whom you deny
that it was made.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p26"></span>There follows a most senseless
comparison. “As the builder,” he says, “when he is about to erect any
building, does not himself make the materials, but uses those which are
already prepared, and the statuary also the wax; so that divine
providence ought to have had materials at hand, not of its own
production, but already prepared for use.” Nay rather it ought not; for
God will have less power if He makes from materials already provided,
which is the part of man. The builder will erect nothing without wood,
for he cannot make the wood itself; and not to be able to do this is the
part of human weakness. But God Himself makes the materials for Himself,
because He has the power. For to have the power is the property of God;
for if He is not able, He is not God. Man produces <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p26.1"></span>his works out of that which already
exists, because through his mortality he is weak, and through his
weakness his power is limited and moderate; but God produces His works
out of that which has no existence, because through His eternity He is
strong, and through His strength His power is immense, which has no end
or limit, like the life of the Maker Himself. What wonder, then, if God,
when He was about to make the world, first prepared the material from
which to make it, and prepared it out of that which had no existence?
Because it is impossible for God to borrow anything from another source,
inasmuch as all things are in Himself and from Himself. For if there is
anything before Him, and if anything has been made, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p26.2"></span>but not by Him, He will therefore lose
both the power and the name of God. But it may be said matter was never
made, like God, who out of matter made this world. In that case, it
follows that two eternal <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p26.3"></span>principles
are established, and those indeed opposed to one another, which cannot
happen without discord and destruction. For those things which have a
contrary force and method must of necessity come into collision. In this
manner it will be impossible that both should be eternal, if they are
opposed to one another, because one must overpower the other. Therefore
the nature of that which is eternal cannot be otherwise than simple, so
that all things descended from that source as from a fountain. Therefore
either God proceeded from matter, or matter from God. Which of these is
more true, is easily understood. For of these two, one is endued with
sensibility, the other is insensible. The power of making anything
cannot exist, except in that which has sensibility, intelligence,
reflection, and the power of motion. Nor can anything be begun, or made,
or completed, unless it shall have been foreseen by reason how it shall
be made before it exists, and how it shall endure <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) after it has been made. In short, he
<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p27.1"></span>only makes anything who has the
will to make it, and hands to complete that which he has willed. But
that which is insensible always lies inactive and torpid; nothing can
originate in that source where there is no voluntary motion. For if
every animal is possessed of reason, it is certain that it cannot be
produced from that which is destitute of reason, nor can that which is
not present in the original source <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) be received from any other quarter.
Nor, however, let it disturb any one, that certain animals appear to be
born from the earth. For the earth does not give birth to these of
itself, but the Spirit of God, without which nothing is produced.
Therefore God did not arise from matter, because a being endued with
sensibility can never spring from one that is insensible, a wise one
from one that is irrational, one that is incapable of suffering from one
that can suffer, an incorporeal being from a corporeal one; but matter
is rather from God. For whatever consists of a body solid, and capable
of being handled, admits of an external force. That which admits of
force is capable of dissolution; that which is dissolved perishes; that
which perishes must necessarily have had an origin; that which had an
origin had a source <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) from which
it originated, that is, some maker, who is intelligent, foreseeing, and
skilled in making. There is one assuredly, and that no other than God.
And since He is possessed of sensibility, intelligence, providence,
power, and vigour, He is able to create and make both animated and
inanimate objects, because He has the means of making everything. But
matter cannot always have existed, for if it had existed it would be
incapable of change. For that which always was, does not cease always to
be; and that which had no beginning must of necessity be without an end.
Moreover, it is easier for that which had a beginning to be without an
end, than for that which had no beginning, <span id="page_55">p.
55</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-Page_55"></span>to have an end.
Therefore if matter was not made, nothing can be made from it. But if
nothing can be made from it, then matter itself can have no existence.
For matter is that out of which something is made. But everything out of
which anything is made, inasmuch as it has received the hand of the
artificer, is destroyed, <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) and
begins to be some other thing. Therefore, since matter had an end, at
the time when the world was made out of it, it also had a beginning. For
that which is destroyed <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) was
<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31.3"></span>previously built up; that which is
loosened was <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31.4"></span>previously bound up;
that which is brought to an end was begun. If, then, it is inferred from
its change and end, that matter had a beginning, from whom could that
beginning have been, except from God? God, therefore, is the only being
who was not made; and therefore He can destroy other things, but He
Himself cannot be destroyed. That which was in Him will always be
permanent, because He has not been produced or sprung from any other
source; nor does His birth depend on any other object, which being
changed may cause His dissolution. He is of Himself, as we said in the
first book; <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) and therefore He is
such as He willed that He should be, incapable of suffering,
unchangeable, incorruptible, blessed, and eternal.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p33"></span>But now the conclusion, with which
<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p33.1"></span>Tully finished the sentiment, is
much more absurd. <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) “But if
matter,” he says, “was not made by God, the earth indeed, and water, and
air, and fire, were not made by God.” How skilfully he avoided the
danger! For he stated the former point as though it required no proof,
whereas it was much more uncertain than that on account of which the
statement was made. If matter, he says, was not made by God, the world
was not made by God. He preferred to draw a false inference from that
which is false, than a true one from that which is true. And though
uncertain things ought to be proved from those which are certain, he
drew a proof from an uncertainty, to overthrow that which was certain.
For, that the world was made by divine providence (not to mention <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p34.2"></span>Trismegistus, who proclaims this; not to
mention the verses of the Sibyls, who make the same announcement; not to
mention the prophets, <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) who with
one impulse and with harmonious <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)
voice bear witness that the world was made, <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) and that it was the workmanship of
God), even the philosophers almost universally agree; for this is the
opinion of the Pythagoreans, the Stoics, and the Peripatetics, who are
the chief of every sect. <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) In
short, from those first seven wise men, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) even to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p39.2"></span>Socrates and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p39.3"></span>Plato, it was held as an acknowledged and
undoubted fact; until many ages afterwards <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) the crazy <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.5"></span>Epicurus lived, who alone ventured to
deny that which is most evident, doubtless through the desire of
discovering novelties, that he might found a sect in his own name. And
because he could find out nothing new, that he might still appear to
disagree with the others, he wished to overthrow old opinions. But in
this all the philosophers who snarled <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) around him, refuted him. It is more
certain, therefore, that the world was arranged by providence, than that
matter was collected <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) by
providence. Wherefore he ought not to have supposed that the world was
not made by divine providence, because its matter was not made by divine
providence; but because the world was made by divine providence, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.3"></span>he ought to have concluded that matter
also was made by the Deity. For it is more credible that matter was made
by God, because He is all-powerful, than that the world was not made by
God, because nothing can be made without mind, intelligence, and design.
But this is not the fault of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.4"></span>Cicero, but of the sect. For when he had
undertaken a disputation, by which he might take away the nature of the
gods, respecting which philosophers prated, in his ignorance of the
truth he imagined that the Deity must altogether be taken away. He was
able therefore to take away the gods, for they had no existence. But
when he attempted to overthrow the divine providence, which is in the
one God, because he had begun to strive against the truth, his arguments
failed, and he necessarily fell into this pitfall, from which he was
unable to withdraw himself. Here, then, I hold him firmly fixed; I hold
him fastened to the spot, since <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.5"></span>Lucilius, who disputed on the other side,
was silent. Here, then, is the turning-point; <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) on this everything depends. Let <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p43.1"></span>Cotta disentangle himself, if he can,
from this difficulty; <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) let him
bring forward arguments by which he may prove that matter has always
existed, which no providence made. Let him show how anything ponderous
and heavy either could exist without an author or could be changed, and
how that which <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-Page_56"></span>always was ceased to be, so that that
which never was might begin to be. And if he shall prove these things,
then, and not till then, will I admit that the world itself was not
established by divine providence, and yet in making this admission I
shall hold him fast by another snare. For he will turn round again to
the same point, to which he will be unwilling <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p44.1"></span>to return, so as to say that both the
matter of which the world consists, and the world which consists of
matter, existed by nature; though I contend that nature itself is God.
For no one can make wonderful things, that is, things existing with the
greatest order, except one who has intelligence, foresight, and power.
And thus it will come to be seen that God made all things, and that
nothing at all can exist which did not derive its origin from God.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p45"></span>But the same, as often as he follows
the Epicureans, <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) and does not
admit that the world was made by God, is wont to inquire by what hands,
by what machines, by what levers, by what contrivance, He made this work
of such magnitude. He might see, if he could have lived at that time in
which <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p46.1"></span>God made it. But, that man
might not look into the works of God, He was unwilling to bring him into
this world until all things were completed. But he could not be brought
in: for how could he exist while the heaven above was being built, and
the foundations of the earth beneath were being laid; when humid things,
perchance, either benumbed with excessive stiffness were becoming
congealed, or seethed with fiery heat and rendered solid were growing
hard? Or how could he live when the sun was not yet established, and
neither corn nor animals were produced? Therefore it was necessary that
man should be last made, when the finishing <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) hand had now been applied to the world
and to all other things. Finally, the sacred writings teach that man was
the last work of God, and that he was brought into this world as into a
house prepared and made ready; for all things were made on his account.
The poets also acknowledge the same. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p47.1"></span>Ovid, having described the completion of
the world, and the formation of the other animals, added: <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p48.2"></span> “An animal more sacred than
> these, and more capacious of a lofty mind, was yet wanting, and which
> might exercise dominion over the rest. Man was produced.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p49"></span>So impious must we think it to search
into those things which God wished to be kept secret! But his inquiries
were not made through a desire of hearing or learning, but of refuting;
for he was confident that no one could assert that. As though, in truth,
it were to be supposed that these things were not made by God, because
it cannot be plainly seen in what manner they were created! If you had
been brought up in a well-built and ornamented house, and had never seen
a workshop, <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) would you have
supposed that that house was not built by man, because you did not know
how it was built? You would assuredly ask the same question about the
house which you now ask about the world—by what hands, with what
implements, man had contrived such great works; and especially if you
should see large stones, immense blocks, <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) vast columns, the whole work lofty and
elevated, would not these things appear to you to exceed the measure of
human strength, because you would not know that these things were made
not so much by strength as by skill and ingenuity?  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p52"></span>But if man, in whom nothing is
perfect, nevertheless effects more by skill than his feeble strength
would permit, what reason is there why it should appear to you
incredible, when it is alleged that the world was made by God, in whom,
since He is perfect, wisdom can have no limit, and strength no measure?
His works are seen by the eyes; but how He made them is not seen even by
the mind, because, as Hermes says, the mortal cannot draw nigh to (that
is, approach nearer, and follow up with the understanding) the immortal,
the temporal <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) to the eternal, the
corruptible to the incorruptible. And on this account the earthly animal
is as yet incapable of perceiving <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) heavenly things, because it is shut in
and held as it were in custody by the body, so that it cannot discern
all things with free and unrestrained perception. Let him know,
therefore, how foolishly he acts, who inquires into things which are
indescribable. For this is to pass the limits of one’s own condition,
and not to understand how far it is permitted man to approach. In short,
when God revealed the truth to man, He wished us only to know those
things which it concerned man to know for the attainment of life; but as
to the things which related to a profane and eager curiosity <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) He was silent, that they might be
secret. Why, then, do you inquire into things which you cannot know, and
if you knew them you would not be happier. It is perfect wisdom in man,
if he knows that there is but one God, and that all things were made by
Him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[52:201](0070039.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p2"></span> The tricks of a juggler.  

<span id="fn_201"></span>[52:202](0070039.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p4"></span> Most prudent.  

<span id="fn_202"></span>[52:203](0070039.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p5"></span> Chap. vi., <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>infra</span>  

<span id="fn_203"></span>[52:204](0070039.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p6"></span> Free.  

<span id="fn_204"></span>[52:205](0070039.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p7"></span> The Son of God, afterwards spoken of.
 

<span id="fn_205"></span>[52:206](0070039.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p8"></span> By perseverance. There seems to be a
contrast between the Son, who remained stedfast, and the evil spirits
who fell.  

<span id="fn_206"></span>[53:207](0070039.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>διάβολος</span>, “slanderer or accuser.”
The Greek and Latin words employed by <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p9.2"></span>Lactantius have the same meaning.  

<span id="fn_207"></span>[53:208](0070039.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p10"></span> Providence.  

<span id="fn_208"></span>[53:209](0070039.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p11"></span> Book iv. ch. vi., etc. \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>Deus, igitur, machinator constitutorque
rerum, etc.\]  

<span id="fn_209"></span>[53:210](0070039.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p13"></span> Lying under; answering to the Greek
expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>ὑποκειμένη ὕλη</span>, subject matter.  

<span id="fn_210"></span>[53:211](0070039.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p14"></span> Not now found in the treatise which
bears this title.  

<span id="fn_211"></span>[53:212](0070039.htm#fr_211) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p15"></span> Capable of proof.  

<span id="fn_212"></span>[53:213](0070039.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>Materia; perhaps from “<span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>mater,” mother stuff—matter out of which
anything is composed.  

<span id="fn_213"></span>[53:214](0070039.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p17"></span> The moulder. The ancients made
statues of wax or clay, as well as of wood, ivory, and marble.  

<span id="fn_214"></span>[53:215](0070039.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p18"></span> Contradict.  

<span id="fn_215"></span>[53:216](0070039.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p19"></span> Alluding to the well-known practise
of the Academics, viz., of arguing on both sides of a question.  

<span id="fn_216"></span>[53:217](0070039.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p20"></span> The founder or preparer of the
material.  

<span id="fn_217"></span>[53:218](0070039.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p21"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>Quam <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p21.2"></span>vim<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p21.3"></span>
potuit habere nullo dante?\]  

<span id="fn_218"></span>[53:219](0070039.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>Providentia.  

<span id="fn_219"></span>[54:220](0070039.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>Sibi illam dedit. There is another
reading, <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p23.2"></span>illa sibi illam dedit, but
it does not give so good a sense.  

<span id="fn_220"></span>[54:221](0070039.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p24"></span> A proverbial expression, signifying
“to get out of one difficulty by getting into another.” The passage in
the text is a quotation from <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p24.1"></span>Terence, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p24.2"></span>Phorm , v. 2. 15. \[Not in some editions
of our author; e.g., Basil, 1521.\]  

<span id="fn_221"></span>[54:222](0070039.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p27"></span> Stand firm and stedfast.  

<span id="fn_222"></span>[54:223](0070039.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p28"></span> Which does not exist there, from
whence it is sought.  

<span id="fn_223"></span>[54:224](0070039.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p29"></span> Fountain.  

<span id="fn_224"></span>[55:225](0070039.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p30"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p30.1"></span>Distruitur, “pulled to pieces.” The word
is thus used by <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p30.2"></span>Cicero.  

<span id="fn_225"></span>[55:226](0070039.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31.1"></span>Distruitur, “pulled to pieces.” The word
is thus used by <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31.2"></span>Cicero.  

<span id="fn_226"></span>[55:227](0070039.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p31.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p32"></span> Ch. 3 and 7. \[See pp. 11, 17, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p32.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_227"></span>[55:228](0070039.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p34"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p34.1"></span>Multo absurdior.\]  

<span id="fn_228"></span>[55:229](0070039.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.1"></span>Lactantius seems to refer not to the true
prophets, but to those of other nations, such as <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.2"></span>Orpheus and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.3"></span>Zoroaster, or the magi of the Persians,
the gymnosophists of the Indians, or the Druids of the Gauls. St. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.4"></span>Augustine often makes mention of these.
It would seem inconsistent to mention <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.5"></span>Moses and the prophets of God with the
prophets of the heathens. \[Compare, however, “Christian analogies,”
etc., in <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.6"></span>Justin. See vol. i. 169;
also <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.8"></span>Ibid., pp. 182, 283–286.\]  

<span id="fn_229"></span>[55:230](0070039.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p35.11"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p36"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p36.1"></span>Pari voce.  

<span id="fn_230"></span>[55:231](0070039.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p37"></span> The work of the world, and the
workmanship of God.  

<span id="fn_231"></span>[55:232](0070039.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p38"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p38.1"></span>Qui sunt principes omnis disciplinæ.
There is another reading: <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p38.2"></span>quæ sunt
principes omnium disciplinæ, “which are the leading sects of all.”  

<span id="fn_232"></span>[55:233](0070039.htm#fr_232) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p39"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p39.1"></span>Thales said that the world was the work
of God.  

<span id="fn_233"></span>[55:234](0070039.htm#fr_233) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p39.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40"></span> This statement is incorrect, as
<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.1"></span>Plato was born <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.2"></span>b.c. 430, and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.3"></span>Epicurus <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.4"></span>b.c. 337.  

<span id="fn_234"></span>[55:235](0070039.htm#fr_234) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p40.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p41"></span> There is probably an allusion to the
Cynics.  

<span id="fn_235"></span>[55:236](0070039.htm#fr_235) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.1"></span>Conglobatam. Another reading is, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.2"></span>quàm materiâ providentiam conglobatam.  

<span id="fn_236"></span>[55:237](0070039.htm#fr_236) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p42.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p43"></span> Hinge.  

<span id="fn_237"></span>[55:238](0070039.htm#fr_237) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p44"></span> Abyss.  

<span id="fn_238"></span>[56:239](0070039.htm#fr_238) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p46"></span> As often as he is an Epicurean.  

<span id="fn_239"></span>[56:240](0070039.htm#fr_239) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p47"></span> The last hand.  

<span id="fn_240"></span>[56:241](0070039.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p48"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p48.1"></span>Metamorph , book i.  

<span id="fn_241"></span>[56:242](0070039.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p50"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p50.1"></span>Fabrica. The word is also used to denote
the <span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p50.2"></span>exercise of skill in
workmanship.  

<span id="fn_242"></span>[56:243](0070039.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p51"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p51.1"></span>Cæmenta, rough stones from the quarry.  

<span id="fn_243"></span>[56:244](0070039.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p53"></span> Pertaining to time, as opposed to
eternal.  

<span id="fn_244"></span>[56:245](0070039.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p54"></span> Looking into.  

<span id="fn_245"></span>[56:246](0070039.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ix-p55"></span> A curious and profane eagerness.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. X.—Of the world, and its parts, the elements and
seasons](0070040)
