[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070214)  [Next](0070216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXVII.—Of the Creation, Sin, and Punishment of Man; And of Angels, Both Good and Bad.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p1"></span>One subject remains, and that the
last: that, since it usually happens, as we read in histories, that the
gods appear to have displayed their majesty by auguries, by dreams, by
oracles, and also by the punishments of those who had committed
sacrilege, I may show what cause produced this effect, so that no one
even now may fall into the same snares into which those of old fell.
When God, according to His excellent majesty, had framed the world out
of nothing, and had decked the heaven with lights, and had filled the
earth and the sea with living creatures, then He formed man out of clay,
and fashioned him after the resemblance of His own likeness, and
breathed into him that he might live, <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) and placed him in a garden <span
id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) which He had planted with every
kind of fruit-bearing tree, and commanded him not to eat of one tree in
which He had placed the knowledge of good and evil, warning him that it
would come to pass, that if he did so he would lose his life, but that
if he observed the command of God he would remain immortal. Then the
serpent, who was one of the servants of God, envying man because he was
made immortal, enticed him by stratagem to transgress the command and
law of God. And in this manner he did indeed receive the knowledge of
good and evil, but he lost the life which God had given him to be for
ever.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p4"></span>Therefore He drove out the sinner
from the sacred place, and banished him into this world, that he might
seek sustenance by labour, that he might according to his deserts
undergo difficulties and troubles; and He surrounded the garden itself
with a fence of fire, that none of men even till the day of judgment
might attempt secretly <span id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) to
enter into that place of perpetual blessedness. Then death came upon man
according to the sentence of God; and yet his life, though it had begun
to be temporary, had as its boundary a thousand years, and that was the
extent of human life even to the deluge. For after the flood the life of
men was gradually shortened, and was reduced to a hundred and twenty
years. But that serpent, who from his deeds received the name of devil,
that is, accuser or informer, did not cease to persecute the seed of
man, whom he had deceived from the beginning. At length he urged him who
was first born in this world, under the impulse of envy, to the murder
of his brother, that of the two men who were first born he might destroy
the one, and make the other a parricide. <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) Nor did he cease upon this from
infusing the venom of malice into the breasts of men through each
generation, from corrupting and depraving them; in short, from
overwhelming them with such crimes, that an instance of justice was now
rare, but men lived after the manner of the beasts.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p7"></span>But when God saw this, He sent
His angels to instruct the race of men, and to protect them from all
evil. He gave these a command to abstain from earthly things, lest,
being polluted by any taint, they should be deprived of the honour of
angels. But that wily accuser, while they tarried among men, allured
these also to <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-Page_232"></span>pleasures, so that they might
defile themselves with women. Then, being condemned by the sentence of
God, and cast forth on account of their sins, they lost both the name
and substance of angels. Thus, having become ministers of the devil,
that they might have a solace of their ruin, they betook themselves to
the ruining of men, for whose protection they had come. <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[231:1480](0070215.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Inspiravit ad vitam.  

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[231:1481](0070215.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>Paradiso.  

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[231:1482](0070215.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Irrepere.  

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[231:1483](0070215.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>Parricidam. The word first means the
murderer of a parent or near relative; then simply a murderer.  

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[232:1484](0070215.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xxiii-p8"></span> \[This is a curious enlargement
of the idea as taught elsewhere. See vol. ii. p. 142, this series.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXVIII.—Of the demons, and their evil practices](0070216)
