[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070114)  [Next](0070116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p0.1"></span>Chap. II.—To What an Extent the Christian Truth Has Been Assailed by Rash Men.

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p1"></span>Therefore, because there have been
wanting among us suitable and skilful teachers, who might vigorously and
sharply refute public errors, and who might defend the whole cause of
truth with elegance and copiousness, this very want incited some to
venture to write against the truth, which was unknown to them. I pass by
those who in former times in vain assailed it. When I was teaching
rhetorical learning in Bithynia, having been called thither, and it had
happened that at the same time the temple of God was overthrown, there
were living at the same place two men who insulted the truth as it lay
prostrate and overthrown, I know not whether with greater arrogance or
harshness: the one of whom professed himself the high priest of
philosophy; <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) but he was so
addicted to vice, that, though a teacher of abstinence, he was not less
inflamed with avarice than with lusts; so extravagant in his manner of
living, that though in his school he was the maintainer of virtue, the
praiser of parsimony and poverty, he dined less sumptuously in a palace
than at his own house. Nevertheless he sheltered <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) his vices by his hair <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) and his cloak, and (that which is the
greatest screen <span id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) ) by his riches;
and that he might increase these, he used to penetrate with wonderful
effort <span id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) to the friendships of the
judges; and he suddenly attached them to himself by the authority of a
fictitious name, not only that he might make a traffic of their
decisions, but also that he might by this influence hinder his
neighbours, whom he was driving from their homes and lands, from the
recovery of their property. This man, in truth, who overthrew his own
arguments by his character, or censured his own character by his
arguments, a weighty censor and most keen accuser against himself, at
the very same time in which a righteous people were impiously assailed,
vomited forth three books against the Christian religion and name;
professing, above all things, that it was the office of a philosopher to
remedy the errors of men, and to recall them to the true way, that is,
to the worship of the gods, by whose power and majesty, as he said, the
world is governed; and not to permit that inexperienced men should be
enticed by the frauds of any, lest their simplicity should be a prey and
sustenance to crafty men.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p7"></span>Therefore he said that he had
undertaken this office, worthy of philosophy, that he might hold out to
those who do not see the light of wisdom, not only that they may return
to a healthy state of mind, having undertaken the worship of the gods,
but also that, having laid aside their pertinacious obstinacy, they may
avoid tortures of the body, nor wish in vain to endure cruel lacerations
of their limbs. But that it might be evident on what account he had
laboriously worked out that task, he broke out profusely into praises of
the princes, whose piety and foresight, as he himself indeed said, had
been distinguished both in other matters, and especially in defending
the religious rites of the gods; that he had, in short, consulted the
interests of men, in order that, impious and foolish superstition having
been restrained, all men might have leisure for lawful sacred rites, and
might experience the gods propitious to them. But when he wished to
weaken the grounds of that religion against which he was pleading, he
appeared senseless, vain, and ridiculous; because that weighty adviser
of the advantage of others was ignorant not only what to oppose, but
even what to speak. For if any of our religion were present, although
they were silent on account of the time, nevertheless in their mind they
derided him; since they saw a man professing that he would enlighten
others, when he himself was blind; that he would recall others from
error, when he himself was ignorant where to plant his feet; that he
would instruct others to the truth, of which he himself had never seen
even a spark at any time; inasmuch as he who was a professor of wisdom,
endeavoured to overthrow wisdom. All, however, censured this, that he
undertook this work at that time in particular, in which odious cruelty
raged. O philosopher, a flatterer, and a time-server! But this man was
despised, as his vanity deserved; for he did not gain the popularity
which he hoped for, and the glory which he eagerly sought for was
changed into censure and blame. <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931)
 

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p9"></span>Another <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) wrote the same subject with more
bitterness, who was then of the number of the judges, and who was
especially the adviser of enacting persecution; and not contented with
this crime, he also pursued with writings those whom he had persecuted.
For he composed <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-Page_138"></span>two books, not <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.5"></span>against the Christians, lest he might
appear to assail them in a hostile manner but <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.6"></span>to the Christians, that he might be
thought to consult for them with humanity and kindness. And in these
writings he endeavoured so to prove the falsehood of sacred Scripture,
as though it were altogether contradictory to itself; for he expounded
some chapters which seemed to be at variance with themselves,
enumerating so many and such secret <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) things, that he sometimes appears to
have been one of the same sect. But if this was so, what <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p11.2"></span>Demosthenes will be able to defend from
the charge of impiety him who became the betrayer of the religion to
which he had given his assent, <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934)
and of the faith the name of which he had assumed, <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) and of the mystery <span
id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) which he had received, unless it
happened by chance that the sacred writings fell into his hands? What
rashness was it, therefore, to dare to destroy that which no one
explained to him! It was well that he either learned nothing or
understood nothing. For contradiction is as far removed from the sacred
writings as he was removed from faith and truth. He chiefly, however,
assailed <span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14.2"></span>Paul and <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14.3"></span>Peter, and the other disciples, as
disseminators of deceit, whom at the same time he testified to have been
unskilled and unlearned. For he says that some of them made gain by the
craft of fishermen, as though he took it ill that some <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14.4"></span>Aristophanes or <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14.5"></span>Aristarchus did not devise that subject.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_926"></span>[137:927](0070115.htm#fr_926) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p2"></span> \[Let us call him <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>Barbatus; for one so graphically described
by our author deserves a name worthy of his sole claim to be a
philosopher.\]  

<span id="fn_927"></span>[137:928](0070115.htm#fr_927) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p3.1"></span>Protegebat.  

<span id="fn_928"></span>[137:929](0070115.htm#fr_928) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4"></span> It was the custom of the philosophers
to wear a beard; to which practise <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.1"></span>Horace alludes, <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.2"></span>Serm., ii. 3, “<span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.3"></span>Sapientem pascere barbam,” to nourish a
philosophic beard. \[The readers of this series no longer require this
information: but it may be convenient to recur to vol. ii. note 9, p.
321; also, perhaps, to Clement’s <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.5"></span>terrible defence of beards, <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.6"></span>Ibid., pp. 276–277.\]  

<span id="fn_929"></span>[137:930](0070115.htm#fr_929) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p4.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p5.1"></span>Velamentum.  

<span id="fn_930"></span>[137:931](0070115.htm#fr_930) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p6.1"></span>Ambitu. The word denotes the unlawful
striving for a post.  

<span id="fn_931"></span>[137:932](0070115.htm#fr_931) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p8"></span> \[On the reference to these two
adversaries, see <span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p8.1"></span>Lardner, <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p8.2"></span>Credib., iii. cap. 65, p. 491; vii. cap.
39, p. 471; also vii. 207.\]  

<span id="fn_932"></span>[137:933](0070115.htm#fr_932) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.1"></span>Hierocles is referred to, who was a great
persecutor of the Christians in the beginning of the fourth century. He
was the chief promoter of the persecution which the Christians suffered
under <span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.2"></span>Diocletian. \[Wrote a work
(<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.3"></span>Philalethes) to show the
contradictions of Scripture. [Acts xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.4"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_933"></span>[138:934](0070115.htm#fr_933) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p10.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p11"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p11.1"></span>Intima, i.e., of an esoteric character,
known only to those within the school or sect.\]  

<span id="fn_934"></span>[138:935](0070115.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p12.1"></span>Cui fuerat assensus. Other editions read
“<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p12.2"></span>accensus,” i.e., reckoned among.  

<span id="fn_935"></span>[138:936](0070115.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p13.1"></span>Induerat.  

<span id="fn_936"></span>[138:937](0070115.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.ii-p14.1"></span>Sacramenti.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. III.—Of the truth of the Christian doctrine, and the vanity
of its adversaries; and that Christ was not a magician](0070116)
