[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070436)  [Next](0070438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.v"></span>

##### <span id="ix.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Sec. V.—On Accusations, and the Treatment of Accusers.

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p0.2"></span>Concerning Accusers and False Accusers, and How a Judge is Not Rashly Either to Believe Them or Disbelieve Them, But After an Accurate Examination.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p1.1"></span>XXXVII</span>. But it is the duty of the
bishop to judge rightly, as it is written, “Judge righteous
judgment;” <span id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) and elsewhere,
“Why do ye not even of yourselves judge what is right?” <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) Be ye therefore as skilful dealers
in money: for as these reject bad money, but take to themselves what is
current, in the same manner it is the bishops’s duty to retain the
unblameable, but either to heal, or, if they be past cure, to cast off
those that are blameworthy, so as not to be hasty in cutting off, nor to
believe all accusations; for it sometimes happens that some, either
<span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="ix.iii.v-Page_414"></span>through passion or envy, do insist on a
false accusation against a brother, as did the two elders in the case of
<span id="ix.iii.v-p3.2"></span>Susanna in Babylon, <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) and the Egyptian woman in the case
of <span id="ix.iii.v-p4.1"></span>Joseph. <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) Do thou therefore, as a man of God,
not rashly receive such accusations, lest thou take away the innocent
and slay the righteous; for he that will receive such accusations is the
author of anger rather than of peace. But where there is anger, there
the Lord is not; for that anger, which is the friend of Satan—I mean
that which is excited unjustly by the means of false brethren—never
suffers unanimity to be in the Church. Wherefore, when you know such
persons to be foolish, quarrelsome, passionate, and such as delight in
mischief, do not give credit to them; but observe such as they are, when
you hear anything from them against their brother: for murder is nothing
in their eyes, and they cast a man down in such a way as one would not
suspect. Do thou therefore consider diligently the accuser, <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) wisely observing his mode of life,
what, and of what sort it is; and in case thou findest him a man of
veracity, do according to the doctrine of our Lord, <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) and taking him who is accused,
rebuke him, that he may repent, when nobody is by. But if he be not
persuaded, take with thee out or two more, and so show him his fault,
and admonish him with mildness and instruction; for “wisdom will rest
upon an heart that is good, but is not understood in the heart of the
foolish.” <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p8.2"></span>That Sinners are Privately to Be Reproved, and the Penitent to Be Received, According to the Constitution of Our Lord.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p9.1"></span>XXXVIII</span>. If, therefore, he be persuaded
by the mouth of you three, it is well. But if any one hardens himself,
“tell it to the Church: but if he neglects to hear the Church, let him
be to thee as an heathen man and a publican;” <span
id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) and receive him no longer into the
Church as a Christian, but reject him as an heathen. But if he be
willing to repent, receive him. For the Church does not receive an
heathen or a publican to communion, before they every one repent of
their former impieties; for our Lord <span
id="ix.iii.v-p10.2"></span>Jesus, the Christ of God, has appointed place
for the acceptance of men upon their repentance.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p10.3"></span>Examples of Repentance.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p11.1"></span>XXXIX</span>. For I <span
id="ix.iii.v-p11.2"></span>Matthew, one of those twelve which speak to
you in this doctrine, am an apostle, having myself been formerly a
publican, but now have obtained mercy through believing, and have
repented of my former practices, and have been vouchsafed the honour to
be an apostle and preacher of the word. And <span
id="ix.iii.v-p11.3"></span>Zacchæus, whom the Lord received upon his
repentance and prayers to Him, was also himself in the same manner a
publican at first. And, besides, even the soldiers and multitude of
publicans, who came to hear the word of the Lord about repentance, heard
this from the prophet <span id="ix.iii.v-p11.4"></span>John, after he
had baptized them: “Do nothing more than that which is appointed
you.” <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) In like manner, life is
not refused to the heathen, if they repent and cast away their unbelief.
Esteem, therefore, every one that is convicted of any wicked action, and
has not repented, as a publican or an heathen. But if he afterward
repents, and turns from his error, then, as we receive the heathen, when
they wish to repent, into the Church indeed to hear the word, but do not
receive them to communion until they have received the seal of baptism,
and are made complete Christians; so do we also permit such as these to
enter only to hear, until they show the fruit of repentance, that by
hearing the word they may not utterly and irrecoverably perish. But let
them not be admitted to communion in prayer; and let them depart after
the reading of the law, and the prophets, and the Gospel, that by such
departure they may be made better in their course of life, by
endeavouring to meet every day about the public assemblies, and to be
frequent in prayer, that they also may be at length admitted, and that
those who behold them may be affected, and be more secured by fearing to
fall into the same condition.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p12.2"></span>That We are Not to Be Implacable to Him Who Has Once or Twice Offended.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p13.1"></span>XL</span>. But yet do not thou, O bishop,
presently abhor any person who has fallen into one or two offences, nor
shalt thou exclude him from the word of the Lord, nor reject him from
common intercourse, since neither did the Lord refuse to eat with
publicans and sinners; and when He was accused by the Pharisees on this
account, He said: “They that are well have no need of the physician, but
they that are sick.” <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768) Do you,
therefore, live and dwell with those who are separated from you for
their sins; and take care of them, comforting them, and confirming them,
and saying to them: “Be strengthened, ye weak hands and feeble
knees.” <span id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) For we ought to
comfort those that mourn, and afford encouragement to the fainthearted,
lest by immoderate sorrow they degenerate into distraction, since “he
that is fainthearted is exceedingly distracted.” <span
id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770) <span id="page_415">p. 415</span>
<span id="ix.iii.v-Page_415"></span>  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p16.2"></span>After What Manner We Ought to Receive a Penitent; How We Ought to Deal with Offenders, and When They are to Be Cut Off from the Church.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p17"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p17.1"></span>XLI</span>. But if any one returns, and shows
forth the fruit of repentance, then do ye receive him to prayer, as the
lost son, the prodigal, who had consumed his father’s substance with
harlots, who fed swine, and desired to be fed with husks, and could not
obtain it. This son, when he repented, and returned to his father, and
said, “I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son;” <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771)
the father, full of affection to his child, received him with music, and
restored him his old robe, and ring, and shoes, and slew the fatted
calf, and made merry with his friends. Do thou therefore, O bishop, act
in the same manner. And as thou receivest an heathen after thou hast
instructed and baptized him, so do thou let all join in prayers for this
man, and restore him by imposition of hands to his ancient place among
the flock, as one purified by repentance; and that imposition of hands
shall be to him instead of baptism: for by the laying on of our hands
the Holy Ghost was given to believers. And in case some one of those
brethren who had stood immoveable accuse thee, because thou art
reconciled to him, say to him: “Thou art always with me, and all that I
have is thine. It was meet to make merry and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.” For
that God does not only receive the penitent, but restores them to their
former dignity, holy <span id="ix.iii.v-p18.2"></span>David is a
sufficient witness, who, after his sin in the matter of <span
id="ix.iii.v-p18.3"></span>Uriah, prayed to God, and said: “Restore unto
me the joy of Thy salvation, and uphold me with Thy free Spirit.” <span
id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772) And again: “Turn Thy face from my
sins, and blot out all mine offences. Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and renew a right spirit in my inward parts. Cast me not away from Thy
presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.” Do thou therefore, as a
compassionate physician, heal all that have sinned, making use of saving
methods of cure; not only cutting and searing, or using corrosives, but
binding up, and putting in tents, and using gentle healing medicines,
and sprinkling comfortable words. If it be an hollow wound, or great
gash, nourish it with a suitable plaister, that it may be filled up, and
become even with the rest of the whole flesh. If it be foul, cleanse it
with corrosive powder, that is, with the words of reproof. If it have
proud flesh, eat it down with a sharp plaister—the threats of judgment.
If it spreads further, sear it, and cut off the putrid flesh, mortifying
him with fastings. But if, after all that thou hast done, thou
perceivest that from the feet to the head there is no room for a
fomentation, or oil, or bandage, but that the malady spreads and
prevents all cure, as a gangrene which corrupts the entire member; then,
with a great deal of consideration, and the advice of other skilful
physicians, cut off the putrefied member, that the whole body of the
Church be not corrupted. Be not therefore ready and hasty to cut off,
nor do thou easily have recourse to the saw, with its many teeth; but
first use a lancet to lay open the wound, that the inward cause whence
the pain is derived being drawn out, may keep the body free from pain.
But if thou seest any one past repentance, and he is become insensible,
then cut off the incurable from the Church with sorrow and lamentation.
For: “Take out from among yourselves that wicked person.” <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) And: “Ye shall make the children of
Israel to fear.” <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774) And again:
“Thou shalt not accept the persons of the rich in judgment.” <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775) And: “Thou shalt not pity a poor
man in his cause: for the judgment is the Lord’s.” <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p23.2"></span>That a Judge Must Not Be a Respecter of Persons.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p24"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p24.1"></span>XLII</span>. But if the slanderous accusation
be false, and you that are the pastors, with the deacons, admit of that
falsehood for truth, either by acceptance of persons or receiving of
bribes, as willing to do that which will he pleasing to the devil, and
so you thrust out from the Church him that is accused, but is clear of
the crime, you shall give an account in the day of the Lord. For it is
written: “The innocent and the righteous thou shalt not slay.” <span
id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777) “Thou shalt not take gifts to smite
the soul: for gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and destroy the words of
the righteous.” <span id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) And again:
“They that justify the wicked for gifts, and take away the righteousness
of the righteous from him.” <span id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779)
Be careful, therefore, not to condemn any persons unjustly, and so to
assist the wicked. For “woe to him that calls evil good, and good evil;
bitter sweet, and sweet bitter; that puts light for darkness, and
darkness for light.” <span id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p28.2"></span>Take care, therefore, lest by any means ye
become acceptors of persons, and thereby fall under this voice of the
Lord. <span id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781) For if you condemn
others unjustly, you pass sentence against yourselves. For the Lord
says: “With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and as you
condemn, you shall be <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="ix.iii.v-Page_416"></span>condemned.” <span
id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782) If, therefore, ye judge without
respect of persons, ye will discover that accuser who bears false
witness against his neighbour, and will prove him to be a sycophant, a
spiteful person, and a murderer, causing perplexity by accusing the man
as if he were wicked, inconstant in his words, contradicting himself in
what he affirms, and entangled with the words of his own mouth; for his
own lips are a dangerous snare to him: whom, when thou hast convicted
him of speaking falsely, thou shalt judge severely, and shalt deliver
him to the fiery sword, and thou shalt do to him as he wickedly proposed
to do to his brother; for as much as in him lay he slew his brother, by
forestalling the ears of the judge. <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783) Now it is written, that “he that
sheddeth man’s blood, for that his own blood shall be shed.” <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784) And: “Thou shalt take away that
innocent blood, which was shed without cause, from thee.” <span
id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.v-p33.2"></span>After What Manner False Accusers are to Be Punished.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p34"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p34.1"></span>XLIII</span>. Thou shalt therefore cast him
out of the congregation as a murderer of his brother. Some time
afterwards, if he says that he repents, mortify him with fastings, and
afterwards ye shall lay your hands upon him and receive him, but still
securing him, that he does not disturb anybody a second time. But if,
when he is admitted again, he be alike troublesome, and will not cease
to disturb and to quarrel with his brother, spying faults out of a
contentious spirit, cast him out as a pernicious person, that he may not
lay waste the Church of God. For such a one is the raiser of
disturbances in cities; for he, though he be within, does not become the
Church, but is a superfluous and vain member, casting a blot, as far as
in him lies, on the body of Christ. For if such men as are born with
superfluous members of their body, which hang to them as fingers, or
excrescences of flesh, cut them away from themselves on account of their
indecency, whereby the unseemliness vanishes, and the man recovers his
natural good shape by the means of the surgeon; how much more ought you,
the pastors of the Church (for the Church is a perfect body, and sound
members; of such as believe in God, in the fear of the Lord, and in
love), to do the like when there is found in it a superfluous member
with wicked designs, and rendering the rest of the body unseemly, and
disturbing it with sedition, and war, and evil-speaking; causing fears,
disturbances, blots, evil-speaking, accusations, disorders, and doing
the like works of the devil, as if he were ordained by the devil to cast
a reproach on the Church by calumnies, and mighty disorders, and strife,
and division! Such a one, therefore, when he is a second time cast out
of the Church, is justly cut off entirely from the congregation of the
Lord. And now the Church of the Lord will be more beautiful than it was
before, when it had a superfluous, and to itself a disagreeable member.
Wherefore henceforward it will be free from blame and reproach, and
become clear of such wicked, deceitful, abusive, unmerciful, traitorous
persons; of such as are “haters of those that are good, lovers of
pleasure,” <span id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786) affecters of
vainglory, deceivers, and pretenders to wisdom; of such as make it their
business to scatter, or rather utterly to disperse, the lambs of the
Lord.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[413:2760](0070437.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p2"></span> [John vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii.v-p2.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[413:2761](0070437.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p3"></span> [Luke xii.
57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#057)<span id="ix.iii.v-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[414:2762](0070437.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p4"></span> Hist. Susanna.  

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[414:2763](0070437.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p5"></span> [Gen.
xxxix.](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.v-p5.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[414:2764](0070437.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p6"></span> The <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p6.1"></span>mss</span>. read, “the accused.”  

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[414:2765](0070437.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p7"></span> [Matt. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span id="ix.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[414:2766](0070437.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p8"></span> [Prov. xiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#032)<span id="ix.iii.v-p8.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[414:2767](0070437.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p10"></span> [Matt. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.v-p10.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[414:2768](0070437.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p11.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p12"></span> [Luke iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii.v-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[414:2769](0070437.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p14"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.v-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[414:2770](0070437.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p15"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.v-p15.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[414:2771](0070437.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p16"></span> [Prov. xiv.
29](../../../bib/sep/pro014.htm#029)<span id="ix.iii.v-p16.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[415:2772](0070437.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p18"></span> [Luke xv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#021)<span id="ix.iii.v-p18.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[415:2773](0070437.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p19"></span> [Ps.
li.](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.v-p19.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[415:2774](0070437.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p20"></span> [Deut. xvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.v-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[415:2775](0070437.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p21"></span> [Lev. xv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031)<span id="ix.iii.v-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[415:2776](0070437.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p22"></span> [Deut. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.v-p22.1"></span>;
[Lev. xix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iii.v-p22.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[415:2777](0070437.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p23"></span> [Ex. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.v-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[415:2778](0070437.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p25"></span> [Exod.
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii.v-p25.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[415:2779](0070437.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p26"></span> [Deut. xxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#025)<span id="ix.iii.v-p26.1"></span>,
xvi. 19.  

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[415:2780](0070437.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p27"></span> [Isa. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.v-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[415:2781](0070437.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p28"></span> [Isa. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.v-p28.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[415:2782](0070437.htm#fr_2781) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p29"></span> This sentence follows the passage from
[Isa. v. 23](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#023)<span
id="ix.iii.v-p29.1"></span> in most <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p29.2"></span>mss.</span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p29.3"></span>ms</span>. has the order adopted In the text.
 

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[416:2783](0070437.htm#fr_2782) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p29.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p30"></span> [Matt. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.v-p30.1"></span>;
[Luke vi. 37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)<span
id="ix.iii.v-p30.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[416:2784](0070437.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p31"></span> [Deut. xix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#019)<span id="ix.iii.v-p31.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[416:2785](0070437.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p32"></span> [Gen. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii.v-p32.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[416:2786](0070437.htm#fr_2785) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p33"></span> [Deut. xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii.v-p33.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[416:2787](0070437.htm#fr_2786) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p35"></span> [2 Tim.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii.v-p35.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. VI.—The Disputes of the Faithful to Be Settled by the
Decisions of the Bishop, and the Faithful to Be Reconciled](0070438)
