[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070013)  [Next](0070015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. viii.—that god is without a body, nor does he need difference of sex for procreation.

<span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1"></span>It is proved, therefore, by these
witnesses, so numerous and of such authority, that the universe <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.ix-Page_18"></span>is
governed by the power and providence of one God, whose energy and
majesty <span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.1"></span>Plato in the <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.2"></span>Timæus asserts to be so great, that no one
can either conceive it in his mind, or give utterance to it in words, on
account of His surpassing and incalculable power. And then can any one
doubt whether any thing can be difficult or impossible for God, who by
His providence designed, by His energy established, and by His judgment
completed those works so great and wonderful, and even now sustains them
by His spirit, and governs them by His power, being incomprehensible and
unspeakable, and fully known to no other than Himself? Wherefore, as I
often reflect on the subject of such great majesty, they who worship the
gods sometimes appear so blind, so incapable of reflection, so
senseless, so little removed from the mute animals, as to believe that
those who are born from the natural intercourse of the sexes could have
had anything of majesty and divine influence; since the <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.3"></span>Erythræan Sibyl says: “It is impossible for
a God to be fashioned from the loins of a man and the womb<span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.4"></span> of a woman.” And if this is true, as it
really is, it is evident that <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.5"></span>Hercules, <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.6"></span>Apollo, <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.7"></span>Bacchus, <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.8"></span>Mercury, and <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p1.9"></span>Jupiter, with the rest, were but men, since
they were born from the two sexes. But what is so far removed from the
nature of God as that operation which He Himself assigned to mortals for
the propagation of their race, and which cannot be affected without
corporeal substance?  

<span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p2"></span>Therefore, if the gods are immortal and
eternal, what need is there of the other sex, when they themselves do
not require succession, since they are always about to exist? For
assuredly in the case of mankind and the other animals, there is no
other reason for difference of sex and procreation and bringing forth,
except that all classes of living creatures, inasmuch as they are doomed
to death by the condition of their mortality, may be preserved by mutual
succession. But God, who is immortal, has no need of difference of sex,
nor of succession. Some one will say <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p2.1"></span>that this arrangement is necessary, in
order that He may have some to minister to Him, or over whom He may bear
rule. What need is there of the female sex, since God, who is almighty,
is able to produce sons without the agency of the female? For if He has
granted to certain minute creatures <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)
that they  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p3.3"></span> “Should gather offspring for
> themselves with their mouth from leaves and sweet herbs,”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p4"></span>why should any one think it impossible
for God Himself to have offspring except by union with the other sex? No
one, therefore, is so thoughtless as not to understand that those were
mere mortals, whom the ignorant and foolish regard and worship as gods.
Why, then, some one will say, were they believed to be gods? Doubtless
because they were very great and powerful kings; and since, on account
of the merits of their virtues, or offices, or the arts which they
discovered, they were beloved by those over whom they had ruled, they
were consecrated to <span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p4.1"></span>lasting memory.
And if any one doubts this, let him consider their exploits and deeds,
the whole of which both ancient poets and historians have handed down.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[18:44](0070014.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.ix-p3"></span> \[The bees, according to <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p3.1"></span>Virgil, <span
id="iii.ii.i.ix-p3.2"></span>Georg., iv. 199.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—Of Hercules and his life and death](0070015)
