[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070300)  [Next](0070302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIV.—Of the Unknown Purpose of Some of the Intestines.

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p1"></span>It is evident that there are many things
in the body, the force and purpose of which no one can perceive but He
who made them. Can any one suppose that he is able to relate what is the
advantage, and what the effect, of that slight transparent membrane by
which the stomach is netted over and covered? What the twofold
resemblance of the kidneys? which <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Varro says are so named because streams of
foul moisture arise from these; which is far from being the case,
because, rising on either side of the spine, they are united, and are
separated from the intestines. What is the use of the spleen? What of
the liver? Organs which appear as it were to be made up <span
id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912) of disordered blood. What of the
very bitter moisture of the gall? What of the heart? unless we shall
happen to think that they ought to be believed, who think that the
affection of anger is placed in the gall, that of fear in the heart, of
joy in the spleen. But they will have it that the office of the liver
is, by its embrace and heat, to digest the food in the stomach; some
think that the desires of the amorous passions are contained in the
liver.  

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p3"></span>First of all, the acuteness of the human
sense is unable to perceive these things, because their offices lie
concealed; nor, when laid open, do they show their uses. For, if it were
so, perhaps the more gentle animals would either have no gall at all, or
less than the wild beasts; the more timid ones would have more heart,
the more lustful would have more liver, the more playful more spleen.
As, therefore, we perceive that we hear with our ears, that we see with
our eyes, that we smell with our nostrils; so assuredly we should
perceive that we are angry with the gall, that we desire with the liver,
that we rejoice with the spleen. Since, therefore, we do not at all
perceive from what part those affections come, it is possible that they
may come from another source, and that those organs may have a different
effect to that which we suppose. We cannot prove, however, that they who
discuss these things speak falsely. But I think that all things which
relate to the motions of the mind and soul, are of so obscure and
profound a nature, that it is beyond the power of man to see through
them clearly. This, however, ought to be sure and undoubted, that so
many objects and so many organs have one and the same office—to retain
the soul in the body. But what office is particularly assigned to each,
who can know, except the Designer, to whom alone His own work is known?
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[295:1913](0070301.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xiv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>Concreta esse. \[See p. 180, note 1, <span
id="iii.iv.xiv-p2.3"></span>supra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XV.—Of the voice](0070302)
