[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070285)  [Next](0070287) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXIII.—Of the Anger of God and the Punishment of Sins, and a Recital of the Verses of the Sibyls Respecting It; And, Moreover, a Reproof and Exhortation.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>But because it is related by most
learned men that there have been many <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Sibyls, the testimony of one may not be
sufficient to confirm the truth, as we purpose to do. The volumes,
indeed, of the Cumæan <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.2"></span>Sibyl, in
which are written the fates of the Romans are kept secret; but the
writings of all the others are, for the most part, not prohibited from
being in common use. And of these another, denouncing the anger of God
against all nations on account of the impiety of men, thus began:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p1.3"></span> “Since great anger is coming
> upon a disobedient world, I disclose the commands of God to the last
> age, prophesying to all men from city to city.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>Another <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Sibyl also said, that the deluge was
caused by the indignation of God against the unrighteous in a former
age, that the wickedness of the human race might be extinguished:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p2.2"></span> “From the time when, the God of
> heaven being enraged against the cities themselves and all men, a
> deluge having burst forth, the sea covered the earth.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3"></span>In like manner she foretold a
conflagration about to take place hereafter, in which the impiety of men
should again be destroyed:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span> “ And at some time, God no
> longer soothing His anger, but increasing it, and destroying the race
> of men, and laying waste the whole of it by fire.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>From which mention is thus made
concerning <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Jupiter by <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>Ovid: <span
id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) —  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5.2"></span> “He remembers also that it is
> fated that the time shall come in which the sea, the earth, and the
> palace of heaven, being caught by fire, shall be burnt, and the
> curiously wrought framework of the world <span
> id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) be in danger.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>And this must come to pass at the
time when the honour and worship of the Supreme shall have perished
among men. The same <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>Sibyl, however,
testifying that He was appeased by reformation <span
id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) of conduct and self-improvement,
added these things :—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8.2"></span> “But, ye mortals, in pity <span
> id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) turn yourselves now, and do not
> lead the great God to every kind of anger.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10"></span>And also a little later:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span> “He will not destroy, but will
> again restrain His anger, if you all practice valuable piety in your
> minds.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11"></span>Then another <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>Sibyl declares that the Father of
heavenly and earthly things ought to be loved, lest His indignation
should arise, to the destruction of men:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p11.2"></span> “Lest by chance the immortal
> God should be angry, and destroy the whole race of men, their life and
> shameless race, it is befitting that we love the wise, ever-living God
> the Father.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p12"></span><span id="page_279">p. 279</span>
<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-Page_279"></span>From these things it is evident
that the arguments of the philosophers are vain, who imagine that God is
without anger, and among His other praises reckon that which is most
useless, detracting from Him that which is most salutary for human
affairs, by which majesty itself exists. For this earthly kingdom and
government, unless guarded by fear, is broken down. Take away anger from
a king, and he will not only cease to be obeyed, but he will even be
cast down headlong from his height. Yea, rather take away this affection
from any person of low degree, and who will not plunder him? Who will
not deride him? Who will not treat him with injury? Thus he will be able
to have neither clothing, nor an abode, nor food, since others will
deprive him of whatever he has; much less can we suppose that the
majesty of the heavenly government can exist without anger and fear. The
<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>Milesian Apollo being consulted
concerning the religion of the Jews, inserted these things in his
answer:—  

> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p12.2"></span> “God, the King and Father of
> all, before whom the earth trembles, and the heaven and sea, and whom
> the recesses of Tartarus and the demons dread.”  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p13"></span>If He is so mild, as the
philosophers will have it, how is it that not only the demons and
ministers of such great power, but even the heaven and earth, and the
whole system of the universe, tremble at His presence? For if no one
submits to the service of another except by compulsion, it follows that
all government exists by fear, and fear by anger. For if any one is not
aroused against one who is unwilling to obey, it will not be possible
for him to be compelled to obedience. Let any one consult his own
feelings; he will at once understand that no one can be subdued to the
command of another without anger and chastisement. Therefore, where
there shall be no anger, there will be no authority. But God has
authority; therefore also He must have anger, in which authority
consists. Therefore let no one, induced by the empty prating <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) of the philosophers, train himself
to the contempt of God, which is the greatest impiety. We all are bound
both to love Him, because He is our Father; and to reverence Him,
because He is our Lord: both to pay Him honour, because He is bounteous;
and to fear Him, because He is severe: each character in Him is worthy
of reverence. <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) Who can
preserve his piety, and yet fail to love the parent of his life? or who
can with impunity despise Him who, as ruler of all things, has true and
everlasting power over all? If you consider Him in the character of
Father, He supplies to us our entrance to the light which we enjoy:
through Him we live, through Him we have entered into the abode <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) of this world. If you contemplate
Him as God, it is He who nourishes us with innumerable resources: it is
He who sustains us, we dwell in His house, we are His household;  <span
id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) and if we are less obedient than
was befitting, and less attentive to our duty <span
id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) than the endless merits of our
Master and Parent demanded: nevertheless it is, of great avail to our
obtaining pardon, if we retain the worship and knowledge of Him; if,
laying aside low and earthly affairs and goods, we meditate upon
heavenly and divine things which are everlasting. And that we may be
able to do this, God must be followed by us, God must be adored and
loved; since there is in Him the substance <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) of things, the principle <span
id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) of the virtues, and the source of
all that is good.  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p21"></span>For what is greater in power than
God, or more perfect in reason, or brighter in clearness? And since He
begat us to wisdom, and produced us to righteousness, it is not
allowable for man to forsake God, who is the giver of intelligence and
life and to serve earthly and frail things, or, intent upon seeking
temporal goods, to turn aside from innocence and piety. Vicious and
deadly pleasures do not render a man happy; nor does opulence, which is
the inciter of lusts; nor empty ambition; nor frail honours, by which
the human soul, being ensnared and enslaved to the body, is
condemned <span id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) to eternal death:
but innocence and righteousness alone, the lawful and due reward of
which is immortality, which God from the beginning appointed for holy
and uncorrupted minds, which keep themselves pure and uncontaminated
from vices, and from every earthly impurity. Of this heavenly and
eternal reward they cannot be partakers, who have polluted their
conscience by deeds of violence, frauds, rapine, and deceits; and who,
by injuries inflicted upon men, by impious actions, have branded
themselves <span id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) with indelible
stains. Accordingly it is befitting that all who wish deservedly to be
called wise, who wish to be called men, should despise frail things,
should trample upon earthly things, and should look down upon base <span
id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799) things, that they may be able to be
united in a most blissful relationship with God.  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p25"></span>Let impiety and discords be removed;
let turbulent and deadly dissensions be allayed, <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800) by which human societies and the
divine union of the public league are broken in upon, divided, and
dispersed; as far as we can, let us aim at <span id="page_280">p.
280</span> <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-Page_280"></span>being good and
bounteous: if we have a supply of wealth and resources, let it not be
devoted to the pleasure of a single person, but bestowed on the welfare
of many. For pleasure is as short lived as the body to which it does
service. But justice and kindness are as immortal as the mind and soul,
which by good works attain to the likeness of God. Let God be
consecrated by us, not in temples, but in our heart. All things which
are made by the hand are destructible. <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) Let us cleanse this temple, which
is defiled not by smoke or dust, but by evil thoughts which is lighted
not by blazing tapers <span id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) but by
the brightness and light of wisdom. And if we believe that God is always
present in this temple, to whose divinity the secrets of the heart are
open, we shall so live as always to have Him propitious, and never to
fear His anger.  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p29"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p30"></span>  

##### <span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p30.1"></span><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p30.2"></span>Note by the American Editor.

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p31"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>It is worth while to direct attention to
(book vi. cap. 2) what our author has said of “<span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p31.2"></span>true worship,” just now, when the most
violent and persistent efforts are made to sensualize Christian worship,
and to explain away the testimony of the Ante-Nicene Fathers on this
important subject. The argument of our author, in its entire drift, is
as applicable to our own times as to his; and, deeply as I value beauty
in the public worship of God, I cannot, as a Nicene Catholic, do less
than adopt the universal sentiment of the early Fathers as to the limits
of decoration.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[278:1787](0070286.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Metam., i. 256.  

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[278:1788](0070286.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>Moles operose laboret.  

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[278:1789](0070286.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>Pœnitentiâ factorum.  

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[278:1790](0070286.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>ἐλέει</span>. Others read, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>ὦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.3"></span>με</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.4"></span>́</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p9.5"></span>λευι</span> “O
wretched.”  

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[279:1791](0070286.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>Vaniloquentia.  

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[279:1792](0070286.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>Venerabilis.  

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[279:1793](0070286.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>Hospitium, i.e., a place of hospitality.
 

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[279:1794](0070286.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>Familia, “a household of slaves.”  

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[279:1795](0070286.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>Officiosa, i.e., <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p18.2"></span>familia.  

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[279:1796](0070286.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>Materia rerum.  

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[279:1797](0070286.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p20"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>Ratio virtutum.  

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[279:1798](0070286.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p22"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>Æterna morte damnatur.  

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[279:1799](0070286.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>Ineluibiles sibi maculas inusserunt.  

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[279:1800](0070286.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>Humilia.  

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[279:1801](0070286.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p26"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>Sopiantur, i.e., be lulled to sleep.  

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[280:1802](0070286.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>Destructilia. The word is used by
Prudentius.  

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[280:1803](0070286.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xxiii-p28"></span> \[See p. 163, <span
id="iii.iii.xxiii-p28.2"></span>supra. See note below.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Workmanship of God, or the Formation of Man](0070287)
