[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070143)  [Next](0070145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p0.1"></span>Chap. VI.—Of the Chief Good and Virtue, and or Knowledge and Righteousness.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p1"></span>I have said that which was the first
thing, that the knowledge of good is not virtue; and secondly, I have
shown what virtue is, and in what it consists. It follows that I should
show this also, that the philosophers were ignorant of what is good and
evil; and this briefly, because it has been almost <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112) made plain in the third book, when
I was discussing the subject of the chief good. And because they did not
know what the chief good was, they necessarily erred in the case of the
other goods and evils which are not the chief; for no one can weigh
these with a true judgment who does not possess the fountain itself from
which they are derived. Now the source of good things is God; but of
evils, he who is always the enemy of the divine name, of whom we have
often spoken. From these two sources good and evil things have their
origin. Those which proceed from God have this object, to procure
immortality, which is the greatest good; but those which arise from the
other have this office, to call man away from heavenly things and sink
him in earthly things, and thus to consign him to the punishment of
everlasting death, which is the greatest evil. Is it therefore doubtful
but that all those were ignorant of what was good and evil, who neither
knew God nor the adversary of God? Therefore they referred the end of
good things to the body, and to this short life, which must be dissolved
and perish: they did not advance further. But all their precepts, and
all the things which they introduce as goods, adhere to the earth, and
lie on the ground, since they die with the body, which is earth; for
they do not tend to procure life for man, but either to the acquisition
or increase of riches, honour, glory, and power, which are altogether
mortal things, as much so indeed as he who has laboured to obtain them.
Hence is that saying, <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) “It is
virtue to know the end of an object <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) to be sought, and the means of
procuring it;” for they enjoin by what means and by what practices
property is to be sought, for they see that it is often sought unjustly.
But virtue of this kind is not proposed to the wise man; for it is not
virtue to seek riches, of which neither the finding nor the possession
is in our power: therefore they are more easy to be gained and to be
retained by the bad than by the good. Virtue, then, cannot consist in
the seeking of those things in the despising of which the force and
purport of virtue appears; nor will it have recourse to those very
things which, with its great and lofty mind, it desires to trample upon
and bruise under foot; nor is it lawful for a soul which is earnestly
fixed on heavenly goods to be called away from its immortal pursuits,
that it may acquire for itself these frail things. But the course <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115) of virtue especially consists in
the acquisition of those things which neither any man, nor death itself,
can take away from us. Since these things are so, that which follows is
true: “It is virtue to be able to assign their value to riches:” which
verse is nearly of the same meaning as the first two. But neither he nor
any of the philosophers was able to know the price itself, either of
what nature or what it is; for the poet, and all those whom he followed,
thought that it meant to make a right use of riches,—that is, to be
moderate in living, not to make costly entertainments, not to squander
carelessly, not to expend property on superfluous or disgraceful
objects. <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p7"></span>Some one will perhaps say, What do you
say? Do you deny that this is virtue? I do not deny it indeed; for if I
should deny it, I should appear to prove the opposite. But I deny that
it is true virtue; because it is not that heavenly principle, but is
altogether of the earth, since it produces no effect but that which
remains on the earth. <span id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) But
what it is to make a right use of wealth, and what advantage is to be
sought from riches, I will declare more openly when I shall begin to
speak of the duty of piety. Now the other things which follow are by no
means true; for to proclaim enmity against the wicked, or to undertake
the defence of the good, may be common to it with the evil. For some, by
a pretence of goodness, prepare the way for themselves to power, and do
many things which the good are accustomed to do, and that the more
readily because they do them for the sake of deceiving; and I wish that
it were as easy to carry out goodness in action as it is to pretend to
it. But when they have begun to attain to their purpose and their wish
in reaching the highest step of power, then, truly laying aside
pretence, these men discover their character; they seize upon
everything, and offer violence, and lay waste; and they press upon the
good themselves, whose cause they had undertaken; and they cut away the
steps by which they mounted, that no one <span id="page_169">p.
169</span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-Page_169"></span>may be able to
imitate them against themselves. But, however, let us suppose that this
duty of defending the good belongs only to the good man. Yet to
undertake it is easy, to fulfil it is difficult; because when you have
committed yourself to a contest and an encounter, the victory is placed
at the disposal of God, not in your own power. And for the most part the
wicked are more powerful both in number and in combination than the
good, so that it is not so much virtue which is necessary to overcome
them as good fortune. Is any one ignorant how often the better and the
juster side has been overcome? From this cause harsh tyrannies have
always broken out against the citizens. All history is full of examples,
but we will be content with one. <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p8.4"></span>Cnœus Pompeius wished to be the defender
of the good, since he took up arms in defence of the commonwealth, in
defence of the senate, and in defence of liberty; and yet the same man,
being conquered, perished together with liberty itself, <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118) and being mutilated by Egyptian
eunuchs, was cast forth unburied. <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p11"></span>It is not virtue, therefore, either
to be the enemy of the bad or the defender of the good, because virtue
cannot be subject to uncertain chances.  

> <span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p11.1"></span> “Moreover, to reckon the
> interests of our country as in the first place.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p12"></span>When the agreement of men is taken
away, virtue has no existence at all; for what are the interests of our
country, but the inconveniences of another state or nation?—that is, to
extend the boundaries which are violently taken from others, to increase
the power of the state, to improve the revenues,—all which things are
not virtues, but the overthrowing of virtues: for, in the first place,
the union of human society is taken away, innocence is taken away, the
abstaining from the property of another is taken away; lastly, justice
itself is taken away, which is unable to bear the tearing asunder of the
human race, and wherever arms have glittered, must be banished and
exterminated from thence. This saying of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p12.1"></span>Cicero <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) is true: “But they who say that
regard is to be had to citizens, but that it is not to be had to
foreigners, these destroy the common society of the human race; and when
this is removed, beneficence, liberality, kindness, and justice are
entirely <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121) taken away.” For how
can a man be just who injures, who hates, who despoils, who puts to
death? And they who strive to be serviceable to their country do all
these things: for they are ignorant of what this being serviceable is,
who think nothing useful, nothing advantageous, but that which can be
held by the hand; and this alone cannot be held, because it may be
snatched away.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p15"></span>Whoever, then, has gained for his
country these goods—as they themselves call them—that is, who by the
overthrow of cities and the destruction of nations has filled the
treasury with money, has taken lands and enriched his country-men—he is
extolled with praises to the heaven: in him there is said to be the
greatest and perfect virtue. And this is the error not only of the
people and the ignorant, but also of philosophers, who even give
precepts for injustice, lest folly and wickedness should be wanting in
discipline and authority. Therefore, when they are speaking of the
duties relating to warfare, all that discourse is accommodated neither
to justice nor to true virtue, but to this life and to civil
institutions; <span id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) and that this
is not justice the matter itself declares, and <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p16.2"></span>Cicero has testified. <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123) “But we,” he says, “are not in
possession of the real and life-like figure of true law and genuine
justice, we have nothing but delineations and sketches; <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) and I wish that we followed even
these, for they are taken from the excellent copies made by nature and
truth.” It is then a delineation and a sketch which they thought to be
justice. But what of wisdom? does not the same man confess that it has
no existence in philosophers? “Nor,” he says, <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) “when <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.7"></span>Fabricius or <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.8"></span>Aristides is called just, is an example
of justice sought from these as from a wise man; for none of these is
wise in the sense in which we wish the truly wise to be understood. Nor
were they who are esteemed and called wise, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.9"></span>Marcus Cato and <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.10"></span>Caius Lælius, actually wise, nor those
well-known seven; <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126) but from
their constant practice of the ‘middle duties,’ <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) they bore a certain likeness and
appearance <span id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128) of wise men.” If
therefore wisdom is taken away from the philosophers by their own
confession, and justice is taken away from those who are regarded as
just, it follows that all those descriptions of virtue must be false,
because no one can know what true virtue is but he who is just and wise.
But no one is just and wise but he whom God has instructed with heavenly
precepts.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[168:1113](0070144.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>Pœne: others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2.2"></span>plenè,” and “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2.3"></span>planè.” \[c. 30, p. 100, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2.4"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[168:1114](0070144.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3"></span> \[The first of the three <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>inutilia</span> of
<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.2"></span>Lucilius, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.3"></span>ut supra, thus: (1) “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.4"></span>Virtus quærendæ rei finem scire,
modumque;” (2) “<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.5"></span>Virtus divitiis
pretium persolvere posse;” (3) “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.6"></span>Virtus id dare quod re ipsa debetur
honori.” See p. 167, <span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.8"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[168:1115](0070144.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p3.9"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p4"></span> See chap. v. \[p. 167, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p4.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[168:1116](0070144.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p5.1"></span>Ratio virtutis.  

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[168:1117](0070144.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p6"></span> \[How I love our author for his
winning reproof of mere philosophical virtue in contrast with
evangelical righteousness!\]  

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[168:1118](0070144.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p8"></span> \[See the <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p8.1"></span>Quis Dives Salvetur of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p8.2"></span>Clement, vol. ii. p. 591, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[169:1119](0070144.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p9"></span> \[[Haggai. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>.
“La journée de Pharsale fut la dernière heure de la liberté. Le sénat,
les lois, le peuple, les mœurs, le mond romain étaient anéantis avec
Pompée.”—<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p9.2"></span>Lamartine.\]  

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[169:1120](0070144.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p10"></span> \[See, on Pharsalia, etc., <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p10.1"></span>Lamartine’s eloquent remarks, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p10.2"></span>Vie des Grands Hommes (César), vol. v.
pp. 276–277, ed. Paris, 1856.\]  

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[169:1121](0070144.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p13.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 6.  

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[169:1122](0070144.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p14.1"></span>Funditus, “from the very foundation.”  

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[169:1123](0070144.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p16.1"></span>Moremque civilem.  

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[169:1124](0070144.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 17.  

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[169:1125](0070144.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p18.1"></span>Umbrâ et imaginibus. The figure is
borrowed partly from sculpture and partly from painting. “Effigies” is
the moulded form, as opposed to the mere outline, “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p18.2"></span>umbra” and “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p18.3"></span>imago.”  

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[169:1126](0070144.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>De Offic., iii. 4. The words, “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.2"></span>aut ab illis fortitudinis, aut,” have not
been translated, because they refer to the “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.3"></span>Decii” and the “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.4"></span>Scipiones,” who are mentioned by <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.5"></span>Cicero as examples of bravery, but are
omitted by <span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.6"></span>Lactantius.  

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[169:1127](0070144.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p19.11"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p20"></span> \[See p. 101, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p20.2"></span>supra\]  

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[169:1128](0070144.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p21"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p21.1"></span>Ex <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p21.2"></span>mediorum officiorum<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p21.3"></span> frequentia, etc.\]  

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[169:1129](0070144.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p22"></span> \[[Rom. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.vi-p22.1"></span>.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Of the Way of Error and of Truth: that It is Single,
Narrow, and Steep, and Has God for Its Guide](0070145)
