[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070232)  [Next](0070234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p0.1"></span>Chap. XLV.—The Power and Works of Christ are Proved from the Scriptures.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p1"></span>We have spoken of His nativity; now
let us speak of His power and works, which, when He wrought them among
men, the Jews, seeing them to be great and wonderful, supposed that they
were done by the influence of magic, not knowing that all those things
which were done by Him had been foretold by the prophets. He gave
strength to the sick, and to those languishing under various diseases,
not by any healing remedy, but instantaneously, by the force and power
of His word; He restored the weak, He made the lame to walk, He gave
sight to the blind, He made the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear; He
cleansed the polluted and unclean, He restored their right mind to those
who were maddened with the attack of demons, He recalled to life and
light those who were dead or now buried. He also fed and satisfied <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) five thousand men with five loaves
and two fishes. He also walked upon the sea. He also in a tempest
commanded the wind to be still, and immediately there was a calm; all
which things we find predicted both in the books of the prophets and in
the verses of the Sibyls.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p3"></span>When a great multitude resorted to
Him on account of these miracles, and, as He truly was, believed Him to
be the Son of God, and sent from God, the priests and rulers of the
Jews, filled with envy, and at the same time excited with anger, because
He reproved their sins and injustice, conspired to put Him to death; and
that this would happen, <span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p3.1"></span>Solomon
had foretold a little more than a thousand years before, in the book of
Wisdom, using these words: <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530)
“Let us defraud the righteous, for he is unpleasant to us, and
upbraideth us with our offences against the law. He maketh his boast
that he has the knowledge of God, and he calleth himself the Son of God.
He is made to reprove our thoughts: it grieveth us even to look upon
him; for his life is not like the life of others, his ways are of
another fashion. We are counted by him as triflers; he withdraweth
himself from our ways, as from filthiness; he commendeth greatly the
latter end of the just, and boasteth that he has God for his father. Let
us see, therefore, if his words be true; let us prove what end he shall
have; let us examine him with rebukes and torments, that we may know his
meekness and prove his patience; let us condemn him to a shameful death.
Such things have they imagined, and have gone astray; for their own
folly hath blinded them, and they do not understand the mysteries of
God.”  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p5"></span>Therefore, being unmindful of these
writings which they read, they incited the people as though against an
impious man, so that they seized and led Him to trial, and with impious
words demanded His death. But they alleged against Him as a crime this
very thing, that He said that He was the Son of God, and that by healing
on the Sabbath He broke the law, which He said that He did not break,
but fulfilled. And when <span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p5.1"></span>Pontius
Pilate, who then as legate had authority in Syria, perceived that the
cause did not belong to the office of the Roman judge, he sent Him to
<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p5.2"></span>Herod the Tetrarch, and permitted
the Jews themselves to be the judges of their own law: who, having
received the power of punishing His guilt, sentenced <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) Him to the cross, but first
scourged and struck him with their hands, put on Him a crown of thorns,
spat upon His face, gave Him gall and vinegar to eat and drink; and
amidst these things no word was heard to fall from His lips. Then the
executioners, having cast lots over His tunic and mantle, suspended Him
on the cross, and affixed Him to it, though on the next day they were
about to celebrate the Passover, that is, their festival. Which crime
was followed by prodigies, that they might understand the impiety which
they had committed; for at the same moment in which He expired, there
was a great earthquake, and a withdrawing <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) of the sun, so that the day was
turned into night.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[240:1530](0070233.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p2.1"></span>Saturavit.  

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[240:1531](0070233.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p4"></span> [Wisd. ii.
12-22](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p4.1"></span>. See <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p4.2"></span>Instit., iv. 16, p. 117, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p4.4"></span>supra.  

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[240:1532](0070233.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p6.1"></span>Addixerunt. Some read “<span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p6.2"></span>affixerunt,” affixed Him to the cross.
 

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[240:1533](0070233.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xli-p7.1"></span>Deliquium solis. \[Elucidation IV.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XLVI.—It is proved from the prophets that the passion and
death of Christ had been foretold](0070234)
