[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070287)  [Next](0070289) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. I.—The Introduction, and Exhortation to Demetrianus. <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span>How disturbed I am, and in the greatest
necessities, you will be able to judge from this little book which I
have written to you, <span id="iii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Demetrianus, almost
in unadorned words, as the mediocrity of my talent permitted, that you
might know my daily pursuit, and that I might not be wanting to you,
even now an instructor, but of a more honourable subject and of a better
system. For if you afforded yourself a ready hearer in literature, which
did nothing else than form the style, how much more teachable ought you
to be in these true studies, which have reference even to the life! And
I now profess to you, that I am hindered by no necessity of circumstance
or time from composing something by which the philosophers of our
sect <span id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804) which we uphold may
become better instructed and more learned for the future, although they
now have a bad reputation, and are commonly reproved, as living
otherwise than is befitting for wise men, and as concealing their vices
under the covering of a name; whereas they ought either to have remedied
them, or to have altogether avoided them, that they might render the
name of wisdom happy and uncorrupted, their life itself agreeing with
their precepts. I, however, shrink from no labour that I may at once
instruct ourselves and others. For I am not able to forget myself, and
especially at that time when it is most necessary for me to remember; as
also you do not forget yourself, as I hope and wish. For although the
necessity of the state may turn you aside from true and just works, yet
it is impossible that a mind conscious of rectitude should not from time
to time look to the heaven.  

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span>I indeed rejoice that all things which are
esteemed blessings turn out prosperously to you, but only on condition
of their changing nothing of your state of mind. For I fear lest custom
and the pleasantness of these subjects should, as usually happens, creep
by degrees into your mind. Therefore I advise you,  

> <span id="iii.iv.i-p4.1"></span> “And repeating it, will again and
> again advise you,” <span id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805)  

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span>not to believe that you have these
enjoyments of the earth as great or true blessings, since they are not
only deceitful because they are doubtful, but also treacherous because
they are pleasant. For you know how crafty that wrestler and adversary
of ours is, and also often violent, as we now see that he is. He employs
all these things which are able to entice as snares, and with such
subtilty that they escape the notice of the eyes of the mind, so that
they cannot be avoided by the foresight of man. Therefore it is the
highest prudence to advance step by step, since he occupies the passes
on both sides, and secretly places stumbling-blocks for our feet.
Accordingly I advise you, either to disregard, if you are able according
to your virtue, your prosperity in which you live, or not to admire it
greatly. Remember your true parent, and in what <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806) city you have given your name, and
of what rank you have been. You understand assuredly what I say. For I
do not charge you with pride, of which there is not even a suspicion in
your case; but the things which I say are to be referred to the mind,
not to the body, the whole system of which has been arranged on this
account, that it may be in subjection to the soul as to a master, and
may be ruled by its will. For it is in a certain manner an earthen
vessel in which the soul, that is, the true man himself, is contained,
and that vessel indeed not made by <span
id="iii.iv.i-p7.3"></span>Prometheus, as the poets say, but by that
supreme Creator and Artificer of the world, God, whose divine providence
and most perfect excellence it is <span id="page_282">p. 282</span>
<span id="iii.iv.i-Page_282"></span>neither possible to comprehend by
the perception, nor to express in word.  

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span>I will attempt, however, since mention has
been made of the body and soul, to explain the nature of each, as far as
the weakness of my understanding sees through; and I think that this
duty is especially to be undertaken on this account, because <span
id="iii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>Marcus Tullius, a man of remarkable talent, in
his fourth book on the Republic, when he had attempted to do this,
concluded a subject of wide extent within narrow limits, lightly
selecting the chief points. And that there might be no excuse, because
he had not followed up this subject, he testified that neither
inclination nor attention had been wanting to him. For in his first book
concerning the Laws, when he was concisely summing up the same subject,
he thus spoke: “<span id="iii.iv.i-p8.2"></span>Scipio, as it appears to
me, has sufficiently expressed this subject in those books which you
have read.” Afterwards, however, in his second book concerning the
Nature of the Gods, he endeavoured to follow up the same subject more
extensively. But since he did not express it sufficiently even there, I
will approach this office, and will take upon myself boldly to explain
that which a man of the greatest eloquence has almost left untouched.
Perhaps you may blame me for attempting to discuss something in matters
of obscurity, when you see that there have been men of such rashness who
are commonly called philosophers, that they scrutinized those things
which God willed to be abstruse and hidden, and investigated the nature
of things in heaven and on earth, which are far removed from us, and
cannot be examined <span id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807) by the
eyes, nor touched by the hand, nor perceived by the senses; and yet they
so dispute concerning the nature of these things, as to wish that the
things which they bring forward may appear to be proved and known. What
reason is there, I pray, why any one should think it an invidious thing
in us, if we wish to look into and contemplate the system of our
body, <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808) which is not altogether
obscure, because from the very offices of the limbs, and the uses of the
several parts, it is permitted us to understand with what great power of
providence each part has been made?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[281:1804](0070288.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span> \[Of whom, <span
id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>infra.\]  

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[281:1805](0070288.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span> \[<span id="iii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Nostræ
sectæ. Perhaps adopted pleasantly from [Acts xxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv.i-p3.2"></span>.\]
i.e., Christians.  

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[281:1806](0070288.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span> <span id="iii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>Virg.,
<span id="iii.iv.i-p5.2"></span>Æn., iii. 436.  

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[281:1807](0070288.htm#fr_1806) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span> i.e., have been initiated by baptism.
\[[Philipp. iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p7.1"></span>. <span id="iii.iv.i-p7.2"></span>Greek.\]  

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[282:1808](0070288.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>Contrectari.  

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[282:1809](0070288.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p10"></span> \[The argument from design is
unanswerable, and can never be obsolete. The objections are frivolous,
and belong to <span id="iii.iv.i-p10.1"></span>Cicero’s “minute
philosophers.”\] Of whom, see <span id="iii.iv.i-p10.2"></span>Tuscal.
Quæst., book i. cap. 23.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—Of the production of the beasts and of man](0070289)
