[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070338)  [Next](0070340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXX.

<span id="iii.v.xxx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Maximian, having thus forfeited the respect
due to an emperor and a father-in-law, grew impatient at his abased
condition, and, emboldened by impunity, formed new plots against <span
id="iii.v.xxx-p1.2"></span>Constantine. He addressed himself to his
daughter <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.3"></span>Fausta, and, as well by
entreaties as by the soothing of flattery, solicited her to betray her
husband. He promised to obtain for her a more honourable alliance than
that with <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.4"></span>Constantine; and he requested
her to allow the bed-chamber of the emperor to be left open, and to be
slightly guarded. <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.5"></span>Fausta undertook to
do whatever he asked, and instantly revealed the whole to her husband. A
plan was laid for detecting <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.6"></span>Maximian in
the very execution of his crime. They placed a base eunuch to be
murdered instead of the emperor. At the dead of night <span
id="iii.v.xxx-p1.7"></span>Maximian arose, and perceived all things to
be favourable for his insidious purpose. There were few soldiers on
guard, and these too at some distance from the bed-chamber. However, to
prevent suspicion, he accosted them, and said that he had had a dream
which he wished to communicate to his son-in-law. He went in armed, slew
the eunuch, sprung forth exultingly, and avowed the murder. At that
moment <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.8"></span>Constantine showed himself on
the opposite side with a band of soldiers; the dead body was brought out
of the bed-chamber; the murderer, taken in the fact, all aghast,  

> <span id="iii.v.xxx-p1.9"></span> “Stood like a stone, silent and
> motionless;”  

<span id="iii.v.xxx-p2"></span>while <span
id="iii.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>Constantine upbraided him for his impiety and
enormous guilt. At last <span id="iii.v.xxx-p2.2"></span>Maximian
obtained leave that the manner of his death should be at his own choice,
and he strangled himself.  

<span id="iii.v.xxx-p3"></span>Thus that mightiest sovereign of Rome—who
ruled so long with exceeding glory, and who celebrated his twentieth
anniversary—thus that most haughty man had his neck broken, and ended
his detestable life by a death base and ignominious.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXXI](0070340)
