[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070053)  [Next](0070055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Of What Subjects Philosophy Consists, and Who Was the Chief Founder of the Academic Sect.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p1"></span>Philosophy appears to consist of two
subjects, knowledge and conjecture, and of nothing more. Knowledge
cannot come from the understanding, nor be apprehended by thought;
because <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-Page_71"></span>to have knowledge in oneself as a
peculiar property does not belong to man, but to God. But the nature of
mortals does not receive knowledge, except that which comes from
without. For on this account the divine intelligence has opened the eyes
and ears and other senses in the body, that by these entrances knowledge
might flow through to the mind. For to investigate or wish to know the
causes of natural things,—whether the sun is as great as it appears to
be, or is many times greater than the whole of this earth; also whether
the moon be spherical or concave; and whether the stars are fixed to the
heaven, or are borne with free course through the air; of what magnitude
the heaven itself is, of what material it is composed; whether it is at
rest and immoveable, or is turned round with incredible swiftness; how
great is the thickness of the earth, or on what foundations it is poised
and suspended,—to wish to comprehend these things, I say, by disputation
and conjectures, is as though we should wish to discuss what we may
suppose to be the character of a city in some very remote country, which
we have never seen, and of which we have heard nothing more than the
name. If we should claim to ourselves knowledge in a matter of this
kind, which cannot be known, should we not appear to be mad, in
venturing to affirm that in which we may be refuted? How much more are
they to be judged mad and senseless, who imagine that they know natural
things, which cannot be known by man! Rightly therefore did <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Socrates, and the Academics <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) who followed him, take away knowledge,
which is not the part of a disputant, but of a diviner. It remains that
there is in philosophy conjecture only; for that from which knowledge is
absent, is entirely occupied by conjecture. For every one conjectures
that of which he is ignorant. But they who discuss natural subjects,
conjecture that they are as they discuss them. Therefore they do not
know the truth, because knowledge is concerned with that which is
certain, conjecture with the uncertain.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p3"></span>Let us return to the example before
mentioned. Come, let us conjecture about the state and character of that
city which is unknown to us in all respects except in name. It is
probable that it is situated on a plain, with walls of stone, lofty
buildings, many streets, magnificent and highly adorned temples. Let us
describe, if you please, the customs and deportment of the citizens. But
when we shall have described these, another will make opposite
statements; and when he also shall have concluded, a third will arise,
and others after him; and they will make very different conjectures to
those of ours. Which therefore of all is more true? Perhaps none of
them. But all things have been mentioned which the nature of the
circumstances admits, so that some one of them must necessarily be true.
But it will not be known who has spoken the truth. It may possibly be
that all have in some degree erred <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>in their description, and that all have
in some degree attained to the truth. Therefore we are foolish if we
seek this by disputation; for some one may present himself who may
deride our conjectures, and esteem us as mad, since we wish to
conjecture the character of that which we do not know. But it is
unnecessary to go in quest of remote cases, from which perhaps no one
may come to refute us. Come, let us conjecture what is now going on in
the forum, what in the senate-house. That also is too distant. Let us
say what is taking place with the interposition of a single wall; <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) no one can know this but he who has
heard or seen it. No one therefore ventures to say this, because he will
immediately be refuted not by words, but by the presence of the fact
itself. But this is the very thing which philosophers do, who discuss
what is taking place in heaven, but think that they do that with
impunity, because there is no one to refute their errors. But if they
were to think that some one was about to descend who would prove them to
be mad and false, they would never discuss those subjects at all which
they cannot possibly know. Nor, however, is their shamelessness and
audacity to be regarded as more successful because they are not refuted;
for God refutes them to whom alone the truth is known, although He may
seem to connive at their conduct, and He reckons such wisdom of men as
the greatest folly.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[71:374](0070054.htm#fr_373) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2"></span> It is evident that the Academy took
its rise from the doctrine of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>Socrates. <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>Plato, the disciple of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2.3"></span>Socrates, founded the Academy. However
excellent their system may appear to many, the opinion of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2.4"></span>Carneades the Stoic seems just, who said
that “the wise man who is about to conjecture is about to err, for he
who conjectures knows nothing.” Thus knowledge is taken from them by
themselves.—<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p2.5"></span>Betul.  

<span id="fn_374"></span>[71:375](0070054.htm#fr_374) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.iii-p4"></span> With nothing but an inner wall
between.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IV.—That knowledge is taken away by Socrates, and
conjecture by Zeno](0070055)
