[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070131)  [Next](0070133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIX.—Of Virtue and the Tortures of Christians, and of the Right of a Father and Master.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p1"></span>But undoubtedly this is the
cause <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) why he appears to be
foolish who prefers to be in want, or to die rather than to inflict
injury or take away the property of another,—namely, because they think
that man is destroyed by death. And from this persuasion all the errors
both of the common people and also of the philosophers arise. For if we
have no existence after death, assuredly it is the part of the most
foolish man not to promote the interests of the present life, that it
may be long-continued, and may abound with all advantages. But he who
shall act thus must of necessity depart from the rule of justice. But if
there remains to man a longer and a better life—and this we learn both
from the arguments of great philosophers, and from the answers of seers,
and the divine words of prophets—it is the part of the wise man to
despise this present life with its advantages, since its entire loss is
compensated by immortality. The same defender of justice, <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.5"></span>Lælius, says in <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.6"></span>Cicero: <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047) “Virtue altogether wishes for
honour; nor is there any other reward of virtue.” There is indeed
another, and that most worthy of virtue, which you, O <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p3.2"></span>Lælius, could never have supposed; for you
had no knowledge of the sacred writings. And this reward it easily
receives, and does not harshly demand. You are greatly mistaken, if you
think that a reward can be paid to virtue by man, since you yourself
most truly said in another <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-Page_155"></span>place: “What riches will you offer to
this man? what commands? what kingdoms? He who regards these things as
human, judges his own advantages to be divine.” Who, therefore, can
think you a wise man, O <span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p3.3"></span>Lælius, when
you contradict yourself, and after a short interval take away from
virtue that which you have given to her? But it is manifest that
ignorance of the truth makes your opinion uncertain and wavering.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p4"></span>In the next place, what do you add?
“But if all the ungrateful, or the many who are envious, or powerful
enemies, deprive virtue of its rewards.” Oh how frail, how worthless,
have you represented virtue to be, if it can be deprived of its reward!
For if it judges its goods to be divine, as you said, how can there be
any so ungrateful, so envious, so powerful, as to be able to deprive
virtue of those goods which were conferred upon it by the gods?
“Assuredly it delights itself,” he says, “by many comforts, and
especially supports itself by its own beauty.” By what comforts? by what
beauty? since that beauty is often charged upon it as a fault, and
turned into a punishment. For what if, as <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p4.1"></span>Furius said, <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) a man should be dragged away,
harassed, banished, should be in want, be deprived of his hands, have
his eyes put out, be condemned, put into chains, be burned, be miserably
tortured also? will virtue lose its reward, or rather, will it perish
itself? By no means. But it will both receive its reward from God the
Judge, and it will live, and always flourish. And if you take away these
things, nothing in the life of man can appear to be so useless, so
foolish, as virtue, the natural goodness and honour of which may teach
us that the soul is not mortal, and that a divine reward is appointed
for it by God. But on this account God willed that virtue itself should
be concealed under the character of folly, that the mystery of truth and
of His religion might be secret; that He might show the vanity and error
of these superstitions, and of that earthly wisdom which raises itself
too highly, and exhibits great self-complacency, that its difficulty
being at length set forth, that most narrow path might lead to the lofty
reward of immortality.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p6"></span>I have shown, as I think, why our
people are esteemed foolish by the foolish. For to choose to be tortured
and slain, rather than to take incense in three fingers, and throw it
upon the hearth, <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049) appears as
foolish as, in a case where life is endangered, to be more careful of
the life of another than of one’s own. For they do not know how great an
act of impiety it is to adore any other object than God, who made heaven
and earth, who fashioned the human race, breathed into them the breath
of life, and gave them light. But if he is accounted the most worthless
of slaves who runs away and deserts his master, and if he is judged most
deserving of stripes and chains, and a prison, and the cross, and of all
evil; and if a son, in the same manner, is thought abandoned and impious
who deserts his father, that he may not pay him obedience, and on this
account is considered deserving of being disinherited, and of having his
name removed for ever from his family,—how much more so does he who
forsakes God, in whom the two names entitled to equal reverence, of Lord
and Father, alike meet? For what benefit does he who buys a slave bestow
upon him, beyond the nourishment with which he supplies him for his own
advantage? And he who begets a son has it not in his power to effect
that he shall be conceived, or born, or live; from which it is evident
that he is not the father, but only the instrument <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050) of generation. Of what punishments,
therefore, is he deserving, who forsakes Him who is both the true Master
and Father, but those which God Himself has appointed? who has prepared
everlasting fire for the wicked spirits; and this He Himself threatens
by His prophets to the impious and the rebellious. <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[154:1047](0070132.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2"></span> Thus far he has refuted the arguments
of <span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.1"></span>Furius, the advocate of
injustice. He now shows the reasons why <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.2"></span>Lælius, who was esteemed most wise, does
not worthily maintain the cause of justice, i.e., because he was
ignorant of heavenly wisdom. \[See cap. xvii. p. 152, <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.4"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[154:1048](0070132.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p2.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p3.1"></span>De Republ., i. 3.  

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[155:1049](0070132.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p5.1"></span>Vid. ch. xii.  

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[155:1050](0070132.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p7"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p7.1"></span>In focum. Here it means the <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p7.2"></span>brazier placed before an image.\]  

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[155:1051](0070132.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p8.1"></span>Generandi ministrum.  

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[155:1052](0070132.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xix-p9"></span> \[Perpetually recurring are such
ideas and interpretations of God’s warnings. Vol. iv. p. 542.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XX.—Of the vanity and crimes, impious superstitions, and of
the tortures of the Christians](0070133)
