[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070244)  [Next](0070246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LVII.—Of Wisdom and Foolishness.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p1"></span>These things indeed are said with
acuteness; but we are able very readily to reply to them. For the
imitation of names causes it thus to appear. For justice bears a
resemblance to foolishness, and yet it is not foolishness; and at the
same time malice bears a resemblance to wisdom, and yet it is not
wisdom. But as that malice is intelligent and shrewd in preserving its
own interests, it is not wisdom, but cunning and craftiness; so likewise
justice ought not to be called foolishness, but innocence, because <span
id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.liii-Page_246"></span>the just man must be wise, and the
foolish man unjust. For neither reason nor nature itself permits that he
who is just should not be wise, since it is plain that the just man does
nothing except that which is right and good, and always avoids that
which is perverted <span id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575) and evil.
But who will be able to distinguish between good and evil, depravity and
rectitude, but he who shall be wise? But the fool acts badly, because he
is ignorant of what is good and evil. Therefore he does wrong, because
he is unable to distinguish between things which are perverted and those
which are right. Therefore justice cannot be befitting to the foolish
man, nor wisdom to the unjust. He is not then a foolish person who has
not thrust off a shipwrecked man from a plank, nor a wounded man from
his horse, because he has abstained from injury, which is a sin; and it
is the part of the wise man to avoid sin.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p3"></span>But that he should appear foolish
at first sight is caused by this, that they suppose the soul to be
extinguished together with the body; and for this reason they refer all
advantage to this life. For if there is no existence after death, it is
plain that he acts foolishly who spares the life of another to his own
loss, or who consults the gain of another more than his own. If death
destroys the soul, we must use our endeavours to live for a longer time,
and more to our own advantage; but if there remains after death a life
of immortality and blessedness, the just and wise man will certainly
despise this corporeal existence, with all earthly goods, because he
will know what kind of a reward he is about to receive from God.
Therefore let us maintain innocency, let us maintain justice, let us
undergo the appearance of foolishness, that we may be able to maintain
true wisdom. And if it appears to men senseless and foolish to prefer
torture and death rather than to sacrifice to gods, and to escape
without harm, let us however strive to exhibit faithfulness towards God
by all virtue and by all patience. Let not death terrify us, nor pain
subdue us, so as to prevent the vigour of our mind and constancy from
being preserved unshaken. Let them call us foolish, whilst they
themselves are most foolish, and blind and dull, and like sheep; who do
not understand that it is a deadly thing to leave the living God, and
prostrate themselves in the adoration of earthly objects; who do not
know that eternal punishment awaits those who have worshipped senseless
images; and that those who have neither refused tortures nor death for
the worship and honour of the true God will obtain eternal life. This is
the highest faith; this is true wisdom; this is perfect justice. It
matters nothing to us what fools may judge, what trifling men may think.
We ought to await the judgment of God, that we may hereafter judge those
who have passed judgment on us.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[246:1576](0070245.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.liii-p2.1"></span>Pravum.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LVIII.—Of the true worship of God, and sacrifice](0070246)
