[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070064)  [Next](0070066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIV.—That <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p0.2"></span>Lucretius and Others Have Erred, and <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p0.3"></span>Cicero Himself, in Fixing the Origin of Wisdom.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Lucretius, accordingly, acts more
correctly in praising him who was the first discoverer of wisdom; but he
acts foolishly in this, that he supposed it to be discovered by a
man,—as though that man whom he praises had found it lying somewhere as
flutes at the fountain, <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411)
according to the legends of the poets. But if he praised the inventor of
wisdom as a god,—for thus he speaks: <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span> “No one, I think, who is formed
> of mortal body. For if we must speak, as the acknowledged majesty of
> the subject itself demands, he was a god, he was a god, most noble
> Memmius,”—  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p4"></span>yet God ought not to have been
praised on this account, because He discovered wisdom, but because He
created man, who might be capable of receiving wisdom. For he diminishes
the praise who praises a part only of the whole. But he praised Him as a
man; whereas He ought to have been esteemed as a God on this very
account, because He found out wisdom. For thus he speaks: <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span> “Will it not be right that this
> man should be enrolled among the gods?”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>From this it appears, either that he
wished to praise <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>Pythagoras, who
was the first, as I have said, <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)
to call himself a philosopher; or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>Thales of Miletus, who is reported to
have been the first who discussed the nature of things. Thus, while he
seeks to exalt, he has depressed the thing itself. For it is not great
if it could have been discovered by man. But he may be pardoned as a
poet. But that same accomplished orator, that same consummate
philosopher, also censures the Greeks, whose levity he always accuses,
and yet imitates. Wisdom itself, which at one time he calls the gift, at
another time the invention, of the gods, he fashions after the manner of
the poets, and praises on account of its beauty. He also grievously
complains that there have been some who disparaged it. “Can any one,” he
says, “dare to censure the parent of life, and to defile himself with
this guilt of parricide, and to be so impiously ungrateful?”  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p8"></span>Are we then parricides, <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>Marcus Tullius, and in your judgment
worthy to be sewed <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) up in a bag,
who deny that philosophy is the parent of life? Or you, who are so
impiously ungrateful towards God (not this god whose image you worship
as he sits in the Capitol, but Him who made the world and created man,
who bestowed wisdom also among His heavenly benefits), do you call her
the teacher of virtue or the parent of life, having learned <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) from whom, one must be in much greater
uncertainty than he was before? For of what virtue is she the teacher?
For philosophers to the present time do not explain where she is
situated. Of what life is she the parent? since the teachers themselves
have been worn out by old age and death before they have determined upon
the befitting course of life. Of what truth can you hold her forth as an
explorer? since you often testify that, in so great a multitude of
philosophers, not a single wise man has yet existed. What, then, did
that mistress of life teach you? Was it to assail with reproaches the
most powerful consul, <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) and by
<span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-Page_83"></span>your envenomed speeches to render him
the enemy of his country? But let us pass by those things, which may be
excused under the name of fortune. You applied yourself, in truth, to
the study of philosophy, and so, indeed, that no one ever applied
himself more diligently; since you were acquainted with all the systems
of philosophy, as you yourself are accustomed to boast, and elucidated
the subject itself in Latin writings, and displayed yourself as an
imitator of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.5"></span>Plato. Tell us,
therefore, what you have learned, or in what sect you have discovered
the truth. Doubtless it was in the Academy which you followed and
approved. But this teaches nothing, excepting that you know your own
ignorance. <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) Therefore your own
books refute you, and show the nothingness of the learning which may be
gained from philosophy for life. These are your words: “But to me we
appear not only blind to wisdom, but dull and obtuse to those very
things which may appear in some degree to be discerned.” If, therefore,
philosophy is the teacher of life, why did you appear to yourself blind,
and dull, and obtuse? whereas you ought, under her teaching, both to
perceive and to be wise, and to be engaged in the clearest light. But
how you confessed the truth of philosophy we learn from the letters
addressed to your son, in which you advise him that the precepts of
philosophy ought to be known, but that we must live as members of a
community. <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p14"></span>What can be spoken so
contradictory? If the precepts of philosophy ought to be known, it is on
this account that they ought to be known, in order to our living well
and wisely. Or if we must live as members of a community, then
philosophy is not wisdom, if it is better to live in accordance with
society than with philosophy. For if that which is called philosophy be
wisdom, he assuredly lives foolishly who does not live according to
philosophy. But if he does not live foolishly who lives in accordance
with society, it follows that he who lives according to philosophy lives
foolishly. By your own judgment, therefore, philosophy is condemned of
folly and emptiness. And you also, in your <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p14.1"></span>Consolation, that is, not in a work of
levity and mirth, introduced this sentiment respecting philosophy: “But
I know not what error possesses us, or deplorable ignorance of the
truth.” Where, then, is the guidance of philosophy? or what has that
parent of life taught you, if you are deplorably ignorant of the truth?
But if this confession of error and ignorance has been extorted almost
against your will from your innermost breast, why do you not at length
acknowledge to yourself the truth, that philosophy which, though it
teaches nothing, you extolled with praises to the heavens, cannot be the
teacher of virtue?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_411"></span>[82:412](0070065.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p2"></span> A proverbial expression, denoting
an accidental occurrence.  

<span id="fn_412"></span>[82:413](0070065.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p3"></span> Book v. 6.  

<span id="fn_413"></span>[82:414](0070065.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p5"></span> Book v. 51.  

<span id="fn_414"></span>[82:415](0070065.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p7"></span> Ch. ii.  

<span id="fn_415"></span>[82:416](0070065.htm#fr_415) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p9"></span> The allusion is to the punishment
of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p9.1"></span>parricides, who were sewed into
a bag with an ape, a serpent, and a cock, and thus thrown into the sea.
 

<span id="fn_416"></span>[82:417](0070065.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p10"></span> If any one has approached her as a
learner.  

<span id="fn_417"></span>[82:418](0070065.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>Marcus Antonius, who was consul with C.
Cæsar in the year when Cæsar was assassinated. It was against <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.2"></span>Antonius that <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.3"></span>Cicero wrote those speeches full of
invectives, which, in imitation of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.4"></span>Demosthenes, he named Philippics.  

<span id="fn_418"></span>[83:419](0070065.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p11.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p12"></span> This point is discussed by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p12.1"></span>Cicero in his Academic questions.  

<span id="fn_419"></span>[83:420](0070065.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xiv-p13"></span> \[Advice which he took to heart as
a swinish debauchee.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XV.—The error of Seneca in philosophy, and how the speech
of philosophers is at variance with their life](0070066)
