[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070125)  [Next](0070127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Of the Increase and the Punishment of the Christians. <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p2"></span>But since our number is continually
increased from the worshippers of gods, but is never lessened, not even
in persecution itself,—since men may commit sin, and be defiled by
sacrifice, but they cannot be turned away from God, for the truth
prevails by its own power,—who is there, I pray, so foolish and so blind
as not to see on which side wisdom is? But they are blinded by malice
and fury, that they cannot see; and they think that those are foolish
who, when they have it in their power to avoid punishments, nevertheless
prefer to be tortured and to be put to death; whereas they might see
from this very circumstance, that it is not folly to which so many
thousands throughout the world agree with one and the same mind. For if
women fall into error through the weakness of their sex (for these
persons sometimes call it a womanish and anile superstition), men
doubtless are wise. If boys, if youths are improvident through their
age, the mature and aged doubtless have a fixed judgment. If one city is
unwise, it is evident that the other innumerable cities cannot be
foolish. If one province or one nation is without prudence, the rest
must have understanding of that which is right. But since the divine law
has been received from the rising even to the setting of the sun, and
each sex, every age, and nation, and country, with one and the same mind
obeys God—since there is everywhere the same patient endurance, the same
contempt of death—they ought to have understood that there is some
reason in that matter, that it is not without a cause that it is
defended even to death, that there is some foundation and solidity,
which not <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-Page_149"></span>only frees that religion from
injuries and molestation, but always increases and makes it stronger.
For in this respect also the malice of those is brought to light, who
think that they have utterly overthrown the religion of God if they have
corrupted men, when it is permitted them to make satisfaction also to
God; and there is no worshipper of God so evil who does not, when the
opportunity is given him, return to appease God, and that, too, with
greater devotedness. For the consciousness of sin and the fear of
punishment make a man more religious, and the faith is always much
stronger which is replaced through repentance. If, therefore, they
themselves, when they think that the gods are angry with them,
nevertheless believe that they are appeased by gifts, and sacrifices,
and incense, what reason is there why they should imagine our God to be
so unmerciful and implacable, that it should appear impossible for him
to be a Christian, who by compulsion and against his will has poured a
libation to their gods? Unless by chance they think that those who are
once contaminated are about to change their mind, so that they may now
begin of their own accord to do that which they have done under the
influence of torture. Who would willingly undertake that duty which
began with injury? Who, when he sees the scars on his own sides, would
not the more hate the gods, on account of whom he bears the traces of
lasting punishment, and the marks imprinted upon his flesh? Thus it
comes to pass, that when peace is given from heaven, those who were
estranged <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) from us return, and
a fresh crowd <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) of others are
added on account of the wonderful nature <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) of the virtue displayed. For when
the people see that men are lacerated by various kinds of tortures, and
that they retain their patience unsubdued while the executioners are
wearied, they think, as is really the case, that neither the agreement
of so many nor the constancy of the dying is without meaning, and that
patience itself could not surmount such great tortures without the aid
of God. Robbers and men of robust frame are unable to endure lacerations
of this kind: they utter exclamations, and send forth groans; for they
are overcome by pain, because they are destitute of patience
infused <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) into them. But in our
case (not to speak of men), boys and delicate women in silence overpower
their torturers, and even the fire is unable to extort from them a
groan. Let the Romans go and boast in their <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p6.2"></span>Mutius or <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p6.3"></span>Regulus,—the one of whom gave himself up
to be slain by the enemy, because he was ashamed to live as a captive;
the other being taken by the enemy, when he saw that he could not escape
death, laid his hand upon the burning hearth, that he might make
atonement for his crime to the enemy whom he wished to kill, and by that
punishment received the pardon which he had not deserved. Behold, the
weak sex and fragile age endure to be lacerated in the whole body, and
to be burned: not of necessity, for it is permitted them to escape if
they wished to do so; but of their own will, because they put their
trust in God. <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[148:1014](0070126.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p1"></span> \[Vol. iv. p. 116; same vol., p.
125.\]  

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[149:1015](0070126.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p3.1"></span>Et qui fuerint aversi, redeant. The
common reading is, “<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p3.2"></span>et qui
fugerunt, universi redeant.”  

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[149:1016](0070126.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>Alius novas populus.  

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[149:1017](0070126.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p5.1"></span>Propter miraculum virtutis.  

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[149:1018](0070126.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p6.1"></span>Deest illis inspirata patientia.  

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[149:1019](0070126.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xiii-p7"></span> \[Vol. iii. p. 700, this series.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIV.—Of the fortitude of the Christians](0070127)
