[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070051)  [Next](0070053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. I.—A Comparison of the Truth with Eloquence: Why the Philosophers Did Not Attain to It. Of the Simple Style of the Scriptures.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Since it is supposed that the truth still
lies hidden in obscurity—either through the error and ignorance of the
common people, who are the slaves of various and foolish superstitions,
or through the philosophers, who by the perverseness of their minds
confuse rather than throw light upon it—I could wish that the power of
eloquence had fallen to my lot, though not such as it was in <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p1.2"></span>Marcus Tullius, for that was extraordinary
and admirable, but in some degree approaching it; <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) that, being supported as much by the
strength of talent as it has weight by its own force, the truth might at
length come forth, and having dispelled and refuted public errors, and
the errors of those who are considered wise, might introduce among the
human race a brilliant light. And I could wish that this were so, for
two reasons: either that men might more readily believe the truth when
adorned with embellishments, since they even believe falsehood, being
captivated by the adornment of speech and the enticement of words; or,
at all events, that the philosophers themselves might be overpowered by
us, most of all by their own arms, in which they are accustomed to pride
themselves and to place confidence.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p3"></span>But since God has willed this to be
the nature of the case, that simple and undisguised truth should be more
clear, because it has sufficient ornament of itself, and on this account
it is corrupted when embellished <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364)
with adornings from without, but that falsehood should please by means
of a splendour not its own, because being corrupt of itself it vanishes
and melts away, unless it is set off <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) and polished with decoration sought
from another source; I bear it with equanimity that a moderate degree of
talent has been granted to me. But it is not in reliance upon eloquence,
but upon the truth, that I have undertaken this work,—a work, perhaps,
too great to be sustained by my strength; which, however, even if I
should fail, the truth itself will complete, with the assistance of God,
whose office this is. For when I know that the greatest orators have
often been overcome by pleaders of moderate ability, because the power
of truth is so great that it defends itself even in small things by its
own clearness: why should I imagine that it will be overwhelmed in a
cause of the greatest importance by men who are ingenious and eloquent,
as I admit, but who speak false things; and not that it should appear
bright and illustrious, if not by our speech, which is very feeble, and
flows from a slight fountain, but by its own light? Nor, if there have
been philosophers worthy of admiration on account of their literary
erudition, should I also yield to them the knowledge and learning of the
truth, which no one can attain to by reflection or disputation. Nor do I
now disparage the pursuit of those who wished to know the truth, because
God has made the nature of man most desirous of arriving at the truth;
but I assert and maintain this against them, that the effect did not
follow their honest and well-directed will, because they neither knew
what was true in itself, nor how, nor where, nor with what mind it is to
be sought. And thus, while they desire to remedy the errors of men, they
have become entangled in snares and the greatest errors. I have
therefore been led to this task of refuting philosophy by the very order
of the subject which I have undertaken.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p6"></span>For since all error arises either from
false religion or from wisdom, <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366)
 <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) in refuting error it is
necessary to overthrow both. For inasmuch as <span id="page_70">p.
70</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.i-Page_70"></span>it has been handed down
to us in the sacred writings that the thoughts of philosophers are
foolish, this very thing is to be proved by fact and by arguments, that
no one, induced by the honourable name of wisdom, or deceived by the
splendour of empty eloquence, may prefer to give credence to human
rather than to divine things. Which things, indeed, are related in a
concise and simple manner. For it was not befitting that, when God was
speaking to man, He should confirm His words by arguments, as though He
would not otherwise <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) be regarded
with confidence: but, as it was right, He spoke as the mighty Judge of
all things, to whom it belongs not to argue, but to pronounce sentence.
He Himself, as God, is truth. But we, since we have divine testimony for
everything, will assuredly show by how much surer arguments truth may be
defended, when even false things are so defended that they are
accustomed to appear true. Wherefore there is no reason why we should
give so much honour to philosophers as to fear their eloquence. For they
might speak well as men of learning; but they could not speak truly,
because they had not learned the truth from Him in whose power it was.
Nor, indeed, shall we effect anything great in convicting them of
ignorance, which they themselves very often confess. Since they are not
believed in that one point alone in which alone they ought to have been
believed, I will endeavour to show that they never spoke so truly as
when they uttered their opinion respecting their own ignorance.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_363"></span>[69:364](0070052.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p2"></span> \[A modest confession of his desire
to “find out acceptable words.” [Eccles. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>. His success is proverbial.\]  

<span id="fn_364"></span>[69:365](0070052.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p4"></span> Stained, counterfeit.  

<span id="fn_365"></span>[69:366](0070052.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p5"></span> Embellished.  

<span id="fn_366"></span>[69:367](0070052.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p6.1"></span> <span
id="fn_367"></span>[69:368](0070052.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p7"></span> \[i.e., false <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>sophia = “philosophy falsely so called.”
Vol. v. p. 81.\]  

<span id="fn_368"></span>[70:369](0070052.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.i-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Aliter. This word is usually read in the
former clause, but it gives a better meaning in this position.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—Of philosophy, and how vain was its occupation in
setting forth the truth](0070053)
