[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070478)  [Next](0070480) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_529"></span>  

## <span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice

###### <span id="xii.i-p1.2"></span>to

## <span id="xii.i-p1.3"></span>the Early Liturgies.

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span><span id="xii.i-p2.1"></span>It is in curious
contrast with the work of <span id="xii.i-p2.2"></span>Brett and others
like-minded that we have in these Edinburgh translations a reflection
from the minds of divines who are unused to liturgies, and who have no
interest in their elucidation. For the mere reader this is not an
advantage; but the student who goes to the originals will find that it
affords at times no inconsiderable help. These translations are
“inartificially drawn,” as the lawyers say. They are so much Greek and
Latin rendered grammatically by competent scholars, who have no theories
to sustain, and who are equally devoid of <span
id="xii.i-p2.3"></span>technique and of a disposition to exhibit it for
the support of preconceptions. Not infrequently one gets a new view of
certain stereotyped expressions from the way in which they are here
handled. The liturgiologist finds his researches freshened by
etymologies he had hardly thought of, here literally rendered. Of
course, these are mere specimens, and no one can use them for argument,
except by comparison with the Greek, or the Latin of <span
id="xii.i-p2.4"></span>Renaudot, or the originals in Syriac or Coptic;
but they will prove very useful in many ways. The whole science is in
its infancy; and we have no specimen of a primitive liturgy unless it be
the Clementine, so called. The specimens here given are like cloth of
gold ([Ps. xlv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)<span
id="xii.i-p2.5"></span>), moth-eaten and patched, and spangled over with
tinsel; and the true artist has only the one object in view,—to restore
it, that is, to the king’s daughter, as it was aforetime.  

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>The following is the announcement of the
Messrs. <span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>Clark in the Edinburgh edition:
“The Liturgy of St. James has been translated by <span
id="xii.i-p3.2"></span>William Macdonald, M.A.; that of the Evangelist
<span id="xii.i-p3.3"></span>Mark by <span id="xii.i-p3.4"></span>George
Ross Merry, B.A.; and that of the Holy Apostles by Dr. <span
id="xii.i-p3.5"></span>Donaldson.”  

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>It will be observed that the translations are
given in the Edinburgh series with hardly a line of comment, and with no
editorial helps to the reader whatever. These have been scantily
supplied, here and there, where the case seemed to require some
elucidation; and in a few instances I have ventured to reduce a word or
two in the rendering to liturgical phraseology.  

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>The interest which has recently been awakened
in <span id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>liturgiology, and which exists among the
learned so generally, will justify me in stating somewhat at large the
considerations which are prerequisites to an intelligent study of these
compilations. I shall not depart from my rule, nor formulate my personal
convictions; but I must indicate sources of information not mentioned by
the Edinburgh editors, only remarking, that, while they have cited the
learned and excellent Dr. <span id="xii.i-p5.2"></span>Neale, with
others who advance untenable claims in some instances, I shall refer to
writers of a more moderate school, such as have taken a less narrow and
more historic view of the whole matter. By claiming too much, and by
reading their own ideas back into the ancient exemplars, many good and
learned men have overdone their argument, and confused scriptural
simplicity with the artificial systems of post-Nicene ages. Earnest and
worthy of respect as they are, I must therefore prefer a class of
writers who breathe the spirit of the ante-Nicene Fathers as better
elucidating the primitive epoch and its principles, alike in doctrine
and worship.  

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span><span id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_530"></span><span id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>Hippolytus, in a
few terse sentences, has pointed out the epoch of <span
id="xii.i-p6.2"></span>David, in its vast import, as the dawning of
Christianity itself. <span id="fr_4019"></span>[4020](#fn_4019)  <span
id="fr_4020"></span>[4021](#fn_4020) More elaborately, a recent writer
of great erudition has expounded the same historic fact, and given us
the pivot of Hebrew history on which turns the whole system of that
“goodly fellowship of prophets” who heralded the Sun of righteousness as
successive constellations rise before the day. The learned Dean <span
id="xii.i-p7.2"></span>Payne-Smith, more minutely than <span
id="xii.i-p7.3"></span>Hippolytus, identifies <span
id="xii.i-p7.4"></span>Samuel, the master of <span
id="xii.i-p7.5"></span>David, as the great instrument of God in shaping
the institutions of <span id="xii.i-p7.6"></span>Moses to be a prelude
to the Advent; in other words, transforming a local and tribal religion
into that of Catholicity. The value of the Dean’s condensed and luminous
elaboration of this cardinal truth can hardly be overstated.  

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>But, to go behind even the Dean’s
stand-point, we shall better comprehend the era of which, under God,
<span id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>Samuel was the author, by noting the
immense importance of that specific Mosaic ordinance which not only made
it possible, but which proves that an all-wise <span
id="xii.i-p8.2"></span>prolepsis governed the whole law of <span
id="xii.i-p8.3"></span>Moses. We generally conceive of the Mosaic system
as one of unlimited hecatombs and burnt-offerings. On the contrary, it
was a system restricting and limiting the unsystematized primeval
institution of sacrifice, which had done its work by passing into the
universal religions and rituals of Gentilism. <span
id="fr_4021"></span>[4022](#fn_4021) When the seminal idea of expiation,
atonement, and the blood of innocence as a propitiation for guilt, was
communicated to all the families of the earth, the Mosaic institutions
limited sacrifices for the faithful, and localized them with marvellous
significance. Previously the faithful everywhere had imitated the
sacrifices of their fathers, <span id="xii.i-p9.2"></span>Noah and <span
id="xii.i-p9.3"></span>Abraham, who reared their altars everywhere, as
<span id="xii.i-p9.4"></span>Job also did,—wherever they dwelt or
sojourned. Now mark the first step towards a more spiritual worship,
based, nevertheless, on the fundamental principle of sacrifice. <span
id="xii.i-p9.5"></span>Moses ordains as follows:—  

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>1. “When ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the
land which the Lord your God giveth you,…then <span
id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>there shall be a place which the Lord your God
shall choose to cause His name to dwell there; <span
id="xii.i-p11.2"></span>thither shall ye bring all that I command you,
your burnt-offerings,” etc. <span id="fr_4022"></span>[4023](#fn_4022)  

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>2. “Take heed to thyself that thou offer not
thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou seest; but <span
id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>in the place which the Lord shall choose in one
of the tribes, <span id="xii.i-p13.2"></span>there thou shalt offer thy
burnt-offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.” <span
id="fr_4023"></span>[4024](#fn_4023)  

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>3. “If the place which the Lord thy God hath
chosen to put His name there, be too far from thee” \[i.e., <span
id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>for frequent sacrifices; observe, nevertheless,
the law as to the sanctity of blood in thy common use of meats, and
forbear to sacrifice, till the opportunity comes\], “only thy <span
id="xii.i-p15.2"></span>holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou
shalt take, and <span id="xii.i-p15.3"></span>go unto the place which
the Lord shall choose; and thou shalt offer thy burnt-offerings, the
flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the Lord thy God.” <span
id="fr_4024"></span>[4025](#fn_4024)  

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>4. “Three times in a year shall all thy
males appear before the Lord thy God, <span id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>in
the place which He shall choose.” <span
id="fr_4025"></span>[4026](#fn_4025)  

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>5. “Thou mayest not sacrifice <span
id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>The Passover within any of thy gates;…but <span
id="xii.i-p19.2"></span>at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose
to place His name in, <span id="xii.i-p19.3"></span>there thou shalt
sacrifice the Passover.”  

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>Note, further, that all this provision and
<span id="xii.i-p21.1"></span>prevision was part of the great Messianic
system, which reached its crisis in the time of <span
id="xii.i-p21.2"></span>David, as prophetic of “the Son of <span
id="xii.i-p21.3"></span>David.”  

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>It was the office of <span
id="xii.i-p22.1"></span>Samuel to take the Mosaic ordinances just there,
and to shape them for the advent of the Lamb of God, for His sacrifice
upon Calvary, and for the setting-up of His universal kingdom.  

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>The Institutions of Samuel, therefore, were
<span id="xii.i-p23.1"></span>in essence institutions for the
Gospel-day, and they were completed by the anointing of <span
id="xii.i-p23.2"></span>David as king, and by his prophetic mission to
provide the Psalter (of which more, by and by); then the Ark came out of
curtains, and the Lord chose and appointed <span
id="xii.i-p23.3"></span>the place of which <span
id="xii.i-p23.4"></span>Moses had spoken,—none other than the spot where
<span id="xii.i-p23.5"></span>Abraham had rehearsed in type the
Sacrifice and Resurrection of Christ, according as it was written: <span
id="fr_4026"></span>[4027](#fn_4026) <span id="page_531">p. 531</span>
<span id="xii.i-Page_531"></span>“Jehovah-Jireh…<span
id="xii.i-p24.2"></span>in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.”
Thus, all sacrifice acceptable to God was shown to have reference to the
Paschal Lamb, who on that mount of the Lord should be sacrificed, and
rise again, as was accomplished in a figure aforetime. <span
id="fr_4027"></span>[4028](#fn_4027)  

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>And next, the Psalmist commemorates the
putting away of the migratory Tabernacle, and the <span
id="xii.i-p26.1"></span>rest of the Ark of the Covenant in the place
designed for the grand accomplishment of redemption (“the sure mercies
of <span id="xii.i-p26.2"></span>David”), as follows: <span
id="fr_4028"></span>[4029](#fn_4028) —  

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>“He refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and
chose not the tribe of Ephraim: but chose the tribe of Judah, <span
id="xii.i-p28.1"></span>the <span id="xii.i-p28.2"></span>Mount <span
id="xii.i-p28.3"></span>Zion which He loved. And He built His sanctuary
like high palaces, like the earth which He hath established for ever.”  

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>Thus, localized sacrifice was made to
designate <span id="xii.i-p29.1"></span>the spot where the one
propitiatory sacrifice should be offered, “for the sins of the whole
world;” and that spot in turn interpreted the great canon of
redemption, <span id="fr_4029"></span>[4030](#fn_4029) —  

> <span id="xii.i-p30.2"></span> “Without shedding of blood is no
> remission:”  

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>and all this, being accomplished in the
Messiah, passed away for ever. The veil of the Temple was rent when
<span id="xii.i-p31.1"></span>Jesus cried, “It is finished.”  

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>And now let us note the “Institutions of
<span id="xii.i-p32.1"></span>Samuel.” The localizing of the
Temple-worship made way for the clearer revelation of spiritual
sacrifices: the Temple itself was to be supplied with an expository
liturgy. Moreover, a liturgical system, revolving about the central
worship of the Temple, was to be brought to every man’s door by the
establishment of the synagogue for the villages of Israel. <span
id="fr_4030"></span>[4031](#fn_4030) The synagogue-worship became,
therefore, the education and preparation of the faithful for the simple
and spiritual worship of the new law. This our Lord Himself expounded in
the grand Catholicity of His words to the outcast Samaritans:—  

> <span id="xii.i-p33.2"></span> “The hour cometh, when ye shall neither
> in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.…But the
> hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
> Father in spirit and in truth,” <span
> id="fr_4031"></span>[4032](#fn_4031) etc.  

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>We have seen that the hour promised by <span
id="xii.i-p35.1"></span>Malachi was supposed by the Ante-Nicene Fathers
to be here intended: “My name shall be great among the Gentiles; and
<span id="xii.i-p35.2"></span>in every place incense shall be offered
unto My name, and a pure offering.” <span
id="fr_4032"></span>[4033](#fn_4032)  

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>The student of this series must have
observed that the primitive writers were universally impressed with
these principles, <span id="fr_4033"></span>[4034](#fn_4033) and they
are essential to the study of the liturgies here introduced into the
series by the Edinburgh editors. For other purposes, expounding the
prophetic system, on a text of St. <span id="xii.i-p38.2"></span>Peter,
Dean <span id="xii.i-p38.3"></span>Payne-Smith has incidentally
elucidated these ideas so fully, and with such originality, that I leave
the student to consult his pages, <span
id="fr_4034"></span>[4035](#fn_4034) with only the following important
hints to those who may fail to see them:—  

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>1. We find the prophet <span
id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>Samuel instituting “Schools of the Prophets,”
out of which grew the synagogue system supplying the Rabbinical
education to Israel, and furnishing chiefs to the synagogues. See [Acts
iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)<span id="xii.i-p40.2"></span>;
and compare [1 Sam. x. 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005)<span
id="xii.i-p40.3"></span>, xix. 20, and [1 Chron. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#022)<span
id="xii.i-p40.4"></span>. <span id="fr_4035"></span>[4036](#fn_4035)  

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>2. We find the institution of choral worship
and the chanting of hymns—e.g., of <span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>Moses
and <span id="xii.i-p42.2"></span>Miriam, and <span
id="xii.i-p42.3"></span>Hannah (<span id="xii.i-p42.4"></span>Samuel’s
mother)—in full operation under <span id="xii.i-p42.5"></span>Samuel.  

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>3. We find <span
id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>David at this juncture inspired, as “the sweet
singer of Israel,” to supply the Psalter, which in divers arrangements
has continued among Christians to be the marrow of public worship “in
every place,” and throughout the world.  

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>4. The reading of the law and the prophets
was now set in order; and not only was the Temple supplied with
teachers, but also the villages in every tribe. <span
id="fr_4036"></span>[4037](#fn_4036)  

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>5. Thus the Christian Church was provided
with a system of worship from the hour of <span id="page_532">p.
532</span> <span id="xii.i-Page_532"></span>its institution, <span
id="fr_4037"></span>[4038](#fn_4037) the synaxis succeeding the
synagogue; the “ministration of the word” being enriched by Gospels and
Epistles, by psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and by “the prayers”
(based upon the <span id="xii.i-p47.2"></span>Shemone esre) <span
id="fr_4038"></span>[4039](#fn_4038) which now began to be composed and
multiplied in the churches. Touching “free prayer” as exemplified in the
first ages, see St. <span id="xii.i-p48.2"></span>Cyprian’s <span
id="xii.i-p48.3"></span>Epistles more especially: <span
id="fr_4039"></span>[4040](#fn_4039) “Let us pray for the lapsed,” etc.
 

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>6. It is most significant, that, as St.
<span id="xii.i-p50.1"></span>Paul was not present at the institution of
the Lord’s Supper, he was, nevertheless, “not behind the chiefest of the
Apostles,” even in this. He also “received” the whole knowledge of the
institution, and became, in so far, the author of an original Gospel in
his details of Christ’s great oblation of Himself. Hereupon, he adds the
sacrificial expositions <span id="fr_4040"></span>[4041](#fn_4040) of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and “delivered the ordinances” to <span
id="xii.i-p51.3"></span>every church <span
id="fr_4041"></span>[4042](#fn_4041) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p52.2"></span>κατα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p52.3"></span>̀ </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p52.4"></span>τα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p52.5"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p52.6"></span>ξιν</span>), providing for order and decorum in
divine offices.  

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>This he seems to have done as “Liturge” and
“Hierurge,” or evangelical priest, <span
id="fr_4042"></span>[4043](#fn_4042) “<span
id="xii.i-p54.2"></span>ministering in sacrifice <span
id="fr_4043"></span>[4044](#fn_4043) the Gospel of God,” etc.  

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span>Compare, then, with the Scriptures, <span
id="xii.i-p56.1"></span>Justin Martyr’s account of the early worship of
Christians; and after consulting the (so-called) “Clementine
Liturgy,” <span id="fr_4044"></span>[4045](#fn_4044) the student will be
qualified to form an enlightened judgment upon the primitive and the
interpolated elements of the following liturgies. For we must bear in
mind that they are reflected from <span id="xii.i-p57.4"></span>mss.,
not one of which has any claim to represent the <span
id="xii.i-p57.5"></span>Ante-Nicene period. To purify them, therefore,
by Scripture, and the truly primitive testimonies of this series, is a
task yet remaining to be accomplished, and one which may well invoke the
most conscientious and patient labours of the most learned in the land.
 

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span>Here follows the Edinburgh <span
id="xii.i-p58.1"></span>Introductory Notice:—  

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span><span id="xii.i-p60.1"></span>The word <span
id="xii.i-p60.2"></span>Liturgy has a special meaning as applied to the
following documents. It denotes the service used in the celebration of
the Eucharist.  

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span>Various liturgies have come down to us from
antiquity; and their age, authorship, and genuineness have been matter
of keen discussion. In our own country two writers on this subject stand
specially prominent: the Rev. <span id="xii.i-p61.1"></span>William
Palmer, M.A., who in his <span id="xii.i-p61.2"></span>Origines
Liturgicæ <span id="fr_4045"></span>[4046](#fn_4045) gave a dissertation
on Primitive Liturgies; and the Rev. <span id="xii.i-p62.1"></span>J.
Mason Neale, who devoted a large portion of his life to liturgies,
edited four of them in his <span id="xii.i-p62.2"></span>Tetralogia
Liturgica, <span id="fr_4046"></span>[4047](#fn_4046) five of them in
his <span id="xii.i-p63.1"></span>Liturgies of St. Mark, St. James, St.
Clement, St. Chrysostom, and St. Basil, <span
id="fr_4047"></span>[4048](#fn_4047) and discussed them in a masterly
manner in several works, but especially in his <span
id="xii.i-p64.1"></span>General Introduction to a History of the Holy
Eastern Church  <span id="fr_4048"></span>[4049](#fn_4048)  

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>Ancient liturgies are generally divided into
four families,—the Liturgy of the Jerusalem Church, <span
id="fr_4049"></span>[4050](#fn_4049) adopted throughout the East; the
Alexandrian, <span id="fr_4050"></span>[4051](#fn_4050) used in Egypt
and the neighbouring countries; and the Roman and Gallican Liturgies. To
these Neale has added a fifth, the Liturgy of Persia or Edessa.  

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span>There is also a liturgy not included in any
of these families—the Clementine. It seems never to have been used in
any public service. It forms part of the eighth book of the <span
id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>Apostolical Constitutions. <span
id="fr_4051"></span>[4052](#fn_4051)  

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span><span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_533"></span>The age ascribed to these documents depends
very much on the temperament and inclination of the inquirer. Those who
have great reverence for them think that they must have had an apostolic
origin, that they contain the apostolic form, first handed down by
tradition, and then committed to writing, but they allow that there is a
certain amount of interpolation and addition of a date later than the
Nicene Council. Such words as “consubstantial” and “mother of God” bear
indisputable witness to this. Others think that there is no real
historical proof of their early existence at all,—that they all belong
to a late date, and bear evident marks of having been written long after
the age of the apostles. <span id="fr_4052"></span>[4053](#fn_4052)  

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span>There can scarcely be a doubt that they were
not committed to writing till a comparatively late day. Those who think
that their origin was apostolic allow this. “The period,” says <span
id="xii.i-p73.1"></span>Palmer, <span
id="fr_4053"></span>[4054](#fn_4053) “when liturgies were first
committed to writing is uncertain, and has been the subject of some
controversy. <span id="xii.i-p74.2"></span>Le Brun contends that no
liturgy was written till the fifth century; but his arguments seem quite
insufficient to prove this, and he is accordingly opposed by <span
id="xii.i-p74.3"></span>Muratori and other eminent ritualists. It seems
certain, on the other hand, that the liturgy of the <span
id="xii.i-p74.4"></span>Apostolical Constitutions was written at the end
of the third or beginning of the fourth century; and there is no reason
to deny that others may have been written about the same time, or not
long after.”  

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span><span id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>Neale <span
id="fr_4054"></span>[4055](#fn_4054) sums up the results of his study in
the following words: “I shall content myself therefore with assuming,
(1) that these liturgies, though not composed by the Apostles whose
names they bear, were the legitimate development of their unwritten
tradition respecting the Christian Sacrifice; the words, probably, in
the most important parts, the general tenor in all portions, descending
unchanged from the apostolic authors. (2) That the Liturgy of St. <span
id="xii.i-p76.2"></span>James is of earlier date, as to its main fabric,
than <span class="sc"><span id="xii.i-p76.3"></span>a.d.</span> 200;
that the Clementine Office is at least not later than 260; that the
Liturgy of St. <span id="xii.i-p76.4"></span>Mark is nearly coeval with
that of St. <span id="xii.i-p76.5"></span>James; while those of St.
<span id="xii.i-p76.6"></span>Basil and St. <span
id="xii.i-p76.7"></span>Chrysostom are to be referred respectively to
the saints by whom they purport to be composed. In all these cases,
several manifest insertions and additions do not alter the truth of the
general statement.”  

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span>1. The Roman Liturgy. The first writer who
is supposed to allude to a Roman Liturgy is <span
id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>Innocentius, in the beginning of the fifth
century; but it may well be doubted whether his words refer to any
liturgy now extant. <span id="fr_4055"></span>[4056](#fn_4055) Some have
attributed the authorship of the Roman Liturgy to <span
id="xii.i-p78.3"></span>Leo the Great, who was made bishop of Rome in
<span class="sc"><span id="xii.i-p78.4"></span>a.d.</span> 451; some to
<span id="xii.i-p78.5"></span>Gelasius, who was made bishop of Rome in
<span class="sc"><span id="xii.i-p78.6"></span>a.d.</span> 492; and some
to <span id="xii.i-p78.7"></span>Gregory the First, who was made bishop
of Rome in <span class="sc"><span id="xii.i-p78.8"></span>a.d.</span>
590. Such being the opinions of those who have given most study to the
subject, we have not deemed it necessary to translate it, though <span
id="xii.i-p78.9"></span>Probst, in his <span
id="xii.i-p78.10"></span>Liturgie der drei ersten christlichen
Jahrhunderte, <span id="fr_4056"></span>[4057](#fn_4056) probably out of
affection for his own Church, has given it a place beside the Clementine
and those of St. James and St. Mark.  

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span>2. The Gallican has still less claim to
antiquity. In fact, <span id="xii.i-p80.1"></span>Daniel marks it among
the spurious. <span id="fr_4057"></span>[4058](#fn_4057) <span
id="xii.i-p81.3"></span>Mabillon tries to prove that three ecclesiastics
had a share in the authorship of this liturgy: <span
id="xii.i-p81.4"></span>Musæus, presbyter of Marseilles, who died after
the middle of the fifth century; <span id="xii.i-p81.5"></span>Sidonius,
bishop of Auvergne, who died <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.i-p81.6"></span>a.d.</span> 494; and <span
id="xii.i-p81.7"></span>Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, who died <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.i-p81.8"></span>a.d.</span> 366. <span
id="fr_4058"></span>[4059](#fn_4058) <span
id="xii.i-p82.2"></span>Palmer strives to show with great ingenuity that
it is not improbable that the Gallican Liturgy may have been originally
derived from St. <span id="xii.i-p82.3"></span>John; but his arguments
are merely conjectures.  

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span>3. The Liturgy of St. James, the Liturgy of
the Church of Jerusalem. <span id="xii.i-p83.1"></span>Asseman, <span
id="xii.i-p83.2"></span>Zaccaria, Dr. <span
id="xii.i-p83.3"></span>Brett, <span id="xii.i-p83.4"></span>Palmer,
<span id="xii.i-p83.5"></span>Trollope, and <span
id="xii.i-p83.6"></span>Neale, think that the main structure of this
liturgy is the work of St. <span id="xii.i-p83.7"></span>James, while
they admit that it contains some evident interpolations. <span
id="xii.i-p83.8"></span>Leo Allatius, <span
id="xii.i-p83.9"></span>Bona, <span id="xii.i-p83.10"></span>Bellarmine,
<span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span id="xii.i-Page_534"></span><span
id="xii.i-p83.11"></span>Baronius, and some others, think that the whole
is the genuine production of the apostle. <span
id="xii.i-p83.12"></span>Cave, <span id="xii.i-p83.13"></span>Fabricius,
<span id="xii.i-p83.14"></span>Dupin, <span id="xii.i-p83.15"></span>Le
Nourry, <span id="xii.i-p83.16"></span>Basnage, <span
id="xii.i-p83.17"></span>Tillemont, and many others, think that it is
entirely destitute of any claim to an apostolic origin, and that it
belongs to a much later age. <span id="fr_4059"></span>[4060](#fn_4059)
 

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span>“From the Liturgy of St. James,” says <span
id="xii.i-p85.1"></span>Neale, “are derived, on the one hand, the forty
Syro-Jacobite offices: on the other, the Cæsarean office, or Liturgy of
St. Basil, with its offshoots; that of St. Chrysostom, and the
Armeno-Gregorian.” <span id="fr_4060"></span>[4061](#fn_4060)  

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span>There are only two manuscripts of the Greek
Liturgy of St. James,—one of the tenth, the other of the twelfth
century,—with fragments of a third. <span
id="fr_4061"></span>[4062](#fn_4061) The first edition appeared at Rome
in 1526. In more recent times it has been edited by Rev. <span
id="xii.i-p88.3"></span>W. Trollope, M.A., <span
id="fr_4062"></span>[4063](#fn_4062) <span id="xii.i-p89.1"></span>Neale
in the two works mentioned above, and <span
id="xii.i-p89.2"></span>Daniel in his <span
id="xii.i-p89.3"></span>Codex Liturgicus Bishop <span
id="xii.i-p89.4"></span>Rattray edited the <span
id="xii.i-p89.5"></span>Anaphora, <span
id="fr_4063"></span>[4064](#fn_4063) and attempted to separate the
original from the interpolations, “though,” says <span
id="xii.i-p90.1"></span>Neale, “the supposed restoration is
unsatisfactory enough.” <span id="xii.i-p90.2"></span>Bunsen, in his
<span id="xii.i-p90.3"></span>Analecta Ante-Nicæna, <span
id="fr_4064"></span>[4065](#fn_4064) has tried to restore the <span
id="xii.i-p91.2"></span>Anaphora to the state in which it may have been
in the fourth century, “as far as was possible—<span
class="Foreign"><span id="xii.i-p91.3"></span>quantum fieri
potuit</span> ”  

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span>4. The Liturgy of St. <span
id="xii.i-p92.1"></span>Mark, the liturgy of the church of Alexandria.
The same difference of opinion exists in regard to the age and
genuineness of this liturgy as we found existing in regard to that of
St. James, and the same scholars occupy the same relative position.  

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>The offshoots from St. Mark’s Liturgy are
St. Basil, St. Cyril, and St. Gregory, and the Ethiopic Canon or Liturgy
of All Apostles. In regard to the Liturgy of St. Cyril, <span
id="xii.i-p93.1"></span>Neale says that it is “to all intents and
purposes the same as that of St. Mark; and it seems highly probable that
the Liturgy of St. Mark came, as we have it now, from the hands of St.
<span id="xii.i-p93.2"></span>Cyril, or, to use the expression of <span
id="xii.i-p93.3"></span>Abu’lberkat, that <span
id="xii.i-p93.4"></span>Cyril ‘perfected’ it.” <span
id="fr_4065"></span>[4066](#fn_4065)  

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span>There is only one manuscript of the Liturgy
of St. <span id="xii.i-p95.1"></span>Mark, probably belonging to the
twelfth century. The first edition appeared at Paris in 1583. The
liturgy is given in <span id="xii.i-p95.2"></span>Renaudot’s <span
id="xii.i-p95.3"></span>Liturgiarum Orientalium Collectio, tom. i. pp.
120–148, <span id="fr_4066"></span>[4067](#fn_4066) in <span
id="xii.i-p96.2"></span>Neale’s two works, and in <span
id="xii.i-p96.3"></span>Daniel’s <span id="xii.i-p96.4"></span>Codex
Liturgicus  

<span id="xii.i-p97"></span>5. The Liturgy of the Apostles <span
id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>Adæus and <span id="xii.i-p97.2"></span>Maris.
This liturgy has been brought prominently forward by <span
id="xii.i-p97.3"></span>Neale, who says: “It is generally passed over as
of very inferior importance, and <span id="xii.i-p97.4"></span>Renaudot
alone seems to have been prepared to acknowledge in some degree its
great antiquity.” <span id="fr_4067"></span>[4068](#fn_4067) He thinks
that it is “one of the earliest, and perhaps the very earliest, of the
many formularies of the Christian Sacrifice.” <span
id="fr_4068"></span>[4069](#fn_4068) It is one of the three Nestorian
liturgies, the other two being that of <span
id="xii.i-p99.2"></span>Nestorius and that of <span
id="xii.i-p99.3"></span>Theodore the interpreter.  

<span id="xii.i-p100"></span>A Latin translation of it is given in <span
id="xii.i-p100.1"></span>Renaudot’s <span
id="xii.i-p100.2"></span>Collectio, <span
id="fr_4069"></span>[4070](#fn_4069) which is reprinted in <span
id="xii.i-p101.1"></span>Daniel’s <span id="xii.i-p101.2"></span>Codex
Liturgicus It is from this version that our translation is made. Several
prayers and hymns are indicated only by the initial words, and the
rubrical directions are probably of a much later date than the text.  

<span id="xii.i-p102"></span>The Liturgies are divided into two
parts,—the part before “Lift we up our hearts,” and the part after this.
The first is termed the Proanaphoral Part, the second the Anaphora.  

<span id="xii.i-p103"></span><span id="xii.i-p103.1"></span>Trollope
describes what he conceives to be the form of worship in the early
Church, thus: <span id="fr_4070"></span>[4071](#fn_4070) “The service of
this day divided itself into two parts; at the latter of which, called
in the Eastern <span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_535"></span>churches <span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.i-p104.2"></span>Liturgia mystica</span>, and in the Western
<span class="Foreign"><span id="xii.i-p104.3"></span>Missa</span><span
class="Foreign"><span id="xii.i-p104.4"></span> fidelium</span>, none
but perfect and approved Christians were allowed to be present. To the
<span class="Foreign"><span id="xii.i-p104.5"></span>Missa
Catechumenorum</span>, or that part of the service which preceded the
prayers peculiar to communicants only, not only believers, but Gentiles,
were admitted, in the hope that some might possibly become converts to
the faith. After the Psalms and Lessons with which the service
commenced, as on ordinary occasions, a section from the Acts of the
Apostles or the Epistles was read; after which the deacon or presbyter
read the Gospel. Then followed an exhortation from one or more of the
presbyters; and the bishop or president delivered a <span
id="xii.i-p104.6"></span>Homily or <span
id="xii.i-p104.7"></span>Sermon, explanatory, it should seem, of the
Scripture which had been read, and exciting the people to an imitation
of the virtues therein exemplified. When the preacher had concluded his
discourse with a doxology in praise of the Holy Trinity, a deacon made
proclamation for all infidels and non-communicants to withdraw; then
came the dismissal of the several classes of catechumens, energumens,
competents, and penitents, after the prayers for each respectively, as
on ordinary days; and the <span class="Foreign"><span
id="xii.i-p104.8"></span>Missa fidelium</span> commenced. This office
consisted of two parts, essentially distinct: viz., of <span
id="xii.i-p104.9"></span>prayers for the faithful, and for mankind in
general, introductory to the Oblation; and the <span
id="xii.i-p104.10"></span>Anaphora or <span
id="xii.i-p104.11"></span>Oblation itself. The introductory part varied
considerably in the formularies of different churches; but in the <span
id="xii.i-p104.12"></span>Anaphora all the existing liturgies so closely
agree, in substance at least, if not in words, that they can only be
reasonably referred to the same common origin. <span
id="fr_4071"></span>[4072](#fn_4071) Their arrangement, indeed, is not
always the same; but the following essential points belong, without
exception, to them all:—1. The Kiss of Peace; 2. The form beginning,
<span id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>Lift up your hearts; 3. The Hymn, <span
id="xii.i-p105.2"></span>Therefore with angels, etc.; 4. Commemoration
of the words of Institution; 5. The Oblation; 6. Prayer of Consecration;
7. Prayers for the Church on Earth; 8. Prayers for the Dead; 9. The
Lord’s Prayer; 10. Breaking of the Bread; 11. Communion.”  

<span id="xii.i-p106"></span><span id="xii.i-p106.1"></span>Neale gives
a more minute account of the different parts of the service. He divides
the <span id="xii.i-p106.2"></span>Proanaphoral portion into parts in
the following manner: <span id="fr_4072"></span>[4073](#fn_4072) —  

<span id="xii.i-p108"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p109"></span>“Liturgy (or <span
id="xii.i-p109.1"></span>Missa) of the Catechumens.  

<span id="xii.i-p110"></span>I.  

<span id="xii.i-p111"></span>The Preparatory Prayers.  

<span id="xii.i-p112"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p113"></span>II.  

<span id="xii.i-p114"></span>The Initial Hymn or Introit.  

<span id="xii.i-p115"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p116"></span>III.  

<span id="xii.i-p117"></span>The Little Entrance.  

<span id="xii.i-p118"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p119"></span>IV.  

<span id="xii.i-p120"></span>The Trisagion.  

<span id="xii.i-p121"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p122"></span>V.  

<span id="xii.i-p123"></span>The Lections.  

<span id="xii.i-p124"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p125"></span>VI.  

<span id="xii.i-p126"></span>The Prayers after the Gospel, and expulsion
of the Catechumen.  

<span id="xii.i-p127"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p128"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p129"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p130"></span>“Liturgy (or <span
id="xii.i-p130.1"></span>Missa) of the Faithful.  

<span id="xii.i-p131"></span>I.  

<span id="xii.i-p132"></span>The Prayers for the Faithful.  

<span id="xii.i-p133"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p134"></span>II.  

<span id="xii.i-p135"></span>The Great Entrance.  

<span id="xii.i-p136"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p137"></span>III.  

<span id="xii.i-p138"></span>The Offertory.  

<span id="xii.i-p139"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p140"></span>IV.  

<span id="xii.i-p141"></span>The Kiss of Peace.  

<span id="xii.i-p142"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p143"></span>V.  

<span id="xii.i-p144"></span>The Creed.”  

<span id="xii.i-p145"></span>The <span id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>Anaphora
he divides into four parts in the following manner: <span
id="fr_4073"></span>[4074](#fn_4073) —  

<span id="xii.i-p147"></span>“The great Eucharistic Prayer.  

<span id="xii.i-p148"></span>I.  

<span id="xii.i-p149"></span>The Preface.  

<span id="xii.i-p150"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p151"></span>II.  

<span id="xii.i-p152"></span>The Prayer of the Triumphal Hymn.  

<span id="xii.i-p153"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p154"></span>III.  

<span id="xii.i-p155"></span>The Triumphal Hymn.  

<span id="xii.i-p156"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p157"></span>IV.  

<span id="xii.i-p158"></span>Commemoration of Our Lord’s Life.  

<span id="xii.i-p159"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p160"></span>V.  

<span id="xii.i-p161"></span>Commemoration of Institution.  

<span id="xii.i-p162"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p163"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p164"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p165"></span>“The Consecration.  

<span id="xii.i-p166"></span>VI.  

<span id="xii.i-p167"></span>Words of Institution of the Bread.  

<span id="xii.i-p168"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p169"></span>VII.  

<span id="xii.i-p170"></span>Words of Institution of the Wine.  

<span id="xii.i-p171"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p172"></span>VIII.  

<span id="xii.i-p173"></span>Oblation of the Body and Blood.  

<span id="xii.i-p174"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p175"></span>IX.  

<span id="xii.i-p176"></span>Introductory Prayer for the Descent of the
Holy Ghost.  

<span id="xii.i-p177"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p178"></span>X.  

<span id="xii.i-p179"></span>Prayer for the Sanctification of Elements.
<span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span id="xii.i-Page_536"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p180"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p181"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p182"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p183"></span>“The great Intercessory Prayer.  

<span id="xii.i-p184"></span>XI.  

<span id="xii.i-p185"></span>General Intercession for Quick and Dead.  

<span id="xii.i-p186"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p187"></span>XII.  

<span id="xii.i-p188"></span>Prayer before the Lord’s Prayer.  

<span id="xii.i-p189"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p190"></span>XIII.  

<span id="xii.i-p191"></span>The Lord’s Prayer.  

<span id="xii.i-p192"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p193"></span>XIV.  

<span id="xii.i-p194"></span>The Embolismus.  

<span id="xii.i-p195"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p196"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p197"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p198"></span>“The Communion.  

<span id="xii.i-p199"></span>XV.  

<span id="xii.i-p200"></span>The Prayer of Inclination.  

<span id="xii.i-p201"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p202"></span>XVI.  

<span id="xii.i-p203"></span>The <span id="xii.i-p203.1"></span>Holy
Things for Holy Persons.  

<span id="xii.i-p204"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p205"></span>XVII.  

<span id="xii.i-p206"></span>The Fraction.  

<span id="xii.i-p207"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p208"></span>XVII.  

<span id="xii.i-p209"></span>The Confession.  

<span id="xii.i-p210"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p211"></span>XIX.  

<span id="xii.i-p212"></span>The Communion.  

<span id="xii.i-p213"></span>  

<span id="xii.i-p214"></span>XX.  

<span id="xii.i-p215"></span>The Antidoron: and Prayers of
Thanksgiving.”  

<span id="xii.i-p216"></span>The whole subject is discussed by Mr. <span
id="xii.i-p216.1"></span>Neale with extraordinary minuteness, fulness of
detail, and perfect mastery of his subject; and to his work we refer
those who wish to prosecute the study of the subject. <span
id="fr_4074"></span>[4075](#fn_4074)  

<span id="xii.i-p218"></span>  

##### <span id="xii.i-p218.1"></span>General Note by the American Editor.

<span id="xii.i-p219"></span><span id="xii.i-p219.1"></span>I Have found
a few less noted works most useful in my own studies, which began with
<span id="xii.i-p219.2"></span>Palmer’s <span
id="xii.i-p219.3"></span>Origines on their first publication, followed
up by <span id="xii.i-p219.4"></span>Brett, and then by <span
id="xii.i-p219.5"></span>Renaudot. The publications of Drs. <span
id="xii.i-p219.6"></span>Neale and <span
id="xii.i-p219.7"></span>Littledale are sufficiently referred to
elsewhere; and I purposely omit the mention of many purely Anglican
authorities, as well as costly works from other European sources.  

<span id="xii.i-p220"></span>1. <span id="xii.i-p220.1"></span>Freeman’s
<span id="xii.i-p220.2"></span>Principles of Divine Service, etc. <span
id="fr_4075"></span>[4076](#fn_4075) A work of incomparable utility to
those who would comprehend the Jewish ritual and its preparations for
Christian worship.  

<span id="xii.i-p222"></span>2. <span id="xii.i-p222.1"></span>Badger’s
<span id="xii.i-p222.2"></span>Nestorians and their Rituals  <span
id="fr_4076"></span>[4077](#fn_4076)  

<span id="xii.i-p224"></span>3. <span id="xii.i-p224.1"></span>Warren’s
<span id="xii.i-p224.2"></span>Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic
Church; <span id="fr_4077"></span>[4078](#fn_4077) replete with
information hitherto inaccessible.  

<span id="xii.i-p226"></span>4. <span
id="xii.i-p226.1"></span>Scudamore’s <span
id="xii.i-p226.2"></span>Notitia Eucharistica; <span
id="fr_4078"></span>[4079](#fn_4078) Anglican, but full of general
information.  

<span id="xii.i-p228"></span>5. <span id="xii.i-p228.1"></span>Trevor’s
<span id="xii.i-p228.2"></span>Catholic Doctrine of Sacrifice,
etc.; <span id="fr_4079"></span>[4080](#fn_4079) a candid and learned
study of this subject, and free from fanatical or visionary conceptions.
 

<span id="xii.i-p230"></span>6. <span id="xii.i-p230.1"></span>Hammond’s
<span id="xii.i-p230.2"></span>Liturgies, etc., <span
id="fr_4080"></span>[4081](#fn_4080) elsewhere spoken of.  

<span id="xii.i-p232"></span>7. <span id="xii.i-p232.1"></span>Burbidge,
<span id="xii.i-p232.2"></span>Liturgies and Offices<span
id="xii.i-p232.3"></span>, <span id="fr_4081"></span>[4082](#fn_4081) of
which I have only lately discovered the value.  

<span id="xii.i-p234"></span>8. <span id="xii.i-p234.1"></span>Field’s
<span id="xii.i-p234.2"></span>Apostolic Liturgy and the Ep. to the
Hebrews; <span id="fr_4082"></span>[4083](#fn_4082) open to some
objections, but full of valuable and suggestive information.  

<span id="xii.i-p236"></span>9. <span id="xii.i-p236.1"></span>Pfaffius,
Christ. Math. His invaluable <span id="xii.i-p236.2"></span>Dissertatio
de Oblatione, etc. <span id="fr_4083"></span>[4084](#fn_4083) A high
Lutheran authority of great learning.  

<span id="xii.i-p238"></span>10. <span
id="xii.i-p238.1"></span>Marriott’s <span
id="xii.i-p238.2"></span>Testimony of the Catacombs; <span
id="fr_4084"></span>[4085](#fn_4084) learned and instructive.  

<span id="xii.i-p240"></span><span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_537"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4019"></span>[530:4020](0070479.htm#fr_4019) <span
id="xii.i-p6.3"></span> <span
id="fn_4020"></span>[530:4021](0070479.htm#fr_4020) <span
id="xii.i-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span> Vol. v. note 2, p. 170.  

<span id="fn_4021"></span>[530:4022](0070479.htm#fr_4021) <span
id="xii.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span> Vol. vi. p. 542, Elucidation VI.  

<span id="fn_4022"></span>[530:4023](0070479.htm#fr_4022) <span
id="xii.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span> [Deut. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p12.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4023"></span>[530:4024](0070479.htm#fr_4023) <span
id="xii.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span> [Deut. xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#024)<span id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4024"></span>[530:4025](0070479.htm#fr_4024) <span
id="xii.i-p15.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span> [Deut. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#021)<span id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>, xiv.
24.  

<span id="fn_4025"></span>[530:4026](0070479.htm#fr_4025) <span
id="xii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span> [Exod. xxiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017)<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>;
[Deut. xvi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)<span
id="xii.i-p18.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4026"></span>[530:4027](0070479.htm#fr_4026) <span
id="xii.i-p23.6"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span> [Gen. xxii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)<span id="xii.i-p24.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4027"></span>[531:4028](0070479.htm#fr_4027) <span
id="xii.i-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span> [Heb. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019)<span id="xii.i-p25.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4028"></span>[531:4029](0070479.htm#fr_4028) <span
id="xii.i-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
67-69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span id="xii.i-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4029"></span>[531:4030](0070479.htm#fr_4029) <span
id="xii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span> [Heb. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p30.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4030"></span>[531:4031](0070479.htm#fr_4030) <span
id="xii.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span> [Ps. lxxxiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p33.1"></span>,
lxxiv. 6.  

<span id="fn_4031"></span>[531:4032](0070479.htm#fr_4031) <span
id="xii.i-p33.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span> [John iv.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)<span id="xii.i-p34.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4032"></span>[531:4033](0070479.htm#fr_4032) <span
id="xii.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span> [Mal. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_4033"></span>[531:4034](0070479.htm#fr_4033) <span
id="xii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span> This series <span
id="xii.i-p38.1"></span>passim; but, e.g., vol. i. pp. 138, 482, and v.
p. 290, note 8.  

<span id="fn_4034"></span>[531:4035](0070479.htm#fr_4034) <span
id="xii.i-p38.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span> As above mentioned in his work on <span
id="xii.i-p39.1"></span>Prophecy. See p. 530.  

<span id="fn_4035"></span>[531:4036](0070479.htm#fr_4035) <span
id="xii.i-p40.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span> See also <span
id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>Cruden on the word “school” in his <span
id="xii.i-p41.2"></span>Concordance  

<span id="fn_4036"></span>[531:4037](0070479.htm#fr_4036) <span
id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span> Dean <span id="xii.i-p45.1"></span>Smith,
<span id="xii.i-p45.2"></span>Prophecy, etc., p. 124.  

<span id="fn_4037"></span>[532:4038](0070479.htm#fr_4037) <span
id="xii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span> [Acts i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p47.1"></span>
(Greek), 14, ii. 1, 42, iv. 24.  

<span id="fn_4038"></span>[532:4039](0070479.htm#fr_4038) <span
id="xii.i-p47.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span> Vol. v. Elucidation III. p. 559.  

<span id="fn_4039"></span>[532:4040](0070479.htm#fr_4039) <span
id="xii.i-p48.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span> <span id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>Ibid.,
Elucidation VI. p. 412.  

<span id="fn_4040"></span>[532:4041](0070479.htm#fr_4040) <span
id="xii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span> See <span id="xii.i-p51.1"></span>Field,
<span id="xii.i-p51.2"></span>Epistle to the Hebrews, London,
Rivingtons, 1882.  

<span id="fn_4041"></span>[532:4042](0070479.htm#fr_4041) <span
id="xii.i-p51.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#017)<span id="xii.i-p52.1"></span>, xi.
2, 25, 33, etc., xiv. 34–40.  

<span id="fn_4042"></span>[532:4043](0070479.htm#fr_4042) <span
id="xii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span> See vol. v. p. 409.  

<span id="fn_4043"></span>[532:4044](0070479.htm#fr_4043) <span
id="xii.i-p54.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span> Revised Version of 1881.  

<span id="fn_4044"></span>[532:4045](0070479.htm#fr_4044) <span
id="xii.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span> See <span id="xii.i-p57.1"></span>Apostolic
Constitutions, p. 489, <span id="xii.i-p57.3"></span>supra.  

<span id="fn_4045"></span>[532:4046](0070479.htm#fr_4045) <span
id="xii.i-p61.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span> Oxford, 1832.  

<span id="fn_4046"></span>[532:4047](0070479.htm#fr_4046) <span
id="xii.i-p62.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span> London, 1849.  

<span id="fn_4047"></span>[532:4048](0070479.htm#fr_4047) <span
id="xii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span> Second ed. London, 1868.  

<span id="fn_4048"></span>[532:4049](0070479.htm#fr_4048) <span
id="xii.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span> London, 1850.  

<span id="fn_4049"></span>[532:4050](0070479.htm#fr_4049) <span
id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span> \[Or of St. James, so called.\]  

<span id="fn_4050"></span>[532:4051](0070479.htm#fr_4050) <span
id="xii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span> \[Called the Liturgy of St. Mark.\]  

<span id="fn_4051"></span>[532:4052](0070479.htm#fr_4051) <span
id="xii.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span> \[It is most valuable, and indicates the
usages of a period near the age of <span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>Justin
Martyr. It is typical of an original from which the Liturgy of St. James
itself is derived. It was probably used in Gaul, if not also in Rome.\]
 

<span id="fn_4052"></span>[533:4053](0070479.htm#fr_4052) <span
id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span> \[A fair view of their origin is to be
found in Sir <span id="xii.i-p72.1"></span>William Palmer’s <span
id="xii.i-p72.2"></span>Origines Liturgicæ, Oxford, 1832.\]  

<span id="fn_4053"></span>[533:4054](0070479.htm#fr_4053) <span
id="xii.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span> <span id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>Origines
Liturgicæ, p. 11.  

<span id="fn_4054"></span>[533:4055](0070479.htm#fr_4054) <span
id="xii.i-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span> <span id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>General
Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern Church, p. 319.  

<span id="fn_4055"></span>[533:4056](0070479.htm#fr_4055) <span
id="xii.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span> \[If <span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>Justin
Martyr describes the liturgy used in Rome, when he lived there under the
Antonines, then it was nearly identical with the “Clementine,” and had
reached them from the East. See vol. i. p. 185, this series.\]  

<span id="fn_4056"></span>[533:4057](0070479.htm#fr_4056) <span
id="xii.i-p78.11"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span> Tübingen, 1870.  

<span id="fn_4057"></span>[533:4058](0070479.htm#fr_4057) <span
id="xii.i-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.i-p81.1"></span>νόθοι</span>. <span
id="xii.i-p81.2"></span>Codex Liturgicus, vol. iv. p. 35, note.  

<span id="fn_4058"></span>[533:4059](0070479.htm#fr_4058) <span
id="xii.i-p81.9"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span> <span id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>Palmer, vol.
i. p. 144.  

<span id="fn_4059"></span>[534:4060](0070479.htm#fr_4059) <span
id="xii.i-p83.18"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span> \[Here the <span
id="xii.i-p84.1"></span>weight of authorities is clearly on this side.\]
 

<span id="fn_4060"></span>[534:4061](0070479.htm#fr_4060) <span
id="xii.i-p85.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span> <span id="xii.i-p86.1"></span>General
Introd., p. 317.  

<span id="fn_4061"></span>[534:4062](0070479.htm#fr_4061) <span
id="xii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span> \[<span id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>Palmer
gives proof of its currency at an early period in some details. <span
id="xii.i-p88.2"></span>O. S., vol. i. p. 42.\]  

<span id="fn_4062"></span>[534:4063](0070479.htm#fr_4062) <span
id="xii.i-p88.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span> Edinburgh, T. & T. Clark, 1848.  

<span id="fn_4063"></span>[534:4064](0070479.htm#fr_4063) <span
id="xii.i-p89.6"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span> London, 1744.  

<span id="fn_4064"></span>[534:4065](0070479.htm#fr_4064) <span
id="xii.i-p90.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span> Vol. iii. \[<span
id="xii.i-p91.1"></span>Grabe also attempted this.\]  

<span id="fn_4065"></span>[534:4066](0070479.htm#fr_4065) <span
id="xii.i-p93.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span> <span id="xii.i-p94.1"></span>General
Introd., p. 324. \[From the poverty of <span id="xii.i-p94.2"></span>ms.
authority, we can only form a judgment by comparison with the Clementine
and with other more fully represented originals.\]  

<span id="fn_4066"></span>[534:4067](0070479.htm#fr_4066) <span
id="xii.i-p95.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p96"></span> <span id="xii.i-p96.1"></span>Editio
secunda correctior. Francofurti ad Moenum, 1847.  

<span id="fn_4067"></span>[534:4068](0070479.htm#fr_4067) <span
id="xii.i-p97.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p98"></span> <span id="xii.i-p98.1"></span>General
Introd., p. 319.  

<span id="fn_4068"></span>[534:4069](0070479.htm#fr_4068) <span
id="xii.i-p98.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p99"></span> <span id="xii.i-p99.1"></span>Ibid., p.
323.  

<span id="fn_4069"></span>[534:4070](0070479.htm#fr_4069) <span
id="xii.i-p100.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p101"></span> Tom. ii. pp. 578–592, ed. sec.  

<span id="fn_4070"></span>[534:4071](0070479.htm#fr_4070) <span
id="xii.i-p103.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p104"></span> <span
id="xii.i-p104.1"></span>Introduction, p. 11.  

<span id="fn_4071"></span>[535:4072](0070479.htm#fr_4071) <span
id="xii.i-p104.13"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p105"></span> \[Hence the value of these liturgies is to
be sought in the points of their agreement and their comparative concord
with the Clementine.\]  

<span id="fn_4072"></span>[535:4073](0070479.htm#fr_4072) <span
id="xii.i-p106.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p107"></span> <span id="xii.i-p107.1"></span>General
Introduction, p. 359.  

<span id="fn_4073"></span>[535:4074](0070479.htm#fr_4073) <span
id="xii.i-p145.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p146"></span> <span id="xii.i-p146.1"></span>Ibid., p.
463.  

<span id="fn_4074"></span>[536:4075](0070479.htm#fr_4074) <span
id="xii.i-p216.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p217"></span> \[A very fair reviewal of <span
id="xii.i-p217.1"></span>Neale’s theoretical statements may be found in
<span id="xii.i-p217.2"></span>Hammond’s <span
id="xii.i-p217.3"></span>Liturgies, Eastern and Western, Oxford, 1878.\]
 

<span id="fn_4075"></span>[536:4076](0070479.htm#fr_4075) <span
id="xii.i-p220.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p221"></span> Oxford, Parker, 1855.  

<span id="fn_4076"></span>[536:4077](0070479.htm#fr_4076) <span
id="xii.i-p222.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p223"></span> London, Masters, 1852.  

<span id="fn_4077"></span>[536:4078](0070479.htm#fr_4077) <span
id="xii.i-p224.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p225"></span> Oxford, University Press, 1881.  

<span id="fn_4078"></span>[536:4079](0070479.htm#fr_4078) <span
id="xii.i-p226.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p227"></span> London, Rivingtons, 1872.  

<span id="fn_4079"></span>[536:4080](0070479.htm#fr_4079) <span
id="xii.i-p228.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p229"></span> Oxford, Parker, 1876.  

<span id="fn_4080"></span>[536:4081](0070479.htm#fr_4080) <span
id="xii.i-p230.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p231"></span> Oxford, University Press, 1878. Also <span
id="xii.i-p231.1"></span>Ancient Liturgy of <span
id="xii.i-p231.2"></span>Antioch, Oxford, 1879.  

<span id="fn_4081"></span>[536:4082](0070479.htm#fr_4081) <span
id="xii.i-p232.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p233"></span> London, Bells, 1885.  

<span id="fn_4082"></span>[536:4083](0070479.htm#fr_4082) <span
id="xii.i-p234.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p235"></span> London, Rivingtons, 1882.  

<span id="fn_4083"></span>[536:4084](0070479.htm#fr_4083) <span
id="xii.i-p236.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p237"></span> The Hague, Scheurler, 1715. Let me give
the title of this rare book more fully, thus: <span
id="xii.i-p237.1"></span>S<span id="xii.i-p237.2"></span>. Irenæi
Fragmenta Anecdota, etc., quæ illustravit, denique Liturgia Græca Jo.
Ern. <span id="xii.i-p237.3"></span>Grabii, et dissertatione de
præjudiciis theologicis auxit Christoph. Matth. Pfaffius Of whom see
<span id="xii.i-p237.4"></span>Lardner, <span
id="xii.i-p237.5"></span>Credib., i. 17. See vol. i. p. 574, note 5.  

<span id="fn_4084"></span>[536:4085](0070479.htm#fr_4084) <span
id="xii.i-p238.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p239"></span> London, Hatchards, 1870. Valuable for its
study of the “Autun Inscription.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Liturgy of James the Holy Apostle and Brother of the
Lord](0070480)
