[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070147)  [Next](0070149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—Of Religion Towards God, and Mercy Towards Men; And of the Beginning of the World.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p1"></span>I have said what is due to God, I will
now say what is to be given to man; although this very thing which you
shall give to man is given to God, for man is the image of God. But,
however, the first office of justice is to be united with God, the
second with man. But the former is called religion; the second is named
mercy or kindness; <span id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) which
virtue is peculiar to the just, and to the worshippers of God, because
this alone comprises the principle of common life. For God, who has not
given wisdom to the other animals, has made them more safe from attack
in danger by natural defences. But because He made him naked and
defenceless, <span id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) that He might
rather furnish him with wisdom, He gave him, besides other things, this
feeling of kindness; <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) so that
man should protect, love, and cherish man, and both receive and afford
assistance against all dangers. Therefore kindness is the greatest bond
of human society; and he who has broken this is to be deemed impious,
and a parricide. For if we all derive our origin from one man, whom God
<span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-Page_173"></span>created, we are plainly of one blood;
and therefore it must be considered the greatest wickedness to hate a
man, even though guilty. On which account God has enjoined that enmities
are never to be contracted by us, but that they are always to be
removed, so that we soothe those who are our enemies, by reminding them
of their relationship. Likewise, if we are all inspired and animated by
one God, what else are we than brothers? And, indeed, the more closely
united, because we are united in soul rather than in body. <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) Accordingly <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9.4"></span>Lucretius does not err when he says: <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) “In short, we are all sprung from a
heavenly seed; all have that same father.” Therefore they are to be
accounted as savage beasts who injure man; who, in opposition to every
law and right of human nature, plunder, torture, slay, and banish.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p14"></span>On account of this relationship of
brotherhood, God teaches us never to do evil, but always good. And He
also prescribes <span id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) in what this
doing good consists: in affording aid to those who are oppressed and in
difficulty, and in bestowing food on those who are destitute. For God,
since He is kind, <span id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) wished us
to be a social animal. Therefore, in the case of other men, we ought to
think of ourselves. We do not deserve to be set free in our own dangers,
if we do not succour others; we do not deserve assistance, if we refuse
to render it. There are no precepts of philosophers to this purport,
inasmuch as they, being captivated by the appearance of false virtue,
have taken away mercy from man, and while they wish to heal, have
corrupted. <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) And though they
generally admit that the mutual participation of human society is to be
retained, they entirely separate themselves from it by the harshness of
their inhuman virtue. This error, therefore, is also to be refuted, of
those who think that nothing is to be bestowed on any one. They have
introduced not one origin only, and cause of building a city; but some
relate that those men who were first born from the earth, when they
passed a wandering life among the woods and plains, and were not united
by any mutual bond of speech or justice, but had leaves and grass for
their beds, and caves and grottos for their dwellings, were a prey to
the beasts and stronger animals. Then, that those who had either
escaped, having been torn, or had seen their neighbours torn, being
admonished of their own danger, had recourse to other men, implored
protection, and at first made their wishes known by nods; then that they
tried the beginnings of conversation, and by attaching names to each
object, by degrees completed the system of speech. But when they saw
that numbers themselves were not safe against the beasts, they began
also to build towns, either that they might make their nightly repose
safe, or that they might ward off the incursions and attacks of beasts,
not by fighting, but by interposing barriers. <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p19"></span>O minds unworthy of men, which
produced these foolish trifles! O wretched and pitiable men, who
committed to writing and handed down to memory the record of their own
folly; who, when they saw that the plan of assembling themselves
together, or of mutual intercourse, or of avoiding danger, or of
guarding against evil, or of preparing for themselves sleeping-places
and lairs, was natural even to the dumb animals, thought, however, that
men could not have been admonished and learned, except by examples, what
they ought to fear, what to avoid, and what to do, or that they would
never have assembled together, or have discovered the method of speech,
had not the beasts devoured them! These things appeared to others
senseless, as they really were; and they said that the cause of their
coming together was not the tearing of wild beasts, but rather the very
feeling of humanity itself; and that therefore they collected themselves
together, because the nature of men avoided solitude, and was desirous
of communion and society. The discrepancy between them is not great;
since the causes are different, the fact is the same. Each might have
been true, because there is no direct opposition. But, however, neither
is by any means true, because men were not born from the ground
throughout the world, as though sprung from the teeth of some dragon, as
the poets relate; but one man was formed by God, and from that one man
all the earth was filled with the human race, in the same way as again
took place after the deluge, which they certainly cannot deny. <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) Therefore no assembling together of
this kind took place at the beginning; and that there were never men on
the earth who could not speak except those who were infants, <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) every one who is possessed of sense
will understand. Let us suppose, however, that these things are true
which idle and foolish old men vainly say, that we may refute them
especially by their own feelings and arguments.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p22"></span>If men were collected together on this
account, <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-Page_174"></span>that they might protect their weakness
by mutual help, therefore we must succour man, who needs help. For,
since men entered into and contracted fellowship with men for the sake
of protection, either to violate or not to preserve that compact which
was entered into among men from the commencement of their origin, is to
be considered as the greatest impiety. For he who withdraws himself from
affording assistance must also of necessity withdraw himself from
receiving it; for he who refuses his aid to another thinks that he
stands in need of the aid of none. But he who withdraws and separates
himself from the body <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) at
large, must live not after the custom of men, but after the manner of
wild beasts. But if this cannot be done, the bond of human society is by
all means to be retained, because man can in no way live without man.
But the preservation <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) of
society is a mutual sharing of kind offices; that is, the affording
help, that we may be able to receive it. But if, as those others assert,
the assembling together of men has been caused on account of humanity
itself, man ought undoubtedly to recognise man. But if those ignorant
and as yet uncivilized men did this, and that, when the practice of
speaking was not yet established, what must we think ought to be done by
men who are polished, and connected together by interchange of
conversation and all business, who, being accustomed to the society of
men, cannot endure solitude?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[172:1146](0070148.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p2.1"></span>Humanitas.  

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[172:1147](0070148.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p3.1"></span>Fragilem.  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.1"></span>Φυ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.2"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.3"></span>σις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.4"></span>κε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.5"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.6"></span>ρατα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.7"></span>ταυ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.8"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p4.9"></span>ροις</span>  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.1"></span>ὁπλα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.2"></span>̀</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.3"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.4"></span>δ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.5"></span>' </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.6"></span>ἒδωκεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.7"></span>ἲπποι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.8"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p5.9"></span>ς</span>  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.1"></span>τοι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.2"></span>̑</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.3"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.4"></span>ἀνδρα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.5"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.6"></span>σιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.7"></span>φρο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.8"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.9"></span>νημα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.10"></span>, </span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.11"></span>κ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.12"></span>τ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p6.13"></span>λ</span>  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p7"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p7.1"></span>Anacreon, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p7.2"></span>Ode 2.\]  

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[172:1148](0070148.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p8.1"></span>Hunc pietatis affectum.  

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[173:1149](0070148.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9.1"></span>Conjunctiores, quòd animis, quàm quòd
(others read “<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9.2"></span>qui”<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9.3"></span>) corporibus.  

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[173:1150](0070148.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p10"></span> \[Modern followers of <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p10.1"></span>Lucretius may learn from him:—  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p11"></span>Denique cœlesti sumus omnes semine
oriundi;  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p12"></span>Omnibus ille idem pater est.\]  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p13"></span>ii. 991.  

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[173:1151](0070148.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p15"></span> [Isa.
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p15.1"></span>; [Ezek. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p15.2"></span>;
[Matt. xxv. 35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p15.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[173:1152](0070148.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p16.1"></span>Pius.  

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[173:1153](0070148.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p17.1"></span>Dum volunt sanare, vitiaverunt. There is
another reading: “dum volunt sanare vitia, auxerunt,” while they wish to
apply a remedy to vices, have increased them.  

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[173:1154](0070148.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p18.1"></span>Objectis aggeribus. “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p18.2"></span>Agger” properly signifies a mound of earth
or other material.  

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[173:1155](0070148.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p20"></span> \[[Gen. x.
32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032)<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p20.1"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[173:1156](0070148.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p21.1"></span>Prater infantiam—others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p21.2"></span>propter infans”—properly means, one unable
to speak. \[See fine remarks on language, etc., in <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p21.3"></span>De Maistre, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p21.4"></span>Soirées, etc., vol. i. p. 105 and notes,
ed. Lyon, 1836.\]  

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[174:1157](0070148.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p23"></span> <span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p23.1"></span>A
corpore, that is, from society.  

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[174:1158](0070148.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.x-p24"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p24.1"></span>Retentio. The word sometimes signifies a
“withholding,” or “drawing back;” but here, as in other passages, <span
id="iii.ii.vi.x-p24.2"></span>Lactantius uses it to express
“preservation.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of the persons upon whom a benefit is to be
conferred](0070149)
