[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070256)  [Next](0070258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXIX.—That the World Was Made on Account of Man, and Man on Account of God.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p1"></span>I will now say what is that
chief <span id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598) point which not even
those who spoke the truth were able to connect together, bringing into
one view causes and reasons. The world was made by God, that men might
be born; again, men are born, that they may acknowledge God as a Father,
in whom is wisdom; they acknowledge Him, that they may worship Him, in
whom is justice; they worship Him, that they may receive the reward of
immortality; they receive immortality, that they may serve God for ever.
Do you see how closely connected the first are with the middle, and the
middle with the last? Let us look into them separately, and see whether
they are consistent <span id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599) with each
other. God made the world on account of man. He who does not see this,
does not differ much from a beast. Who but man looks up to the heaven?
who views with admiration the sun, who the stars, who all the works of
God? Who inhabits the earth? who receives the fruit from it? Who has in
his power the fishes, who the winged creatures, who the quadrupeds,
except man? Therefore God made all things on account of man, because all
things have turned out for the use of man.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p4"></span>The philosophers saw this, but they
did not see the consequence, that He made man himself on His own
account. For it was befitting, and pious, and necessary, that since He
contrived such great works for the sake of man, when He gave him so much
honour, and so much power, that he should bear rule in the world, man
should both acknowledge God, the Author of such great benefits, who made
the world itself on his account, and should pay Him the worship and
honour due to Him. Here <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p4.1"></span>Plato
erred; here he lost the truth which he had at first laid hold of, when
he was silent concerning the worship of that God whom he confessed to be
the framer and parent of all things, and did not understand that man is
bound to God by the ties of piety, whence religion itself receives its
name, and that this is the only thing on account of which souls become
immortal. He perceived, however, that they are eternal, but he did not
descend by the regular gradations to that opinion. For the middle
arguments being taken away, he rather fell into the truth, as though by
some abrupt precipice; nor did he advance further, since he had found
the truth by accident, and not by reason. Therefore God is to be
worshipped, that by means of religion, which is also justice, man may
receive from God immortality, nor is there any other reward of a pious
mind; and if this is <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-Page_253"></span>invisible, it cannot be presented
by the invisible God with any reward but that which is invisible.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[252:1599](0070257.htm#fr_1598) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p2.1"></span>Summa.  

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[252:1600](0070257.htm#fr_1599) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxv-p3.1"></span>Utrumne illis ratio subsistat.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXX.—The immortality of the soul is confirmed](0070258)
