[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070290)  [Next](0070292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. IV.—Of the Weakness of Man.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span>They also complain that man is liable to
diseases, and to untimely death. They are indignant, it appears, that
they are not born gods. By no means, they say; but we show from this,
that man was made with no foresight, which ought to have been otherwise.
What if I shall show, that this very thing was foreseen with great
reason, that he might be able to be harassed by diseases, and that his
life might often be cut short in the midst of its course? For, since God
had known that the animal which He had made, of its own accord passed to
death, that it might be capable of receiving death itself, which is the
dissolution of nature, He gave to it frailty, which might find an
approach for death in order to the dissolution of the animal. For if it
had been of such strength that disease and sickness could not approach
it, not even could death, since death is the consequence of diseases.
But how could a premature death be absent from him, for whom a mature
death had been appointed? Assuredly they wish that no man should die,
unless when he has completed his hundredth year. How can they maintain
their consistency in so great an opposition of circumstances? For, in
order that no one may be capable of dying before a hundred years,
something of the strength which is immortal must be given to him; and
when this is granted, the condition of death must necessarily be
excluded. But of what kind can that be, which can render a man firm and
impregnable against diseases and attacks from without? For, inasmuch as
he is composed of bones, and nerves, and flesh, and blood, which of
these can be so firm as to repel frailty and death? That man, therefore,
may not be liable to dissolution before that time which they think ought
to have been appointed for him, of what material will they assign to him
a body? All things which can be seen and touched are frail. It remains
that they seek something from heaven, since there is nothing on earth
which is not weak.  

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>Since, therefore, man had to be so formed
by <span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-Page_285"></span>God, that he should at some time be
mortal, the matter itself required that he should be made with a frail
and earthly body. It is necessary, therefore, that he should at some
time receive death, since he is possessed of a body; for everybody is
liable to dissolution and to death. Therefore they are most foolish who
complain of premature death, since the condition of nature makes a place
for it. Thus it will follow that he is subject also to diseases; for
nature does not admit that infirmity can be absent from that body which
is at some time to undergo dissolution. But let us suppose it to be
possible, as they wish, that man is not born under those conditions by
which he is subject to disease or death, unless, having completed the
course of his life, he shall have arrived at the extremity of old age.
They do not, therefore, see what would be the consequence if it were so
arranged, that it would be plainly impossible to die at another time;
but if any one can be deprived of nourishment by another, it will be
possible for him to die. Therefore the case requires that man, who
cannot die before an appointed day, should have no need of the
nourishment of food, because it may be taken from him; but if he shall
have no need of food, he will now not be a man, but will become a god.
Therefore, as I have already said, they who complain of the frailty of
man, make this complaint especially, that they were not born immortal
and everlasting. No one ought to die unless he is old. On this account,
in truth, he ought to die, because he is not God. But mortality cannot
be united with immortality: for if a man is mortal in old age, he cannot
be immortal in youth; neither is the condition of death foreign to him
who is at some time about to die; nor is there any immortality to which
a limit is appointed. Thus it comes to pass, that the exclusion of
immortality for ever, and the reception of mortality for a time, place
man in such a condition that he is at some time mortal.  

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>Therefore the necessity is in all points
suitable, <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825) that he ought not
to have been otherwise than he is, and that it was impossible. But they
do not see the order of consequences, because they have once committed
an error in the main point itself. For the divine providence having been
excluded from the affairs of men, it necessarily followed that all
things were produced of their own accord. Hence they invented the notion
of those blows and fortuitous meetings together of minute seeds, because
they did not see the origin of things. And when they had thrown
themselves into this difficulty, necessity now compelled them to think
that souls were born together with bodies, and in like manner were
extinguished together with bodies; for they had made the assumption,
that nothing was made by the divine mind. And they were unable to prove
this in any other way, than by showing that there were some things in
which the system of providence appeared to be at fault. <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) Therefore they blamed those things
in which providence wonderfully expressed its divinity, as those things
which I have related concerning diseases and premature death; whereas
they ought to have considered, these things being assumed, what would be
the necessary consequences (but those things which I have spoken are the
consequences) if he were not liable to diseases, and did not require a
dwelling, nor clothing. For why should he fear the winds, or rains, or
colds, the power of which consists in this, that they bring diseases?
For on this account he has received wisdom, that he may guard his
frailty against things that would injure him. The necessary consequence
is, that since he is liable to diseases for the sake of retaining his
wisdom, he must also be liable to death; because he to whom death does
not come, must of necessity be firm. But infirmity has in itself the
condition of death; but where there shall be firmness, neither can old
age have any place, nor death, which follows old age.  

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>Moreover, if death were appointed for a
fixed age, man would become most arrogant, and would be destitute of all
humanity. For almost all the rights of humanity, by which we are united
with one another, arise from fear and the consciousness of frailty. In
short, all the more feeble and timid animals herd together, that, since
they are unable to protect themselves by strength, they may protect
themselves by their multitude; but the stronger animals seek solitudes,
since they trust in their force and strength. <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) If man also, in the same manner,
had sufficient strength for the repelling of dangers, and did not stand
in need of the assistance of any other, what society would there be? Or
what system? What humanity? Or what would be more harsh than man? What
more brutal? What more savage? But since he is feeble, and not able to
live by himself apart from man, he desires society, that his life,
passed in intercourse with others, may become both more adorned and more
safe. You see, therefore, that the whole reason of man centres most of
all in this, that he is born naked and fragile, that he is attacked by
diseases, that he is punished by premature death. And if these things
should be taken away from man, reason also, and wisdom, must necessarily
be taken away. But I am discussing too long respecting things which are
manifest, since it is clear that nothing ever was made, or could have
been made, without providence. And if <span id="page_286">p. 286</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv-Page_286"></span>I should now wish to discuss
respecting all its works in order, the subject would be infinite. But I
have purposed to speak so much concerning the body of man only, that I
may show in it the power of divine providence, how great it has been in
those things only which are easy of comprehension and open; for those
things which relate to the soul can neither be subjected to the eyes,
nor comprehended. Now we speak concerning the vessel itself of man,
which we see.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[285:1826](0070291.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>Quadrat.  

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[285:1827](0070291.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>Claudicare.  

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[285:1828](0070291.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span> \[The disposition, even among men, to
herd together in artificial societies, is instinctively repugnant to the
stronger natures.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—Of the figures and limbs of animals](0070292)
