[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070331)  [Next](0070333) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXIII.

<span id="iii.v.xxiii-p1"></span>But that which gave rise to public and
universal calamity, was the tax imposed at once on each province and
city. Surveyors having been spread abroad, and occupied in a general and
severe scrutiny, horrible scenes were exhibited, like the outrages of
victorious enemies, and the wretched state of captives. Each spot of
ground was measured, vines and fruit-trees numbered, lists taken of
animals of every kind, and a capitation-roll made up. In cities, the
common people, whether residing within or without the walls, were
assembled, the market-places filled with crowds of families, all
attended with their children and slaves, the noise of torture and
scourges resounded, sons were hung on the rack to force discovery of the
effects of their fathers, the most trusty slaves compelled by pain to
bear witness against their masters, and wives to bear witness against
their husbands, In default of all other evidence, men were tortured to
speak against themselves; and no sooner did agony oblige them to
acknowledge what they had not, but those imaginary effects were noted
down in the lists. Neither youth, nor old age, nor sickness, afforded
any exemption. The diseased and the infirm were carried in; the age of
each was estimated; and, that the capitation-tax might be enlarged,
years were added to the young and struck off from the old. General
lamentation and sorrow prevailed. Whatever, by the laws of war,
conquerors had done to the conquered, the like did this man presume to
perpetrate against Romans and the subjects of Rome, because his
forefathers had been made liable to a like tax imposed by the victorious
<span id="iii.v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Trajan, as a penalty on the Dacians
for their frequent rebellions. After this, money was levied for each
head, as if a price had been paid for liberty to exist; yet full trust
was not reposed on the same set of surveyors, but others and others
still were sent round to make further discoveries; and thus the tributes
were redoubled, not because the new surveyors made any fresh
discoveries, but because they added at pleasure to the former rates,
lest they should seem to have been employed to no purpose. Meanwhile the
number of animals decreased, and men died; nevertheless taxes were paid
even for the dead, so that no one could either live or cease to live
without being subject to impositions. There remained mendicants alone,
from whom nothing could be exacted, and whom their misery and
wretchedness secured from ill-treatment. But this pious man had
compassion on them, and determining that they should remain no longer in
indigence, he caused them all to be assembled, put on board vessels, and
sunk in the sea. So merciful was he in making provision that under his
administration no man should want! And thus, while he took effectual
measures that none, under the reigned pretext of poverty, should elude
the tax, he put to death a multitude of real wretches, in violation of
every law of humanity.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXIV](0070333)
