[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070015)  [Next](0070017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—Of the life and actions of <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p0.2"></span>Æsculapius, apollo, neptune, mars, castor and pollux, mercury and bacchus.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1"></span>What other action worthy of divine
honours, except the healing of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.1"></span>Hippolytus, did <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.2"></span>Æsculapius perform, whose birth also was
not without disgrace to <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.3"></span>Apollo? His
death was certainly more renowned, because he earned the distinction of
being struck with lightning by a god. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.4"></span>Tarquitius, in a dissertation concerning
illustrious men, says that he was born of uncertain parents, exposed,
and found by some hunters; that he was nourished by a dog, and that,
being delivered to <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.5"></span>Chiron, he learned
the art of medicine. He says, moreover, that he was a Messenian, but
that he spent some time at <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.6"></span>Epidaurus.
<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.7"></span>Tully also says that he was buried at
Cynosuræ. What was the conduct of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.8"></span>Apollo, his father? Did he not, on account
of his impassioned love, most disgracefully tend the flock of another,
and build walls for <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.9"></span>Laomedon, having
been hired together with <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.10"></span>Neptune for
a reward, which could with impunity be withheld from him? And from him
first the perfidious king learned to refuse <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p1.11"></span>to carry out whatever contract he had made
with gods. And he also, while in love with a beautiful boy, offered
violence to him, and while engaged in play, slew him.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2"></span><span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.1"></span>Mars, when guilty of homicide, and set free
from the charge of murder by the Athenians through favour, lest he
should appear to be too fierce and savage, committed adultery with <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.2"></span>Venus. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.3"></span>Castor and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.4"></span>Pollux, while they are engaged in carrying
off the wives of others, ceased to be twin-brothers. For <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.5"></span>Idas, being excited with jealousy on
account of the injury, transfixed one<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.6"></span>
of the brothers with his sword. And the poets relate that they live and
die alternately: so that they are now the most wretched not only of the
gods, but also of all mortals, inasmuch as they are not permitted to die
once only. And yet <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.7"></span>Homer, differing
from the other poets, simply records that they both died. For when he
represented <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.8"></span>Helen as sitting by the
side of <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.9"></span>Priam on the walls of Troy,
and recognising all the chieftains of Greece, but as looking in vain for
her brothers only, he added to his speech a verse of this kind:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p2.10"></span> “Thus she; unconscious that in
> Sparta they,  
> Their native land, beneath the sod were laid.”  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p3"></span>What did <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p3.1"></span>Mercury, a thief and spendthrift, leave to
contribute to his fame, except the memory of his frauds? Doubtless he
was deserving of heaven, because he taught the exercises of the
palæstra, and was the first who invented the lyre. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) It is necessary that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p4.3"></span>Father Liber should be of chief authority,
and of the first rank in the senate of the gods, because he was the only
one of them all, except <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p4.4"></span>Jupiter, who
triumphed, led an army, and subdued the Indians. But that very great and
unconquered Indian commander was most shamefully overpowered by love and
lust. For, being conveyed to Crete with his effeminate retinue, he met
with an unchaste woman on the shore; and in the confidence inspired by
his <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-Page_20"></span>Indian victory, he wished to give proof
of his manliness, lest he should appear too effeminate. And so he took
to himself in marriage that woman, the betrayer of her father, and the
murderer of her brother, after that she had been deserted and repudiated
by another husband; and he made her <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p4.5"></span>Libera, and with her ascended into heaven.
 

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p5"></span>What was the conduct of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p5.1"></span>Jupiter, the father of all these, who in
the customary prayer is styled <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) Most
Excellent and Great? Is he not, from his earliest childhood, proved to
be impious, and almost a parricide, since he expelled his father from
his kingdom, and banished him, and did not await his death though he was
aged and worn out, such was his eagerness for rule? And when he had
taken his father’s throne by violence and arms, he was attacked with war
by the Titans, which was the beginning of evils to the human race; and
when these had been overcome and lasting peace procured, he spent the
rest of his life in debaucheries and adulteries. I forbear to mention
the virgins whom he dishonoured. For that is wont to be judged
endurable. I cannot pass by the cases of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.4"></span>Amphitryon and <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.5"></span>Tyndarus, whose houses he filled to
overflowing with disgrace and infamy. But he reached the height of
impiety and guilt in carrying off the royal boy. For it did not appear
enough to cover himself with infamy in offering violence to women,
unless he also outraged his own sex. This is true adultery, which is
done against nature. Whether he who committed these crimes can be called
Greatest is a matter of question, undoubtedly he is not the Best; to
which name corrupters, adulterers, and incestuous persons have no claim;
unless it happens that we men are mistaken in terming those who do such
things wicked and abandoned, and in judging them most deserving of every
kind of punishment. But <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.6"></span>Marcus
Tullius was foolish in upbraiding <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.7"></span>Caius Verres with adulteries, for <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.8"></span>Jupiter, whom he worshipped, committed the
same; and in upbraiding <span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.9"></span>Publius
Clodius with incest with his sister, for he who was Best and Greatest
had the same person both as sister and wife.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[19:47](0070016.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p4"></span> \[See vol. v. p. 43, and note, p. 46,
this series.\]  

<span id="fn_47"></span>[20:48](0070016.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.1"></span>Nat. Deor., iii. 36. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.2"></span>De Maistre, <span
id="iii.ii.i.xi-p6.3"></span>Soirèes, i. p. 30, and note, p 63.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of the origin, life, reign, name and death of Jupiter,
and of Saturn and Uranus](0070017)
