[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070153)  [Next](0070155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVI.—Of the Affections, and the Refutation of the Opinion of the Peripatetics Concerning Them; What is the Proper Use of the Affections, and What is a Bad Use of Them.

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p1"></span>But I think that the Peripatetics did
not even approach the truth, who allow that they are vices, but regulate
them with moderation. For we must be free even from moderate vices; yea,
rather, it ought to have been at first effected that there should be no
vices. For nothing can be born vicious; <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) but if we make a bad use of the
affections they become vices, if we use them well they become virtues.
Then it must be shown that the causes of the affections, and not the
affections themselves, must be moderated. We must not, they say, rejoice
with excessive joy, but moderately and temperately. This is as though
they should say that we must not run swiftly, but walk quietly. But it
is possible that he who walks may err, and that he who runs may keep the
right path. What if I show that there is a case in which it is vicious
not only to rejoice moderately, but even in the smallest degree; and
that there is another case, on the contrary, in which even to exult with
transports of joy is by no means faulty? What then, I pray, will this
mediocrity profit us? I ask whether they think that a wise man ought to
rejoice if he sees any evil happening to his enemy; or whether he ought
to curb his joy, if by the conquest of enemies, or the overthrow of a
tyrant, liberty and safety have been acquired by his countrymen. <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201)  

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p4"></span>No one doubts but that in the former
case to rejoice a little, and in the latter to rejoice too little, is a
very great crime. We may say the same respecting the other affections.
But, as I have said, the object of wisdom does not consist in the
regulation of these, but of their causes, since they are acted upon from
without; nor was it befitting that these themselves should be
restrained; since they may exist in a small degree with the greatest
criminality, and in the greatest degree without any criminality. But
they ought to have been assigned to fixed times, and circumstances, and
places, that they may not be vices, when it is permitted us to make a
right use of them. For as to walk in the right course is good, but to
wander from it is evil, so to be moved by the affections to that which
is right is good, but to that which is corrupt is evil. For sensual
desire, if it does not wander from its lawful object, although it be
ardent, yet is without fault. But if it desires an unlawful object,
although it be moderate, yet it is a great vice. Therefore it is not a
disease to be angry, nor to desire, nor to be excited by lust; but to be
passionate, to be covetous or licentious, is a disease. For he who is
passionate is angry even with him with whom he ought not to be angry or
at times when he ought not. He who is covetous desires even that which
is unnecessary. He who is licentious pursues even that which is
forbidden by the laws. The whole matter ought to have turned on this,
that since the impetuosity of these things cannot be restrained, nor is
it right that it should be, because it is necessarily implanted for
maintaining the duties of life, it might rather be directed into the
right way, where it may be possible even to run without stumbling and
danger.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[181:1201](0070154.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p2"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>Augustine against <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p2.2"></span>Pelagius: another view.\]  

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[181:1202](0070154.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi.xvi-p3"></span> \[Again this love of liberty, but
loosely said.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVII.—Of the affections and their use; of patience, and the
chief good of Christians](0070155)
