[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070129)  [Next](0070131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XVII.—Of the Equity, Wisdom, and Foolishness of Christians.

<span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p1"></span>I have explained the reason why
philosophers were unable either to find or to defend justice. Now I
return to that which I had purposed. <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Carneades, therefore, since the arguments
of the philosophers were weak, undertook the bold task of refuting them,
because he understood that they were capable of refutation. The
substance of his disputation was this: “That men <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) enacted <span id="page_152">p.
152</span> <span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-Page_152"></span>laws for themselves,
with a view to their own advantage, differing indeed according to their
characters, and in the case of the same persons often changed according
to the times: but that there was no natural law: that all, both men and
other animals, were borne by the guidance of nature to their own
advantage; therefore that there was no justice, or if any did exist, it
was the greatest folly, because it injured itself by promoting the
interests of others.” And he brought forward these arguments: “That all
nations which flourished with dominion, even the Romans themselves, who
were masters of the whole world, if they wish to be just, that is, to
restore the possessions of others, must return to cottages, and lie down
in want and miseries.” Then, leaving general topics, he came to
particulars. “If a good man,” he says, “has a runaway slave, or an
unhealthy and infected house, and he alone knows these faults, and on
this account offers it for sale, will he give out that the slave is a
runaway, and the house which he offers for sale is infected, or will he
conceal it from the purchaser? If he shall give it out, he is good
indeed, because he will not deceive; but still he will be judged
foolish, because he will either sell at a low price or not sell at all.
If he shall conceal it, he will be wise indeed, because he will consult
his own interest; but he will be also wicked, because he will deceive.
Again, if he should find any one who supposes that he is selling copper
ore when it is gold, or lead when it is silver, will he be silent, that
he may buy it at a small price; or will he give information of it, so
that he may buy it at a great price? It evidently appears foolish to
prefer to buy it at a great price.” From which he wished it to be
understood, both that he who is just and good is foolish, and that he
who is wise is wicked; and yet that it may possibly happen without ruin,
for men to be contented with poverty. Therefore he passed to greater
things, in which no one could be just without danger of his life. For he
said: “Certainly it is justice not to put a man to death, not to take
the property of another. What, then, will the just man do, if he shall
happen to have suffered shipwreck, and some one weaker than himself
shall have seized a plank? Will he not thrust him from the plank, that
he himself may get upon it, and supported by it may escape, especially
since there is no witness in the middle of the sea? If he is wise, he
will do so; for he must himself perish unless he shall thus act. But if
he choose rather to die than to inflict violence upon another, in this
case he is just, but foolish, in not sparing his own life while he
spares the life of another. Thus also, if the army of his own people
shall have been routed, and the enemy have begun to press upon them, and
that just man shall have met with a wounded man on horseback, will he
spare him so as to be slain himself, or will he throw him from his
horse, that he himself may escape from the enemy? If he shall do this,
he will be wise, but also wicked; if he shall not do it, he will be
just, but also of necessity foolish.” When, therefore, he had thus
divided justice into two parts, saying that the one was civil, the other
natural, he subverted both: because the civil part is wisdom, but not
justice; but the natural part is justice, but not wisdom. These
arguments are altogether subtle and acute, <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) and such as <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.3"></span>Marcus Tullius was unable to refute. For
when he represents <span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.4"></span>Lælius as
replying to <span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.5"></span>Furius, and speaking in
behalf of justice, he passed them by as a pitfall without refuting them;
so that the same <span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.6"></span>Lælius appears not
to have defended natural justice, which bad fallen under the charge of
folly, but that civil justice which <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.7"></span>Furius had admitted to be wisdom, but
unjust. <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[151:1034](0070130.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p2"></span> \[From the <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p2.1"></span>Republic, book iii. cap. 12, sec. 21.\]  

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[152:1035](0070130.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.1"></span>Venenata \[See <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.2"></span>De Finibus, book v. cap. 23.\]  

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[152:1036](0070130.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p4"></span> \[See p. 150, <span
id="iii.ii.v.xvii-p4.2"></span>supra \]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—Of justice, wisdom, and folly](0070131)
