[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070442)  [Next](0070444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.i"></span>

#### <span id="ix.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Sec. I.—Concerning Widows.

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p0.2"></span>The Age at Which Widows Should Be Chosen.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p1"></span>I. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Choose</span> your “widows not under sixty
years of age,” <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) that in some
measure the suspicion of a second marriage may be prevented by their
age. But if you admit one younger into the order of widows, and she
cannot bear her widowhood in her youth, and marries, she will procure
indecent reflections on the glory of the order of the widows, and shall
give an account to God; not because she married a second time, but
because she has “waxed wanton against Christ,” <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) and not kept her promise, <span
id="ix.iv.i-p3.2"></span>because she did not come and keep her promise
with faith and the fear of God. <span
id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) Wherefore such a promise ought not
to be rashly made, but with great caution: “for it is better for her not
to vow, than to vow and not to pay.” <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) But if any younger woman, who has
lived but a while with her husband, and has lost him by death or some
other occasion, and remains by herself, having the gift of widowhood,
she will be found to be blessed, and to be like the widow of Sarepta,
belonging to Sidon, with whom the holy prophet of God, <span
id="ix.iv.i-p5.2"></span>Elijah, <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) lodged. Such a one may also be
compared to “<span id="ix.iv.i-p6.2"></span>Anna, the daughter of <span
id="ix.iv.i-p6.3"></span>Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser, which departed
not from the temple, but continued in supplications and prayers night
and day, who was fourscore years old, and had lived with an husband
seven years from her virginity, who glorified the coming of Christ, and
gave thanks to the Lord, and spake concerning Him to all those who
looked for redemption in Israel.” <span
id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) Such a widow will have a good
report, and will be honoured, having both glory with men upon earth, and
eternal praise with God in heaven.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p7.2"></span>That We Must Avoid the Choice of Younger Widows, Because of Suspicion.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p8"></span>II. But let not the younger widows be
placed in the order of widows, lest, under pretence of inability to
contain in the flower of their age, they come to a second marriage, and
become subject to imputation. But let them be assisted and supported,
that so they may not, under pretence of being deserted, come to a second
marriage, and so be ensnared in an unseemly imputation. For you ought to
know this, that once marrying according to the law is righteous, as
being according to the will of God; but second marriages, after the
promise, are wicked, not on account of the marriage itself, but because
of the falsehood. Third marriages are indications of incontinency. But
such marriages as are beyond the third are manifest fornication, and
unquestionable uncleanness. For God in the creation gave one woman to
one man; for “they two shall be one flesh.” <span
id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) But to the younger women let a
second marriage be allowed after the death of their first husband, lest
they fall into the condemnation of the devil, and many snares, and
foolish lusts, which are hurtful to souls, and which bring upon them
punishment rather than rest.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p9.2"></span>What Character the Widows Ought to Be Of, and How They Ought to Be Supported by the Bishop.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p10"></span>III. But the true widows are those which
have had only one husband, having a good report among the generality for
good works; widows indeed, sober, chaste, faithful, pious, who have
brought up their children well, and have entertained strangers
unblameably, which are to be supported as devoted to God. Besides, do
thou, O bishop, be mindful of the needy, both reaching out thy helping
hand and making provision <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="ix.iv.i-Page_427"></span>for them as the steward of God,
distributing seasonably the oblations to every one of them, to the
widows, the orphans, the friendless, and those tried with affliction.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p10.1"></span>That We Ought to Be Charitable to All Sorts of Persons in Want.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p11"></span>IV. For what if some are neither widows
nor widowers, but stand in need of assistance, either through poverty or
some disease, or the maintenance of a great number of children? It is
thy duty to oversee all people, and to take care of them all. For they
that give gifts do not of their own head give them to the widows, but
barely bring them in, calling them free-will offerings, that so thou
that knowest those that are in affliction mayest as a good steward give
them their portion of the gift. For God knows the giver, though thou
distributest it to those in want when he is absent. And he has the
reward of well-doing, but thou the blessedness of having dispensed it
with a good conscience. But do thou tell them who was the giver, that
they may pray for him by name. For it is our duty to do good to all men,
not fondly preferring one or another, whoever they be. For the Lord
says: “Give to every one that asketh of thee.” <span
id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) It is evident that it is meant of
every one that is really in want, whether he be friend or foe, whether
he be a kinsman or a stranger, whether he be single or married. For in
all the Scripture the Lord gives us exhortations about the needy, saying
first by Isaiah: “Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor which
have no covering into thine house. If thou seest the naked, do thou
cover him; and thou shalt not overlook those which are of thine own
family and seed.” <span id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) And then by
<span id="ix.iv.i-p13.2"></span>Daniel He says to the potentate:
“Wherefore, O king, let my counsel please thee, and purge thy sins by
acts of mercy, and thine iniquities by bowels of compassion to the
needy.” <span id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) And He says by <span
id="ix.iv.i-p14.2"></span>Solomon: “By acts of mercy and of faith
iniquities are purged.” <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) And
He says again by <span id="ix.iv.i-p15.2"></span>David: “Blessed is he
that has regard to the poor and needy; the Lord shall deliver him in the
evil day.” <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) And again: “He
hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the needy, his righteousness
remaineth for ever.” <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) And
<span id="ix.iv.i-p17.3"></span>Solomon says: “He that hath mercy on the
poor lendeth to the Lord; <span id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881)
according to his gift it shall be repaid him again.” <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882) And afterwards: “He that stoppeth
his ear, that he may not hear him that is in want, he also shall call
himself, and there shall be none to hear him.” <span
id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p20.2"></span>That the Widows are to Be Very Careful of Their Behavior.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p21"></span>V. Let every widow be meek, quiet, gentle,
sincere, free from anger, not talkative, not clamorous, not hasty of
speech, not given to evil-speaking, not captious, not double-tongued,
not a busybody. If she see or hear anything that is not right, let her
be as one that does not see, and as one that does not hear. And let the
widow mind nothing but to pray for those that give, and for the whole
Church; and when she is asked anything by any one, let her not easily
answer, excepting questions concerning the faith, and righteousness, and
hope in God, remitting those that desire to be instructed in the
doctrines of godliness to the governors. Let her only answer so as may
tend to the subversion of the error of polytheism, and let her
demonstrate the assertion concerning the monarchy of God. But of the
remaining doctrines let her not answer anything rashly, lest by saying
anything unlearnedly she should make the word to be blasphemed. For the
Lord has taught us that the word is like “a grain of mustard
seed,” <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) which is of a fiery
nature, which if any one uses unskilfully, he will find it bitter. For
in the mystical points we ought not to be rash, but cautious; for the
Lord exhorts us, saying: “Cast not your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them with their feet, and turn again and rend you.” <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885) For unbelievers, when they hear the
doctrine concerning Christ not explained as it ought to be, but
defectively, and especially that concerning His incarnation or His
passion, will rather reject it with scorn, and laugh at it as false,
than praise God for it. And so the aged women will be guilty of
rashness, and of causing blasphemy, and will inherit a woe. For says He,
“Woe to him by whom my name is blasphemed among the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p24.2"></span>That Women Ought Not to Teach, Because It is Unseemly; And What Women Followed Our Lord.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p25.1"></span>VI</span>. We do not permit our “women to
teach in the Church,” <span id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) but
only to pray and hear those that teach; for our Master and Lord, <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.2"></span>Jesus Himself, when He sent us the twelve to
make disciples of the people and of the nations, did nowhere send out
women to preach, although He did not want such. For there were with us
the mother of our Lord and His sisters; also <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.3"></span>Mary Magdalene, and <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.4"></span>Mary the mother of James, and <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.5"></span>Martha and <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.6"></span>Mary the sisters of Lazarus; <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.7"></span>Salome, and certain others. For, had it been
necessary for women to teach, He Himself had first commanded <span
id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span id="ix.iv.i-Page_428"></span>these
also to instruct the people with us. For “if the head of the wife be the
man,” <span id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) it is not reasonable
that the rest of the body should govern the head. Let the widow
therefore own herself to be the “altar of God,” and let her sit in her
house, and not enter into the houses of the faithful, under any
pretence, to receive anything; for the altar of God never runs about,
but is fixed in one place. Let, therefore, the virgin and the widow be
such as do not run about, or gad to the houses of those who are alien
from the faith. For such as these are gadders and impudent: they do not
make their feet to rest in one place, because they are not widows, but
purses ready to receive, triflers, evil-speakers, counsellors of strife,
without shame, impudent, who being such, are not worthy of Him that
called them. For they do not come to the common station of the
congregation on the Lord’s day, <span
id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889) as those that are watchful; but
either they slumber, or trifle, or allure men, or beg, or ensnare
others, bringing them to the evil one; not suffering them to be watchful
in the Lord, but taking care that they go out as vain as they came in,
because they do not hear the word of the Lord either taught or read. For
of such as these the prophet Isaiah says: “Hearing ye shall hear, and
shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive: for the
heart of this people is waxen gross, <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) <span id="ix.iv.i-p29.2"></span>and
they hear heavily with their ears.” <span
id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p30.2"></span>What are the Characters of Widows Falsely So Called.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p31.1"></span>VII</span>. In the same manner, therefore, the
ears of the hearts of such widows as these are stopped, that they will
not sit within in their cottages to speak to the Lord, but will run
about with the design of getting, and by their foolish prattling fulfil
the desires of the adversary. Such widows, therefore, are not affixed to
the altar of Christ: for there are some widows which esteem gain their
business; and since they ask without shame, and receive without being
satisfied, render the generality more backward in giving. For when they
ought to be content with their subsistence from the Church, as having
moderate desires, on the contrary, they run from one of their
neighbours’ houses <span id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892) to
another, and disturb them, heaping up to themselves plenty of money, and
lend at bitter usury, and are only solicitous about mammon, whose bag is
their god; who prefer eating and drinking before all virtue, saying,
“Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die;” <span
id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893) who esteem these things as if they
were durable and not perishing things. For she that uses herself to
nothing but talking of money, worships mammon instead of God,—that is,
is a servant to gain, but cannot be pleasing to God, nor resigned to His
worship; not being able to intercede with Him continuously on account
that her mind and disposition run after money: for “where the treasure
is, there will the heart be also.” <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) For she is thinking in her mind
whither she may go to receive, or that a certain woman her friend has
forgot her, and she has somewhat to say to her. She that thinks of such
things as these will no longer attend to her prayers, but to that
thought which offers itself; so that though sometimes she would pray for
anybody, she will not be heard, because she does not offer her petition
to the Lord with her whole heart, but with a divided mind. But she that
will attend to God will sit within, and mind the things of the Lord day
and night, offering her sincere petition with a mouth ready to utter the
same without ceasing. As therefore <span
id="ix.iv.i-p34.2"></span>Judith, most famous for her wisdom, and of a
good report for her modesty, “prayed to God night and day for
Israel;” <span id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895) so also the widow
who is like to her will offer her intercession without ceasing for the
Church to God. And He will hear her, because her mind is fixed on this
thing alone, and is not disposed to be either insatiable, or covetous,
or expensive; when her eye is pure, and her hearing clean, and her hands
undefiled, and her feet quiet, and her mouth prepared for neither
gluttony nor trifling, but speaking the things that are fit, and
partaking of only such things as are necessary for her maintenance. So,
being grave, and giving no disturbance, she will be pleasing to God; and
as soon as she asks anything, the gift will come to her: as He says,
“While thou art speaking, I will say, Behold, I am here.” <span
id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896) Let such a one also be free from
the love of money, free from arrogance, not given to filthy lucre, not
insatiable, not gluttonous, but continent, meek, giving nobody
disturbance, pious, modest, sitting at home, singing, and praying, and
reading, and watching, and fasting; speaking to God continually in songs
and hymns. And let her take wool, and rather assist others than herself
want from them; being mindful of that widow who is honoured in the
Gospel with the Lord’s testimony, who, coming into the temple, “cast
into the treasury two mites, which make a farthing. And Christ our Lord
and Master, and Searcher of hearts, saw her, and said, Verily I say unto
you, that this widow hath cast into the treasury more than they all: for
all they have cast in of their <span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="ix.iv.i-Page_429"></span>abundance, but this woman of her penury
hath cast in all the living that she had.” <span
id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897)  

<span id="ix.iv.i-p38"></span>The widows therefore ought to be grave,
obedient to their bishops, and their presbyters, and their deacons, and
besides these to the deaconesses, with piety, reverence, and fear; not
usurping authority, nor desiring to do anything beyond the constitution
without the consent of the deacon: as, suppose, the going to any one to
eat or drink with him, or to receive anything from anybody. But if
without direction she does any one of these things, let her be punished
with fasting, or else let her be separated on account of her rashness.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p38.1"></span>That the Widows Ought Not to Accept of Alms from the Unworthy No More Than the Bishop, or Any Other of the Faithful.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p39"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p39.1"></span>VIII</span>. For how does such a one know of
what character the person is from whom she receives? or from what sort
of ministration he supplies her with food, whether it does not arise
from rapine or some other ill course of life? while the widow does not
remember that if she receives in a way unworthy of God, she must give an
account for every one of these things. For neither will the priests at
any time receive a free-will offering from such a one, as, suppose, from
a rapacious person or from a harlot. For it is written, “Thou shalt not
covet the goods that are thy neighbour’s;” <span
id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898) and, “Thou shalt not offer the hire
of an harlot to the Lord God.” <span
id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899) From such as these no offerings
ought to be accepted, nor indeed from those that are separated from the
Church. Let the widows also be ready to obey the commands given them by
their superiors, and let them do according to the appointment of the
bishop, being obedient to him as to God; for he that receives from such
a one who is worthy of blame, or from one excommunicated, and prays for
him, while he purposes to go on in a wicked course, and while he is not
willing at any time to repent, holds communion with him in prayer, and
grieves Christ, who rejects the unrighteous, and confirms them by means
of the unworthy gift, and is defiled with them, not suffering them to
come to repentance, so as to fall down before God with lamentation, and
pray to Him.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p41.2"></span>That Women Ought Not to Baptize, Because It is Impious, and Contrary to the Doctrine of Christ.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p42"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p42.1"></span>IX</span>. Now, as to women’s baptizing, we
let you know that there is no small peril to those that undertake it.
Therefore we do not advise you to it; for it is dangerous, or rather
wicked and impious. For if the “man be the head of the woman,” <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900) and he be originally ordained for
the priesthood, it is not just to abrogate the order of the creation,
and leave the principal to come to the extreme part of the body. For the
woman is the body of the man, taken from his side, and subject to him,
from whom she was separated for the procreation of children. For says
He, “He shall rule over thee.” <span
id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) For the principal part of the woman
is the man, as being her head. But if in the foregoing constitutions we
have not permitted them to teach, how will any one allow them, contrary
to nature, to perform the office of a priest? For this is one of the
ignorant practices of the Gentile atheism, to ordain women priests to
the female deities, not one of the constitutions of Christ. For if
baptism were to be administered by women, certainly our Lord would have
been baptized by His own mother, and not by <span
id="ix.iv.i-p44.2"></span>John; or when He sent us to baptize, He would
have sent along with us women also for this purpose. But now He has
nowhere, either by constitution or by writing, delivered to us any such
thing; as knowing the order of nature, and the decency of the
action; <span id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) as being the Creator
of nature, and the Legislator of the constitution.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p45.1"></span>That a Layman Ought Not to Do Any Office of the Priesthood: He Ought Neither to Baptize, Nor Offer, Nor Lay on Hands, Nor Give the Blessing.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p46"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p46.1"></span>X</span>. Neither do we permit the laity to
perform any of the offices belonging to the priesthood; as, for
instance, neither the sacrifice, nor baptism, nor the laying on of
hands, nor the blessing, whether the smaller or the greater: for “no one
taketh this honour to himself, but he that is called of God.” <span
id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903) For such sacred offices are
conferred by the laying on of the hands of the bishop. But a person to
whom such an office is not committed, but he seizes upon it for himself,
he shall undergo the punishment of <span
id="ix.iv.i-p47.2"></span>Uzziah. <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p48.2"></span>That None But a Bishop and Presbyter, None Even of the Inferior Ranks of the Clergy, are Permitted to Do the Offices of the Priests; That Ordination Belongs Wholly to the Bishop, and to Nobody Else.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p49"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p49.1"></span>XI</span>. Nay, further, we do not permit to
the rest of the clergy to baptize,—as, for instance, neither to readers,
nor singers, nor porters, nor ministers,—but to the bishops and
presbyters alone, yet so that the deacons are to minister to them <span
id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span id="ix.iv.i-Page_430"></span>therein.
But those who venture upon it shall undergo the punishment of the
companions of <span id="ix.iv.i-p49.2"></span>Corah. <span
id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905) We do not permit presbyters to
ordain deacons, or deaconesses, or readers, or ministers, or singers, or
porters, but only bishops; for this is the ecclesiastical order and
harmony.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p50.2"></span>The Rejection of All Uncharitable Actions.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p51"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p51.1"></span>XII</span>. Now, as concerning envy, or
jealousy, or evil-speaking, or strife, or the love of contention, we
have said already to you, that these are alien from a Christian, and
chiefly in the case of widows. But because the devil, who works in men,
is in his conduct cunning, and full of various devices, he goes to those
that are not truly widows, as formerly to <span
id="ix.iv.i-p51.2"></span>Cain (for some say they are widows, but do not
perform the injunctions agreeable to the widowhood; as neither did <span
id="ix.iv.i-p51.3"></span>Cain discharge the duties due to a brother:
for they do not consider how it is not the name of widowhood that will
bring them to the kingdom of God, but true faith and holy <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) works). But if any one possesses
the name of widowhood, but does the works of the adversary, her
widowhood will not be imputed, but she will be thrust out of the
kingdom, and delivered to eternal punishment. For we hear that some
widows are jealous, envious calumniators, and envious at the quiet of
others. Such widows as these are not the disciples of Christ, nor of His
doctrine; for it becomes them, when one of their fellow-widows is
clothed by any one, or receives money, or meat, or drink, or shoes, at
the sight of the refreshment of their sister to say:—  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p52.2"></span>How the Widows are to Pray for Those that Supply Their Necessities.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p53"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p53.1"></span>XIII</span>. Thou art blessed, O God, who hast
refreshed my fellow-widow. Bless, O Lord, and glorify him that has
bestowed these things upon her, and let his good work ascend in truth to
Thee, and remember him for good in the day of his visitation. And as for
my bishop, who <span id="ix.iv.i-p53.2"></span>has so well performed his
duty to Thee, and <span id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) has ordered
such a seasonable alms to be bestowed on my fellow-widow, who was naked,
do Thou increase his <span id="ix.iv.i-p54.2"></span>glory, and give him
a <span id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) crown of rejoicing in the
day of the revelation of Thy visitation. In the same manner, let the
widow who has received the alms join with the other in praying for him
who ministered to her.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p55.2"></span>That She Who Has Been Kind to the Poor Ought Not to Make a Stir and Tell Abroad Her Name, According to the Constitution of the Lord.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p56"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p56.1"></span>XIV</span>. But if any woman has been good,
let her, as a prudent person, conceal her own name, not sounding a
trumpet before her, that her alms may be with God in secret, as the Lord
says: “Thou, when thou doest thine alms, let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand cloth, that thine alms may be in secret.” <span
id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) And let the widow pray for him that
gave her the alms, whosoever he be, as being the holy altar of
Christ; <span id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) and “the Father, who
seeth in secret, will render to him that did good openly.” But those
widows which will not live according to the command of God, are
solicitous and inquisitive what deaconess it is that gives the charity,
and what widows receive it. And when she has learned those things, she
murmurs at the deaconess who distributed the charity, saying, Dost not
thou see that I am in more distress, and want of thy charity? Why,
therefore, hast thou preferred her before me? She says these things
foolishly, not understanding that this does not depend on the will of
man, but the appointment of God. For if she is herself a witness that
she was nearer, and, upon inquiry, was in greater want, and more naked
than the other, she ought to understand who it is that made this
constitution, and to hold her peace, and not to murmur at the deaconess
who distributed the charity, but to enter into her own house, and to
cast herself prostrate on her face to make supplication to God that her
sin may be forgiven her. For God commanded the deaconess who brought the
charity not to proclaim the same, and this widow murmured because she
did not publish her name, that so she might know it, and run to receive;
nay, did not only murmur, but also cursed her, forgetting Him that said:
“He that blesseth thee is blessed, and he that curseth thee is
cursed.” <span id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) But the Lord says:
“When ye enter into an house, say, Peace be to this house. And if the
son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if it be not
worthy, your peace shall return to you.” <span
id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.i-p60.3"></span>That It Does Not Become Us to Revile Our Neighbours, Because Cursing is Contrary to Christianity.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p61"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p61.1"></span>XV</span>. If, therefore, peace returns upon
those that sent it, nay, upon those that before had actually given it,
because it did not find persons fit to receive it, much rather will a
curse return upon the head of him that unjustly sent it, because he to
whom it was sent was not worthy to receive it: for all those who abuse
others without a cause curse themselves, as <span
id="ix.iv.i-p61.2"></span>Solomon says: “As birds and sparrows fly away,
so the curse causeless shall not come upon any one.” <span
id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913) And again he says: “Those that
bring reproaches <span id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="ix.iv.i-Page_431"></span>are exceeding foolish.” <span
id="fr_2914"></span>[2915](#fn_2914) But as the bee, a creature as to
its strength feeble, if she stings any one, loses her sting, and becomes
a drone; in the same manner you also, whatsoever injustice you do to
others, will bring it upon yourselves. “He hath graven and digged a pit,
and he shall fall into the same ditch that he has made.” <span
id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915) And again: “He that diggeth a pit
for his neighbour, shall fall into it.” <span
id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916) Wherefore he that avoids a curse,
let him not curse another; for “what thou hatest should be done to thee,
do not thou to another.” <span id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917)
Wherefore admonish the widows that are feeble-minded, strengthen those
of them that are weak, and praise such of them as walk in holiness. Let
them rather bless, and not calumniate. Let them make peace, and not stir
up contention.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[426:2869](0070443.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p2"></span> <span id="ix.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Vid. [1
Tim. v. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)<span
id="ix.iv.i-p2.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[426:2870](0070443.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p3"></span> [1 Tim. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.i-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[426:2871](0070443.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p4"></span> Not in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p4.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[426:2872](0070443.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p5"></span> [Eccles. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.i-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[426:2873](0070443.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p6"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.i-p6.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[426:2874](0070443.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p7"></span> [Luke ii.
36,](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span id="ix.iv.i-p7.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[426:2875](0070443.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p9"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.i-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[427:2876](0070443.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p12"></span> [Luke vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030)<span id="ix.iv.i-p12.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[427:2877](0070443.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p13"></span> [Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="ix.iv.i-p13.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[427:2878](0070443.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p14"></span> [Dan. iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)<span id="ix.iv.i-p14.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[427:2879](0070443.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p15"></span> [Prov. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.i-p15.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[427:2880](0070443.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p16"></span> [Ps. xli.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.i-p16.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[427:2881](0070443.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p17"></span> [Ps.
cxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#000) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p17.1"></span><span id="ix.iv.i-p17.2"></span>9.  

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[427:2882](0070443.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p18"></span> Instead of “Lord,” one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.i-p18.1"></span>ms</span>. reads “God.”  

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[427:2883](0070443.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p19"></span> [Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span id="ix.iv.i-p19.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[427:2884](0070443.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p20"></span> [Prov. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.i-p20.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[427:2885](0070443.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p22"></span> [Matt. xiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)<span id="ix.iv.i-p22.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[427:2886](0070443.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p23"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.i-p23.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[427:2887](0070443.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p24"></span> [Isa. lii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.i-p24.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[427:2888](0070443.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p26"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)<span id="ix.iv.i-p26.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[428:2889](0070443.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p26.8"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p27"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv.i-p27.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[428:2890](0070443.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p28"></span> “On the Lord’s day” not in one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.i-p28.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[428:2891](0070443.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p29"></span> [Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="ix.iv.i-p29.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[428:2892](0070443.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p29.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p30"></span> Inserted from one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.i-p30.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[428:2893](0070443.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p32"></span> Probably the reading should be, “they go
round the houses of the rich.”  

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[428:2894](0070443.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p33"></span> [Isa. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.i-p33.1"></span>; [1
Cor. xv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span
id="ix.iv.i-p33.2"></span>  

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[428:2895](0070443.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p34"></span> [Matt. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="ix.iv.i-p34.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[428:2896](0070443.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p35"></span> [Judith ix.
1,](../../../bib/apo/jdt009.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.i-p35.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[428:2897](0070443.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p36"></span> [Isa. lviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.i-p36.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[429:2898](0070443.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p37"></span> [Mark xii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042)<span id="ix.iv.i-p37.1"></span>;
[Luke 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.i-p37.2"></span>  

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[429:2899](0070443.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p40"></span> [Ex. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="ix.iv.i-p40.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[429:2900](0070443.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p41"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.i-p41.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[429:2901](0070443.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p43"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv.i-p43.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[429:2902](0070443.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p44"></span> [Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.i-p44.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[429:2903](0070443.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p45"></span> \[“The eternal fitness of things.”\]  

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[429:2904](0070443.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p47"></span> [Heb. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.i-p47.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[429:2905](0070443.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p47.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p48"></span> [2 Chron.
xxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#000) <span id="ix.iv.i-p48.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[430:2906](0070443.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p50"></span> [Num.
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.i-p50.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[430:2907](0070443.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p51.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p52"></span> Instead of “holy,” one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.i-p52.1"></span>ms</span>. reads “divine.”  

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[430:2908](0070443.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p54"></span> Not in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p54.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[430:2909](0070443.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p55"></span> Not in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.i-p55.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[430:2910](0070443.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p57"></span> [Matt.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.i-p57.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[430:2911](0070443.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p58"></span> Instead of “Christ,” one V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.i-p58.1"></span>ms</span>. reads “of God.”  

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[430:2912](0070443.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p59"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029)<span id="ix.iv.i-p59.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[430:2913](0070443.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p60"></span> [Luke
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.i-p60.1"></span>;
[Matt. 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.i-p60.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[430:2914](0070443.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p61.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p62"></span> [Prov. xxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#002)<span id="ix.iv.i-p62.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2914"></span>[431:2915](0070443.htm#fr_2914) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p63"></span> [Prov. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.i-p63.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[431:2916](0070443.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p64"></span> [Ps. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)<span id="ix.iv.i-p64.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[431:2917](0070443.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p65"></span> [Prov. xxvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)<span id="ix.iv.i-p65.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[431:2918](0070443.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="ix.iv.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p66"></span> [Tob. iv.
16](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.i-p66.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. II.—On Deacons and Deaconesses, the Rest of the Clergy, and
on Baptism](0070444)
