[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070379)  [Next](0070381) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="vi.ii.v-p0.1"></span>from the fifth chapter.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>1. “And I
saw in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, a book written
within and without, sealed with seven seals.”\] This book signifies the
Old Testament, which has been given into the hands of our Lord <span
id="vi.ii.v-p1.2"></span>Jesus Christ, who received from the Father
judgment.  

<span id="vi.ii.v-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p2.1"></span>2, 3. “And I
saw an angel full of strength proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? And no one was
found worthy, neither in the earth nor under the earth, to open the
book.”\] Now to open the book is to overcome death for man.<span
id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span id="vi.ii.v-Page_350"></span>  

<span id="vi.ii.v-p3"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p3.1"></span>4. “There
was none found worthy to do this.”\] Neither among the angels of heaven,
nor among men in earth, nor among the souls of the saints in rest, save
Christ the Son of God alone, whom he says that he saw as a Lamb standing
as it were slain, having seven horns. What had not been then announced,
and what the law had contemplated for Him by its various oblations and
sacrifices, it behoved Himself to fulfil. And because He Himself was the
testator, who had overcome death, it was just that Himself should be
appointed the Lord’s heir, that He should possess the substance of the
dying man, that is, the human members.  

<span id="vi.ii.v-p4"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p4.1"></span>5. “Lo, the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, hath prevailed.”\] We
read in Genesis that this lion of the tribe of Judah hath conquered,
when the patriarch <span id="vi.ii.v-p4.2"></span>Jacob says, “<span
id="vi.ii.v-p4.3"></span>Judah, thy brethren shall praise thee; thou
hast lain down and slept, and hast risen up again as a lion, and as a
lion’s whelp.” <span id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) For He is
called a lion for the overcoming of death; but for the suffering for men
He was led as a lamb to the slaughter. But because He overcame death,
and anticipated the duty of the executioner, He was called as it were
slain. He therefore opens and seals again the testament, which He
Himself had sealed. The legislator <span id="vi.ii.v-p5.2"></span>Moses
intimating this, that it behoved Him to be sealed and concealed, even to
the advent of His passion, veiled his face, and so spoke to the people;
showing that the words of his announcement were veiled even to the
advent of His time. For he himself, when he had read to the people,
having taken the wool purpled with the blood of the calf, with water
sprinkled the whole people, saying, “This is the blood of His testament
who hath purified you.” <span id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273) It
should therefore be observed that the Man is accurately announced, and
that all things combine into one. For it is not sufficient that that law
is spoken of, but it is named as a testament. For no law is called a
testament, nor is any thing else called a testament, save what persons
make who are about to die. And whatever is within the testament is
sealed, even to the day of the testator’s death. Therefore it is with
reason that it is only sealed by the Lamb slain, who, as it were a lion,
has broken death in pieces, and has fulfilled what had been foretold;
and has delivered man, that is, the flesh, from death, and has received
as a possession the substance of the dying person, that is, of the human
members; that as by one body all men had fallen under the obligation of
its death, also by one body all believers should be born again unto
life, and rise again. Reasonably, therefore, His face is opened and
unveiled to <span id="vi.ii.v-p6.2"></span>Moses; and therefore He is
called Apocalypse, Revelation. For now His book is unsealed—now the
offered victims are perceived—now the fabrication of the priestly
chrism; moreover the testimonies are openly understood.  

<span id="vi.ii.v-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii.v-p7.1"></span>8, 9.
“Twenty-four elders and four living creatures, having harps and phials,
and singing a new song.”\] The proclamation of the Old Testament
associated with the New, points out the Christian people singing a new
song, that is, bearing their confession publicly. It is a new thing that
the Son of God should become man. It is a new thing to ascend into the
heavens with a body. It is a new thing to give remission of sins to men.
It is a new thing for men to be sealed with the Holy Spirit. It is a new
thing to receive the priesthood of sacred observance, and to look for a
kingdom of unbounded promise. The harp, and the chord stretched on its
wooden frame, signifies the flesh of Christ linked with the wood of the
passion. The phial signifies <span id="vi.ii.v-p7.2"></span>the
Confession, <span id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) and the race of
the new Priesthood. But it is the praise of many angels, yea, of all,
the salvation of all, and the testimony of the universal creation,
bringing to our Lord thanksgiving for the deliverance of men from the
destruction of death. The unsealing of the seals, as we have said, is
the opening of the Old Testament, and the foretelling of the preachers
of things to come in the last times, which, although the prophetic
Scripture speaks by single seals, yet by all the seals opened at once,
prophecy takes its rank.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[350:2273](0070380.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p4.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p5"></span> [Gen.
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.v-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[350:2274](0070380.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p6"></span> [Exod.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008)<span id="vi.ii.v-p6.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[350:2275](0070380.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="vi.ii.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p8"></span> \[The Creed and the evangelical priests.
Vol. ii. note 4, p. 173.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From the sixth chapter](0070381)
