[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070031)  [Next](0070033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chap. ii.—what was the first cause of making images; of the true likeness of god, and the true worship of him.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span>What madness is it, then, either to
form those objects which they themselves may afterwards fear, or to fear
the things which they have formed? But, they say, we do not fear the
images themselves, but those beings after whose likeness they were
formed, and to whose names they are dedicated. You fear them doubtless
on this account, because you think that they are in heaven; for if they
are gods, the case cannot be otherwise. Why, then, do you not raise your
eyes to heaven, and, invoking their names, offer sacrifices in the open
air? Why do you look to walls, and wood, and stone, rather than to the
place where you believe them to be? What is the meaning of temples <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) and altars? what, in short, of the
images themselves, which are memorials either of the dead or absent? For
the plan of making likenesses was invented by men for this reason, that
it might be possible to retain the memory of those who had either been
removed by death or separated by absence. <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-Page_42"></span>In which of these
classes, then, shall we reckon the gods? If among the dead, who is so
foolish as to worship them? If among the absent, then they are not to be
worshipped, if they neither see our actions nor hear our prayers. But if
the gods cannot be absent,—for, since they are divine, they see and hear
all things, in whatever part of the universe they are,—it follows that
images are superfluous, since the gods are present everywhere, and it is
sufficient to invoke with prayer the names of those who hear us. But if
they are present, they cannot fail to be at hand at their own images. It
is entirely so, as the people imagine, that the spirits of the dead
wander <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) about the tombs and
relics of their bodies. But after that the deity has begun to be near,
there is no longer need of his statue.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>For I ask, if any one should often
contemplate the likeness of a man who has settled in a foreign land,
that he may thus solace himself for him who is absent, would he also
appear to be of sound mind, if, when the other had returned and was
present, he should persevere in contemplating the likeness, and should
prefer the enjoyment of it, rather than the sight of the man himself?
Assuredly not. For the likeness of a man appears to be necessary at that
time when he is far away; and it will become superfluous when he is at
hand. But in the case of God, whose spirit and influence are diffused
everywhere, and can never be absent, it is plain that an image is always
superfluous. But they fear lest their religion should be altogether vain
and empty if they should see nothing present which they may adore, and
therefore they set up images; and since these are representations of the
dead, they resemble the dead, for they are entirely destitute of
perception. But the image of the ever-living God ought to be living and
endued with perception. But if it received this name <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) from resemblance, how can it be
supposed that these images resemble God, which have neither perception
nor motion? Therefore the image of God is not that which is fashioned by
the fingers of men out of stone, or bronze, or other material, but man
himself, since he has both perception and motion, and performs many and
great actions. Nor do the foolish men understand, that if images could
exercise perception and motion, they would of their own accord adore
men, by whom they have been adorned and embellished, since they would be
either rough and unpolished stone, or rude and unshapen wood, <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) had they not been fashioned by man.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>Man, therefore, is to be regarded as
the parent of these images; for they were produced by his
instrumentality, and through him they first had shape, figure, and
beauty. Therefore he who made them is superior to the objects which were
made. And yet no one looks up to the Maker Himself, or reverences Him:
he fears the things which he has made, as though there could be more
power in the work than in the workman. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>Seneca, therefore, rightly says in his
moral treatises: They worship the images of the gods, they supplicate
them with bended knee, they adore them, they sit or stand beside them
through the whole day, they offer to them contributions, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) they slay victims; and while they
value these <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>images so highly, they
despise the artificers who made them. What is so inconsistent, as to
despise the statuary and to adore the statue; and not even to admit to
your society him who makes your gods? What force, what power can they
have, when he who made them has none? But he was unable to give to these
even those powers which he had, the power of sight, of hearing, of
speech, and of motion. Is any one so foolish as to suppose that there is
anything in the image of a god, in which there is nothing even of a man
except the mere resemblance? But no one considers these things; for men
are imbued with this persuasion, and their minds have thoroughly imbibed
the deception <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) of folly. And thus
beings endowed with sense adore objects which are senseless, rational
beings adore irrational objects, those who are alive adore inanimate
objects, those sprung from heaven adore earthly objects. It delights me,
therefore, as though standing on a lofty watch-tower, from which all may
hear, to proclaim aloud that saying of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>Persius: <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p10.3"></span> “O souls bent down to the earth,
> and destitute of heavenly things?”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p11"></span>Rather look to the heaven, to the
sight of which God your Creator raised you. He gave to you an elevated
countenance; you bend it down to the earth; you depress to things below
those lofty minds, which are raised together with their bodies to their
parent, as though it repented you that you were not born quadrupeds. It
is not befitting that the heavenly being should make himself equal to
things which are earthly, and incline to the earth. Why do you deprive
yourselves of heavenly benefits, and of your own accord fall prostrate
upon the ground? For you do wretchedly roll yourselves <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) on the ground, <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-Page_43"></span>when you seek here
below that which you ought to have sought above. For as to those
vain <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) and fragile productions,
the work of man’s hands, from whatever kind of material they are formed,
what are they but earth, out of which they were produced? Why, then, do
you subject yourselves to lower objects? why do you place the earth
above your heads? For when you lower yourselves to the earth, and
humiliate yourselves, you sink of your own accord to hell, and condemn
yourselves to death; for nothing is lower and more humble than the
earth, except death and hell. And if you wished to escape these, you
would despise the earth lying beneath your feet, preserving the position
of your body, which you received upright, in order that you might be
able to direct your eyes and your mind to Him who made it. But to
despise and trample upon the earth is nothing else than to refrain from
adoring images, because they are made of earth; also not to desire
riches, and to despise the pleasures of the body, because wealth, and
the body itself, which we make use of as a lodging, is but earth.
Worship a living being, that you may live; for he must necessarily die
who has subjected <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) himself and
his soul to the dead.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[41:119](0070032.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span> The word <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>temples is not here applied to the
buildings which the faithful set apart for the worship of God, but to
the places used by the heathens for their rites and sacrifices. \[For
three centuries <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>templa was the word
among Christians for the idolatrous places.\] That buildings were set
apart by Christians from the earliest ages for their religious
assemblies, is gathered from the express testimony of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.3"></span>Tertullian, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.4"></span>Cyprian, and other early writers. They
were called <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.5"></span>ecclesi<span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.6"></span>æ<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.7"></span>;
churches, not temples. \[For <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.8"></span>κυριακο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.9"></span>̀</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.10"></span>ν</span>, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.11"></span>dominicum, basilica, etc., see <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.12"></span>Bingham, book viii. cap i. sec. 2.\]  

<span id="fn_119"></span>[42:120](0070032.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p2.13"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span> The heathens thought that the souls
of the unburied dead wandered about on the earth, until their remains
were committed to the tomb.  

<span id="fn_120"></span>[42:121](0070032.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p5"></span> The words <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>simulacrum</span>, “an image,” and <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>similitudo</span>,
“a likeness” or “resemblance,” are connected together through the common
root <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p5.3"></span>similis</span>, “like.”  

<span id="fn_121"></span>[42:122](0070032.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p6"></span> Materia is especially used in the
sense of wood or timber.  

<span id="fn_122"></span>[42:123](0070032.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p8"></span> Stipem jaciunt, “they throw a coin.”
The word properly means a “coin,” money bearing a stamped impression;
hence <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>stipendium</span>, “soldiers’ pay.”  

<span id="fn_123"></span>[42:124](0070032.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p9"></span> Fucus, “colouring juice;” hence
anything not genuine, but artificial. Others read succum, “juice.”  

<span id="fn_124"></span>[42:125](0070032.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>Persius, Satire 2d, 6. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>Lactantius uses the testimony of heathen
writers against the heathen.  

<span id="fn_125"></span>[42:126](0070032.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p12"></span> Or wallow—“voluto.”  

<span id="fn_126"></span>[43:127](0070032.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p13"></span> Ludicra, “diversions.” The word is
applied to stage-plays.  

<span id="fn_127"></span>[43:128](0070032.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p14"></span> Adjudicavit, adjudged, made over.
Cf. <span id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>Hor., <span
id="iii.ii.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>Ep., i. 18: “Et, si quid abest, Italis
adjudicat armis.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. III.—That Cicero and other men of learning erred in not
turning away the people from error](0070033)
