[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070169)  [Next](0070171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chap. VI.—Why the World and Man Were Created. How Unprofitable is the Worship of False Gods.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p1"></span>Now let us mark the whole argument by
a brief definition. <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336) The world
has been created for this purpose, that we may be born; we are born for
this end, that we may acknowledge the Maker of the world and of
ourselves—God; we acknowledge Him for this end, that we may worship Him;
we worship Him for this end, that we may receive immortality as the
reward of our labours, since the worship of God consists of the greatest
labours; for this end we are rewarded with immortality, that being made
like to the angels, we may serve the Supreme Father and Lord for ever,
and may be to all eternity a kingdom to God. This is the sum of all
things, this the secret of God, this the mystery of the world, from
which they are estranged, who, following present gratification, have
devoted themselves to the pursuit of earthly and frail goods, and by
means of deadly enjoyments have sunk as it were in mire and mud their
souls, which were born for heavenly pursuits.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p3"></span>Let us now, in the next place,
inquire whether there is anything reasonable in the worship of these
gods; for if they are many, if they are worshipped only on this account
by men, that they may afford them riches, victories, honours, and all
things, which are of no avail except for the present; if we are produced
without cause—if no providence is employed in the production of men—if
we are brought forth by chance for ourselves, and for the sake of our
own pleasure—if we are nothing after death,—what can be so superfluous,
so empty, so vain, as the affairs of man, and the world itself? which,
though it is of incredible magnitude, and constructed with such
wonderful arrangement, is nevertheless occupied with trifling subjects.
For why should the breathings of the winds put the clouds in motion? Why
should lightnings shine forth, thunders roar, or showers fall, that the
earth may bring forth its increase, and nourish its various productions?
Why, in short, should all nature labour that nothing may be wanting of
those things by which the life of man is sustained, if it is vain, if we
utterly perish, if there is in us nothing of greater advantage to God?
But if it is unlawful to be spoken, and is not to be thought possible,
that that which you see to be most in accordance with reason was not
established on account of some reason of importance, what reason can
there be in these errors of depraved religions, and in this persuasion
of philosophers, by which they imagine that souls perish? Assuredly
there is none; for what have they to say why the gods so regularly
supply to men everything in its season? Is it that we may present to
them corn and wine, and the odour of incense, and the blood of cattle?
Which things cannot be acceptable to the immortals, because they are
perishable; nor can they be of use to beings destitute of bodies,
because these things have been given for the use of those possessed of
bodies; and yet if they required these things, they could bestow them
upon themselves when they wished. Whether, therefore, souls perish or
exist for ever, what principle is involved in the worship of the gods,
or by whom was the world established? Why, or when, or how long, or how
far were men produced, or on what account? Why do they arise, die,
succeed one another, are renewed? What do the gods obtain from the
worship of those who after death are about to have no existence? What do
they perform, what do they promise, what do they threaten, which is
worthy of men or of gods? Or if souls remain after death, what do they
do or are they about to do respecting them? What need is there to them
of a treasure-house of souls? From what source do they themselves arise?
How, or why, or whence are they so many? Thus it comes to pass, that if
you depart from that sum of things which we comprised above, all system
is destroyed, and all things return <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) to nothing. <span id="page_204">p.
204</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-Page_204"></span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[203:1337](0070170.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>Circumscriptione.  

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[203:1338](0070170.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>Revolvantur. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.vi-p4.2"></span>resolvantur.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VII.—Of the variety of philosophers, and their
truth](0070171)
