[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070070)  [Next](0070072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chap. XX.—Socrates Had More Knowledge in Philosophy Than Other Men, Although in Many Things He Acted Foolishly.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p1"></span>Let us now see what there was so
great in <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Socrates himself, that a
wise man deservedly gave thanks that he was born in his times. I do not
deny that he was a little more sagacious than the others who thought
that the nature of things could be comprehended by the mind. And in this
I judge that they were not only senseless, but also impious; because
they wished to send their inquisitive eyes into the secrets of that
heavenly providence. We know that there are at Rome, and in many cities,
certain sacred things which it is considered impious for men to look
upon. Therefore they who are not permitted to pollute those objects
abstain from looking upon them; and if by error or some accident a man
has happened to see them, his guilt is expiated first by his punishment,
and afterwards by a repetition of sacrifice. What can you do in the case
of those who wish to pry into unpermitted things? Truly they are much
more wicked who seek to profane the secrets of the world and this
heavenly temple with impious disputations, than those who entered the
temple of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p1.2"></span>Vesta, or the Good
Goddess, or <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p1.3"></span>Ceres. And these
shrines, though it is not lawful for men to approach them, were yet
constructed by men. But these men not only escape the charge of impiety,
but, that which is much more unbecoming, they gain the fame of eloquence
and the glory of talent. What if they were able to investigate anything?
For they are as foolish in asserting as they are wicked in searching
out; since they are neither able to find out anything, nor, even if they
had found out anything, to defend it. For if even by chance they have
seen the truth—a thing which often happens—they so act that it is
refuted by others as false. For no one descends from heaven to pass
sentence on the opinions of individuals; wherefore no one can doubt that
those who seek after these things are foolish, senseless, and insane.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p2"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>Socrates therefore had something of human
wisdom, <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) who, when he understood
that these things could not possibly be ascertained, removed himself
from questions of this kind; but I fear that he so acted in this alone.
For many of his actions are not only undeserving of praise, but also
most deserving of censure, in which things he most resembled those of
his own class. Out of these I will select one which may be judged of by
all. <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p3.3"></span>Socrates used this well-known
proverb: “That which is above us is nothing to us.” Let us therefore
fall down upon the earth, and use as feet those hands which have been
given us for the production of excellent works. The heaven is nothing to
us, to the contemplation of which we have been raised; <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) in fine, the light itself can have no
reference to us; undoubtedly the cause of our sustenance is from heaven.
But if he perceived this, that we ought not to discuss the nature of
heavenly things, he was unable even to comprehend the nature of those
things which he had beneath his feet. What then? did he err in his
words? It is not probable; but he undoubtedly meant that which he said,
that we are not to devote ourselves to religion; but if he were openly
to say this, no one would suffer it.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p5"></span>For who cannot perceive that this
world, completed with such wonderful method, is governed by some
providence, since there is nothing which can exist without some one to
direct it? Thus, a house deserted by its inhabitant fails to decay; a
ship without a pilot goes to the bottom; and a body abandoned by the
soul wastes away. Much less can we suppose that so great a fabric could
either have been constructed without an <span id="page_92">p. 92</span>
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-Page_92"></span>Artificer, or have existed so
long without a Ruler. But if he wished to overthrow those public
superstitions, I do not disapprove of this; yea, I shall rather praise
it, if he shall have found anything better <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>to take their place. But the same man
swore <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) by a dog and a goose. Oh
buffoon (as <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6.4"></span>Zeno the
Epicurean <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) says), senseless,
abandoned, desperate man, if he wished to scoff at religion; madman, if
he did this seriously, so as to esteem a most base animal as God! For
who can dare to find fault with the superstitions of the Egyptians, when
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.3"></span>Socrates confirmed them at Athens
by his authority? But was it not a mark of consummate vanity, that
before his death he asked his friends to sacrifice for him a cock which
he had vowed to <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.4"></span>Æsculapius? He
evidently feared lest he should be put upon his trial before <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.5"></span>Rhadamanthus, the judge, by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.6"></span>Æsculapius on account of the vow. I
should consider him most mad if he had died under the influence of
disease. But since he did this in his sound mind, he who thinks that he
was wise is himself of unsound mind. Behold one in whose times the wise
man congratulates himself as having been born!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_455"></span>[91:456](0070071.htm#fr_455) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>Lactantius here uses <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p3.2"></span>cor, “the heart,” for wisdom, regarding
the heart as the seat of wisdom.  

<span id="fn_456"></span>[91:457](0070071.htm#fr_456) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p4"></span> The allusion is to the upright
figure of man, as opposed to the other animals, which look down upon the
earth, whereas man looks upward. \[Our author is partial to this idea.
See p. 41, <span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p4.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_457"></span>[92:458](0070071.htm#fr_457) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6"></span> This oath is mentioned by <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6.1"></span>Athenæus. <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6.2"></span>Tertullian makes an excuse for it, as
though it were done in mockery of the gods. <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6.3"></span>Socrates was called the Athenian buffoon,
because he taught many things in a jesting manner.  

<span id="fn_458"></span>[92:459](0070071.htm#fr_458) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p6.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7"></span> To be distinguished from <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.1"></span>Zeno of Citium, the Stoic, and also from
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xx-p7.2"></span>Zeno of Elea.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXI.—Of the system of Plato, which would lead to the
overthrow of states](0070072)
