[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070022)  [Next](0070024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. xvii.—concerning the same opinion of the stoics, and concerning the hardships and disgraceful conduct of the gods.

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p1"></span>On these accounts the Stoics form a
different conception of the gods; and because they do not perceive what
the truth is, they attempt to join them with the system of natural
things. And <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p1.1"></span>Cicero, following
them, brought forward this opinion respecting the gods and their
religions. Do you see then, he says, how an argument has been drawn from
physical subjects which have been well and usefully found out, to the
existence of false and fictitious gods? And this circumstance gave rise
to false opinions and turbulent errors, and almost old-womanly
superstitions. For both the forms of the gods, and their ages, and
clothing and ornaments, are known to us; and moreover their races, and
marriages, and all their relationships, and all things reduced to the
similitude of human infirmity. What can be said more plain, more true?
The chief of the Roman philosophy, and invested with the most honourable
priesthood, refutes the false and fictitious gods, and testifies that
their worship consists of almost old-womanly superstitions: he complains
that men are entangled in false opinions and turbulent errors. For the
whole of his third book respecting the Nature of the Gods altogether
overthrows and destroys all religion. What more, therefore, is expected
from us? Can we surpass <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p1.2"></span>Cicero in
eloquence? By no means; but confidence was wanting to him, being
ignorant of the truth, as he himself simply acknowledges in the same
work. For he says that he can more easily say what is not, than what is;
that is, that he is aware that <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p1.3"></span>the
received system is false, but is ignorant of the truth. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) It is plain, therefore, that those who
are supposed to be gods were but men, and that their memory was
consecrated after their death. And on this account also different ages
and established representations of form are assigned to each, because
<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-Page_30"></span>their images were fashioned in that
dress and <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p2.2"></span>of that age at which
death arrested each.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p3"></span>Let us consider, if you please, the
hardships of the unfortunate gods. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p3.1"></span>Isis lost her son; <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p3.2"></span>Ceres her daughter; <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p3.3"></span>Latona, expelled and driven about over
the earth, with difficulty found a small island <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) where she might bring forth. The mother
of the gods both loved a beautiful youth, and also mutilated him when
found in company with a harlot; and on this account her sacred rites are
now celebrated by the <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p4.1"></span>Galli <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) as priests. <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p5.3"></span>Juno violently persecuted harlots,
because she was not able to conceive by her brother. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.2"></span>Varro writes, that the island Samos was
before called Parthenia, because <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.3"></span>Juno there grew up, and there also was
married to <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.4"></span>Jupiter. Accordingly
there is a most noble and ancient temple of hers at Samos, and an image
fashioned in the dress of a bride; and her annual sacred rites are
celebrated after the manner of a marriage. If, therefore, she grew up,
if she was at first a virgin and afterwards a woman, he who does not
understand that she was a human being confesses himself a brute. Why
should I speak of the lewdness of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.5"></span>Venus, who ministered to the lusts of
all, not only gods, but also men? For from her infamous debauchery with
<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.6"></span>Mars she brought forth <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.7"></span>Harmonia; from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.8"></span>Mercury she brought forth <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.9"></span>Hermaphroditus, who was born of both
sexes; from <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.10"></span>Jupiter <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.11"></span>Cupid; from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.12"></span>Anchises <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.13"></span>Æneas; from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.14"></span>Butes <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.15"></span>Eryx; from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.16"></span>Adonis she could bring forth no
offspring, because he was struck by a boar, and slain, while yet a boy.
And she first instituted the art of courtesanship, as is contained in
the sacred history; and taught women in Cyprus to seek gain by
prostitution, which she commanded for this purpose, that she alone might
not appear unchaste and a courter of men beyond other females. Has she,
too, any claim to religious worship, on whose part more adulteries are
recorded than births? But not even were those virgins who are celebrated
able to preserve their chastity inviolate. For from what source can we
suppose that <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.17"></span>Erichthonius was
born? Was it from the earth, as the poets would have it appear? But the
circumstance itself cries out. For when <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.18"></span>Vulcan had made arms for the gods, and
<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.19"></span>Jupiter had given him the option
of asking for whatever reward he might wish, and had sworn, according to
his custom, by the infernal lake, that he would refuse him nothing which
he might ask, then the lame artificer demanded <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.20"></span>Minerva in marriage. Upon this the
excellent and mighty <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.21"></span>Jupiter,
being bound by so great an oath, was not able to refuse; he, however,
advised <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.22"></span>Minerva to oppose and
defend her chastity. Then in that struggle they say that <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.23"></span>Vulcan shed his seed upon the earth,
from which source <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.24"></span>Erichthonius
was born: and that this name was given to him from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.25"></span>ἔριδος</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.26"></span>χθσνός</span>, that is, from the
contest and the ground. Why, then, did she, a virgin, entrust that boy
shut up with a dragon and sealed to three virgins born from <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.27"></span>Cecrops? An evident case of incest, as
I think, which can by no means be glossed over. Another, when she had
almost lost her lover, who was torn to pieces by his madened horses,
called in the most excellent physician <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.28"></span>Æsculapius for the treatment of the
youth; and when he was healed,  

> <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.29"></span> “Trivia kind her favourite
> hides,  
> And to <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.32"></span>Egeria’s care
> confides,  
> To live in woods obscure and lone,  
> And lose in <span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.35"></span>Virbius’ name his
> own.” <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)  

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p8"></span>What is the meaning of this so
diligent and anxious care? Why this secret abode? Why this banishment,
either to so great a distance, or to a woman, or into solitude? Why, in
the next place, the change of name? Lastly, why such a determined hatred
of horses? What do all these things imply, but the consciousness of
dishonour, and a love by no means consistent with a virgin? There was
evidently a reason why she undertook so great a labour for a youth so
faithful, who had refused compliance with the love of his stepmother.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[29:76](0070023.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p2"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p2.1"></span>Nat. Deor., liber i. 32.\]  

<span id="fn_76"></span>[30:77](0070023.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p4"></span> Delos.  

<span id="fn_77"></span>[30:78](0070023.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p5"></span> The priests of <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p5.1"></span>Cybele were called <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p5.2"></span>Galli.  

<span id="fn_78"></span>[30:79](0070023.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.1"></span>Jupiter.  

<span id="fn_79"></span>[30:80](0070023.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p6.36"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p7.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.i.xviii-p7.2"></span>Æneid, vii. 774.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVIII.—On the consecration of gods, on account of the
benefits which they conferred upon men](0070024)
