[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070069)  [Next](0070071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIX.—Cicero and Others of the Wisest Men Teach the Immortality of the Soul, But in an Unbelieving Manner; And that a Good or an Evil Death Must Be Weighed from the Previous Life.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p1"></span>But those who assert the advantage
of death, because they know nothing of the truth, thus reason: If there
is nothing after death, death is <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-Page_90"></span>not an evil; for it takes away the
perception of evil. But if the soul survives, death is even an
advantage; because immortality follows. And this sentiment is thus set
forth by <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Cicero concerning the
Laws: <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) “We may congratulate
ourselves, since death is about to bring either a better state than that
which exists in life, or at any rate not a worse. For if the soul is in
a state of vigour without the body, it is a divine life; and if it is
without perception, assuredly there is no evil.” Cleverly argued, as it
appeared to himself, as though there could be no other state. But each
conclusion is false. For the sacred writings <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) teach that the soul is not
annihilated; but that it is either rewarded according to its
righteousness, or eternally punished according to its crimes. For
neither is it right, that he who has lived a life of wickedness in
prosperity should escape the punishment which he deserves; nor that he
who has been wretched on account of his righteousness, should be
deprived of his reward. And this is so true, that <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.4"></span>Tully also, in his <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.5"></span>Consolation, declared that the righteous
and the wicked do not inhabit the same abodes. For those same wise men,
he says, did not judge that the same course was open for all into the
heaven; for they taught that those who were contaminated by vices and
crimes were thrust down into darkness, and lay in the mire; but that, on
the other hand, souls that were chaste, pure, upright, and
uncontaminated, being also refined by the study and practice of virtue,
by a light and easy course take their flight to the gods, that is, to a
nature resembling their own. But this sentiment is opposed to the former
argument. For that is based on the assumption that every man at his
birth is presented with immortality. What distinction, therefore, will
there be between virtue and guilt, if it makes no difference whether a
man be <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.6"></span>Aristides or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.7"></span>Phalaris, whether he be <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.8"></span>Cato or <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.9"></span>Catiline? But a man does not perceive
this opposition between sentiments and actions, unless he is in
possession of the truth. If any one, therefore, should ask me whether
death is a good or an evil, I shall reply that its character depends
upon the course of the life. For as life itself is a good if it is
passed virtuously, but an evil if it is spent viciously, so also death
is to be weighed in accordance with the past actions of life. And so it
comes to pass, that if life has been passed in the service of God, death
is not an evil, for it is a translation to immortality. But if not so,
death must necessarily be an evil, since it transfers men, as I have
said, to everlasting punishment. <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451)
 

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p5"></span>What, then, shall we say, but that
they are in error who either desire death as a good, or flee from life
as an evil? unless they are most unjust, who do not weigh the fewer
evils against the greater number of blessings. For when they pass all
their lives in a variety of the choicest gratifications, if any
bitterness has chanced to succeed to these, they desire to die; and they
so regard it as to appear never to have fared well, if at any time they
happen to fare ill. Therefore they condemn the whole of life, and
consider it as nothing else than filled with evils. Hence arose that
foolish sentiment, that this state which we imagine to be life is death,
and that that which we fear as death is life; and so that the first good
is not to be born, that the second is an early death. And that this
sentiment may be of greater weight, it is attributed to <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>Silenus. <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p6.3"></span>Cicero in his <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p6.4"></span>Consolation says: “Not to be born is by
far the best thing, and not to fall upon these rocks of life. But the
next thing is, if you have been born, to die as soon as possible, and to
flee from the violence of fortune as from a conflagration.” That he
believed this most foolish expression appears from this, that he added
something of his own for its embellishment. I ask, therefore, for whom
he thinks it best not to be born, when there is no one at all who has
any perception; for it is the perception which causes anything to be
good or bad. In the next place, why did he regard the whole of life as
nothing else than rocks, and a conflagration; as though it were either
in our power not to be born, or life were given to us by fortune, and
not by God, or as though the course of life appeared to bear any
resemblance to a conflagration?  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p7"></span>The saying of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p7.1"></span>Plato is not dissimilar, that he gave
thanks to nature, first that he was born a human being rather than a
dumb animal; in the next place, that he was a man rather than a woman;
that he was a Greek rather than a barbarian; <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) lastly, that he was an Athenian, and
that he was born in the time of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p8.1"></span>Socrates. It is impossible to say what
great blindness and errors are produced by ignorance of the truth would
altogether contend that nothing in the affairs of men was ever spoken
more foolishly. As though, if he had been born a barbarian, or a woman,
or, in fine, an ass, he would be the same <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p8.2"></span>Plato, and not that very being which had
been produced. But he evidently believed <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p8.3"></span>Pythagoras, who, in order that he might
prevent men from feeding on animals, said that souls passed from the
bodies of men to the bodies of other animals; which is both foolish and
impossible. It is foolish, because it was unnecessary to introduce souls
that have long existed into new bodies, <span id="page_91">p. 91</span>
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-Page_91"></span>when the same Artificer who at
one time had made the first, was always able to make fresh ones; it is
impossible, because the soul endued with right reason can no more change
the nature of its condition, than fire can rush downwards, or, like a
river, pour its flame obliquely. <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454)
The wise man therefore imagined, that it might come to pass that the
soul which was then in <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.2"></span>Plato might
be shut up in some other animal, and might be endued with the
sensibility of a man, so as to understand and grieve that it was
burthened with an incongruous body. How much more rationally would he
have acted, if he had said that he gave thanks because he was born with
a good capacity, and capable of receiving instruction, and that he was
possessed of those resources which enabled him to receive a liberal
education! For what benefit was it that he was born at Athens? Have not
many men of distinguished talent and learning lived in other cities, who
were better individually than all the Athenians? How many thousands must
we believe that there were, who, though born at Athens, and in the times
of <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.3"></span>Socrates, were nevertheless
unlearned and foolish? For it is not the walls or the place in which any
one was born that can invest a man with wisdom. Of what avail was it to
congratulate himself that he was born in the times of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.4"></span>Socrates? Was <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.5"></span>Socrates able to supply talent to
learners? It did not occur to <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.6"></span>Plato that <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.7"></span>Alcibiades also, and <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.8"></span>Critias, were constant hearers of the
same <span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.9"></span>Socrates, the one of whom was
the most active enemy of his country, the other the most cruel of all
tyrants.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_449"></span>[90:450](0070070.htm#fr_449) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p2"></span> This passage is not contained in
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p2.1"></span>Cicero’s treatise on the Laws, but
the substance of it is in the <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p2.2"></span>Tusculan Questions  

<span id="fn_450"></span>[90:451](0070070.htm#fr_450) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3"></span> See [Dan.
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>; <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.2"></span>Matt. iii., xiii., xxv.; [John
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.3"></span>  

<span id="fn_451"></span>[90:452](0070070.htm#fr_451) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p3.10"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p4"></span> \[See vol. iii. p. 231, and same
treatise <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p4.2"></span>sparsim</span> \]  

<span id="fn_452"></span>[90:453](0070070.htm#fr_452) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p6.1"></span>Silenus was the constant companion of
<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p6.2"></span>Dionysus. He was regarded as an
inspired prophet, who knew all the past and the most distant future, and
as a sage who despised all the gifts of fortune.  

<span id="fn_453"></span>[90:454](0070070.htm#fr_453) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p8"></span> The Greeks included all nations,
except themselves, under the general name of barbarians.  

<span id="fn_454"></span>[91:455](0070070.htm#fr_454) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9"></span> In <span
id="iii.ii.iii.xix-p9.1"></span>transversum, “crosswise or
transversely.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XX.—Socrates had more knowledge in philosophy than other
men, although in many things he acted foolishly](0070071)
