[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070450)  [Next](0070452) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p0.1"></span>Sec. III.—On Feast Days and Fast Days.

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p0.2"></span>A Catalogue of the Feasts of the Lord Which are to Be Kept, and When Each of Them Ought to Be Observed.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>XIII</span>. Brethren, observe the festival
days; and first of all the birthday which you are to celebrate on the
twenty-fifth of the ninth month; after which let the Epiphany be to you
the most honoured, in which the Lord made to you a display of His own
Godhead, and let it take place on the sixth of the tenth month; after
which the fast of Lent is to be observed by you as containing a memorial
of our Lord’s mode of life and legislation. But let this solemnity be
observed before the fast of the passover, beginning from the second day
of the week, and ending at the day of the preparation. After which
solemnities, breaking off your fast, begin the holy week of the
passover, fasting in the same all of you with fear and trembling,
praying in them for those that are about to perish.  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p1.2"></span>Concerning the Passion of Our Lord, and What Was Done on Each Day of His Sufferings; And Concerning Judas, and that Judas Was Not Present When the Lord Delivered the Mysteries to His Disciples.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>XIV</span>. For they began to hold a council
against the Lord on the second day of the week, in the first month,
which is Xanthicus; and the deliberation continued on the third day of
the week; but on the fourth day they determined to take away His life by
crucifixion. And <span id="ix.vi.iii-p2.2"></span>Judas knowing this,
who for a long time had been perverted, but was then smitten by the
devil himself with the love of money, although he had been long
entrusted with the purse, <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) and
used to steal what was set apart for the needy, yet was he not cast off
by the Lord, through much long-suffering; <span id="page_444">p.
444</span> <span id="ix.vi.iii-Page_444"></span>nay, and when we were
once feasting with Him, being willing both to reduce him to his duty and
instruct us in His own foreknowledge, He said: “Verily, verily, I say
unto you, that one of you will betray me;” and every one of us saying,
“Is it I?” <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059) And the Lord being
silent, I, who was one of the twelve, and more beloved by Him than the
rest, arose up from lying in His bosom, and besought Him to tell who it
should be that should betray Him. Yet neither then did our good Lord
declare His name, but gave two signs of the betrayer: one by saying, “he
that dippeth with me in the dish;” a second, “to whom I shall give the
sop when I have dipped it.” Nay, although he himself said, “Master, is
it I?” the Lord did not say Yes, but, “Thou hast said.” And being
willing to affright him in the matter, He said: “Woe to that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for him if he had never been
born. Who, when he had heard that, went his way, and said to the
priests, What will ye give me, and I will deliver Him unto you? And they
bargained with him for thirty pieces of silver.” <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060) And the scripture was fulfilled,
which said, “And they took <span id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061)
the thirty pieces of silver, the price of Him that was valued, whom they
of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the house of the
potter.” <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) And on the fifth day
of the week, when we had eaten the passover with Him, and when <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>Judas had dipped his hand into the dish, and
received the sop, and was gone out by night, the Lord said to us: “The
hour is come that ye shall be dispersed, and shall leave me
alone;” <span id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) and every one
vehemently affirming that they would not forsake Him, I <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p8.3"></span>Peter adding this promise, that I would even
die with Him, He said, “Verily I say unto thee, Before the cock crows,
thou shall thrice deny that thou knowest me.” <span
id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064) And when He had delivered to us the
representative mysteries of His precious body and blood, Judas not being
present with us, He went out to the Mount of Olives, near the brook
Cedron, where there was a garden; <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065) and we were with Him, and sang an
hymn according to the custom. <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066)
And being separated not far <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067)
from us, He prayed to His Father, saying: “Father, remove this cup away
from me; yet not my will, but Thine be done.” <span
id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068) And when He had done this thrice,
while we out of despondency of mind were fallen asleep, He came and
said: “The hour is come, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands
of sinners. And behold <span id="ix.vi.iii-p13.3"></span>Judas, and with
him a multitude of ungodly men,” <span
id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) to whom he shows the signal by
which he was to betray Him—a deceitful kiss. But they, when they had
received the signal agreed on, took hold of the Lord; and having bound
Him, they led Him to the house of <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p14.3"></span>Caiaphas the high priest, wherein were
assembled many, not the people, but a great rout, not an holy council,
but an assembly of the wicked and council of the ungodly, who did many
things against Him, and left no kind of injury untried, spitting upon
Him, cavilling at Him, beating Him, smiting Him on the face, reviling
Him, tempting Him, seeking vain divination instead of true prophecies
from Him, calling Him a deceiver, a blasphemer, a transgressor of <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p14.4"></span>Moses, a destroyer of the temple, a taker
away of sacrifices, an enemy to the Romans, an adversary to Cæsar. And
these reproaches did these bulls and dogs <span
id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) in their madness cast upon Him,
till it was very early in the morning, and then they lead Him away to
<span id="ix.vi.iii-p15.2"></span>Annas, who was father-in-law to <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p15.3"></span>Caiaphas; and when they had done the like
things to Him there, it being the day of the preparation, they delivered
Him to <span id="ix.vi.iii-p15.4"></span>Pilate the Roman governor,
accusing Him of many and great things, none of which they could prove.
Whereupon the governor, as out of patience with them, said: “I find no
cause against Him.” <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071) But they
bringing two lying witnesses, wished to accuse the Lord falsely; but
they being found to disagree, and so their testimony not conspiring
together, they altered the accusation to that of treason, saying, “This
fellow says that He is a king, and forbids to give tribute to
Cæsar.” <span id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) And themselves became
accusers, and witnesses, and judges, and authors of the sentence,
saying, “Crucify Him, crucify Him;” <span
id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073) that it might be fulfilled which is
written by the prophets concerning Him, “Unjust witnesses were gathered
together against me, and injustice lied to itself;” <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074) and again, “Many dogs compassed me
about, the assembly of the wicked laid siege against me;” <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075) and elsewhere, “My inheritance
became to me as a lion in a wood, and has sent forth her voice against
me.” <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076) Pilate therefore,
disgracing his authority by his pusillanimity, convicts himself of
wickedness by regarding the multitude more than this just person, and
bearing witness to Him that He was innocent, yet as guilty delivering
Him up to the punishment of the cross, although the Romans had made laws
that no man unconvicted should be put to death. <span id="page_445">p.
445</span> <span id="ix.vi.iii-Page_445"></span>But the executioners
took the Lord of glory and nailed Him to the cross, crucifying Him
indeed at the sixth hour, but having received the sentence of His
condemnation at the third hour. After this they gave to Him vinegar to
drink, mingled with gall. Then they divided His garments by lot. Then
they crucified two malefactors with Him, on each side one, that it might
be fulfilled which was written: “They gave me gall to eat, and when I
was thirsty they gave me vinegar to drink.” <span
id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077) And again: “They divided my garment
among themselves, and upon my vesture have they cast lots.” <span
id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) And in another place: “And I was
reckoned with the transgressors.” <span
id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079) Then there was darkness for three
hours, from the sixth to the ninth, and again light in the evening; as
it is written: “It shall not be day nor night, and at the evening there
shall be light.” <span id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080) All which
things, <span id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) when those
malefactors saw that were crucified with Him, the one of them reproached
Him as though He was weak and unable to deliver Himself; but the other
rebuked the ignorance of his fellow and turning to the Lord, as being
enlightened by Him, and acknowledging who He was that suffered, he
prayed that He would remember him in His kingdom hereafter. <span
id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082) He then presently granted him the
forgiveness of his former sins, and brought him into paradise to enjoy
the mystical good things; who also cried out about the ninth hour, and
said to His Father: “My God! my God! why hast Thou forsaken me?” <span
id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) And a little afterward, when He had
cried with a loud voice, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do,” <span id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084) and had added,
“Into Thy hands I commit my spirit,” He gave up the ghost, <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) and was buried before sunset in a
new sepulchre. But when the first day of the week dawned He arose from
the dead, and fulfilled those things which before His passion He
foretold to us, saying: “The Son of man must continue in the heart of
the earth three days and three nights.” <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) And when He was risen from the
dead, He appeared first to <span id="ix.vi.iii-p31.2"></span>Mary
Magdalene, and <span id="ix.vi.iii-p31.3"></span>Mary the mother of
James, then to <span id="ix.vi.iii-p31.4"></span>Cleopas in the way, and
after that to us His disciples, who had fled away for fear of the Jews,
but privately were very inquisitive about Him. <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) But these things are also written
in the Gospel.  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p32.5"></span>Of the Great Week, and on What Account They Enjoin Us to Fast on Wednesday and Friday.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p33"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p33.1"></span>XV</span>. He therefore charged us Himself
to fast these six days on account of the impiety and transgression of
the Jews, commanding us withal to bewail over them, and lament for their
perdition. For even He Himself “wept over them, because they knew not
the time of their visitation.” <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) But He commanded us to fast on the
fourth and sixth days of the week; the former on account of His being
betrayed, and the latter on account of His passion. But He appointed us
to break our fast on the seventh day at the cock-crowing, but to fast on
the Sabbath-day. Not that the Sabbath-day is a day of fasting, being the
rest from the creation, but because we ought to fast on this one Sabbath
only, while on this day the Creator was under the earth. For on their
very feast-day they apprehended the Lord, that oracle might be fulfilled
which says: “They placed their signs in the middle of their feast, and
knew them not.” <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) Ye ought
therefore to bewail over them, because when the Lord came they did not
believe on Him, but rejected His doctrine, judging themselves unworthy
of salvation. You therefore are happy who once were not a people, but
are now an holy nation, delivered from the deceit of idols, from
ignorance, from impiety, who once had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy through your hearty obedience: for to you, the converted
Gentiles, is opened the gate of life, who formerly were not beloved, but
are now beloved; a people ordained for the possession of God, to show
forth His virtues, concerning whom our Saviour said, “I was found of
them that sought me not; I was made manifest to them that asked not
after me. I said, Behold me, to a nation which did not call upon my
name.” <span id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090) For when ye did not
seek after Him, then were ye sought for by Him; and you who have
believed in Him have hearkened to His call, and have left the madness of
polytheism, and have fled to the true monarchy, to Almighty God, through
Christ <span id="ix.vi.iii-p36.2"></span>Jesus, and are become the
completion of the number of the saved—“ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands;” <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091)
as it is written in <span id="ix.vi.iii-p37.2"></span>David, “A
thousand <span id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) shall fall beside
thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand;” <span
id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) and again, “The chariots of God are
by tens of thousands, and thousands of the prosperous.” <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) But unto unbelieving Israel <span
id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span id="ix.vi.iii-Page_446"></span>He
says: “All the day long have I stretched out mine hands to a disobedient
and gainsaying people, which go in a way that is not good, but after
their own sins, a people provoking me before my face.” <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p41.2"></span>An Enumeration of the Prophetical Predictions Which Declare Christ, Whose Completion Though the Jews Saw, Yet Out of the Evil Temper of Their Mind They Did Not Believe He Was the Christ of God, and Condemned the Lord of Glory to the Cross.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p42"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p42.1"></span>XVI</span>. See how the people provoked the
Lord by not believing in Him! Therefore He says: “They provoked the Holy
Spirit, and He was turned to be their enemy.” <span
id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096) For blindness is cast upon them, by
reason of the wickedness of their mind, because when they saw <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p43.2"></span>Jesus they did not believe Him to be the
Christ of God, who was before all ages <span
id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097) begotten of Him, His only-begotten
Son, God the Word, whom they did not own through their unbelief, neither
on account of His mighty works, nor yet on account of the prophecies
which were written concerning Him. For that He was to be born of a
virgin, they read this prophecy: “Behold, a virgin shall be with child,
and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call His name
Emanuel.” <span id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) “For to us a Child
is born, to us a Son is given, whose government is upon His shoulders;
and His name is called the Angel of His Great Council, the Wonderful
Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Potentate, the Prince of Peace, the
Father of the Future Age.” <span id="fr_3099"></span>[3100](#fn_3099)
Now, that because of their exceeding great wickedness they would not
believe in Him, the Lord shows in these words: “Who hath believed our
report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?” <span
id="fr_3100"></span>[3101](#fn_3100) And afterward: “Hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not
perceive: for the heart of this people is waxed gross.” <span
id="fr_3101"></span>[3102](#fn_3101) Wherefore knowledge was taken from
them, because seeing they overlooked, and hearing they heard not. But to
you, the converted of the Gentiles, is the kingdom given, because you,
who knew not God, have believed by preaching, and “have known Him, or
rather are known of Him,” <span id="fr_3102"></span>[3103](#fn_3102)
through <span id="ix.vi.iii-p49.2"></span>Jesus, the Saviour and
Redeemer of those that hope in Him. For ye are translated from your
former vain and tedious mode of life and have contemned the lifeless
idols, and despised the demons, which are in darkness, and have run to
the “true light,” <span id="fr_3103"></span>[3104](#fn_3103) and by it
have “known the one and only true God and Father,” <span
id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) and so are owned to be heirs of His
kingdom. For since ye have “been baptized into the Lord’s death,” <span
id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) and into His resurrection, as
“new-born babes,” <span id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106) ye ought to
be wholly free from all sinful actions; “for you are not your own, but
His that bought you” <span id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107) with His
own blood. For concerning the former Israel the Lord speaks thus, on
account of their unbelief: “The kingdom of God shall be taken from them,
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof;” <span
id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108) that is to say, that having given
the kingdom to you, who were once far estranged from Him, He expects the
fruits of your gratitude and probity. For ye are those that were once
sent into the vineyard, and did not obey, but these they that did
obey; <span id="fr_3109"></span>[3110](#fn_3109) but you have repented
of your denial, and you work therein now. But they, being uneasy on
account of their own covenants, have not only left the vineyard
uncultivated, but have also killed the stewards of the Lord of the
vineyard, <span id="fr_3110"></span>[3111](#fn_3110) —one with stones,
another with the sword; one they sawed asunder, <span
id="fr_3111"></span>[3112](#fn_3111) another they slew in the holy
place, “between the temple and the altar;” <span
id="fr_3112"></span>[3113](#fn_3112) nay, at last they “cast the Heir
Himself out of the vineyard, and slew Him.” <span
id="fr_3113"></span>[3114](#fn_3113) And by them He was rejected as an
unprofitable stone, <span id="fr_3114"></span>[3115](#fn_3114) but by
you was received as the corner-stone. Wherefore He says concerning you:
“A people whom I knew not have served me, and at the hearing of the ear
have they obeyed me.” <span id="fr_3115"></span>[3116](#fn_3115)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p62.2"></span>How the Passover Ought to Be Celebrated.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p63"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p63.1"></span>XVII</span>. It is therefore your duty,
brethren, who are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, to observe
the days of the passover exactly, with all care, after the vernal
equinox, lest ye be obliged to keep the memorial of the one passion
twice in a year. Keep it once only in a year for Him that died but once.
 

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p64"></span><span id="ix.vi.iii-p64.1"></span>Do not
you yourselves compute, but keep it when your brethren of the
circumcision do so: keep it together with them; and if they err in their
computation, be not you concerned. Keep your nights of watching in the
middle of the days of unleavened bread. And when the Jews are feasting,
do you fast and wail over them, because an the day of their feast they
crucified Christ; <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="ix.vi.iii-Page_447"></span><span id="ix.vi.iii-p64.2"></span>and
while they are lamenting and eating unleavened bread in bitterness, do
you feast. <span id="fr_3116"></span>[3117](#fn_3116) But no longer be
careful to keep the feast with the Jews, for we have now no communion
with them; for they have been led astray in regard to the calculation
itself, which they think they accomplish perfectly, that they may be led
astray on every hand, and be fenced off from the truth. But do you
observe carefully the vernal equinox, which occurs on the twenty-second
of the twelfth month, which is Dystros (March), observing carefully
until the twenty-first of the moon, lest the fourteenth of the moon
shall fall on another week, and an error being committed, you should
through ignorance celebrate the passover twice in the year, or celebrate
the day of the resurrection of our Lord on any other day than a Sunday.
 

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p65.5"></span>A Constitution Concerning the Great Passover Week.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p66"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p66.1"></span>XVIII</span>. Do you therefore fast on the
days of the passover, beginning from the second day of the week until
the preparation, and the Sabbath, six days, making use of only bread,
and salt, and herbs, and water for your drink; but do you abstain on
these days from wine and flesh, for they are days of lamentation and not
of feasting. Do ye who are able fast the day of the preparation and the
Sabbath-day entirely, tasting nothing till the cock-crowing of the
night; but if any one is not able to join them both together, at least
let him observe the Sabbath-day; for the Lord says somewhere, speaking
of Himself: “When the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, in those
days shall they fast.” <span id="fr_3117"></span>[3118](#fn_3117) In
these days, therefore, He was taken from us by the Jews, falsely so
named, and fastened to the cross, and “was numbered among the
transgressors.” <span id="fr_3118"></span>[3119](#fn_3118)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p68.2"></span>Concerning the Watching All the Night of the Great Sabbath, and Concerning the Day of the Resurrection.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p69"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p69.1"></span>XIX</span>. Wherefore we exhort you to fast
on those days, as we also fasted till the evening, when He was taken
away from us; but on the rest of the days, before the day of the
preparation, let every one eat at the ninth hour, or at the evening, or
as every one is able. But from the even of the fifth day till
cock-crowing break your fast when it is daybreak of the first day of the
week, which is the Lord’s day. From the even till cock-crowing keep
awake, and assemble together in the church, watch and pray, and entreat
God; reading, when you sit up all night, the Law, the Prophets, and the
Psalms, until cock-crowing, and baptizing your catechumens, and reading
the Gospel with fear and trembling, and speaking to the people such
things as tend to their salvation: put an end to your sorrow, and
beseech God that Israel may be converted, and that He will allow them
place of repentance, and the remission of their impiety; for the judge,
who was a stranger, “washed his hands, and said, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person: see ye to it. But Israel cried out, His blood
be on us, and on our children.” <span
id="fr_3119"></span>[3120](#fn_3119) And when <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p70.2"></span>Pilate said, “Shall I crucify your king?
they cried out, We have no king but Cæsar: crucify Him, crucify Him; for
every, one that maketh himself a king speaketh against Cæsar.” And, “If
thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar’s friend.” <span
id="fr_3120"></span>[3121](#fn_3120) And <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p71.2"></span>Pilate the governor and <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p71.3"></span>Herod the king commanded Him to be
crucified; and that oracle was fulfilled which says, “Why did the
Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the
earth set themselves, and the rulers were gathered together against the
Lord, and against His Christ;” <span
id="fr_3121"></span>[3122](#fn_3121) and, “They cast away the Beloved,
as a dead man, who is abominable.” <span
id="fr_3122"></span>[3123](#fn_3122) And since He was crucified on the
day of the Preparation, and rose again at break of day on the Lord’s
day, the scripture was fulfilled which saith, “Arise, O God; judge the
earth: for Thou shalt have an inheritance in all the nations;” <span
id="fr_3123"></span>[3124](#fn_3123) and again, “I will arise, saith the
Lord; I will put Him in safety, I will wax bold through Him;” <span
id="fr_3124"></span>[3125](#fn_3124) and, “But Thou, Lord, have mercy
upon me, and raise me up again, and I shall requite them.” <span
id="fr_3125"></span>[3126](#fn_3125) For this reason do you also, now
the Lord is risen, offer your sacrifice, concerning which He made a
constitution by us, saying, “Do this for a remembrance of me;” <span
id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126) and thenceforward leave off your
fasting, and rejoice, and keep a festival, because <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p77.2"></span>Jesus Christ, the pledge of our
resurrection, is risen from the dead. And let this be an everlasting
ordinance till the consummation of the world, until the Lord come. For
to Jews the Lord is still dead, but to Christians He is risen: to the
former, by their unbelief; to the latter, by their full assurance of
faith. For the hope in Him is immortal and eternal life. After eight
days let there be another feast observed with honour, the eighth day
itself, on which He gave me <span id="ix.vi.iii-p77.3"></span>Thomas,
who was hard of belief, full assurance, by showing me the print of the
nails, and the wound made in His side by the spear. <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) And again, from the first Lord’s
<span id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span
id="ix.vi.iii-Page_448"></span>day count forty days, from the Lord’s day
till the fifth day of the week, and celebrate the feast of the ascension
of the Lord, whereon He finished all His dispensation and constitution,
and returned to that God and Father that sent Him, and sat down at the
right hand of power, and remains there until His enemies are put under
His feet; who also will come at the consummation of the world with power
and great glory, to judge the quick and the dead, and to recompense to
every one according to his works. And then shall they see the beloved
Son of God whom they pierced; <span id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128)
and when they know Him, they shall mourn for themselves, tribe by tribe,
and their wives apart. <span id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129)  

##### <span id="ix.vi.iii-p80.2"></span>A Prophetic Prediction Concerning Christ Jesus.

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p81"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p81.1"></span>XX</span>. For even now, on the tenth day of
the month Gorpiæus, when they assemble together, they read the
Lamentations of Jeremiah, in which it is said, “The Spirit before our
face, Christ the Lord was taken in their destructions;” <span
id="fr_3130"></span>[3131](#fn_3130) and Baruch, in whom it is written,
“This is our God; no other shall be esteemed with Him. He found out
every way of knowledge, and showed it to Jacob His son, and Israel His
beloved. Afterwards He was seen upon earth, and conversed with
men.” <span id="fr_3131"></span>[3132](#fn_3131) And when they read
them, they lament and bewail, as themselves suppose, that desolation
which happened by <span id="ix.vi.iii-p83.2"></span>Nebuchadnezzar; but,
as the truth shows, they unwillingly make a prelude to that lamentation
which will overtake them. But after ten days from the ascension, which
from the first Lord’s day is the fiftieth day, do ye keep a great
festival: for on that day, at the third hour, the Lord <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p83.3"></span>Jesus sent on us the gift of the Holy Ghost,
and we were filled with His energy, and we “spake with new tongues, as
that Spirit did suggest to us;” <span
id="fr_3132"></span>[3133](#fn_3132) and we preached both to Jews and
Gentiles, that He is the Christ of God, who is “determined by Him to be
the Judge of quick and dead.” <span id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133)
To Him did <span id="ix.vi.iii-p85.2"></span>Moses bear witness, and
said: “The Lord received fire from the Lord, and rained it down.” <span
id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) Him did <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p86.2"></span>Jacob see as a man, and said: “I have seen
God face to face, and my soul is preserved.” <span
id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135) Him did <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p87.3"></span>Abraham entertain, and acknowledge to be the
Judge, and his Lord. <span id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) Him did
<span id="ix.vi.iii-p88.2"></span>Moses see in the bush; <span
id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137) concerning Him did he speak in
Deuteronomy: “A Prophet will the Lord your God raise up unto you out of
your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever
He shall say unto you. And it shall be, that every soul that will not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among his people.” <span
id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) Him did <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p90.3"></span>Joshua the son of Nun see, as the captain of
the Lord’s host, in armour, for their assistance against Jericho; to
whom he fell down, and worshipped, as a servant does to his
master. <span id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) Him <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p91.2"></span>Samuel knew as the “Anointed of God,” <span
id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) and thence named the priests and
the kings the anointed. Him <span id="ix.vi.iii-p92.2"></span>David
knew, and sung an hymn concerning Him, “A song concerning the
Beloved;” <span id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) and adds in his
person, and says, “Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Thou who art mighty
in Thy beauty and renown: go on, and prosper, and reign, for the sake of
truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and Thy right hand shall guide
Thee after a wonderful manner. Thy darts are sharpened, O Thou that art
mighty; the people shall fall under Thee in the heart of the king’s
enemies. Wherefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of
gladness above Thy fellows.” Concerning Him also spake <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p93.2"></span>Solomon, as in His person: “The Lord created
me the beginning of His ways, for His works: before the world He founded
me, in the beginning before He made the earth, before the fountains of
waters came, before the mountains were fastened; He begat me before all
the hills.” <span id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) And again:
“Wisdom built herself an house.” <span
id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143) Concerning Him also Isaiah said: “A
Branch shall come out of the root of <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p95.2"></span>Jesse, and a Flower shall spring out of his
root.” And, “There shall be a root of <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p95.3"></span>Jesse; and He that is to rise to reign over
the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust.” <span
id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) And Zechariah says: <span
id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145) “Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,
just, and having salvation; meek, and riding upon an ass, and upon a
colt, the foal of an ass.” <span id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146)
Him Daniel describes as “the Son of man coming to the Father,” <span
id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147) and receiving all judgment and
honour from Him; and as “the stone cut out of the mountain without
hands, and becoming a great mountain, and filling the whole
earth,” <span id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148) dashing to pieces the
many governments of the smaller countries, and the polytheism of gods,
but preaching the one God, and ordaining the monarchy of the Romans.
Concerning Him also did Jeremiah prophesy, saying: “The Spirit before
His face, Christ the Lord, was taken in their snares: of whom we said,
Under His shadow <span id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span
id="ix.vi.iii-Page_449"></span>we shall live among the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149) Ezekiel also, and the following
prophets, affirm everywhere that He is the Christ, the Lord, the King,
the Judge, the Lawgiver, the Angel of the Father, the only-begotten God.
Him therefore do we also preach to you, and declare Him to be God the
Word, who ministered to His God and Father for the creation of the
universe. By believing in Him you shall live, but by disbelieving you
shall be punished. For “he that is disobedient to the Son shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.” <span
id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150) Therefore, after you have kept the
festival of Pentecost, keep one week more festival, and after that fast;
for it is reasonable to rejoice for the gift of God, and to fast after
that relaxation: for both <span id="ix.vi.iii-p102.2"></span>Moses and
<span id="ix.vi.iii-p102.3"></span>Elijah fasted forty days, and <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p102.4"></span>Daniel for “three weeks of days did not eat
desirable bread, and flesh and wine did not enter into his mouth.” <span
id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151) And blessed <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p103.4"></span>Hannah, when she asked for <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p103.5"></span>Samuel, said: “I have not drunk wine nor
strong drink, and I pour out my soul before the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152) And the Ninevites, when they fasted
three days and three nights, <span id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153)
escaped the execution of wrath. And <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p105.2"></span>Esther, and <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p105.3"></span>Mordecai, and <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p105.4"></span>Judith, <span
id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154) by fasting, escaped the
insurrection of the ungodly <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.4"></span>Holofernes and <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.5"></span>Haman. And <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.6"></span>David says: “My knees are weak through
fasting, and my flesh faileth for <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.7"></span>want of oil.” <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155) Do you therefore fast, and ask your
petitions of God. We enjoin you to fast every fourth day of the week,
and every day of the preparation, and the surplusage of your fast bestow
upon the needy; every Sabbath-day excepting one, and every Lord’s day,
hold your solemn assemblies, and rejoice: for he will be guilty of sin
who fasts on the Lord’s day, being the day of the resurrection, or
during the time of Pentecost, or, in general, who is sad on a festival
day to the Lord. For on them we ought to rejoice, and not to mourn.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[443:3059](0070451.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p3"></span> [John xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[444:3060](0070451.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p4"></span> [Matt.
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>;
[John xiii. 21,](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p4.2"></span> etc.  

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[444:3061](0070451.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[444:3062](0070451.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p6"></span> The words from “And they took” to “house
of the potter” are wanting in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>ms</span>. The other reads “field” of the
potter, instead of “house.”  

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[444:3063](0070451.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p7"></span> [Matt.
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[444:3064](0070451.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p8"></span> [John xvi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#032)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>;
[Matt. xxvi. 31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p8.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[444:3065](0070451.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p9"></span> [Luke xxii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#034)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[444:3066](0070451.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p10"></span> [John xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[444:3067](0070451.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p11"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[444:3068](0070451.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p12"></span> “Not far,” the reading of the V. <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> The others
read: “And being separated from us, He prayed earnestly.”  

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[444:3069](0070451.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p13"></span> <span id="ix.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>I.uke
xxii. 42; [Matt. 26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p13.2"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[444:3070](0070451.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p14"></span> [Luke xxii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>;
[Matt. xxvi. 47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p14.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[444:3071](0070451.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p15"></span> [Ps.
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[444:3072](0070451.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p16"></span> [Luke xxiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>;
[John xviii. 38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#038)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p16.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[444:3073](0070451.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p17"></span> [Luke xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[444:3074](0070451.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p18"></span> [Luke xxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#021)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[444:3075](0070451.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p19"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[444:3076](0070451.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p20"></span> [Ps. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[444:3077](0070451.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p21"></span> [Jer. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[445:3078](0070451.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p22"></span> [Ps. lxix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[445:3079](0070451.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p23"></span> [Ps. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[445:3080](0070451.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p24"></span> [Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[445:3081](0070451.htm#fr_3080) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p25"></span> [Zech. xiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>.
The V. <span class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.iii-p25.2"></span>mss.</span>
read: “On that day there will not be light, but there will be cold and
frost for one day.”  

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[445:3082](0070451.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p26"></span> The words from “All which things” to
“mystical good things” are omitted in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[445:3083](0070451.htm#fr_3082) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p27"></span> [Luke xxiii.
39,](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p27.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[445:3084](0070451.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p28"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p28.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[445:3085](0070451.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p29"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[445:3086](0070451.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p30"></span> [Luke xxiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[445:3087](0070451.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p31"></span> [Matt. xii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[445:3088](0070451.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p31.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p32"></span> [Mark xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p32.1"></span>;
[John xx. 11,](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p32.2"></span> etc.; [Luke xxiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p32.3"></span>;
[Mark xvi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p32.4"></span>  

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[445:3089](0070451.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p34"></span> [Luke xix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p34.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[445:3090](0070451.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p35"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p35.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[445:3091](0070451.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p36"></span> [Isa. lxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p36.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[445:3092](0070451.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p37"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p37.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[445:3093](0070451.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p38"></span> The words from “A thousand” to “of the
prosperous” are not in the V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p38.1"></span>mss.</span>  

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[445:3094](0070451.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p39"></span> [Ps. xci.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p39.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[445:3095](0070451.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p40"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[446:3096](0070451.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p41"></span> [Isa. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p41.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[446:3097](0070451.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p43"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[446:3098](0070451.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p44"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p44.1"></span>ms</span>. omits “ages,” and the other
“begotten of Him.”  

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[446:3099](0070451.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p45"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p45.1"></span>;
[Matt. i. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p45.2"></span>  

<span id="fn_3099"></span>[446:3100](0070451.htm#fr_3099) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p46"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p46.1"></span>
\[<span id="ix.vi.iii-p46.2"></span>Justin Martyr, p. 236, n. 8, vol.
i., this series.\]  

<span id="fn_3100"></span>[446:3101](0070451.htm#fr_3100) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p46.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p47"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p47.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3101"></span>[446:3102](0070451.htm#fr_3101) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p48"></span> [Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p48.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3102"></span>[446:3103](0070451.htm#fr_3102) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p49"></span> [Gal. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p49.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3103"></span>[446:3104](0070451.htm#fr_3103) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p50"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p50.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[446:3105](0070451.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p51"></span> [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p51.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[446:3106](0070451.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p52"></span> [Rom. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p52.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[446:3107](0070451.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p53"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p53.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[446:3108](0070451.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p54"></span> [1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p54.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[446:3109](0070451.htm#fr_3108) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p55"></span> [Matt. xxi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p55.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3109"></span>[446:3110](0070451.htm#fr_3109) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p56"></span> [Matt. xxi.
28,](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p56.1"></span>
etc.  

<span id="fn_3110"></span>[446:3111](0070451.htm#fr_3110) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p57"></span> [Matt. xxi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#035)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p57.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3111"></span>[446:3112](0070451.htm#fr_3111) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p58"></span> [Heb. xi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p58.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3112"></span>[446:3113](0070451.htm#fr_3112) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p59"></span> [Matt xxiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p59.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3113"></span>[446:3114](0070451.htm#fr_3113) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p60"></span> [Matt. xxi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#039)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p60.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3114"></span>[446:3115](0070451.htm#fr_3114) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p61"></span> [Matt. xxi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p61.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3115"></span>[446:3116](0070451.htm#fr_3115) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p62"></span> [Ps.
18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p62.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3116"></span>[447:3117](0070451.htm#fr_3116) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p65"></span> This italicized passage does not occur
in the <span class="sc"><span id="ix.vi.iii-p65.1"></span>mss.</span>,
but is taken from <span id="ix.vi.iii-p65.2"></span>Epiphanius. It is
believed to be genuine, in which case what follows must be regarded as
the work of the interpolator. \[See <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p65.3"></span>Epiphanius, tom. iv. p. 29, ed. <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p65.4"></span>Oehler, 1861.\]  

<span id="fn_3117"></span>[447:3118](0070451.htm#fr_3117) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p67"></span> [Matt. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p67.1"></span>;
[Mark ii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#020)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p67.2"></span>; [Luke v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#035)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p67.3"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3118"></span>[447:3119](0070451.htm#fr_3118) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p67.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p68"></span> [Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p68.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3119"></span>[447:3120](0070451.htm#fr_3119) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p70"></span> [Matt.
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p70.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3120"></span>[447:3121](0070451.htm#fr_3120) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p71"></span> [John
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p71.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3121"></span>[447:3122](0070451.htm#fr_3121) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p71.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p72"></span> [Ps.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p72.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3122"></span>[447:3123](0070451.htm#fr_3122) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p73"></span> [Isa. xiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p73.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3123"></span>[447:3124](0070451.htm#fr_3123) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p74"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p74.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3124"></span>[447:3125](0070451.htm#fr_3124) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p75"></span> [Ps. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p75.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3125"></span>[447:3126](0070451.htm#fr_3125) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p76"></span> [Ps. xli.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p76.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[447:3127](0070451.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p77"></span> [Luke xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p77.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[447:3128](0070451.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p77.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p78"></span> [John xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p78.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[448:3129](0070451.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p79"></span> [Zech. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p79.1"></span>;
[John xix. 37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p79.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[448:3130](0070451.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p79.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p80"></span> The words “and their wives apart” are
not in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p80.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_3130"></span>[448:3131](0070451.htm#fr_3130) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p82"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p82.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3131"></span>[448:3132](0070451.htm#fr_3131) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p83"></span> [Bar. iii.
35-37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p83.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3132"></span>[448:3133](0070451.htm#fr_3132) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p83.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p84"></span> [Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p84.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[448:3134](0070451.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p85"></span> [Acts x.
42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p85.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[448:3135](0070451.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p85.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p86"></span> [Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p86.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[448:3136](0070451.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p86.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p87"></span> [Gen.
xxxii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p87.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.iii-p87.2"></span>30  

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[448:3137](0070451.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p87.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p88"></span> [Gen.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p88.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[448:3138](0070451.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p88.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p89"></span> [Ex. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p89.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[448:3139](0070451.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p90"></span> [Deut.
xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p90.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.iii-p90.2"></span>15.  

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[448:3140](0070451.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p90.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p91"></span> [Josh. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p91.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[448:3141](0070451.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p92"></span> [1 Sam. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p92.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[448:3142](0070451.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p92.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p93"></span> [Ps.
xlv](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#000)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p93.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[448:3143](0070451.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p93.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p94"></span> [Prov. viii.
22-25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p94.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[448:3144](0070451.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p95"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p95.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[448:3145](0070451.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p95.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p96"></span> [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p96.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[448:3146](0070451.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p97"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.vi.iii-p97.1"></span>ms</span>. inserts: “Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion.”  

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[448:3147](0070451.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p98"></span> [Zech ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p98.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[448:3148](0070451.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p99"></span> [Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p99.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[448:3149](0070451.htm#fr_3148) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p100"></span> [Dan. ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p100.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[449:3150](0070451.htm#fr_3149) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p101"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p101.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[449:3151](0070451.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p102"></span> [John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p102.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[449:3152](0070451.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p102.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p103"></span> [Ex. xxxiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p103.1"></span>;
[1 Kings xix. 8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008)<span
id="ix.vi.iii-p103.2"></span>; [Dan.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p103.3"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[449:3153](0070451.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p103.6"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p104"></span> [1 Sam. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p104.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[449:3154](0070451.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p105"></span> [Jonah iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p105.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[449:3155](0070451.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p105.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p106"></span> [Esth. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p106.1"></span>;
[Judith viii.](../../../bib/apo/jdt008.htm#000) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.2"></span><span id="ix.vi.iii-p106.3"></span>6  

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[449:3156](0070451.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="ix.vi.iii-p106.8"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.iii-p107"></span> [Ps. cix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#024)<span id="ix.vi.iii-p107.1"></span>
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](0070452)
