[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070007)  [Next](0070009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. II.—That there is a providence in the affairs of men.

<span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1"></span>Having therefore undertaken the office
of explaining the truth, I did not think it so necessary to take my
commencement from that inquiry which naturally seems the first, whether
there is a providence which consults for all things, or all things were
either made or are governed by chance; which sentiment was introduced by
<span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.1"></span>Democritus, and confirmed by <span
id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.2"></span>Epicurus. But before them, what did <span
id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.3"></span>Protagoras effect, who raised doubts
respecting the gods; or <span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.4"></span>Diagoras
afterwards, who excluded them; and some others, who did not hold the
existence of gods, except that there was supposed to be no providence?
These, however, were most vigorously opposed by the other philosophers,
and especially by the Stoics, who taught that the universe could neither
have been made without divine intelligence, nor continue to exist unless
it were governed by the highest intelligence. But even <span
id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.5"></span>Marcus Tullius, although he was a defender
of the Academic system, discussed at length and on many occasions
respecting the providence which governs affairs, confirming the
arguments of the Stoics, and himself adducing many new ones; and this he
does both in all the books of his own philosophy, and especially in
those which treat of the nature of the gods. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)  

<span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p3"></span>And it was no difficult task, indeed,
to refute the falsehoods of a few men who entertained perverse
sentiments by the testimony of communities and tribes, who on this one
point had no disagreement. For there is no one so uncivilized, and of
such an uncultivated disposition, who, when he raises his eyes to
heaven, although he knows not by the providence of what God all this
visible universe is governed, does not understand from the very
magnitude of the objects, from their motion, arrangement, constancy,
usefulness, beauty, and temperament, that there is some providence, and
that that which exists with wonderful method must have been prepared by
some greater intelligence. And for us, assuredly, it is very easy to
follow up this part as copiously as it may please us. But because the
subject has been much agitated among philosophers, and they who take
away providence appear to have been sufficiently answered by men of
sagacity and eloquence, and because it is necessary to speak, in
different places throughout this work which we have undertaken,
respecting the skill of the divine providence, let us for the present
omit this inquiry, which is so closely connected with the other
questions, that it seems possible for us to discuss no subject, without
at the same time discussing the subject of providence.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[11:25](0070008.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.ii.i.iii-p1.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.iii-p2"></span> \[Ingeniously introduced, and
afterward very forcibly expanded.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. III.—Whether the universe is governed by the power of one
God or of many](0070009)
