[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070184)  [Next](0070186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. XXI.—Of the Torments and Punishments of Souls.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p1"></span>First of all, therefore, we say that
the power of God is so great, that He perceives even incorporeal things,
and manages them as He will. <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-Page_217"></span>For even angels fear God, because
they can be chastised by Him in some unspeakable manner; and devils
dread Him, because they are tormented and punished by Him. What wonder
is it, therefore, if souls, though they are immortal, are nevertheless
capable of suffering at the hand of God? For since they have nothing
solid and tangible in themselves, they can suffer no violence from solid
and corporeal beings; but because they live in their spirits only, they
are capable of being handled by God alone, whose energy and substance is
spiritual. But, however, the sacred writings inform us in what manner
the wicked are to undergo punishment. For because they have committed
sins in their bodies, they will again be clothed with flesh, that they
may make atonement in their bodies; and yet it will not be that flesh
with which God clothed man, like this our earthly body, but
indestructible, and abiding for ever, that it may be able to hold out
against tortures and everlasting fire, the nature of which is different
from this fire of ours, which we use for the necessary purposes of life,
and which is extinguished unless it be sustained by the fuel of some
material. But that divine fire always lives by itself, and flourishes
without any nourishment; nor has it any smoke mixed with it, but it is
pure and liquid, and fluid, after the manner of water. For it is not
urged upwards by any force, as our fire, which the taint of the earthly
body, by which it is held, and smoke intermingled, compels to leap
forth, and to fly upwards to the nature of heaven, with a tremulous
movement. <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p3"></span>The same divine fire, therefore,
with one and the same force and power, will both burn the wicked and
will form them again, and will replace as much as it shall consume of
their bodies, and will supply itself with eternal nourishment: which the
poets transferred to the vulture of <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>Tityus. Thus, without any wasting of
bodies, which regain their substance, it will only burn and affect them
with a sense of pain. But when He shall have judged the righteous, He
will also try them with fire. Then they whose sins shall exceed either
in weight or in number, shall be scorched by the fire and burnt: <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) but they whom full justice and
maturity of virtue has imbued will not perceive that fire; for they have
something of God in themselves which repels and rejects the violence of
the flame. So great is the force of innocence, that the flame shrinks
from it without doing harm; which has received from God this power, that
it burns the wicked, and is under the command of the righteous. Nor,
however, let any one imagine that souls are immediately judged after
death. For all are detained in one and a common place of confinement,
until the arrival of the time in which the great Judge shall make an
investigation of their deserts. <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414) Then they whose piety shall have
been approved of will receive the reward of immortality; but they whose
sins and crimes shall have been brought to light will not rise again,
but will be hidden in the same darkness with the wicked, being destined
to certain punishment.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[217:1413](0070185.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>Cum trepidatione mobili. \[See vol. vi.
p. 375, note 1.\]  

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[217:1414](0070185.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>Perstringentur igni atque amburentur.
\[See p. 216, n. 5, <span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4.3"></span>supra.\] This
idea of passing through flames of the final judgment has in it nothing
in common with “purgatory” as a <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4.4"></span>place and as a punishment from which
admission into heaven may be gained <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4.5"></span>before judgment.\]  

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[217:1415](0070185.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p5"></span> \[See vol. iii. p. 59, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xxi-p5.2"></span>supra, Elucidation X.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XXII.—Of the error of the poets, and the return of the soul
from the lower regions](0070186)
