[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070266)  [Next](0070268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. IV.—Of God and His Affections, and the Censure of Epicurus.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>That which follows is concerning the
school of <span id="iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Epicurus; that as there is
no anger in God, so indeed there is no kindness. For when <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p1.2"></span>Epicurus thought that it was inconsistent
with God to injure and to inflict harm, which for the most part arises
from the affection of anger, he took away from Him beneficence also,
since he saw that it followed that if God has anger, He must also have
kindness. Therefore, lest he should concede to Him a vice, he deprived
Him also of virtue. <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) From
this, he says, He is happy and uncorrupted, because He cares about
nothing, and neither takes trouble Himself nor occasions it to another.
Therefore He is not God, if He <span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-Page_261"></span>is neither moved, which is peculiar to a
living being, nor does anything impossible for man, which is peculiar to
God, if He has no will at all, no action, in short, no administration,
which is worthy of God. And what greater, what more worthy
administration can be attributed to God, than the government of the
world, and especially of the human race, to which all earthly things are
subject?  

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p3"></span>What happiness, then, can there be in
God, if He is always inactive, being at rest and unmoveable? if He is
deaf to those who pray to Him, and blind to His worshippers? What is so
worthy of God, and so befitting to Him, as providence? But if He cares
for nothing, and foresees nothing, He has lost all His divinity. What
else does he say, who takes from God all power and all substance, except
that there is no God at all? In short, <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>Marcus Tullius relates that it was said by
<span id="iii.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>Posidonius, <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) that <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.3"></span>Epicurus understood that there were no gods,
but that he said those things which he spoke respecting the gods for the
sake of driving away odium; and so that he leaves the gods in words, but
takes them away in reality, since he gives them no motion, no office.
But if this is so, what can be more deceitful than him? And this ought
to be foreign to the character of a wise and weighty man. But if he
understood one thing and spoke another, what else is he to be called
than a deceiver, double-tongued, wicked, and moreover foolish? But <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.4"></span>Epicurus was not so crafty as to say those
things with the desire of deceiving, when he consigned these things also
by his writings to everlasting remembrance; but he erred through
ignorance of the truth. For, being led from the beginning by the
probability <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) of a single
opinion, he necessarily fell into those things which followed. For the
first opinion was, that anger was not consistent with the character of
God. And when this appeared to him to be true and unassailable, <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) he was unable to refuse the
consequences; because one affection being removed, necessity itself
compelled him to remove from God the other affections also. Thus, he who
is not subject to anger is plainly uninfluenced by kindness, which is
the opposite feeling to anger. Now, if there is neither anger nor
kindness in Him, it is manifest that there is neither fear, nor joy, nor
grief, nor pity. For all the affections have one system, one
motion, <span id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) which cannot be the
case with God. But if there is no affection in God, because whatever is
subject to affections is weak, it follows that there is in Him neither
the care of anything, nor providence.  

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p8"></span>The disputation of the wise man <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645) extends thus far: he was silent as
to the other things which follow; namely, that because there is in Him
neither care nor providence, therefore there is no reflection nor any
perception in Him, by which it is effected that He has no existence at
all. Thus, when he had gradually descended, he remained on the last
step, because he now saw the precipice. But what does it avail to have
remained silent, and concealed the danger? Necessity compelled him even
against his will to fall. For he said that which he did not mean,
because he so arranged his argument that he necessarily came to that
point which he wished to avoid. You see, therefore, to what point he
comes, when anger is removed and taken away from God. In short, either
no one believes that, or a very few, and they the guilty and the wicked,
who hope for impunity for their sins. But if this also is found to be
false, that there is neither anger nor kindness in God, let us come to
that which is put in the third place.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[260:1641](0070267.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p2"></span> \[<span id="iii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>Ne
illi vitium concederet etiam virtutis fecit expertem.\]  

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[261:1642](0070267.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p4"></span> \[Disciple of <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>Panætius the Rhodian, a Stoic, third century
<span id="iii.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>B.C.\]  

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[261:1643](0070267.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>Verisimilitudine, i.e., likeness of truth.  

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[261:1644](0070267.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>Inexpugnabile, impregnable.  

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[261:1645](0070267.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>Commotio.  

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[261:1646](0070267.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>Epicurus: it seems to be spoken with some
irony.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. V.—The opinion of the Stoics concerning God; of His anger
and kindness](0070268)
