[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070267)  [Next](0070269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chap. V.—The Opinion of the Stoics Concerning God; Of His Anger and Kindness.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span>The Stoics and some others are supposed
to have entertained much better sentiments respecting the divine nature,
who say that there is kindness in God, but not anger. A very pleasing
and popular speech, that God is not subject to such littleness of mind
as to imagine that He is injured by any one, since it is impossible for
Him to be injured; so that that serene and holy majesty is excited,
disturbed, and maddened, which is the part of human frailty. For they
say that anger is a commotion and perturbation of the mind, which is
inconsistent with God. Since, when it falls upon the mind of any one, as
a violent tempest it excites such waves that it changes the condition of
the mind, the eyes gleam, the countenance trembles, the tongue stammers,
the teeth chatter, the countenance is alternately stained now with
redness spread over it, now with white paleness. But if anger is
unbecoming to a man, provided he be of wisdom and authority, how much
more is so foul a change unbecoming to God! And if man, when he has
authority and power, inflicts widespread injury through anger, sheds
blood, overthrows cities, destroys communities, reduces provinces to
desolation, how much more is it to be believed that God, since He has
power over the whole human race, and over the universe itself, would
have been about to destroy all things if He were angry.  

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>Therefore they think that so great and so
pernicious an evil ought to be absent from Him. And if anger and
excitement are absent from <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-Page_262"></span>Him, because it is disfiguring and
injurious, and He inflicts injury on no one, they think that nothing
else remains, except that He is mild, calm, propitious, beneficent, the
preserver. For thus at length He may be called the common Father of all,
and the best and greatest, which His divine and heavenly nature demands.
For if among men it appears praiseworthy to do good rather than to
injure, to restore to life <span id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646)
rather than to kill, to save rather than to destroy, and innocence is
not undeservedly numbered among the virtues,—and he who does these
things is loved, esteemed, honoured, and celebrated with all blessings
and vows,—in short, on account of his deserts and benefits is judged to
be most like to God; how much more right is it that God Himself, who
excels in divine and perfect virtues, and who is removed from all
earthly taint, should conciliate <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647) the whole race of man by divine and
heavenly benefits! Those things are spoken speciously and in a popular
manner, and they allure many to believe them; but they who entertain
these sentiments approach nearer indeed to the truth, but they partly
fail, not sufficiently considering the nature of the case. For if God is
not angry with the impious and the unrighteous, it is clear that He does
not love the pious and the righteous. Therefore the error of those is
more consistent who take away at once both anger and kindness. For in
opposite matters it is necessary to be moved to both sides or to
neither. Thus, he who loves the good also hates the wicked, and he who
does not hate the wicked does not love the good; because the loving of
the good arises from the hatred of the wicked, and the hating of the
wicked has its rise from the love of the good. There is no one who loves
life without a hatred of death, nor who is desirous of light, but he who
avoids darkness. These things are so connected by nature, that the one
cannot exist without the other.  

<span id="iii.iii.v-p5"></span>If any master has in his household a good
and a bad servant, it is evident that he does not hate them both, or
confer upon both benefits and honours; for if he does this, he is both
unjust and foolish. But he addresses the one who is good with friendly
words, and honours him and sets him over his house and household, and
all his affairs; but punishes the bad one with reproaches, with stripes,
with nakedness, with hunger, with thirst, with fetters: so that the
latter may be an example to others to keep them from sinning, and the
former to conciliate them; so that fear may restrain some, and honour
may excite others. He, therefore, who loves also hates, and he who hates
also loves; for there are those who ought to be loved, and there are
those who ought to be hated. And as he who loves confers good things on
those whom he loves, so he who hates inflicts evils upon those whom he
hates; which argument, because it is true, can in no way be refuted.
Therefore the opinion of those is vain and false, who, when they
attribute the one to God, take away the other, not less than the opinion
of those who take away both. But the latter,  <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) as we have shown, in part do not
err, but retain that which is the better of the two; whereas the former,
 <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649) led on by the accurate
method of their reasoning, fall into the greatest error, because they
have assumed premises which are altogether false. For they ought not to
have reasoned thus: Because God is not liable to anger, therefore He is
not moved by kindness; but in this manner: Because God is moved by
kindness, therefore He is also liable to anger. For if it had been
certain and undoubted that God is not liable to anger, then the other
point would necessarily be arrived at. But since the question as to
whether God is angry is more open to doubt, while it is almost perfectly
plain that He is kind, it is absurd to wish to subvert that which is
certain by means of an uncertainty, since it is easier to confirm
uncertain things by means of those which are certain.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[262:1647](0070268.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-p3.1"></span>Vivificare.  

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[262:1648](0070268.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.v-p4.1"></span>Promereri.  

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[262:1649](0070268.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p6"></span> The Stoics. \[Encountered first by St.
<span id="iii.iii.v-p6.1"></span>Paul, [Acts xvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span id="iii.iii.v-p6.2"></span>.\]
 

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[262:1650](0070268.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p7"></span> The Epicureans. \[<span
id="iii.iii.v-p7.1"></span>Ibid.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. VI.—That God is angry](0070269)
