[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070355)  [Next](0070357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xlvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.v.xlvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XLVII.

<span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1"></span>So the two armies drew nigh; the
trumpets gave the signal; the military ensigns advanced; the troops of
<span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Licinius charged. But the enemies,
panic-struck, could neither draw their swords nor yet throw their
javelins. <span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.2"></span>Daia went about, and,
alternately by entreaties and promises, attempted to seduce the soldiers
of <span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.3"></span>Licinius. But he was not hearkened
to in any quarter, and they drove him back. Then were the troops of
<span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.4"></span>Daia slaughtered, none making
resistance; and such numerous legions, and forces so mighty, were mowed
down by an inferior enemy. No one called to mind his reputation, or
former valour, or the honourable rewards which had been conferred on
him. The Supreme God did so place their necks under the sword of their
<span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="iii.v.xlvii-Page_320"></span>foes, that they seemed to have entered
the field, not as combatants, but as men devoted to death. After great
numbers had fallen, <span id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.5"></span>Daia perceived
that everything went contrary to his hopes; and therefore he threw aside
the purple, and having put on the habit of a slave, hasted across the
Thracian Bosphorus. One half of his army perished in battle, and the
rest either surrendered to the victor or fled; for now that the emperor
himself had deserted, there seemed to be no shame in desertion. Before
the expiration of the kalends of May, <span
id="iii.v.xlvii-p1.6"></span>Daia arrived at Nicomedia, although distant
one hundred and sixty miles from the field of battle. So in the space of
one day and two nights he performed that journey. Having hurried away
with his children and wife, and a few officers of his court, he went
towards Syria; but having been joined by some troops from those
quarters, and having collected together a part of his fugitive forces,
he halted in Cappadocia, and then he resumed the imperial garb.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XLVIII](0070357)
