[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070060)  [Next](0070062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—It is the Peculiar Property of Man to Know and Worship God.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.x-p1"></span>Therefore the chief good of man is in
religion only; for the other things, even those which are supposed to be
peculiar to man, are found in the other animals also. For when they
discern and distinguish their own voices <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) by peculiar marks among themselves,
they seem to converse: they also appear to have a kind of smile, when
with soothed ears, and contracted mouth, and with <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> <span id="iii.ii.iii.x-Page_78"></span>eyes relaxed to
sportiveness, they fawn upon man, or upon their own mates and young. Do
they not give a greeting which bears some resemblance to mutual love and
indulgence? Again, those creatures which look forward to the future and
lay up for themselves food, plainly have foresight. Indications of
reason are also found in many of them. For since they desire things
useful to themselves, guard against evils, avoid dangers, prepare for
themselves lurking-places standing open in different places with various
outlets, assuredly they have some understanding. Can any one deny that
they are possessed of reason, since they often deceive man himself? For
those which have the office of producing honey, when they inhabit the
place assigned to them, fortify a camp, construct dwellings with
unspeakable skill, and obey their king; I know not if there is not in
them perfect prudence. It is therefore uncertain whether those things
which are given to man are common to him with other living creatures:
they are certainly without religion. I indeed thus judge, that reason is
given to all animals, but to the dumb creatures only for the protection
of life, to man also for its prolongation. And because reason itself is
perfect in man, it is named wisdom, which renders man distinguished in
this respect, that to him alone it is given to comprehend divine things.
And concerning this the opinion of <span
id="iii.ii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>Cicero is true: “Of so many kinds of
animals,” he says, “there is none except man which has any knowledge of
God; and among men themselves, there is no nation either so uncivilized
or so savage, which, even if it is ignorant of due conceptions of the
Deity, does not know that some conception of Him ought to be
entertained.” From which it is effected, that he acknowledges God, who,
as it were, calls to mind the source from which he is sprung. Those
philosophers, therefore, who wish to free the mind from all fear, take
away even religion, and thus deprive man of his peculiar and surpassing
good, which is distinct from living uprightly, and from everything
connected with man, because God, who made all living creatures subject
to man, also made man subject to Himself. What reason is there why they
should also maintain that the mind is to be turned in the same direction
to which the countenance is raised? For if we must look to the heaven,
it is undoubtedly for no other reason than on account of religion; if
religion is taken away, we have nothing to do with the heaven. Therefore
we must either look in that direction or bend down to the earth. We are
not able to bend down to the earth, even if we should wish, since our
posture is upright. We must therefore look up to the heaven, to which
the nature of the body calls us. And if it is admitted that this must be
done, it must either be done with this view, that we may devote
ourselves to religion, or that we may know the nature of the heavenly
objects. But we cannot by any means know the nature of the heavenly
objects, because nothing of that kind can be found out by reflection, as
I have before shown. We must therefore devote ourselves to religion, and
he who does not undertake this prostrates himself to the ground, and,
imitating the life of the brutes, abdicates the office of man. Therefore
the ignorant are more wise; for although they err in choosing religion,
yet they remember their own nature and condition.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_402"></span>[77:403](0070061.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.x-p2"></span> The sounds uttered by the beasts, by
which they are able to distinguish one another. \[Rousseau’s theory goes
further.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of religion, wisdom, and the chief good](0070062)
