[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070243)  [Next](0070245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LVI.—Of Justice, Which is the Worship of the True God.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lii-p1"></span>For if justice is the worship of
the true God (for what is so just with respect to equity, so pious with
respect to honour, so necessary with respect to safety, as to
acknowledge God as a parent, to reverence Him as Lord, and to obey His
law or precepts?), it follows that the philosophers were ignorant of
justice, for they neither acknowledged God Himself, nor observed His
worship and law; and on this account they might have been refuted by
<span id="iii.ii.viii.lii-p1.1"></span>Carneades, whose disputation was
to this effect, that there is no natural justice, and therefore that all
animals defended their own interests by the guidance of nature itself,
and therefore that justice, if it promotes the advantages of others and
neglects its own, is to be called foolishness. But if all people who are
possessed of power, and the Romans themselves, who are masters of the
whole world, were willing to follow justice, and to restore to every one
his property which they have seized by force and arms, they will return
to cottages and a condition of want. And if they did this, they might
indeed be just, but they must of necessity be considered foolish, who
proceed to injure themselves for the advantage of others. Then, if any
one should find a man who was through a mistake offering for sale gold
as mountain-brass, or silver as lead, and necessity should compel him to
buy it, will he conceal his knowledge and buy it for a small sum, or
will he rather inform the seller of its value? If he shall inform him,
he will manifestly be called just; but he will also be foolish, for
conferring an advantage upon another, and injuring himself. But it is
easy <span id="iii.ii.viii.lii-p1.2"></span>to judge in a case of
injury. What if he shall incur danger of his life, so that it shall be
necessary for him either to kill another or to die, what will he do? It
may happen that, having suffered shipwreck, he may find some feeble
person clinging to a plank; or, his army having been defeated, in his
flight he may find a wounded man on horseback: will he thrust the one
from the plank, the other from his horse, that he himself may be able to
escape? If he shall wish to be just, he will not do it; but he will also
be judged foolish, who in sparing the life of another shall lose his
own. If he shall do it, he will indeed appear wise, because he will
provide for his own interests; but he will also be wicked, because he
will commit a wrong.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LVII.—Of wisdom and foolishness](0070245)
