[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070252)  [Next](0070254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxi-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXV.—Precepts About Those Things Which are Commanded, and of Pity.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxi-p1"></span>I have spoken of those things which
are forbidden; I will now briefly say what things are commanded. Closely
connected with harmlessness is pity. For the former does not inflict
injury, the latter works good; the former begins justice, the latter
completes it. For since the nature of men is more feeble than that of
the other animals, which God has provided with means of inflicting
violence, and with defences for repelling it, He has given to us the
affection of pity, that we might place the whole protection of our life
in mutual aid. For if we are created by one God, and descended from one
man, and are thus connected by the law of consanguinity, we ought on
this account to love every man; and therefore we are bound not only to
abstain from the infliction of injury, but not even to avenge it when
inflicted on us, that there may be in us complete harmlessness. And on
this account God commands us to pray always even for our enemies.
Therefore we ought to be an animal fitted for companionship and society,
that we may mutually protect ourselves by giving and receiving
assistance. For our frailty is liable to many accidents and
inconveniences. Expect that that which you see has happened to another
may happen to you also. Thus you will at length be excited to render
aid, if you shall assume the mind of him who, being placed in evils,
implores your aid. If any one is in need of food, let us bestow it; if
any one meets us who is naked, let us clothe him; if any one suffers
injury from one who is more powerful than himself, let us rescue him.
Let our house be open to strangers, or to those who are in need of
shelter. Let our defence not be wanting to wards, or our protection to
the defenceless. <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) To ransom
captives is a great work of pity, and also to visit and comfort the sick
who are in poverty. If the helpless or strangers die, we should not
permit them to lie unburied. These are the works, these the duties, of
pity; and if any one undertakes these, he will offer unto God a true and
acceptable sacrifice. This victim is more adapted for an offering to
God, who is not appeased with the blood of a sheep, but with the piety
of man, whom God, because He is just, follows up with His own law, and
with His own condition. He shows mercy to him whom He sees to be
merciful; He is inexorable to him whom He sees to be harsh to those who
entreat him. Therefore, that we may be able to do all these things,
which are pleasing to God, money is to be despised, and to be
transferred to heavenly treasures, where neither thief can break
through, nor rust corrupt, nor tyrant take away, but it may be preserved
for us under the guardianship of God to our eternal wealth.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[250:1589](0070253.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxi-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxi-p2.1"></span>Viduis.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXVI.—Of faith in religion, and of fortitude](0070254)
