[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070179)  [Next](0070181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p0.1"></span><span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p0.2"></span>CHAP. XVI.—OF THE DEVASTATION of the World, and Its Prophetic Omens. <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397)

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p2"></span>But, test any one should think this
incredible, I will show how it will come to pass. First, the kingdom
will be enlarged, and the chief power, dispersed among many and
divided, <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) will be diminished.
Then civil discords will perpetually be sown; nor will there be any rest
from deadly wars, until ten kings arise at the same time, who will
divide the world, not to govern, but to consume it. These, having
increased their armies to an immense extent, and having deserted the
cultivation of the fields, which is the beginning of overthrow and
disaster, will lay waste and break in pieces and consume all things.
Then a most powerful enemy will suddenly arise against him from the
extreme boundaries of the northern region, who, having destroyed three
of that number who shall then be in possession of Asia, shall be
admitted into alliance by the others, and shall be constituted prince of
all. He shall harass the world with an intolerable rule; shall mingle
things divine and human; shall contrive things impious to relate, and
detestable; shall meditate new designs in his breast, that he may
establish the government for himself: he will change the laws, and
appoint his own; he will contaminate, plunder, spoil, and put to death.
And at length, the name being changed and the seat of government being
transferred, confusion and the disturbance of mankind will follow. Then,
in truth, a detestable and abominable time shall come, in which life
shall be pleasant to none of men.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p4"></span>Cities shall be utterly overthrown,
and shall perish; not only by fire and the sword, but also by continual
earthquakes and overflowings of waters, and by frequent diseases and
repeated famines. For the atmosphere will be tainted, and become corrupt
and pestilential—at one time by unseasonable rains, at another by barren
drought, now by colds, and now by excessive heats. Nor will the earth
give its fruit to man: no field, or tree, or vine will produce anything;
but after they have given the greatest hope in the blossom, they will
fail in the fruit. Fountains also shall be dried up, together with the
rivers; so that there shall not be a sufficient supply for drinking; and
waters shall be changed into blood or bitterness. On account of these
things, beasts shall fail on the land, and birds in the air, and fishes
in the sea. Wonderful prodigies also in heaven shall confound the minds
of men with the greatest terrors, and the trains of comets, and the
darkness of the sun, and the colour of the moon, and the gliding of the
falling stars. Nor, however, will these things take place in the
accustomed manner; but there will suddenly appear stars unknown and
unseen by the eyes; the sun will be perpetually darkened, so that there
will be scarcely any distinction between the night and the day; the moon
will now fail, not for three hours only, but overspread with perpetual
blood, will go through extraordinary movements, so that <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-Page_214"></span>it
will not be easy for man to ascertain the courses of the heavenly bodies
or the system of the times; for there will either be summer in the
winter, or winter in the summer. Then the year will be shortened, and
the month diminished, and the day contracted into a short space; and
stars shall fall in great numbers, so that all the heaven will appear
dark without any lights. The loftiest mountains also will fall, and be
levelled with the plains; the sea will be rendered unnavigable.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p5"></span>And that nothing may be wanting to
the evils of men and the earth, the trumpet shall be heard from heaven,
which the <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p5.1"></span>Sibyl foretells in this
manner:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p5.2"></span> “The trumpet from heaven shall
> utter its wailing voice.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p6"></span>And then all shall tremble and quake
at that mournful sound. <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) But
then, through the anger of God against the men who have not known
righteousness, the sword and fire, famine and disease, shall reign; and,
above all things, fear always overhanging. Then they shall call upon
God, but He will not hear them; death shall be desired, but it will not
come; not even shall night give rest to their fear, nor shall sleep
approach to their eyes, but anxiety and watchfulness shall consume the
souls of men; they shall deplore and lament, and gnash their teeth; they
shall congratulate the dead, and bewail the living. Through these and
many other evils there shall be desolation on the earth, and the world
shall be disfigured and deserted, which is thus expressed in the verses
of the <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p7.4"></span>Sibyl:—  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p7.5"></span> “The world shall be despoiled
> of beauty, through the destruction of men.”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p8"></span>For the human race will be so
consumed, that scarcely the tenth part of men will be left; and from
whence a thousand had gone forth, scarcely a hundred will go forth. Of
the worshippers of God also, two parts will perish; and the third part,
which shall have been proved, will remain.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[213:1398](0070180.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p0.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Prodigiis. \[These primitive
interpretations of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1.2"></span>Daniel and St.
<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1.3"></span>John may be compared with the
expositions of <span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1.4"></span>Victorinus, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p1.5"></span>infra.\]  

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[213:1399](0070180.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p3.1"></span>Concisa.  

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[214:1400](0070180.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p7"></span> \[P. 210, note 2, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p7.2"></span>supra <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xvi-p7.3"></span>Tuba spargens mirum sonum.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XVII.—Of the false prophet, and the hardships of the
righteous, and his destruction](0070181)
