[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070434)  [Next](0070436) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Sec. III.—How the Bishop is to Treat the Innocent, the Guilty, and the Penitent.

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p0.2"></span>What Ought to Be the Character of the Initiated.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>VII</span>. Beloved, be it known to you that
those who are baptized into the death of our Lord Jesus are obliged to
go on no longer in sin; for as those who are dead cannot work wickedness
any longer, so those who are dead with Christ cannot practice
wickedness. We do not therefore believe, brethren, that any one who has
received the washing of life continues in the practice of the licentious
acts of transgressors. Now he who sins after his baptism, unless he
repent and forsake his sins, shall be condemned to hell-fire. <span
id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_399"></span>  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p1.2"></span>Concerning a Person Falsely Accused, or a Person Convicted.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>VIII</span>. But if any one be maliciously
prosecuted by the heathen, because he will not still go along with them
to the same excess of riot, let him know that such a one is blessed of
God, according as our Lord says in the Gospel: “Blessed are ye when men
shall reproach you, or persecute you, or say all manner of evil against
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for your reward
is great in heaven.” <span id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625) If,
therefore, any one be slandered and falsely accused, such a one is
blessed; for the Scripture says, “A man that is a reprobate is not tried
by God.” <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) But if any one be
convicted as having done a wicked action, such a one not only hurts
himself, but occasions the whole body of the Church and its doctrine to
be blasphemed; as if we Christians did not practice those things that we
declare to be good and honest, and we ourselves shall be reproached by
the Lord, that “they say and do not.” <span
id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627) Wherefore the bishop must boldly
reject such as these upon full conviction, unless they change their
course of life.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p5.2"></span>That a Bishop Ought Not to Receive Bribes.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>IX</span>. For the bishop must not only
himself give no offence, but must be no respecter of persons; in
meekness instructing those that offend. But if he himself has not a good
conscience, and is a respecter of persons for the sake of filthy lucre,
and receiving of bribes, and spares the open offender, and permits him
to continue in the Church, he disregards the voice of God and of our
Lord, which says, “Thou shalt exactly execute right judgment.” <span
id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628) “Thou shalt not accept persons in
judgment: thou shalt not justify the ungodly.” <span
id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) “Thou shalt not receive gifts
against any one’s life; for gifts do blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.” <span
id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630) And elsewhere He says: “Take away
from among yourselves that wicked person.” <span
id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631) And Solomon says in his Proverbs:
“Cast out a pestilent fellow from the congregation, and strife will go
out along with him.” <span id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>That a Bishop Who by Wrong Judgment Spares an Offender is Himself Guilty.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>X</span>. But he who does not consider
these things, will, contrary to justice, spare him who deserves
punishment; as <span id="ix.iii.iii-p12.2"></span>Saul spared <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p12.3"></span>Agag, <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633) and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p13.2"></span>Eli <span
id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634) his sons, “who knew not the Lord.”
Such a one profanes his own dignity, and that Church of God which is in
his parish. Such a one is esteemed unjust before God and holy men, as
affording occasion of scandal to many of the newly baptized, and to the
catechumens; as also to the youth of both sexes, to whom a woe belongs,
add “a mill-stone about his neck,” <span
id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) and drowning, on account of his
guilt. For, observing what a person their governor is, through his
wickedness and neglect of justice they will grow sceptical, and,
indulging the same disease, will be compelled to perish with him; as was
the case of the people joining with <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>Jeroboam, <span
id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) and those which were in the
conspiracy with <span id="ix.iii.iii-p16.2"></span>Corah. <span
id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637) But if the offender sees that the
bishop and deacons are innocent and unblameable, and the flock pure, he
will either not venture to despise their authority, and to enter into
the Church of God at all, as one smitten by his own conscience: or if he
values nothing, and ventures to enter in, either he will be convicted
immediately, as <span id="ix.iii.iii-p17.2"></span>Uzza <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638) at the ark, when he touched it to
support it; and as <span id="ix.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>Achan, <span
id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639) when he stole the accursed thing;
and as <span id="ix.iii.iii-p19.2"></span>Gehazi, <span
id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) when he coveted the money of <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p20.2"></span>Naaman, and so will be immediately
punished: or else he will be admonished by the pastor, and drawn to
repentance. For when he looks round the whole Church one by one, and can
spy no blemish, neither in the bishop nor in the people who are under
his care, he will be put to confusion, and pricked at the heart, and in
a peaceable manner will go his way with shame and many tears, and the
flock will remain pure. He will apply himself to God with tears, and
will repent of his sins, and have hope. Nay, the whole flock, at the
sight of his tears, will be instructed, because a sinner avoids
destruction by repentance.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p20.3"></span>How a Bishop Ought to Judge Offenders.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>XI</span>. Upon this account, therefore, O
bishop, endeavour to be pure in thy actions, and to adorn thy place and
dignity, which is that of one sustaining the character of God among men,
as being set over all men, over priests, kings, rulers, fathers,
children, teachers, and in general over all those who are subject to
thee: and so sit in the Church when thou speakest, as having authority
to judge offenders. For to you, O bishops, it is said: “Whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) <span id="page_400">p. 400</span>
<span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_400"></span>  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p22.2"></span>Instruction as to How a Bishop Ought to Behave Himself to the Penitent.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>XII</span>. Do thou therefore, O bishop,
judge with authority like God, yet receive the penitent; for God is a
God of mercy. Rebuke those that sin, admonish those that are not
converted, exhort those that stand to persevere in their goodness,
receive the penitent; for the Lord God has promised with an oath to
afford remission to the penitent for what things they have done amiss.
For He says by Ezekiel: “Speak unto them, As I live, saith the Lord, I
would not the death of a sinner, but that the wicked turn from his evil
way, and live. Turn ye therefore front your evil ways; for why will ye
die, O house of Israel?” <span id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) Here
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p24.2"></span>the word <span
id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) affords hope to sinners, that if
they will repent they shall have hope of salvation, lest otherwise out
of despair they yield themselves up to their transgressions; but that,
having hope of salvation, they may he converted, and may address to God
with tears, on account of their sins, and may repent from their hearts,
and so appease His displeasure towards them; so shall they receive a
pardon from Him, as from a merciful Father.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p25.2"></span>That We Ought to Beware How We Make Trial of Any Sinful Course.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p26"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>XIII</span>. Yet it is very necessary that
those who are yet innocent should continue so, and not make an
experiment what sin is, that they may not have occasion for trouble,
sorrow, and those lamentations which are in order to forgiveness. For
how dost thou know, O man, when thou sinnest, whether thou shalt live
any number of days in this present state, that thou mayest have time to
repent? For the time of thy departure out of this world is uncertain;
and if thou diest in sin, there will remain no repentance for thee; as
God says by David, “In the grave who will confess to Thee?” <span
id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) It behoves us, therefore, to be
ready in the doing of our duty, that so we may await our passage into
another world without sorrow. Wherefore also the Divine Word exhorts,
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p27.2"></span>speaking to thee by the wise
Solomon, <span id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645) “Prepare thy works
against thy exit, and provide all beforehand in the field,” <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) lest some of the things necessary
to thy journey be wanting; as the oil of piety was deficient in the five
foolish virgins <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) mentioned in
the Gospel, when they, on account of their having extinguished their
lamps of divine knowledge, were shut out of the bride-chamber. Wherefore
he who values the security of his soul will take care to be out of
danger, by keeping free from sin, that so he may preserve the advantage
of his former good works to himself. Do thou, therefore, so judge as
executing judgment for God. For, as the Scripture says, “the judgment is
the Lord’s.” <span id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) In the first
place, therefore, condemn the guilty person with authority; afterwards
try to bring him home with mercy and compassion, and readiness to
receive him, promising him salvation if he will change his course of
life, and become a penitent; and when he does repent, and has submitted
to his chastisement, receive him: remembering that our Lord has said,
“There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.” <span
id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p32.2"></span>Concerning Those Who Affirm that Penitents are Not to Be Received into the Church. That a Righteous Person, Although He Converse with a Sinner, Will Not Perish with Him. That No Person is Punished for Another, But Every One Must Give an Account of Himself. That We Must Assist Those Who are Weak in the Faith; And that a Bishop Must Not Be Governed by Any Turbulent Person Among the Laity.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p33"></span>XIV. But if thou refusest to receive
him that repents, thou exposest him to those who lie in wait to destroy,
forgetting what David says: “Deliver not my soul, which confesses to
Thee, unto destroying beasts.” <span
id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) Wherefore <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p34.2"></span>Jeremiah, when he is exhorting men to
repentance, says thus: “Shall not he that falleth arise? or he that
turneth away, cannot he return? Wherefore have my people gone back by a
shameless backsliding? and they are hardened in their purpose. <span
id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) Turn, ye backsliding children, and
I will heal your backslidings.” <span
id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) Receive, therefore, without any
doubting, him that repents. Be not hindered by such unmerciful men, who
say that we must not be defiled with such as those, nor so much as speak
to them: for such advice is from men that are unacquainted with God and
His providence, and are unreasonable judges, and unmerciful brutes.
These men are ignorant that we ought to avoid society with offenders,
not in discourse, but in actions: for “the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him.” <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) And again: “If a
land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, and I stretch out my
hand upon it, and break the staff of bread upon it, and send famine upon
it, and destroy man and beast therein: though these three men, <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p37.2"></span>Noah, <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p37.3"></span>Job, and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p37.4"></span>Daniel, were in the midst of it, they shall
only save their own souls <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="ix.iii.iii-Page_401"></span>by their righteousness, saith the Lord
God.” <span id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) The Scripture most
clearly shows that a righteous man that converses with a wicked man does
not perish with him. For in the present world the righteous and the
wicked are mingled together in the common affairs of life, but not in
holy communion: and in this the friends and favourites of God are guilty
of no sin. For they do but imitate “their Farther which is in heaven,
who maketh His sun to rise on the righteous and unrighteous, and sendeth
His rain on the evil and on the good;” <span
id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) and the righteous man undergoes no
peril on this account. For those who conquer and those who are conquered
are in the same place of running, but only those who have bravely
undergone the race are where the garland is bestowed; and “no one is
crowned, unless he strive lawfully.” <span
id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656) For every one shall give account of
himself, and God will not destroy the righteous with the wicked; for
with Him it is a constant rule, that innocence is never punished. For
neither did He drown <span id="ix.iii.iii-p40.2"></span>Noah, nor burn
up <span id="ix.iii.iii-p40.3"></span>Lot, nor destroy <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p40.4"></span>Rahab for company. And if you desire to
know how this matter was among us, <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p40.5"></span>Judas was one of us, and took the like part
of the ministry which we had; and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p40.6"></span>Simon the magician received the seal of the
Lord. Yet both the one and the other proving wicked, the former hanged
himself, and the latter, as he flew in the air in a manner unnatural,
was dashed against the earth. Moreover, <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p40.7"></span>Noah and his sons with him were in the ark;
but <span id="ix.iii.iii-p40.8"></span>Ham, who alone was found wicked,
received punishment in his son. <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) But if fathers are not punished for
their children, nor children for their fathers, it is thence clear that
neither will wives be punished for their husbands, nor servants for
their masters, nor one relation for another, nor one friend for another,
nor the righteous for the wicked. But every one will be required an
account of his own doing. For neither was punishment inflicted on <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p41.2"></span>Noah for the world, nor was <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p41.3"></span>Lot destroyed by fire for the Sodomites,
nor was <span id="ix.iii.iii-p41.4"></span>Rahab slain for the
inhabitants of <span id="ix.iii.iii-p41.5"></span>Jericho, nor <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p41.6"></span>Israel for the Egyptians. For not the
dwelling together, but the agreement in their sentiments, alone could
condemn the righteous with the wicked. We ought not therefore to hearken
to such persons who call for death, and hate mankind, and love
accusations, and under fair pretences bring men to death. For one man
shall not die for another, but “every one is held with the chains of his
own sins.” <span id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) And, “behold, the
man and his work is before his face.” <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) Now we ought to assist those who
are with us, <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) and are in
danger, and fall, and, as far as lies in our power, to reduce them to
sobriety by our exhortations, and so save them from death. For “the
whole have no need of the physician, but the sick;” <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) since “it is not pleasing in the
sight of your Father that one of these little ones should perish.” <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) For we ought not to establish the
will of hard-hearted men, but the will of the God and Father of the
universe, which is revealed to us by <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p46.2"></span>Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.  

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p47"></span>For it is not equitable that thou, O
bishop, who art the head, shouldst submit to the tail, that is, to some
seditious person among the laity, to the destruction of another, but to
God alone. For it is thy privilege to govern those under thee, but not
to be governed by them. For neither does a son, who is subject by the
course of generation, govern his father; nor a slave, who is subject by
law, govern his master; nor does a scholar govern his teacher, nor a
soldier his king, nor any of the laity his bishop. For that there is no
reason to suppose that such as converse with the wicked, in order to
their instruction in the word, are defiled by or partake of their sins,
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p47.1"></span>Ezekiel, as it were on purpose
preventing the suspicions of ill-disposed persons, says thus: “Why do
you speak this proverb concerning the land of Israel? The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge. As I live,
saith the Lord God, ye shall not henceforth have occasion to use this
proverb in Israel. For all souls are mine, in like manner as the soul of
the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth,
it shall die. But the man who is righteous, and does judgment and
justice” (and so the prophet reckons up the rest of the virtues, and
then adds for a conclusion, “Such a one is just”), “he shall surely
live, saith the Lord God. And if he beget a son who is a robber, a
shedder of blood, and walks not in the way of his righteous father” (and
when the prophet had added what follows, he adds in the conclusion), “he
shall certainly not live: he has done all this wickedness; he shall
surely die; his blood shall be upon him. Yet they will ask thee, Why?
Does not the son bear the iniquity of the father; or his righteousness,
having exercised righteousness and mercy himself? And thou shalt say
unto them, The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father, and the father shall not bear the iniquity
of the son. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon <span id="page_402">p.
402</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_402"></span>him.” <span
id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) And a little after he says: “When
the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth
iniquity, all his righteousness, by reason of all his wickedness which
he has committed, shall not be mentioned to him: in his iniquity which
he hath committed, and in his sin which he hath sinned, in them shall he
die.” And a little after he adds: “When the wicked turneth away from his
wickedness which he hath committed, and doth judgment and justice, he
hath preserved his soul, he hath turned away from all his ungodliness
which he hath done; he shall surely live, he shall not die.” And
afterwards: “I will judge every one of you according to his ways, O
house of Israel, saith the Lord God.”  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p48.2"></span>That a Priest Must Neither Overlook Offences, Nor Be Rash in Punishing Them.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p49"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>XV</span>. Observe, you who are our beloved
sons, how merciful yet righteous the Lord our God is; how gracious and
kind to men; and yet most certainly “He will not acquit the
guilty:” <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) though He welcomes
the returning sinner, and revives him, leaving no room for suspicion to
such as wish to judge sternly and to reject offenders entirely, and to
refuse to vouchsafe to them exhortations which might bring them to
repentance. In contradiction to such, God by Isaiah says to the bishops:
“Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, ye priests: speak comfortably to
Jerusalem.” It therefore behoves you, upon hearing those words of His,
to encourage those who have offended, and lead them to repentance, and
afford them hope, and not vainly to suppose that you shall be partakers
of their offences on account of such your love to them. Receive the
penitent with alacrity, and rejoice over them, and with mercy and bowels
of compassion judge the sinners. For if a person was walking by the side
of a river, and ready to stumble, and thou shouldest push him and thrust
him into the river, instead of offering him thy hand for his assistance,
thou wouldst be guilty of the murder of thy brother; whereas thou
oughtest rather to lend thy helping hand as he was ready to fall, lest
he perish without remedy, that both the people may take warning, and the
offender may not utterly perish. It is thy duty, O bishop, neither to
overlook the sins of the people, nor to reject those who are penitent,
that thou mayst not unskilfully destroy the Lord’s flock, or dishonour
His new name, which is imposed on His people, and thou thyself beest
reproached as those ancient pastors were, of whom God speaks thus to
Jeremiah: “Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard; they have polluted
my heritage.” <span id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665) And in another
passage: “My anger is waxed hot against the shepherds, and against the
lambs shall I have indignation.” <span
id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666) And elsewhere: “Ye are the priests
that dishonour my name.” <span id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p53.2"></span>Of Repentance, the Manner of It, and Rules About It.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p54"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>XVI</span>. When thou seest the offender,
with severity command him to be cast out; and as he is going out, let
the deacons also treat him with severity, and then let them go and seek
for him, and detain him out of the Church; and when they come in, let
them entreat thee for him. For our Saviour Himself entreated His Father
for those who had sinned, as it is written in the Gospel: “Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668) Then order the offender to come in;
and if upon examination thou findest that he is penitent, and fit to be
received at all into the Church when thou hast afflicted him his days of
fasting, according to the degree of his offence—as two, three, five, or
seven weeks—so set him at liberty, and speak such things to him as are
fit to be said in way of reproof, instruction, and exhortation to a
sinner for his reformation, that so he may continue privately in his
humility, and pray to God to be merciful to him, saying: “If Thou, O
Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who should stand? For with Thee
there is propitiation.” <span id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669) Of
this sort of declaration is that which is said in the book of Genesis to
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p56.2"></span>Cain: “Thou hast sinned; be
quiet;” <span id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670) that is, do not go on
in sin. For that a sinner ought to be ashamed for his own sin, that
oracle of God delivered to <span id="ix.iii.iii-p57.2"></span>Moses
concerning <span id="ix.iii.iii-p57.3"></span>Miriam is a sufficient
proof, when he prayed that she might be forgiven. For says God to him:
“If her father had spit in her face, should she not be ashamed? Let her
be shut out of the camp seven days, and afterwards let her come in
again.” <span id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671) We therefore ought to
do so with offenders, when they profess their repentance,—namely, to
separate them some determinate time, according to the proportion of
their offence, and afterwards, like fathers to children, receive them
again upon their repentance.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p58.2"></span>That a Bishop Must Be Unblameable, and a Pattern for Those Who are Under His Charge.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p59"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p59.1"></span>XVII</span>. But if the bishop himself be
an offender, how will he be able any longer to prosecute the <span
id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="ix.iii.iii-Page_403"></span>offence of another? Or how will he be
able to reprove another, either he or his deacons, if by accepting of
persons, or receiving of bribes, they have not all a clear conscience?
For when the ruler asks, and the judge receives, judgment is not brought
to perfection; but when both are “companions of thieves, and regardless
of doing justice to the widows,” <span
id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672) those who are under the bishop will
not be able to support and vindicate him: for they will say to him what
is written in the Gospel, “Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
eye?” <span id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) Let the bishop,
therefore, with his deacons, dread to bear any such thing; that is, let
him give no occasion for it. For an offender, when he sees any other
doing as bad as himself, will be encouraged to do the very same things;
and then the wicked one, taking occasion from a single instance, works
in others, which God forbid: and by that means the flock will be
destroyed. For the greater number of offenders there are, the greater is
the mischief that is done by them: for sin which passes without
correction grows worse and worse, and spreads to others; since “a little
leaven infects the whole lump,” <span
id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) and one thief spreads the
abomination over a whole nation and “dead flies spoil the whole pot of
sweet ointment;” <span id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) and “when a
king hearkens to unrighteous counsel, all the servants under him are
wicked.” <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676) So one scabbed
sheep, if not separated from those that are whole, infects the rest with
the same distemper; and a man infected with the plague is to be avoided
by all men; and a mad dog is dangerous to every one that he touches. If,
therefore, we neglect to separate the transgressor from the Church of
God, we shall make the “Lord’s house a den of thieves.” <span
id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) For it is the bishop’s duty not to
be silent in the case of offenders, but to rebuke them, to exhort them,
to beat them down, to afflict them with fastings, that so he may strike
a pious dread into the rest: for, as He says, “make ye the children of
Israel pious.” <span id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) For the bishop
must be one who discourages sin by his exhortations, and sets a pattern
of righteousness, and proclaims those good things which are prepared by
God, and declares that wrath which will come at the day of judgment,
lest he contemn and neglect the plantation of God; and, on account of
his carelessness, hear that which is said in Hosea: “Why have ye held
your peace at impiety, and have reaped the fruit thereof?” <span
id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p67.2"></span>That a Bishop Must Take Care that His People Do Not Sin, Considering that He is Set for a Watchman Among Them.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p68"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p68.1"></span>XVIII</span>. Let the bishop, therefore,
extend his concern to all sorts of people: to those who have not
offended, that they may continue innocent; to those who offend, that
they may repent. For to you does the Lord speak thus: “Take heed that ye
offend not one of these little ones.” <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680) It is your duty also to give
remission to the penitent. For as soon as ever one who has offended
says, in the sincerity of his soul, “I have sinned against the Lord,”
the Holy Spirit answers, “The Lord also hath forgiven thy sin; be of
good cheer, thou shalt not die.” <span
id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681) Be sensible, therefore, O bishop,
of the dignity of thy place, that as thou hast received the power of
binding, so hast thou also that of loosing. Having therefore the power
of loosing, know thyself, and behave thyself in this world as becomes
thy place, being aware that thou hast a great account to give. “For to
whom,” as the Scripture says, “men have entrusted much, of him they will
require the more.” <span id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682) For no one
man is free from sin, excepting Him that was made man for us; since it
is written: “No man is pure from filthiness; no, not though he be but
one day old.” <span id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) Upon which
account the lives and conduct of the ancient holy men and patriarchs are
described; not that we may reproach them from our reading, but that we
ourselves may repent, and have hope that we also shall obtain
forgiveness. For their blemishes are to us both security and admonition,
because we hence learn, when we have offended, that if we repent we
shall have pardon. For it is written: “Who can boast that he has a clean
heart? and who dare affirm that he is pure from sin?” <span
id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684) No man, therefore, is without sin.
Do thou therefore labour to the utmost of thy power to be unblameable;
and be solicitous of all the parts of thy flock, lest any one be
scandalized on thy account, and thereby perish. For the layman is
solicitous only for himself, but thou for all, as having a greater
burden, and carrying a heavier load. For it is written: “And the Lord
said unto <span id="ix.iii.iii-p73.2"></span>Moses, Thou and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p73.3"></span>Aaron shall bear the sins of the
priesthood.” <span id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) Since,
therefore, thou art to give an account of all, take care of all.
Preserve those that are sound, admonish those that sin; and when thou
hast afflicted them with fasting, give them ease by remission; and when
with tears the offender begs readmission, receive him, and let the whole
Church pray for him; and when by imposition <span id="page_404">p.
404</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_404"></span>of thy hand thou hast
admitted him, give him leave to abide afterwards in the flock. But for
the drowsy and the careless, do thou endeavour to convert and confirm,
and warn and cure them, as sensible how great a reward thou shalt have
for doing so, and how great danger thou wilt incur if thou beest
negligent therein. For Ezekiel speaks thus to those overseers who take
no care of the people: “Woe unto the shepherds of Israel, for they have
fed themselves; the shepherds feed not the sheep, but themselves. Ye eat
the milk, and are clothed with the wool; ye slay the strong, ye do not
feed the sheep. The weak have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was
broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away,
neither have ye sought that which was lost; but, violently ye chastised
them with insult: and they were scattered, because there was no
shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts of the forest.” And
again: “The shepherds did not search for my sheep; and the shepherds fed
themselves, but they fed not my sheep.” And a little after: “Behold, I
am against the shepherds, and I will require my sheep at their hands,
and cause them to cease from feeding my sheep, neither shall the
shepherds feed themselves any more; and I will deliver my sheep out of
their hands, and they shall not be meat for them.” And he also adds,
speaking to the people: “Behold, I will judge between sheep and sheep,
and between rams and rams. Seemed it a small thing unto you to have
eaten up the good pasture, and to have trodden down with your feet the
residue of your pasture, and that the sheep have eaten what was trodden
down with your feet? “And a little after He adds: “And ye shall know
that I am the Lord, and you the sheep of my pasture; ye are my men, and
I am your God, saith the Lord God.” <span
id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p75.2"></span>That a Shepherd Who is Careless of His Sheep Will Be Condemned, and that a Sheep Which Will Not Be Led by the Shepherd is to Be Punished.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p76"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p76.1"></span>XIX</span>. Hear, O ye bishops; and hear, O
ye of the laity, how God speaks: “I will judge between ram and ram, and
between sheep and sheep.” And He says to the shepherds: “Ye shall be
judged for your unskilfulness, and for destroying the sheep.” That is, I
will judge between one bishop and another, and between one lay person
and another, and between one ruler and another (for these sheep and
these rams are not irrational, but rational creatures): lest at any time
a lay person should say, I am a sheep and not a shepherd, and I am not
concerned for myself; let the shepherd look to that, for he alone will
be required to give an account for me. For as that sheep that will not
follow its good shepherd is exposed to the wolves, to its destruction;
so that which follows a bad shepherd is also exposed to unavoidable
death, since his shepherd will devour him. Wherefore care must be had to
avoid destructive shepherds.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p76.2"></span>How the Governed are to Obey the Bishops Who are Set Over Them.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p77"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p77.1"></span>XX</span>. As to a good shepherd, let the
lay person honour him, love him, reverence him as his lord, as his
master, as the high priest of God, as a teacher of piety. For he that
heareth him, heareth Christ; and he that rejecteth him, rejecteth
Christ; and he who does not receive Christ, does not receive His God and
Father: for, says He, “He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that
rejecteth you, rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me, rejecteth Him
that sent me.” <span id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) In like
manner, let the bishop love the laity as his children, fostering and
cherishing them with affectionate diligence; as eggs, in order to the
hatching of young ones; or as young ones, taking them in his arms, to
the rearing them into birds: admonishing all men; reproving all who
stand in need of reproof; reproving, that is, but not striking; beating
them down to make them ashamed, but not overthrowing them; warning them
in order to their conversion: chiding them in order to their reformation
and better course of life; watching the strong, that is, keeping him
firm in the faith who is already strong; feeding the people peaceably;
strengthening the weak, that is, confirming with exhortation that which
is tempted; healing that which is sick, that is, curing by instruction
that which is weak in the faith through doubtfulness of mind; binding up
that which is broken, that is, binding up by comfortable admonitions
that which is gone astray, or wounded, bruised, or broken by their sins,
and put out of the way; leasing it of its offences, and giving hope: by
this means restore it in strength to the Church, bringing it back into
the flock. Bring again that which is driven away, that is, do not permit
that which is in its sins, and is cast out by way of punishment, to
continue excluded; but receiving it, and bringing it back, restore it to
the flock, that is, to the people of the undefiled Church. Seek for that
which is lost, that is, do not suffer that which desponds of its
salvation, by reason of the multitude of its offences, utterly to
perish. Do thou search for that which is grown sleepy, drowsy, and
sluggish, and that which is unmindful of its own life, through the depth
of its sleep, and which is at a great distance <span id="page_405">p.
405</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_405"></span>from its own flock, so
as to be in danger of falling among the wolves, and being devoured by
them. Bring it back by admonition, exhort it to be watchful; and
insinuate hope, not permitting it to say that which was said by some:
“Our impieties are upon us, and we pine away in them; how shall we then
live?” <span id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) As far as possible,
therefore, let the bishop make the offence his own, and say to the
sinner, Do thou but return, and I will undertake to suffer death for
thee, as our Lord suffered death for me, and for all men. For “the good
shepherd lays down his life for the sheep; but he that is an hireling,
and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf
coming, that is, the devil, and he leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and
the wolf seizes upon them.” <span id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689)
We must know, therefore, that God is very merciful to those who have
offended, and hath promised repentance with an oath. But he who has
offended, and is unacquainted with this promise of God concerning
repentance, and does not understand His long-suffering and forbearance,
and besides is ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, which proclaim
repentance, inasmuch as he has never learned them from you, perishes
through his folly. But do thou, like a compassionate shepherd, and a
diligent feeder of the flock, search out, and keep an account of thy
flock. Seek that which is wanting; <span
id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690) as the Lord God our gracious Father
has sent His own Son, the good Shepherd and Saviour, our Master <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p81.2"></span>Jesus, and has commanded Him to “leave the
ninety-nine upon the mountains, and to go in search after that which was
lost, and when He had found it, to take it upon His shoulders, and to
carry it into the flock, rejoicing that He had found that which was
lost.” <span id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691) In like manner, be
obedient, O bishop, and do thou seek that which was lost, guide that
which has wandered out of the right way, bring back that which is gone
astray: for thou hast authority to bring them back, and to deliver those
that are broken-hearted by remission. For by thee does our Saviour say
to him who is discouraged under the sense of his sins, “Thy sins are
forgiven thee: thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.” <span
id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692) But this peace and haven of
tranquillity is the Church of Christ, into which do thou, when thou hast
loosed them from their sins, restore them, as being now sound and
unblameable, of good hope, diligent, laborious in good works. As a
skilful and compassionate physician, heal all such as have wandered in
the ways of sin; for “they that are whole have no need of a physician,
but they that are sick. For the Son of man came to save and to seek that
which was lost.” <span id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693) Since thou
art therefore a physician of the Lord’s Church, provide remedies
suitable to every patient’s case. Cure them, heal them by all means
possible; restore them sound to the Church. Feed the flock, “not with
insolence and contempt, as lording it over them,” <span
id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) but as a gentle shepherd,
“gathering the lambs into thy bosom, and gently leading those which are
with young.” <span id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695)  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p86.3"></span>That It is a Dangerous Thing to Judge Without Hearing Both Sides, or to Determine of Punishment Against a Person Before He is Convicted.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p87"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p87.1"></span>XXI</span>. Be gentle, gracious, mild,
without guile, without falsehood; not rigid, not insolent, not severe,
not arrogant, not unmerciful, not puffed up, not a man-pleaser, not
timorous, not double-minded, not one that insults over the people that
are under thee, not one that conceals the divine laws and the promises
to repentance, not hasty in thrusting out and expelling, but steady, not
one that delights in severity, not heady. Do not admit less evidence to
convict any one than that of three witnesses, and those of known and
established reputation; inquire whether they do not accuse out of
ill-will or envy: for there are many that delight in mischief, forward
in discourse, slanderous, haters of the brethren, making it their
business to scatter the sheep of Christ; whose affirmation if thou
admittest without nice scanning the same, thou wilt disperse thy flock,
and betray it to be devoured by wolves, that is, by demons and wicked
men, or rather not men, but wild beasts in the shape of men—by the
heathen, by the Jews, and by the atheistic heretics. For those
destroying wolves soon address themselves to any one that is cast out of
the Church, and esteem him as a lamb delivered for them to devour,
reckoning his destruction their own gain. For he that is “their father,
the devil, is a murderer.” <span id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696) He
also who is separated unjustly by thy want of care in judging will be
overwhelmed with sorrow, and be disconsolate, and so will either wander
over to the heathen, or be entangled in heresies, and so will be
altogether estranged from the Church and from hope in God, and will be
entangled in impiety, whereby thou wilt be guilty of his perdition: for
it is not fair to be too hasty in casting out an offender, but slow in
receiving him when he returns; to be forward in cutting off, but
unmerciful when he is sorrowful, and ought to be healed. For of such as
these speaks the divine Scripture: “Their feet run to mischief; they are
hasty to shed blood. Destruction and misery are in their <span
id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_406"></span>ways,
and the way of peace have they not known. The fear of God is not before
their eyes.” <span id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697) Now the way of
peace is our Saviour <span id="ix.iii.iii-p89.5"></span>Jesus Christ,
who has taught us, saying: “Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and
it shall be given to you;” <span id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698)
that is, give remission of sins, and your offences shall be forgiven
you. As also He instructed us by His prayer to say unto God: “Forgive us
our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) If, therefore, you do not forgive
offenders, how can you expect the remission of your own sins? Do not you
rather bind yourselves faster, by pretending in your prayers to forgive,
when you really do not forgive? Will you not be confronted with your own
words, when you say you forgive and do not forgive? For know ye, that he
who casts out one who has not behaved himself wickedly, or who will not
receive him that returns, is a murderer of his brother, and sheds his
blood, as <span id="ix.iii.iii-p91.2"></span>Cain did that of his
brother <span id="ix.iii.iii-p91.3"></span>Abel, and his “blood cries to
God,” <span id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700) and will be required.
For a righteous man unjustly slain by any one will be in rest with God
for ever. The same is the case of him who without cause is separated by
his bishop. He who has cast him out as a pestilent fellow when he was
innocent, is more furious than a murderer. Such a one has no regard to
the mercy of God, nor is mindful of His goodness to those that are
penitent, nor keeping in his eye the examples of those who, having been
once great offenders, received forgiveness upon their repentance. Upon
which account, he who casts off an innocent person is more cruel than he
that murders the body. In like manner, he who does not receive the
penitent, scatters the flock of Christ, being really against Him. For as
God is just in judging of sinners, so is He merciful in receiving them
when they return. For <span id="ix.iii.iii-p92.2"></span>David, the man
after God’s own heart, in his hymns ascribes both mercy and judgment to
Him.  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p92.3"></span>That David, the Ninevites, Hezekiah, and His Son Manasseh, are Eminent Examples of Repentance, the Prayer of Manasseh King of Judah.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p93"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p93.1"></span>XXII</span>. It is also thy duty, O bishop,
to have before thine eyes the examples of those that have gone before,
and to apply them skilfully to the cases of those who want words of
severity or of consolation. Besides, it is reasonable that in thy
administration of justice thou shouldest follow the will of God; and as
God deals with sinners, and with those who return, that thou shouldest
act accordingly in thy judging. Now, did not God by <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p93.2"></span>Nathan reproach <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p93.3"></span>David for his offence? And yet as soon as
he said he repented, He delivered him from death, saying, “Be of good
cheer; thou shalt not die.” <span id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701)
So also, when God had caused <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p94.2"></span>Jonah <span
id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) to be swallowed up by the sea and
the whale, upon his refusal to preach to the Ninevites, when yet he
prayed to Him out of the belly of the whale, He retrieved his life from
corruption. And when <span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.2"></span>Hezekiah had
been puffed up for a while, yet, as soon as he prayed with lamentation,
He remitted his offence. But, O ye bishops, hearken to an instance
useful upon this occasion. For it is written thus in the fourth book of
Kings and the second book of Chronicles: “And <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.3"></span>Hezekiah died; and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.4"></span>Manasseh his son reigned. He was twelve
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in
Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.5"></span>Hephzibah. And he did evil in the sight of
the Lord: he did not abstain from the abominations of the heathen, whom
the Lord destroyed from the face of the children of Israel. And <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.6"></span>Manasseh returned and built the high places
which <span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.7"></span>Hezekiah his father had
overthrown; and he reared pillars for Baal, and set up an altar for
Baal, and made groves, as did <span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.8"></span>Ahab
king of Israel. And he made altars in the house of the Lord, of which
the Lord spake to <span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.9"></span>David and to <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.10"></span>Solomon his son, saying, Therein will I
put my name. And <span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.11"></span>Manasseh set up
altars, and by them served Baal, and said, My name shall continue for
ever. <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) And he built altars to
the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord; and he
made his children pass through the fire in a place named Ge
Benennom; <span id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704) and he consulted
enchanters, and dealt with wizards and familiar spirits, and with
conjurers and observers of times, and with teraphim. And he sinned
exceedingly in the eyes of the Lord, to provoke Him to anger. And he set
a molten and a graven image, the image of his grove, which he made in
the house of the Lord, wherein the Lord had chosen to put His name in
Jerusalem, the holy city, for ever, and had said, I will no more remove
my foot from the land of Israel, which I gave to their fathers; only if
they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and
according to all the precepts that my servant <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.3"></span>Moses commanded them. And they hearkened
not. And <span id="ix.iii.iii-p97.4"></span>Manasseh seduced them to do
more evil before the Lord than did the nations whom the Lord cast out
from the face of the children of Israel. And the Lord spake concerning
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p97.5"></span>Manasseh and concerning His people by
the hand of His servants the prophets, saying, Because <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.6"></span>Manasseh king of Judah <span
id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span id="ix.iii.iii-Page_407"></span>has
done all these wicked abominations in a higher degree than the Amorite
did which was before him, and hath made Judah to sin with his idols,
thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I bring evils upon Jerusalem
and Judah, that whosoever heareth of them, both his ears shall tingle.
And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet
of the house of Ahab; and I will blot out Jerusalem as a table-book is
blotted out by wiping it. And I will turn it upside down; and I will
give up the remnant of my inheritance, and will deliver them into the
hands of their enemies, and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all
their enemies, because of all the evils which they have done in mine
eyes, and have provoked me to anger from the day that I brought their
fathers out of the land of Egypt even until this day. Moreover, <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.7"></span>Manasseh shed innocent blood very much,
till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another, beside his sins
wherewith he made Judah to sin in doing evil in the sight of the Lord.
And the Lord brought upon him the captains of the host of the king of
Assyria, and they caught <span id="ix.iii.iii-p97.8"></span>Manasseh in
bonds, and they bound him in fetters of brass, and brought him to
Babylon; and he was bound and shackled with iron all over in the house
of the prison. And bread made of bran was given unto him scantily, and
by weight, and water mixed with vinegar but a little and by measure, so
much as would keep him alive; and he was in straits and sore affliction.
And when he was violently afflicted, he besought the face of the Lord
his God, and humbled himself greatly before the face of the Lord God of
his fathers. And he prayed unto the Lord, saying, O Lord, almighty God
of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their righteous seed,
who hast made heaven and earth, with all the ornament thereof, who hast
bound the sea by the word of Thy commandment, who hast shut up the deep,
and sealed it by Thy terrible and glorious name, whom all men fear and
tremble before Thy power; for the majesty of Thy glory cannot be borne,
and Thine angry threatening towards sinners is insupportable. But Thy
merciful promise is unmeasurable and unsearchable; for Thou art <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.9"></span>the most high Lord, <span
id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) of great compassion,
long-suffering, very merciful, and repentest of the evils of men. Thou,
O Lord, according to Thy great goodness, hast promised repentance and
forgiveness to them that have sinned against Thee, and of Thine infinite
mercy hast appointed repentance unto sinners, that they may be saved.
Thou therefore, O Lord, that art the God of the just, has not appointed
repentance to the just as to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, which have not
sinned against Thee; but Thou hast appointed repentance unto me that am
a sinner: for I have sinned above the number of the sands of the sea. My
transgressions, O Lord, are multiplied; my transgressions are
multiplied, and I am not worthy to behold and see the height of heaven
for the multitude of mine iniquity. I am bowed down with many iron
bands; for I have provoked Thy wrath, and done evil before Thee, setting
up abominations, and multiplying offences. Now, therefore, I bow the
knee of mine heart, beseeching Thee of grace. I have sinned, O Lord, I
have sinned, and I acknowledge mine iniquities; wherefore I humbly
beseech Thee, forgive me, O Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not with
mine iniquities. Be not angry with me for ever, by reserving evil for
me; neither condemn me into the lower part of the earth. For Thou art
the God, even the God of them that repent, and in me Thou wilt show Thy
goodness; for Thou wilt save me that am unworthy, according to Thy great
mercy. Therefore I will praise Thee for ever all the days of my life;
for all the powers of the heavens do praise Thee, and Thine is the glory
for ever and ever. Amen. And the Lord heard his voice, and had
compassion upon him. And there appeared a flame of fire about him, and
all the iron shackles and chains which were about him fell off; and the
Lord healed <span id="ix.iii.iii-p98.2"></span>Manasseh from his
affliction, and brought him back to Jerusalem unto his kingdom: and
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p98.3"></span>Manasseh knew that the Lord He is God
alone. And he worshipped the Lord God alone with all his heart, and with
all his soul, all the days of his life; and he was esteemed righteous.
And he took away the strange gods and the graven image out of the house
of the Lord, and all the altars which he had built in the house of the
Lord, and all the altars in Jerusalem, and he cast them out of the city.
And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon
peace-offerings and thank-offerings. And <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p98.4"></span>Manasseh spake to Judah to serve the Lord
God of Israel. And he slept in peace with his fathers; and <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p98.5"></span>Amon his son reigned in his stead. And he
did evil in the sight of the Lord according to all things that <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p98.6"></span>Manasseh his father had done in the former
part of his reign. And he provoked the Lord his God to anger.” <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706)  

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p100"></span>Ye have heard, our beloved children,
how the Lord God for a while punished him that was addicted to idols,
and had slain many innocent persons; and yet that He received him when
he repented, and forgave him his offences, and restored him to his
kingdom. For He not only forgives the penitent, but reinstates them in
their former dignity. <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="ix.iii.iii-Page_408"></span>  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p100.1"></span>Amon May be an Example to Such as Sin with an High Hand.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p101"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p101.1"></span>XXIII</span>. There is no sin more
grievous than idolatry, for it is an impiety against God: and yet even
this sin has been forgiven, upon sincere repentance. But if any one sin
in direct opposition, and on purpose to try whether God will punish the
wicked or not, such a one shall have no remission, although he say with
himself, “All is well, and I will walk according to the conversation of
my evil heart.” Such a one was <span id="ix.iii.iii-p101.2"></span>Amon
the son of <span id="ix.iii.iii-p101.3"></span>Manasseh. For the
Scripture says: “And <span id="ix.iii.iii-p101.4"></span>Amon reasoned
an evil reasoning of transgression, and said, My father from his
childhood was a great transgressor, and repented in his old age; and now
I will walk as my soul lusteth, and afterwards I will return unto the
Lord. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were
before him. And the Lord God soon destroyed him utterly from His good
land. And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
house, and he reigned two years only.”  

#### <span id="ix.iii.iii-p101.5"></span>That Christ Jesus Our Lord Came to Save Sinners by Repentance.

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p102"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p102.1"></span>XXIV</span>. Take heed, therefore, ye of
the laity, lest any one of you fix the reasoning of <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p102.2"></span>Amon in his heart, and be suddenly cut
off, and perish. In the same manner, let the bishop take all the care he
can that those which are yet innocent may not fall into sin; and let him
heal and receive those which turn from their sins. But if he is
pitiless, and will not receive the repenting sinner, he will sin against
the Lord his God, pretending to be more just than God’s justice, and not
receiving him whom He has received, through Christ; for whose sake He
sent His Son upon earth to men, as a man; for whose sake God was pleased
that He, who was the Maker of man and woman, should be born of a woman;
for whose sake He did not spare Him from the cross, from death, and
burial, but permitted Him to die, who by nature could not suffer, His
beloved Son, God the Word, the Angel of His great council, that he might
deliver those from death who were obnoxious to death. Him do those
provoke to anger who do not receive the penitent. For He was not ashamed
of me, <span id="ix.iii.iii-p102.3"></span>Matthew, who had been
formerly a publican; and admitted of <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p102.4"></span>Peter, when he had through fear denied Him
three times, but had appeased Him by repentance, and had wept bitterly;
nay, He made him a shepherd to His own lambs. Moreover, He ordained
<span id="ix.iii.iii-p102.5"></span>Paul, our fellow-apostle, to be of a
persecutor an apostle, and declared him a chosen vessel, even when he
had heaped many mischiefs upon us before, and had blasphemed His sacred
name. He says also to another, a woman that was a sinner: “Thy sins,
which are many, are forgiven, for thou lovest much.” <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707) And when the elders had set another
woman which had sinned before Him, and had left the sentence to Him, and
were gone out, our Lord, the Searcher of the hearts, inquiring of her
whether the elders had condemned her, and being answered No, He said
unto her: “Go thy way therefore, for neither do I condemn thee.” <span
id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708) This <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p104.2"></span>Jesus, O ye bishops, our Saviour, our
King, and our God, ought to be set before you as your pattern; and Him
you ought to imitate, in being meek, quiet, compassionate, merciful,
peaceable, without passion, apt to teach, and diligent to convert,
willing to receive and to comfort; no strikers, not soon angry, not
injurious, not arrogant, not supercilious, not wine-bibbers, not
drunkards, not vainly expensive, not lovers of delicacies, not
extravagant, using the gifts of God not as another’s, but as their own,
as good stewards appointed over them, as those who will be required by
God to give an account of the same.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[399:2626](0070435.htm#fr_2625) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p3"></span> [Matt.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[399:2627](0070435.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p4"></span> This passage is not found in Scripture.
Some compare [Jas. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p4.1"></span> and [Heb. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[399:2628](0070435.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[399:2629](0070435.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p7"></span> [Deut. xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>,
i. 17.  

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[399:2630](0070435.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p8"></span> [Ex. xxiii.
7](../../../bib/sep/exo023.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[399:2631](0070435.htm#fr_2630) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p9"></span> [Ex. xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[399:2632](0070435.htm#fr_2631) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p10"></span> [Deut. xxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#025)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>,
xvi. 19, xvii. 7.  

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[399:2633](0070435.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p11"></span> [Prov. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[399:2634](0070435.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p13"></span> [1 Sam.
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[399:2635](0070435.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p14"></span> [1 Sam.
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[399:2636](0070435.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p15"></span> [Matt.
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[399:2637](0070435.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p16"></span> [1 Kings
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[399:2638](0070435.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p17"></span> [Num.
xvi.](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[399:2639](0070435.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p18"></span> [2 Sam.
vi.](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[399:2640](0070435.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p19"></span> [Josh.
vii.](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[399:2641](0070435.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p20"></span> [2 Kings
v.](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#000)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[399:2642](0070435.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p22"></span> [Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[400:2643](0070435.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p24"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[400:2644](0070435.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p25"></span> Not in V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[400:2645](0070435.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p27"></span> [Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[400:2646](0070435.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p28"></span> Not in V. mss.  

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[400:2647](0070435.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p29"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[400:2648](0070435.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p30"></span> [Matt.
xxv.](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[400:2649](0070435.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p31"></span> [Deut. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[400:2650](0070435.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p32"></span> [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[400:2651](0070435.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p34"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[400:2652](0070435.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p35"></span> [Jer.
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[400:2653](0070435.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p36"></span> [Jer. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[400:2654](0070435.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p37"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[401:2655](0070435.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p37.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p38"></span> [Ezek.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[401:2656](0070435.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p39"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[401:2657](0070435.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p40"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[401:2658](0070435.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p40.9"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p41"></span> A various reading gives: “<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p41.1"></span>Ham, one of his sons, who alone was found
wicked, received punishment.”  

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[401:2659](0070435.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p41.7"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p42"></span> [Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p42.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[401:2660](0070435.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p43"></span> [Isa. lxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#011)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[401:2661](0070435.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p44"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>ms</span>. reads: “those who are sick. ”  

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[401:2662](0070435.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p45"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[401:2663](0070435.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p46"></span> [Matt. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[402:2664](0070435.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p48"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[402:2665](0070435.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p50"></span> [Nah. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[402:2666](0070435.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p51"></span> [Jer. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[402:2667](0070435.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p52"></span> [Zech. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[402:2668](0070435.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p53"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[402:2669](0070435.htm#fr_2668) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p55"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[402:2670](0070435.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p56"></span> [Ps. cxxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[402:2671](0070435.htm#fr_2670) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p57"></span> [Gen. iv.
7](../../../bib/sep/gen004.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[402:2672](0070435.htm#fr_2671) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p57.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p58"></span> \[[Num. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>.—R.\]  

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[403:2673](0070435.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p60"></span> [Isa. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p60.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[403:2674](0070435.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p61"></span> [Luke vi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#041)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[403:2675](0070435.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p62"></span> [Gal. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[403:2676](0070435.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p63"></span> [Eccles. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p63.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[403:2677](0070435.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p64"></span> [Prov. xxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p64.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[403:2678](0070435.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p65"></span> [Matt. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p65.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[403:2679](0070435.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p66"></span> [Lev. xv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p66.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[403:2680](0070435.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p67"></span> [Hos. x.
13](../../../bib/sep/hos010.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p67.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[403:2681](0070435.htm#fr_2680) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p69"></span> [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p69.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[403:2682](0070435.htm#fr_2681) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p70"></span> Sam. xii. 13.  

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[403:2683](0070435.htm#fr_2682) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p71"></span> [Luke xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p71.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[403:2684](0070435.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p72"></span> [Job xiv.
4](../../../bib/sep/job014.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p72.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[403:2685](0070435.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p73"></span> [Prov. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p73.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[403:2686](0070435.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p73.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p74"></span> [Num. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p74.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[404:2687](0070435.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p75"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p75.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[404:2688](0070435.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p78"></span> [Luke x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p78.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[405:2689](0070435.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p79"></span> Ezek. xxxiii . 10.  

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[405:2690](0070435.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p80"></span> [John
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p80.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[405:2691](0070435.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p81"></span> [Matt. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p81.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[405:2692](0070435.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p81.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p82"></span> [Luke xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p82.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[405:2693](0070435.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p83"></span> [Luke v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p83.1"></span>;
[Matt. ix. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p83.2"></span>; [Mark v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p83.3"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[405:2694](0070435.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p83.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p84"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p84.1"></span>;
[Luke xix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p84.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[405:2695](0070435.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p84.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p85"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p85.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[405:2696](0070435.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p86"></span> [Matt. xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p86.1"></span>;
[Isa. xl. 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p86.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[405:2697](0070435.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p88"></span> [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p88.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[406:2698](0070435.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p89"></span> [Prov. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p89.1"></span>;
[Isa. 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p89.2"></span>;
[Ps. xxxvi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p89.3"></span>; [Rom. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p89.4"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[406:2699](0070435.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p89.6"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p90"></span> [Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p90.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[406:2700](0070435.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p91"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p91.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[406:2701](0070435.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p91.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p92"></span> [Gen. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p92.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[406:2702](0070435.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p93.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p94"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p94.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[406:2703](0070435.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p94.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p95"></span> [Jonah i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p95.1"></span>,
and ii.  

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[406:2704](0070435.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p95.12"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p96"></span> From “said” to “ever” is not in
Scripture.  

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[406:2705](0070435.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p97"></span> Taken from [2 Chron. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/sep/ch2023.htm#003)<span id="ix.iii.iii-p97.1"></span>,
LXX., instead of the reading of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.2"></span>mss</span>. “Gebanai.”  

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[407:2706](0070435.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p97.10"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p98"></span> Not in <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.iii-p98.1"></span>mss</span>.  

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[407:2707](0070435.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p98.7"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p99"></span> Kings xx., xxi.; <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p99.1"></span>2 Chron. xxxii., xxxiii.  

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[408:2708](0070435.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p102.6"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p103"></span> [Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p103.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[408:2709](0070435.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="ix.iii.iii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iii-p104"></span> [John viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011)<span
id="ix.iii.iii-p104.1"></span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. IV.—On the Management of the Resources Collected for the
Support of the Clergy, and the Relief of the Poor](0070436)
