[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070249)  [Next](0070251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXII.—Of Restraining the Pleasures of the Senses.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lviii-p1"></span>Anger is to be restrained when we
suffer an injury, that the evil may be suppressed which is imminent from
a contest, and that we may retain two of the greatest virtues,
harmlessness and patience. Let the desire of gain be broken when we have
that which is enough. For what madness is it to labour in heaping up
those things which must pass to others, either by robbery, or theft, or
by proscription, or by death? Let lust not go beyond the marriage-bed,
but be subservient to the procreation of children. For a too great
eagerness for pleasure both produces danger and generates disgrace, and
that which is especially to be avoided, leads to eternal death. Nothing
is so hateful to God as an unchaste mind and an impure soul. Nor let any
one think that he must abstain from this pleasure only, <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lviii-p1.1"></span>quæ capitur ex fœminei corporis
copulatione, but also from the other pleasures which arise from the rest
of the senses, because they also are of themselves vicious, and it is
the part of the same virtue to despise them. The pleasure of the eyes is
derived from the beauty of objects, that of the ears from harmonious and
pleasant sounds, that of the nostrils from pleasant odour, that of taste
from sweet food,—all of which virtue ought strongly to resist, lest,
ensnared by these attractions, the soul should be depressed from
heavenly to earthly things, from things eternal to things temporal, from
life immortal to perpetual punishment. In pleasures of the taste and
smell there is this danger, that they are able to draw us to luxury. For
he who shall be given up to these things, either will have no property,
or, if he shall have any, he will expend it, and afterwards live a life
to be abominated. But he who is carried away by hearing (to say nothing
respecting songs, <span id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) which often
so charm the inmost senses that they even disturb with madness a settled
state of the mind by certain elaborately composed speeches and
harmonious poems, or skilful disputations) is easily led aside to
impious worship. Hence it is that they who are either themselves
eloquent, or prefer to read eloquent writings, do not readily believe
the sacred writings, because they appear unpolished; they do not seek
things that are true, but things that are pleasant; nay, to them those
things appear to be most true which soothe the ears. Thus they reject
the truth, while they are captivated by the sweetness of the discourse.
But the pleasure which has reference to the sight is manifold. For that
which is derived from the beauty of precious objects excites avarice,
which ought to be far removed from a wise and just man; but that which
is received from the appearance of woman hurries a man to another
pleasure, of which we have already spoken above.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[248:1584](0070250.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lviii-p2"></span> \[See vol. ii. p. 79, notes 1
and 2.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXIII.—That shows are most powerful to corrupt the
minds](0070251)
