[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070042)  [Next](0070044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIII.—Why Man is of Two Sexes; What is His First Death, and What the Second and of the Fault and Punishment of Our First Parents.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p1"></span>When, therefore, He had first formed
the male after His own likeness, then He also fashioned woman after the
image of the man himself, that the two by their union might be able to
perpetuate their race, and to fill the whole earth with a multitude. But
in the making of man himself He concluded and completed the nature of
those two materials which we have spoken of as contrary to each other,
fire and water. For having made the body, He breathed into it a soul
from the vital source of His own Spirit, which is everlasting, that it
might bear the similitude of the world itself, which is composed of
opposing elements. For he <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287)
consists of soul and body, that is, as it were, of heaven and earth:
since the soul by which we live, has its origin, as it were, out of
heaven from God, the body out of the earth, of the dust of which we have
said that it was formed. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Empedocles—whom you cannot tell whether
to reckon among poets or philosophers, for he wrote in verse respecting
the nature of things, as did <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.2"></span>Lucretius and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.3"></span>Varro among the Romans—determined that
there were four elements, that is, fire, air, water, and earth; perhaps
following <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.4"></span>Trismegistus, who said
that our bodies were composed of these four elements by God, for <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.5"></span>he said that they contained in
themselves something of fire, something of air, something of water, and
something of earth, and <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.6"></span>yet that
they were neither fire, nor air, nor water, nor earth. And these things
indeed are not false; for the nature of earth is contained in the flesh,
that of moisture in the blood, that of air in the breath, that of fire
in the vital heat. But neither can the blood be separated from the body,
as moisture is from the earth; nor the vital heat from the breath, as
fire from the air: so that of all things only two elements are found,
the whole nature of which is included in the formation of our body. Man,
therefore, was made from different and opposite substances, as the world
itself was made from light and darkness, from life and death; and he has
admonished us that these two things contend against each other in man:
so that if the soul, which has its origin from God, gains the mastery,
it is immortal, and lives in perpetual light; if, on the other hand, the
body shall overpower the soul, and subject it to its dominion, it is in
everlasting darkness and death. <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288)
And the force of this is not that it altogether annihilates <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) the souls of the unrighteous, but
subjects them to everlasting punishment. <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>We term that punishment the second
death, which is itself also perpetual, as also is immortality. We thus
define the first death: Death is the dissolution of the nature of living
beings; or thus: Death is the separation of body and <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_62"></span>soul.
But we thus define the second death: Death is the suffering of eternal
pain; or thus: Death is the condemnation of souls for their deserts to
eternal punishments. This does not extend to the dumb cattle, whose
spirits, not being composed of God, <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) but of the common air, are dissolved
by death. Therefore in this union of heaven and earth, the image of
which is developed <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) in man, those
things which belong to God occupy the higher part, namely the soul,
which has dominion over the body; but those which belong to the devil
occupy the lower <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) part,
manifestly the body: for this, being earthly, ought to be subject to the
soul, as the earth is to heaven. For it is, as it were, a vessel which
this heavenly spirit may employ as a temporary dwelling. The duties of
both are—for the latter, which is from heaven and from God, to command;
but for the former, which is from the earth and the devil, to obey. And
this, indeed, did not escape the notice of a dissolute man, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>Sallust, <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) who says: “But all our power consists
in the soul and body; we use the soul to command, the body rather to
obey.” It had been well if he had lived in accordance with his words;
for he was a slave to the most degrading pleasures, and he destroyed the
efficacy of his sentiment by the depravity of his life. But if the soul
is fire, as we have shown, it ought to mount up to heaven as fire, that
it may not be extinguished; that is, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p10.2"></span>it ought to rise to the immortality
which is in heaven. And as fire cannot burn and be kept alive unless it
be nourished <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) by some rich
fuel <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) in which it may have
sustenance, so the fuel and food of the soul is righteousness alone, by
which it is nourished unto life. After these things, God, having made
man in the manner in which I have pointed out, placed him in
paradise, <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) that is, in a most
fruitful and pleasant garden, which He planted in the regions of the
East with every kind of wood and tree, that he might be nourished by
their various fruits; and being free from all labours, <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) might devote himself entirely to the
service of God his Father.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p15"></span>Then He gave to him fixed commands,
by the observance of which he might continue immortal; or if he
transgressed them, be punished with death. It was enjoined that he
should not taste of one tree only which was in the midst of the
garden, <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) in which He had placed
the knowledge of good and evil. Then the accuser, envying the works of
God, applied all his deceits and artifices to beguile <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) the man, that he might deprive him of
immortality. And first he enticed the woman by fraud to take the
forbidden fruit, and through her instrumentality he also persuaded the
man himself to transgress the law of God. Therefore, having obtained the
knowledge of good and evil, he began to be ashamed of his nakedness, and
hid himself from the face of God, which he was not before accustomed to
do. Then God drove out the man from the garden, having passed sentence
upon the sinner, that he might seek support for himself by labour. And
He surrounded <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) the garden itself
with fire, to prevent the approach of the man until He execute the last
judgment on earth; and having removed death, recall righteous men, His
worshippers, to the same place; as the sacred writers teach, and the
Erythræan <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p18.3"></span>Sibyl, when she says:
“But they who honour the true God inherit everlasting life, themselves
inhabiting together paradise, the beautiful garden, for ever.” But since
these are the last things, <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) we
will treat of them in the last part of this work. Now let us explain
those which are first. Death therefore followed man, according to the
sentence of God, which even the <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p19.3"></span>Sibyl teaches in her verse, saying:
“Man made by the very hands of God, whom the serpent treacherously
beguiled that he might come to the fate of death, and receive the
knowledge of good and evil.” Thus the life of man became limited in
duration; <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) but still, however,
long, inasmuch as it was extended to a thousand <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) years. And when <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>Varro was not ignorant of this, handed
down as it is in the sacred writings, and spread abroad by the knowledge
of all, he endeavoured to give reasons why the ancients were supposed to
have lived a thousand years. For he says that among the Egyptians months
are accounted <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) as years: so that
the circuit of the sun through the twelve signs <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p22.1"></span>of the zodiac does not make a year, but
the moon, which traverses that sign-bearing circle in the space of
thirty days; which argument is manifestly false. For no one then
exceeded the thousandth year. But now they who attain to the hundredth
year, which frequently happens, <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_63"></span>undoubtedly live a thousand and two
hundred months. And competent <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306)
authorities report that men are accustomed to reach one hundred and
twenty years. <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) But because <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p24.2"></span>Varro did not know why or when the life
of man was shortened, he himself shortened it, since he knew that it was
possible for man to live a thousand and four hundred months.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[61:288](0070043.htm#fr_287) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2"></span> i.e., man.  

<span id="fn_288"></span>[61:289](0070043.htm#fr_288) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p2.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p3"></span> It was necessary to remove
ambiguity from the heathen, to whom the word death conveys no such
meaning. In the sacred writings the departure of the soul from the body
is often spoken of as sleep, or rest. Thus <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>Lazarus is said to sleep. [1 Thess. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p3.2"></span>, “Them that sleep in <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p3.3"></span>Jesus will God bring with Him,”—an
expression of great beauty and propriety as applied to Christians. On
the other hand, the prophets speak of “the shadow of death.”  

<span id="fn_289"></span>[61:290](0070043.htm#fr_289) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> Extinguishes. Compare the words of
Christ Himself, [John v. 29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>; [Acts xxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p4.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_290"></span>[61:291](0070043.htm#fr_290) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p5"></span> \[Must not be overlooked. See vol.
iv. p. 495, and elucidation (after book. iv.) on p. 542.\]  

<span id="fn_291"></span>[62:292](0070043.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p7"></span> \[[Eccles. iii.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>. Answered, [Eccles. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p7.2"></span>.\]  

<span id="fn_292"></span>[62:293](0070043.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p8"></span> Portrayed or expressed.  

<span id="fn_293"></span>[62:294](0070043.htm#fr_293) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9"></span> It is not to be supposed that <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>Lactantius, following the error of <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>Marcion, believed that the body of man
had been formed by the devil, for he has already described its creation
by God. He rather speaks of the devil as exercising a power permitted to
him over the earth and the bodies of men. Compare [2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>.  

<span id="fn_294"></span>[62:295](0070043.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p10"></span> Preface to <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>Catiline  

<span id="fn_295"></span>[62:296](0070043.htm#fr_295) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11"></span> The word <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>teneo</span> is
used in this sense by <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>Cicero
(<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11.3"></span>De Nat. Deor., 11. 54): “<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11.4"></span>Tribus rebus animantium vita tenetur,
cibo, potione, spiritu.”  

<span id="fn_296"></span>[62:297](0070043.htm#fr_296) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p12"></span> Material.  

<span id="fn_297"></span>[62:298](0070043.htm#fr_297) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p13"></span> [Gen.
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_298"></span>[62:299](0070043.htm#fr_298) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p14"></span> We are not to understand this as
asserting that the man lived in idleness, and without any employment in
paradise; for this would be inconsistent with the Scripture narrative,
which tells us that <span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p14.1"></span>Adam was
placed there to keep the garden and dress it. It is intended to exclude
painful and anxious labour, which is the punishment of sin. See [Gen.
iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p14.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_299"></span>[62:300](0070043.htm#fr_299) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p16"></span> Paradise.  

<span id="fn_300"></span>[62:301](0070043.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p17"></span> Another reading is, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>ad <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p17.2"></span>dejiciendum<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p17.3"></span> hominem, “to overthrow the man.”  

<span id="fn_301"></span>[62:302](0070043.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>Circumvallavit, “placed a barrier
round.” See [Gen. iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>: “He placed at the east of the garden
of Eden cherubims, and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep
the way of the tree of life.”  

<span id="fn_302"></span>[62:303](0070043.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p19"></span> \[Not <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>novissima, but <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p19.2"></span>extrema here. He refers to book vii.
cap. 11, etc.\]  

<span id="fn_303"></span>[62:304](0070043.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p20"></span> Temporary. The word is opposed to
everlasting.  

<span id="fn_304"></span>[62:305](0070043.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p21"></span> No one actually lived a thousand
years. They who approached nearest to it were Methuselah, who lived 969
years, Jared 962, and Noah 950.  

<span id="fn_305"></span>[62:306](0070043.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p22"></span> It appears that the practise of
the Egyptians varied as to the computation of the year.  

<span id="fn_306"></span>[63:307](0070043.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p23"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>Philo and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p23.2"></span>Josephus.  

<span id="fn_307"></span>[63:308](0070043.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p24"></span> \[“Old Parr,” born in Shropshire,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.ii.ii.xiii-p24.1"></span>a.d.</span>
1483, died in 1635: i.e., born before the discovery of America, he lived
to the beginning of Hampden’s career in England.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XIV.—Of Noah the inventor of wine, who first had knowledge
of the stars, and of the origin of false religions](0070044)
