[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070172)  [Next](0070174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chap. IX.—Of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Virtue.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p1"></span>By these arguments, therefore, which
neither <span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Plato nor any other
invented, the immorality of souls can be proved and perceived: which
arguments we will briefly collect, since my discourse hastens on to
relate the great judgment of God, which will be celebrated on the earth
at the approaching end of the world. <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) Before all things, since God cannot
be seen by man, lest any one should imagine from this circumstance that
God does not exist, because He was not seen by mortal eyes, among other
wonderful arrangements. <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) He
also made many things the power of which is manifest, but the substance
is not seen, as the voice, smell, the wind, that by the token and
example of these things we might perceive God from His power and
operation and works, although He did not fall under the notice of our
eyes. What is clearer than the voice, or stronger than the wind, or more
forcible than smell? Yet these, when they are borne through the air and
come to our senses, and impel them by their efficacy, are not
distinguished by the eyesight, but are perceived by other parts of the
body. In like manner, God is not to be perceived by us through the sight
or other frail sense; but He is to be beheld by the eyes of the mind,
since we see His illustrious and wonderful works. For as to those who
have altogether denied the existence of God, I should not only refuse to
call them philosophers, but even deny them the name of men, who, with a
close resemblance to dumb animals, consisted of body only, discerning
nothing with their mind, and referring all things to the bodily senses,
who thought that nothing existed but that which they beheld with their
eyes. And because they saw that adversity befell the wicked, or
prosperity happened to the good, they believed that all things were
carried on by fortune, and that the world was established by nature, and
not by providence.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p4"></span>Hence they at once fell into the
absurdities <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) which necessarily
followed such a sentiment. But if there is a God who is incorporeal,
invisible, and eternal, therefore it is credible that the soul, since it
is not seen, does not perish after its departure from the body; for it
is manifest that something exists which perceives and is vigorous, and
yet does not come into sight. <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-Page_206"></span>But, it is said, it is difficult to
comprehend with the mind how the soul can retain its perception without
those parts of the body in which the office of perception is contained.
What about God? Is it easy to comprehend how He is vigorous without a
body? But if they believe in the existence of gods who, if they exist,
are plainly destitute of bodies, it must be that human souls exist in
the same way, since it is perceived from reason itself, and discernment,
that there is a certain resemblance in man and God. Finally, that proof
which even <span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p5.2"></span>Marcus Tullius <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) saw is of sufficient strength: that
the immortality of the soul may be discerned from the fact that there is
no other animal which has any knowledge of God; and religion is almost
the only thing which distinguishes man from the dumb creation. And since
this falls to man alone, it assuredly testifies that we may aim at,
desire, and cultivate that which is about to be familiar and very near.
 

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p7"></span>Can any one, when he has considered
the nature of other animals, which the providence of the Supreme God has
made abject, with bodies bending down and prostrated to the earth, so
that it may be understood from this that they have no intercourse with
heaven, fail to understand that man alone of all animals is heavenly and
divine, whose body raised from the ground, <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) elevated countenance, and upright
position, goes in quest of its origin, and despising, as it were, the
lowliness of the earth, reaches forth to that which is on high, because
he perceives that the highest good is to be sought by him in the highest
place, and mindful of his condition in which God made him illustrious,
looks towards his Maker? And <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p8.6"></span>Trismegistus most rightly called this
looking a contemplation of God, <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) which has no existence in the dumb
animals. Since therefore wisdom, which is given to man alone, is nothing
else but the knowledge of God, it is evident that the soul does not
perish, nor undergo dissolution, but that it remains for ever, because
it seeks after and loves God, who is everlasting, by the impulse of its
very nature perceiving either from what source it has sprung, or to what
it is about to return. Moreover, it is no slight proof of immortality
that man alone makes use of the heavenly element. For, since the nature
of the world consists of two elements <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) which are opposed to one
another—fire and water—of which the one is assigned to the heaven, the
other to the earth, the other living creatures, because they are of the
earth and mortal, make use of the element which is earthly and heavy:
man alone makes use of fire, which is an element light, rising
upward, <span id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) and heavenly. But
those things which are weighty depress to death, and those which are
light elevate to life; because life is on high, and death below. And as
there cannot be light without fire, so there cannot be life without
light. Therefore fire is the element of light and life; from which it is
evident that man who uses it is a partaker of an immortal condition,
because that which causes life is familiar to him.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p12"></span>The gift of virtue also to man alone
is a great proof that souls are immortal. For this will not be in
accordance with nature if the soul is extinguished; for it is injurious
to this present life. For that earthly life, which we lead in common
with dumb animals, both seeks pleasure, by the varied and agreeable
fruits of which it is delighted, and avoids pain, the harshness of
which, by its unpleasant sensations, injures the nature of living
beings, and endeavours to lead them to death, which dissolves the living
being. If, therefore, virtue both prohibits man from those goods which
are naturally desired, and impels him to endure evils which are
naturally avoided, it follows that virtue is an evil, and opposed to
nature; and he must necessarily be judged foolish who pursues it, since
he injures himself both by avoiding present goods, and by seeking
equally evils, without hope of greater advantage. For when it is
permitted us to enjoy the sweetest pleasures, should we not appear to be
without sense if we should not prefer to live in lowliness, in want, in
contempt and ignominy, or not to live at all, but to be tormented with
pain, and to die, when from these evils we should gain nothing to
compensate us for the pleasure which we have given up? But if virtue is
not an evil, and acts honourably, inasmuch as it despises vicious and
shameful pleasures, and bravely, inasmuch as it neither fears pain nor
death, that it may discharge its duty, therefore it must obtain some
greater good than those things are which it despises. But when death has
been undergone, what further good can be hoped for except immortality?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[205:1354](0070173.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>Appropinquante sæculorum fine.  

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[205:1355](0070173.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p3.1"></span>Institutorum miracula.  

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[205:1356](0070173.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p5.1"></span>Deliramenta.  

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[206:1357](0070173.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p6.1"></span>De Leg., i. 8.  

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[206:1358](0070173.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p8"></span> \[Here again the reference to <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p8.1"></span>Ovid’s maxim. See pp. 41, 56, and 58,
<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p8.5"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[206:1359](0070173.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p8.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p9.1"></span>θεώπιδα</span>. Others read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p9.2"></span>θεωρίαν</span>, i.e.,
“a contemplation.”  

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[206:1360](0070173.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p10"></span> \[See the most instructive pages of
<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p10.1"></span>Taylor Lewis again: <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p10.2"></span>Plato against the Atheists, p. 121.\]  

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[206:1361](0070173.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.ix-p11"></span> Sublime.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. X.—Of vices and virtues, and of life and death](0070174)
