[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070052)  [Next](0070054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chap. II.—Of Philosophy, and How Vain Was Its Occupation in Setting Forth the Truth.

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p1"></span>Now, since the falsehood of
superstitions <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) has been shown in
the two former books, and the origin itself of the whole error has been
set forth, it is the business of this book to show the emptiness and
falsehood of philosophy also, that, all error being removed, the truth
may be brought to light and become manifest. Let us begin, therefore,
from the common name of philosophy, that when the head itself is
destroyed, an easier approach may be open to us for demolishing the
whole body; if indeed that can be called a body, the parts and members
of which are at variance with one another, and are not united together
by any connecting link, <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) but, as
it were, dispersed and scattered, appear to palpitate rather than to
live. Philosophy is (as the name indicates, and they themselves define
it) the love of wisdom. By what argument, then, can I prove that
philosophy is not wisdom, rather than by that derived from the meaning
of the name itself? For he who devotes himself to wisdom is manifestly
not yet wise, but devotes himself to the subject that he may be wise. In
the other arts it appears what this devotedness effects, and to what it
tends: for when any one by learning has attained to these, he is now
called, not a devoted follower of the profession, but an artificer. But
it is said it was on account of modesty that they called themselves
devoted to wisdom, and not wise. Nay, in truth, Pythagoras, who first
invented this name, since he had a little more wisdom than those of
early times, who regarded themselves as wise, understood that it was
impossible by any human study to attain to wisdom, and therefore that a
perfect name ought not to be applied to an incomprehensible and
imperfect subject. And, therefore, when he was asked what was his
profession, <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) he answered that he
was a philosopher, that is, a searcher after wisdom. If, therefore,
philosophy searches after wisdom, it is not wisdom itself, because it
must of necessity be one thing which searches, and another which is
searched for; nor is the searching itself correct, because it can find
nothing.  

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p5"></span>But I am not prepared to concede even
that philosophers are devoted to the pursuit of wisdom, because by that
pursuit there is no attaining to wisdom. For if the power of finding the
truth were connected <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) with this
pursuit, and if this pursuit were a kind of road to wisdom, it would at
length be found. But since so much time and talent have been wasted in
the search for it, and it has not yet been gained, it is plain that
there is no wisdom there. Therefore they who apply themselves to
philosophy do not devote themselves to the pursuit of wisdom; but they
themselves imagine that they do so, because they know not where that is
which they are searching for, or of what character it is. Whether,
therefore, they devote themselves to the pursuit of wisdom or not, they
are not wise, because that can never be discovered which is either
sought in an improper manner, or not sought at all. Let us look to this
very thing, whether it is possible for anything to be discovered by this
kind of pursuit, or nothing.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[70:370](0070053.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>Religionum<span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.2"></span> falsitas. He does not here employ <span
class="Foreign"><span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.3"></span>superstitio</span>
By the way, <span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.4"></span>Lactantius derives this
word from those “<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.5"></span>qui <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.6"></span>superstitem<span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.7"></span> memoriam hominum, tanquam deorum,
colerent.” <span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.8"></span>Cicero, however, derives
it from those who bother the gods with petitions,—”<span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.9"></span>pro <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.10"></span>superstite<span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.11"></span> prole.” See note of the annotator of
the Delphin <span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.12"></span>Cicero, on the <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.13"></span>Natura Deor., i. 17.\]  

<span id="fn_370"></span>[70:371](0070053.htm#fr_370) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p2.14"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p3"></span> A joint or fastening.  

<span id="fn_371"></span>[70:372](0070053.htm#fr_371) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p4"></span> What he professed—gave himself out
to be.  

<span id="fn_372"></span>[70:373](0070053.htm#fr_372) <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>Subjaceret.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. III.—Of what subjects philosophy consists, and who was the
chief founder of the academic sect](0070054)
