[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070039)  [Next](0070041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chap. X.—Of the World, and Its Parts, the Elements and Seasons.

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p1"></span>Now, having refuted those who entertain
false sentiments respecting the world and God its <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-Page_57"></span>Maker, let us return to
the divine workmanship of the world, concerning which we are informed in
the sacred <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) writings of our holy
religion. Therefore, first of all, God made the heaven, and suspended it
on high, that it might be the seat of God Himself, the Creator. Then He
founded the earth, and placed it under the heaven, as a dwelling-place
for man, with the other races of animals. He willed that it should be
surrounded and held together by water. But He adorned and filled His own
dwelling-place with bright lights; He decked it with the sun, and the
shining orb of the moon, and with the glittering signs of the twinkling
stars; but He placed on the earth the darkness, which is contrary to
these. For of itself the earth contains no light, unless it receives it
from the heaven, in which He placed perpetual light, and the gods above,
and eternal life; and, on the contrary, He placed on the earth darkness,
and the inhabitants of the lower regions, and death. For these things
are as far removed from the former ones, as evil things are from good,
and vices from virtues. He also established two parts of the earth
itself opposite to one another, and of a different character,—namely,
the east and the west; and of these the east is assigned to God, because
He Himself is the fountain of light, and the enlightener <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) of all things, and because He makes us
rise to eternal life. But the west is ascribed to that disturbed and
depraved mind, because it conceals the light, because it always brings
on darkness, and because it makes men die and perish in their sins. For
as light belongs to the east, and the whole course of life depends upon
the light, so darkness belongs to the west: but death and destruction
are contained in darkness. <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) Then
He measured out in the same way the other parts,—namely, the south and
the north, which parts are closely united with the two former. For that
which is more glowing with the warmth of the sun, is nearest to and
closely united with the east; but that which is torpid with colds and
perpetual ice belongs to the same division as the extreme west. For as
darkness is opposed to light, so is cold to heat. As, therefore, heat is
nearest to light, so is the south to the east; and as cold is nearest to
darkness, so is the northern region to the west. And He assigned to each
of these parts its own time,—namely, the spring to the east, the summer
to the southern region, the autumn belongs to the west, and the winter
to the north. In these two parts also, the southern and the northern, is
contained a figure of life and death, because life consists in heat,
death in cold. And as heat arises from fire, so does cold from water.
And according to the division of these parts He also made day and night,
to complete by alternate succession with each other the courses <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) and perpetual revolutions of time,
which we call years. The day, which the first east supplies, must belong
to God, as all things do, which are of a better character. But the
night, which the extreme west brings on, belongs, indeed, to him whom we
have said to be the rival of God.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p6"></span>And even in the making of these God had
regard to the future; for He made them so, that a representation of true
religion and of false superstitions might be shown from these. For as
the sun, which rises daily, although it is but one,—from which <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p6.1"></span>Cicero would have it appear that it was
called Sol, <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) because the stars
are obscured, and it alone is seen,—yet, since it is a true light, and
of perfect fulness, and of most powerful heat, and enlightens all things
with the brightest splendour; so God, although He is one only, is
possessed of perfect majesty, and might, and splendour. But night, which
we say is assigned to that depraved adversary of God, <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) shows by a resemblance the many and
various superstitions which belong to him. For although innumerable
stars appear to glitter and shine, <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) yet, because they are not full and
solid lights, and send forth no heat, nor overpower the darkness by
their multitude, therefore these two things are found to be of chief
importance, which have power differing from and opposed to one
another—heat and moisture, which God wonderfully designed for the
support and production of all things. For since the power of God
consists in heat and fire, if He had not tempered its ardour and force
by mingling matter of moisture and cold, nothing could have been born or
have existed, but whatever had begun to exist must immediately have been
destroyed by conflagration. From which also some philosophers and poets
said that the world was made up of a discordant concord; but they did
not thoroughly understand the matter. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.1"></span>Heraclitus said that all things were
produced from fire; <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.2"></span>Thales of Miletus
from water. Each saw something <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.3"></span>of the
truth, and yet each was in error: for if one <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.4"></span>element only had existed, water could not
have been produced from fire, nor, on the other hand, could fire from
water; but it is more true that all things were produced from a mingling
of the two. Fire, indeed, cannot be mixed with water, because they are
opposed to each other; and if they came into collision, the one which
proved superior must destroy the other. But their substances <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-Page_58"></span>may be
mingled. The substance of fire is heat; of water, moisture. Rightly
therefore does <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.5"></span>Ovid say: <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) —  

> <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p10.2"></span> “For when moisture and heat have
> become mingled, they conceive, and all things arise from these two.
> And though fire is at variance with water, moist vapour produces all
> things, and discordant concord <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254)
> is adapted to production.”  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p12"></span>For the one element is, as it were,
masculine; the other, as it were, feminine: the one active, the other
passive. And on this account it was appointed by the ancients that
marriage contracts should be ratified by the solemnity <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) of fire and water, because the young
of animals are furnished with a body by heat and moisture, and are thus
animated to life.  

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p14"></span>For, since every animal consists of
soul <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) and body, the material of
the body is contained in moisture, that of the soul in heat: which we
may know from the offspring of birds; for though these are full of thick
moisture, unless they are cherished by creative <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) heat, the moisture cannot become a
body, nor can the body be animated with life. Exiles also were
accustomed to be forbidden the use of fire and water: for as yet it
seemed unlawful to inflict capital punishment on any, however guilty,
inasmuch as they were men. When, therefore, the use of those things in
which the life of men consists was forbidden, it was deemed to be
equivalent to the actual infliction of death on him who had been thus
sentenced. Of such importance were these two elements considered, that
they believed them to be essential for the production of man, and for
the sustaining of his life. One of these is common to us with the other
animals, the other has been assigned to man alone. For we, being a
heavenly and immortal race, <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) make
use of fire, which is given to us as a proof of immortality, since fire
is from heaven; and its nature, inasmuch as it is moveable and rises
upward, contains the principle of life. But the other animals, inasmuch
as they are altogether mortal, make use of water only, which is a
corporeal and earthly element. And the nature of this, because it is
moveable, and has a downward inclination, shows a figure of death.
Therefore the cattle do not look up to heaven, nor do they entertain
religious sentiments, since the use of fire is removed from them. But
from what source or in what manner God lighted up or caused <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) to flow these two principal elements,
fire and water, He who made them alone can know. <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[57:247](0070040.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p2"></span> Secret writings.  

<span id="fn_247"></span>[57:248](0070040.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.1"></span>Apos. Const. (so-called), book ii. cap. 57.
See <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.2"></span>Bingham, book viii. cap. 3, sec.
3; also vol. ii. note 1, p. 535, this series, and vol. iii. note 1, p.
31. So <span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.5"></span>Cyril of Jerusalem, <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.6"></span>Augustine, and later Fathers. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.7"></span>Bingham book xiii. cap. 8, sec. 15.\]  

<span id="fn_248"></span>[57:249](0070040.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p4"></span> \[In baptism, the renunciations were
made with face turned to the west. <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p4.1"></span>Bingham, book xi. cap. 7, sec. 4.\]  

<span id="fn_249"></span>[57:250](0070040.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>Spatia; an expression derived from the
chariot-race.  

<span id="fn_250"></span>[57:251](0070040.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p7"></span> A play upon the words <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p7.1"></span>Sol, the sun, and <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p7.2"></span>solus, alone.  

<span id="fn_251"></span>[57:252](0070040.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p8.1"></span>Antitheus, one who takes the place of God:
as Antichrist, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p8.2"></span>ἀντίχριστος</span>, one who sets himself in
the place of Christ.  

<span id="fn_252"></span>[57:253](0070040.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9"></span> Emit rays.  

<span id="fn_253"></span>[58:254](0070040.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p9.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p10.1"></span>Metamorph., i. 430.  

<span id="fn_254"></span>[58:255](0070040.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p11"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p11.1"></span>Discors concordia.\]  

<span id="fn_255"></span>[58:256](0070040.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p13.1"></span>Sacramento Torches were lighted at
marriage ceremonies, and the bride was sprinkled with water.  

<span id="fn_256"></span>[58:257](0070040.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p15"></span> The living principle.  

<span id="fn_257"></span>[58:258](0070040.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p16"></span> The artificer.  

<span id="fn_258"></span>[58:259](0070040.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p17"></span> Animal.  

<span id="fn_259"></span>[58:260](0070040.htm#fr_259) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p18"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p18.1"></span>Eliquaverit. “strained off,” “made
liquid.”  

<span id="fn_260"></span>[58:261](0070040.htm#fr_260) <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii.x-p19"></span> \[So <span
id="iii.ii.ii.x-p19.1"></span>Izaak Walton: “Known only to him whose
name is Wonderful.”\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XI.—Of living creatures, of man; Prometheus, Deucalion, the
Parcæ](0070041)
