[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070289)  [Next](0070291) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.iii-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Of the Condition of the Beasts and Man.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p1"></span>They complain that man is born in a more
feeble and frail condition than that in which the other animals are
born: for that these, as soon as they are produced from the womb,
immediately raise themselves on their feet, and express their joy by
running to and fro, and are at once fit for enduring the air, inasmuch
as they have come forth to the light protected by natural coverings; but
man, on the contrary, being naked and defenceless, is cast forth, and
driven, as it were, from a shipwreck, to the miseries of this life; who
is neither able to move himself from the place where he has been
born, <span id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) nor to seek the
nourishment of milk, nor to endure the injury of time. Therefore they
say that Nature is not the mother of the human race, but a stepmother,
who has dealt so liberally with the dumb creation, but has so produced
man, that, without resources, and without strength, and destitute of all
aid, he can do nothing else than give tokens <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) of the state of his frailty by
wailing and lamentations; “as well he may, whose destiny it is to go
through in life so many ills.” <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818)  

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p5"></span>And when they say these things they are
believed to be very wise, because every one without consideration is
displeased with his own condition; but I contend that they are never
more foolish than when they say these things. <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) For when I consider the condition
of things, I understand that nothing ought to have been otherwise than
it is—not to say could have been otherwise, for God is able to do all
things: but it must be, that that most provident majesty made that which
was better and more right.  

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p7"></span>I should like, therefore, to ask those
censurers of the divine works, what they think to be wanting in man, on
account of his being born in a more feeble condition. Do they think that
men are, on this account, brought up worse? Or that they advance the
less to the greatest strength of age? Or that weakness is a hindrance to
their growth or safety, since reason bestows <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) the things which are wanting? But,
they say, the bringing up of man costs the greatest labours: in truth,
the condition of the brute creation is better, because all these, when
they have brought forth their young, have no care except for their own
food; from which it is effected that, their teats being spontaneously
distended, the nourishment of milk is supplied to their offspring, and
that they seek this nourishment by the compulsion of nature, without any
trouble on the part of the mothers. How is it with birds, which have a
different nature? do they not undergo the greatest labours in bringing
up their young, so that they sometimes appear to have something of human
intelligence? For they either build their nests of mud, or construct
them with twigs and leaves, and they sit upon the eggs without taking
food; and since it has not been given to them to nourish their young
from their own bodies, they convey to them food, and spend whole days in
going to and fro in this manner; but by night they defend, cherish, and
protect them. What more can men do? unless it be this only, that they do
not drive away their young when grown up, but retain them bound by
perpetual relationship and the bond of affection. Why should I say that
the offspring of birds is much more fragile than that of man? Inasmuch
as they do not bring forth the animal itself from the body of the
mother, but that which, being warmed by the nourishment and heat of the
body of the mother, produces the animal; and this, even when animated by
breath, being unfledged and tender, is not only without the power of
flying, but even of walking. Would he not, therefore, be most senseless,
if any one should think that nature has dealt badly with birds, first,
because they are twice born, and then because they are so weak, that
they have to be nourished by food sought with labour by their parents?
But they select the stronger, and pass by the more feeble animals.  

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p9"></span>I ask, therefore, from those who prefer
the condition of the beasts to their own, what they would choose if God
should give them the choice: would they prefer the wisdom of man <span
id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-Page_284"></span>together with his weakness, or the
strength of the beasts together with their nature? In truth, they are
not so much like the beasts as not to prefer even a much more fragile
condition, provided that it be human, to that strength of theirs
unattended with reason. But, in truth, prudent men neither desire the
reason of man together with frailty, nor the strength of the dumb
animals without reason. Therefore it is nothing so repugnant or
contradictory, <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) that either
reason or the condition of nature should of necessity prepare each
animal. If it is furnished with natural protection, reason is
superfluous. For what will it contrive? <span
id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) What will it do? Or what will it
plan? Or in what will it display that light of the intellect, when
Nature of its own accord grants those things which are able to be the
result of reason? But if it be endued with reason, what need will there
be of defences for the body, when reason once granted is able to supply
the office of nature? And this has such power for the adorning and
protection of man, that nothing greater or better can be given by God.
Finally, since man is possessed of a body which is not great, and of
slight strength, and of infirm health, nevertheless, since he has
received that which is of greater value, he is better equipped than the
other animals, and more adorned. For though he is born frail and feeble,
yet he is safe from all the dumb animals, and all those which are born
with greater strength, though they are able to bear patiently the
inclemency of the sky, yet are unable to be safe from man. Thus it comes
to pass that reason bestows more on man than nature does on the dumb
animals; since, in their case, neither greatness of strength nor
firmness of body can prevent them from being oppressed by us, or from
being made subject to our power.  

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p12"></span>Can any one, then, when he sees that
even elephants, <span id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) with their
vast bodies and strength, are subservient to man, complain respecting
God, the Maker of all things, because he has received moderate strength,
and a small body; and not estimate according to their deserts the divine
benefits towards himself, which is the part of an ungrateful man, or (to
speak more truly) of a madman? <span id="iii.iv.iii-p13.2"></span>Plato,
I believe, that he might refute these ungrateful men, gave thanks to
nature that he was born a man. <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) How much better and more soundly
did he act, who perceived that the condition of man was better, than
they did who would have preferred that they had been born beasts! For if
God should happen to change them into those animals whose condition they
prefer to their own, they would now immediately desire to return to
their previous state, and would with great outcries eagerly demand their
former condition, because strength and firmness of body are not of such
consequence that you should be without the office of the tongue; or the
free course of birds through the air, that you should be without the
hands. For the hands are of greater service than the lightness and use
of the wings; the tongue is of greater service than the strength of the
whole body. What madness is it, therefore, to prefer those things which,
if they were given, you would refuse to receive!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[283:1817](0070290.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p2"></span> Effusus est.  

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[283:1818](0070290.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p3"></span> Ominari.  

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[283:1819](0070290.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>Lucret., v. 228.  

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[283:1820](0070290.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p6"></span> \[The admirable investigations of the
modern atheists are so many testimonies against their own theories when
they come to talk of <span id="iii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>force, etc.,
instead of God. P. 97, note 4, <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p6.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[283:1821](0070290.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p8.1"></span>Dependit.  

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[284:1822](0070290.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>Contrarium.  

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[284:1823](0070290.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>Excogitabit.  

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[284:1824](0070290.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>Boves Lucas. Elephants are said to have
been so called, because they were first seen by the Romans in Lucania.  

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[284:1825](0070290.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p14"></span> Some editions here add: “But what is
the nature of this, it does not belong to the present subject to
consider.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IV.—Of the weakness of man](0070291)
