[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070294)  [Next](0070296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv.viii-p0.1"></span>Chap. VIII.—Of the Parts of Man: the Eyes and Ears.

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p1"></span>Now I will show the plan of the whole
man, and will explain the uses and habits of the several members which
are exposed to view in the body, or concealed. When, therefore, God had
determined of all the animals to make man alone heavenly, and all the
rest earthly, He <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-Page_289"></span>raised him erect <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) to the contemplation of the heaven,
and made him a biped, doubtless that he might look to the same quarter
from which he derives his origin; but He depressed the others to the
earth, that, inasmuch as they have no expectation of immortality, being
cast down with their whole body to the ground, they might be subservient
to their appetite and food. And thus the right reason and elevated
position of man alone, and his countenance, shared with and closely
resembling God his Father, bespeak his origin and Maker. <span
id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) His mind, nearly divine, because it
has obtained the rule not only over the animals which are on the earth,
but even over his own body, being situated in the highest part, the
head, as in a lofty citadel, looks out upon and observes all things. He
formed this its palace, not drawn out and extended, as in the case of
the dumb animals, but like an orb and a globe, because all <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) roundness belongs to a perfect plan
and figure. Therefore the mind and that divine fire is covered with
it, <span id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850) as with a vault; <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851) and when He had covered its highest
top with a natural garment, He alike furnished and adorned the front
part which is called the face, with the necessary services of the
members.  

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p7"></span>And first, He closed the orbs of the
eyes with concave apertures, from which boring <span
id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p8.3"></span>Varro thought that the forehead <span
id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853) derived its name; and He would have
these to be neither less nor more than two, because no number is more
perfect as to appearance than that of two: as also He made the ears two,
the doubleness <span id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854) of which bears
with it an incredible degree of beauty, both because each part is
adorned with a resemblance, and that voices coming from both sides <span
id="fr_1855"></span>[1856](#fn_1855) may more easily be collected. For
the form itself is fashioned after a wonderful manner: because He would
not have their apertures to be naked and uncovered, which would have
been less becoming and less useful; since the voice might fly beyond the
narrow space of simple caverns, and be scattered, did not the apertures
themselves confine it, received through hollow windings and kept back
from reverberation, like those small vessels, by the application of
which narrow-mouthed vessels are accustomed to be filled.  

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p12"></span>These ears, then, which have their
name from the drinking <span id="fr_1856"></span>[1857](#fn_1856) in of
voices, from which <span id="iii.iv.viii-p13.3"></span>Virgil
says, <span id="fr_1857"></span>[1858](#fn_1857)  

> <span id="iii.iv.viii-p14.3"></span> “And with these ears I drank in
> his voice;”  

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p15"></span>or because the Greeks call the voice
itself <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>αὐδήν</span>, from hearing,—the ears
(<span class="Foreign"><span id="iii.iv.viii-p15.2"></span>aures</span>)
were named as though <span class="Foreign"><span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.3"></span>audes</span> by the change of a
letter,—God would not form of soft skins, which, hanging down and
flaccid, might take away beauty; nor of hard and solid bones, lest,
being stiff and immoveable, they should be inconvenient for use. But He
designed that which might be between these, that a softer cartilage
might bind them, and that they might have at once a befitting and
flexible firmness. In these the office of bearing only is placed, as
that of seeing is in the eyes, the acuteness of which is especially
inexplicable and wonderful; for He covered their orbs, presenting the
similitude of gems in that part with which they had to see, with
transparent membranes, that the images of objects placed opposite them,
being refracted <span id="fr_1858"></span>[1859](#fn_1858) as in a
mirror, might penetrate to the innermost perception. Through these
membranes, therefore, that faculty which is called the mind sees those
things which are without; lest you should happen to think that we see
either by the striking <span id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859) of the
images, as the philosophers discuss, since the office of seeing ought to
be in that which sees, not in that which is seen; or in the tension of
the air together with the eyesight; or in the outpouring of the rays:
since, if it were so, we should see the ray towards which we turn with
our eyes, until the air, being extended together with the eyesight, or
the rays being poured out, should arrive at the object which was to be
seen.  

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p18"></span>But since we see at the same moment of
time, and for the most part, while engaged on other business, we
nevertheless behold all things which are placed opposite to us, it is
more true and evident that it is the mind which, through the eyes, sees
those things which are placed opposite to it, as though through windows
covered with pellucid crystal or transparent stone; <span
id="fr_1860"></span>[1861](#fn_1860) and therefore the mind and
inclination are often known from the eyes. For the refutation of which
<span id="iii.iv.viii-p19.1"></span>Lucretius <span
id="fr_1861"></span>[1862](#fn_1861) employed a very senseless argument.
For if the mind, he says, sees through the eye, it would see better if
the eyes were torn out and dug up, inasmuch as doors being torn up
together with the door-posts let in more light than if they were
covered. Truly his eyes, or rather those of <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p20.1"></span>Epicurus who taught him, ought to have
been dug out, that they might not see, that the torn-out orbs, and the
burst fibres of the eyes, and the blood flowing through the veins, and
the flesh increasing from wounds, and the scars drawn over at last can
admit no light; unless by chance he would have it that eyes are produced
resembling ears, so that we should see <span id="page_290">p. 290</span>
<span id="iii.iv.viii-Page_290"></span>not so much with eyes as with
apertures, than which there can be nothing more unsightly or more
useless. For how little should we be able to see, if from the innermost
recesses of the head the mind should pay attention through slight
fissures of caverns; as, if any one should wish to look through a stalk
of hemlock, he would see no more than the capability of the stalk itself
admitted! For sight, therefore, it was rather needful that the members
should be collected together into an orb, that the sight might be spread
in breadth and the parts which adjoined them in the front of the face,
that they might freely behold all things. Therefore the unspeakable
power of the divine providence made two orbs most resembling each other,
and so bound them together that they might be able not only to be
altogether turned, but to be moved and directed with moderation. <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[1863](#fn_1862) And He willed that the orbs
themselves should be full of a pure and clear moisture, in the middle
part of which sparks of lights might be kept shut up, which we call the
pupils, in which, being pure and delicate, are contained the faculty and
method of seeing. The mind therefore directs itself through these orbs
that it may see, and the sight of both the eyes is mingled and joined
together in a wonderful manner.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[289:1848](0070295.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>Rigidum.  

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[289:1849](0070295.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p3"></span> \[An amusing persistency in the
enforcement of this idea.\]  

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[289:1850](0070295.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>Omnis. Others read “<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p4.2"></span>orbis.”  

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[289:1851](0070295.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p5"></span> i.e., the head.  

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[289:1852](0070295.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p6"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>Cœlo. Some believed that the soul was of
fire.  

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[289:1853](0070295.htm#fr_1852) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>Foratu, “the process of boring;” <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p8.2"></span>foramen, “the aperture thus made.”  

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[289:1854](0070295.htm#fr_1853) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>Frontem.  

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[289:1855](0070295.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>Duplicitas.  

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[289:1856](0070295.htm#fr_1855) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>Altrinsecus.  

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[289:1857](0070295.htm#fr_1856) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>Hauriendis, from which “<span
id="iii.iv.viii-p13.2"></span>aures” is said to be formed.  

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[289:1858](0070295.htm#fr_1857) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>Æneid, iv. 359. \[The English verb <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p14.2"></span>bother (= both ear) is an amusing comment
on the adaptation of ears to unwelcome voices.\]  

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[289:1859](0070295.htm#fr_1858) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p16.1"></span>Refulgentes.  

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[289:1860](0070295.htm#fr_1859) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>Imaginum incursione.  

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[289:1861](0070295.htm#fr_1860) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p19"></span> According to some, “talc.”  

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[289:1862](0070295.htm#fr_1861) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p20"></span> iii. 368.  

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[290:1863](0070295.htm#fr_1862) <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.viii-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.viii-p21.1"></span>Cum modo: “in a measured degree.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—Of the senses and their power](0070296)
