[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070164)  [Next](0070166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. I.—Of the World, and Those Who are About to Believe, and Those Who are Not; And in This the Censure of the Faithless.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>It</span> is well: the foundations are
laid, as the illustrious orator says. But we have not only laid the
foundations, which might be firm and suitable for the support of the
work; but we have raised the entire edifice, with great and strong
buildings, almost to the summit. There remains, a matter which is much
easier, either to cover or adorn it; without which, however, the former
works are both useless and displeasing. For of what avail is it, either
to be freed from false religions <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) or to understand the true <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) one? Of what avail, either to see
the vanity of false wisdom, <span id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278)
or to know what is true? <span id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) Of
what avail is it, I say, to defend that heavenly justice? <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280) Of what avail to hold the worship
of God <span id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) with great
difficulties, which is the greatest virtue, unless the divine reward of
everlasting blessedness attends it? Of which subject we must speak in
this book, lest all that is gone before should appear vain and
unprofitable: if we should leave this, on account of which they were
undertaken, in uncertainty, lest any one should by chance think that
such great labours are undertaken in vain; while he distrusts their
heavenly reward, which God has appointed for him who shall have despised
the present sweet enjoyments of earth in comparison of solitary and
unrewarded <span id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) virtue. Let us
satisfy this part of our subject also, both by the testimonies of the
sacred writings and also by probable arguments, that it may be equally
manifest that future things are to be preferred to those which are
present; heavenly things to earthly; and eternal things to those which
are temporal: since the rewards of vices are temporal, those of virtues
are eternal.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p9"></span>I will therefore set forth the system
of the world, that it may easily be understood both when and how it was
made by God; which <span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p9.1"></span>Plato, who
discoursed about the making of the world, could neither know nor
explain, inasmuch as he was ignorant of the heavenly mystery, which is
not learned except by the teaching of prophets and God; and therefore he
said that it was created for eternity. Whereas the case is far
different, since whatever is of a solid and heavy body, as it received a
beginning at some time, so it must needs have an end. For <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p9.2"></span>Aristotle, when he did not see how so
great a magnitude of things could perish, and wished to escape this
objection, <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) said that the
world always had existed, and always would exist. He did not at all see,
that whatever <span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.2"></span>material thing exists
must at some time have had a beginning, and that nothing can exist at
all unless it had a beginning. For when we see that earth, and water,
and fire perish, are consumed, and extinguished, which are clearly parts
of the world, it is understood that <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.3"></span>that is altogether mortal the members of
which are mortal. Thus it comes to pass, that whatever is liable to
destruction must have been produced. But everything which comes within
the sight of the eyes must of necessity be material, and capable of
dissolution. Therefore <span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.4"></span>Epicurus
alone, following the authority of <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.5"></span>Democritus, spoke truly in this matter,
who said that it had a beginning at some time, and that it would at some
time perish. Nor, however, was he able to assign any reason, either
through what causes or at what time this work of such magnitude should
be destroyed. But since God has revealed this to us, and we do not
arrive at it by conjectures, but by instruction from heaven, we will
carefully teach it, that it may at length be evident to those who are
desirous of the truth, that the <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-Page_195"></span>philosophers did not see nor
comprehend the truth; but that they had so slight a knowledge <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) of it, that they by no means
perceived from what source that fragrance <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285) of wisdom, which was so pleasant
and agreeable, breathed upon them.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p13"></span>In the meantime, I think it necessary
to admonish those who are about to read this, that depraved and vicious
minds, since the acuteness of their mind is blunted by earthly passions,
which weigh down all the perceptions and render them weak, will either
altogether fail to understand these things which we relate, or, even if
they shall understand them, they will dissemble and be unwilling for
them to be true: because they are drawn away by vices, and they
knowingly favour their own evils, by the pleasantness of which they are
captivated, and they desert the way of virtue, by the bitterness of
which they are offended. For they who are inflamed with avarice and a
certain insatiable thirst for riches—because, when they have sold or
squandered the things in which they delight, they are unable to live in
a simple style—undoubtedly prefer that by which they are compelled to
renounce their eager desires. Also, they who, urged on by the
incitements of lusts, as the poet says, <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286)  

> <span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p14.3"></span> “Rush into madness and fire,”  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p15"></span>say that we bring forward things
plainly incredible; because the precepts about self-restraint wound
their ears, which restrain them from their pleasures, to which they have
given <span id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287) up their soul, together
with their body. But those who, swollen with ambition or inflamed with
the love of power, have bestowed all their efforts on the acquisition of
honours, will not, even if we should bear the sun himself in our hands,
believe that teaching which commands them to despise all power and
honour, and to live in humility, and in such humility that they may be
able to receive an injury, and if they have received one, be unwilling
to return it. These are the men who cry out <span
id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288) in any way against the truth with
closed eyes. But they who are or shall be of sound mind, that is, not so
immersed in vices as to be incurable, will both believe these things,
and will readily approach them; and whatever things we say, they will
appear to them open, and plain, and simple, and that which is chiefly
necessary, true and unassailable.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p18"></span>No one favours virtue but he who is
able to follow it; but it is not easy for all to follow it: they can do
so whom poverty and want have exercised, and made capable of virtue. For
if the endurance of evils is virtue, it follows that they are not
capable of virtue who have always lived in the enjoyment of good things;
because they have never experienced evils, nor can they endure them,
through their long-continued use and desire of good things, which alone
they know. Thus it comes to pass that the poor and humble, who are
unencumbered, more readily believe God than the rich, who are entangled
with many hindrances; <span id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289) yea,
rather, in chains and fetters they are enslaved to the nod of desire,
their mistress, which has ensnared them with inextricable bonds; nor are
they able to look up to heaven, since their mind is bent down to the
earth, and fixed on the ground. But the way of virtue does not admit
those carrying great burthens. The path is very narrow by which justice
leads man to heaven; no one can keep this unless he is unencumbered and
lightly equipped. For those wealthy men, who are loaded with many and
great burthens, proceed along the way of death, which is very broad,
since destruction rules with extended sway. The precepts which God gives
for justice, and the things which we bring forward under the teaching of
God respecting virtue and the truth, are bitter and as poisons to these.
And if they shall dare to oppose these things, they must own themselves
to be enemies of virtue and justice. I will now come to the remaining
part of the subject, that an end may be put to the work. But this
remains, that we should treat of the judgment of God, which will then be
established when our Lord shall return to the earth to render to every
one either a reward or punishment, according to his desert. Therefore,
as we spoke in the fourth book concerning His first advent, <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290) so in this book we will relate His
second advent, which the Jews also both confess and hope for; but in
vain, since He must return to the confusion <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291) of those for whose call He had
before come. For they who impiously treated Him with violence in His
humiliation, will experience Him in His power as a conqueror; and, God
requiting them, they will suffer all those things which they read and do
not understand; inasmuch as, being polluted with all sins, and moreover
sprinkled with the blood of the Holy One, they were devoted to eternal
punishment by that very One on whom they laid wicked hands. But we shall
have a separate subject against the Jews, in which we shall convict them
of error and guilt.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[194:1277](0070165.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p2"></span> The subject of the first and second
books.  

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[194:1278](0070165.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p3"></span> The subject of the sixth book.  

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[194:1279](0070165.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p4"></span> The subject of the third book.  

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[194:1280](0070165.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p5"></span> The subject of the fourth book.  

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[194:1281](0070165.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p6"></span> The subject of the fifth book.  

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[194:1282](0070165.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p7"></span> The subject of the sixth book.  

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[194:1283](0070165.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p8"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p8.1"></span>Nuda.  

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[194:1284](0070165.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.1"></span>Præscriptionem.  

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[195:1285](0070165.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p10.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p11.1"></span>Ita leviter odoratos.  

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[195:1286](0070165.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p12"></span> Odor.  

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[195:1287](0070165.htm#fr_1286) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p14.1"></span>Virg., <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p14.2"></span>Georg., iii. 244.  

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[195:1288](0070165.htm#fr_1287) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p16.1"></span>Adjudicaverunt.  

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[195:1289](0070165.htm#fr_1288) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p17.1"></span>Latrant.  

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[195:1290](0070165.htm#fr_1289) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p19.1"></span>Impedimentis.  

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[195:1291](0070165.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p20"></span> \[See p. 108, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p20.2"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[195:1292](0070165.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.i-p21"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p21.1"></span>Ad confundendos. Others read “<span
id="iii.ii.vii.i-p21.2"></span>consolandos.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—Of the error of the philosophers, and of the divine
wisdom, and of the golden age](0070166)
