[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070113)  [Next](0070115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.v.i"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p0.1"></span>Chap. I.—Of the Non-Condemnation of Accused Persons Without a Hearing of Their Cause; From What Cause Philosophers Despised the Sacred Writings; Of the First Advocates of the Christian Religion.

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>I Entertain</span> no doubt, O mighty
Emperor <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p1.2"></span>Constantine, <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) —since they are impatient through
excessive superstition,—that if any <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p2.4"></span>one of those who are foolishly religious
should take in hand this work of ours, in which that matchless Creator
of all things and Ruler of this boundless world is asserted, he would
even assail it with abusive language, and perhaps, having scarcely read
the beginning, would dash it to the ground, cast it from him, curse it,
and think himself contaminated and bound by inexpiable guilt if he
should patiently read or hear these things. We demand, however, from
this man, if it is possible, by the right of human nature, <span
id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) that he should not condemn before that
he knows the whole matter. For if the right of defending themselves is
given to sacrilegious persons, and to traitors and sorcerers, and if it
is lawful for no one to be condemned beforehand, his cause being as yet
untried, we do not appear to ask unjustly, that if there shall be any
one who shall have fallen upon this subject, if he shall read it, he
read it throughout; if he shall hear it, that he put off the forming of
an opinion until the end. But I know the obstinacy of men; we shall
never succeed in obtaining this. For they fear lest they should be
overcome by us, and be compelled at length to yield, truth itself crying
out. They interrupt, therefore, and make hindrances, that they may not
hear; and close their eyes, that they may not see the light which we
present to them. Wherefore they themselves plainly show their distrust
in their own abandoned system, since they neither venture to
investigate, nor to engage with as, because they know that they are
easily overpowered. And therefore, discussion being taken away,  

> <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p3.2"></span> “Wisdom is driven from among them,
> they have recourse to violence,”  

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p4"></span>as Ennius says; and because they eagerly
endeavour to condemn as guilty those whom they plainly know to be
innocent, they are unwilling to be agreed respecting innocence itself;
as though, in truth, it were a greater injustice to have condemned
innocence, when proved to be such, than unheard. But, as I said, they
are afraid lest, if they should hear, they should be unable to condemn.
 

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p5"></span>And therefore they torture, put to
death, and banish the worshippers of the Most High God, that is, the
righteous; nor are they, who so vehemently hate, themselves able to
assign the causes of their hatred. Because they are themselves in error,
they are angry with those who follow the path of truth; and when they
are able to correct themselves, they greatly increase <span
id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) their errors by cruel deeds, they are
stained with the blood of the innocent, and they tear away with violence
souls dedicated to God from the lacerated bodies. Such are the men with
whom we now endeavour to engage and to dispute: these are the men whom
we would lead away from a foolish persuasion to the truth, men who would
more readily drink blood than imbibe the words of the righteous. What
then? Will our labour be in vain? By no means. For if we shall not be
able to deliver these from death, to which they are hastening with the
greatest speed; if we cannot recall them from that devious path to life
and light, since they themselves oppose their own safety; yet we shall
strengthen those who belong to us, whose opinion is not settled, and
founded and fixed <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-Page_136"></span>with solid roots. For many of them
waver, and especially those who have any acquaintance with literature.
For in this respect philosophers, and orators, and poets are pernicious,
because they are easily able to ensnare unwary souls by the sweetness of
their discourse, and of their poems flowing with delightful modulation.
These are sweets <span id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) which conceal
poison. And on this account I wished to connect wisdom with religion,
that that vain system may not at all injure the studious; so that now
the knowledge of literature may not only be of no injury to religion and
righteousness, but may even be of the greatest profit, if he who has
learned it should be more instructed in virtues and wiser in truth.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p8"></span>Moreover, even though it should be
profitable to no other, it certainly will be so to us: the conscience
will delight itself, and the mind will rejoice that it is engaged in the
light of truth, which is the food of the soul, being overspread with an
incredible kind of pleasantness. But we must not despair. Perchance  

> <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p8.1"></span> “We sing not to the deaf.” <span
> id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916)  

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p10"></span>For neither are affairs in so bad a
condition that there are no sound minds to which the truth may be
pleasing, and which may both see and follow the right course when it is
pointed out to them. Only let the cup be anointed <span
id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) with the heavenly honey of wisdom,
that the bitter remedies may be drunk by them unawares, without any
annoyance, whilst the first sweetness of taste by its allurement
conceals, under the cover <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) of
pleasantness, the bitterness of the harsh flavour. For this is
especially the cause why, with the wise and the learned, and the princes
of this world, the sacred Scriptures are without credit, because the
prophets spoke in common and simple language, as though they spoke to
the people. And therefore they are despised by those who are willing to
hear or read nothing except that which is polished and eloquent; nor is
anything able to remain fixed in their minds, except that which charms
their ears by a more soothing sound. But those things which appear
humble <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) are considered anile,
foolish, and common. So entirely do they regard nothing as true, except
that which is pleasant to the ear; nothing as credible, except that
which can excite <span id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) pleasure: no
one estimates <span id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) a subject by its
truth, but by its embellishment. Therefore they do not believe the
sacred writings, because they are without any pretence; <span
id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922) but they do not even believe those who
explain them, because they also are either altogether ignorant, or at
any rate possessed of little learning. For it very rarely happens that
they are wholly eloquent; and the cause of this is evident. For
eloquence is subservient to the world, it desires to display itself to
the people, and to please in things which are evil; since it often
endeavours to overpower the truth, that it may show its power; it seeks
wealth, desires honours; in short, it demands the highest degree of
dignity. Therefore it despises these subjects as low; it avoids secret
things as contrary to itself, inasmuch as it rejoices in publicity, and
longs for the multitude and celebrity. Hence it comes to pass that
wisdom and truth need suitable heralds. And if by chance any of the
learned have betaken themselves to it, they have not been sufficient for
its defence.  

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p17"></span>Of those who are known to me, <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p17.1"></span>Minucius Felix was of no ignoble rank among
pleaders. His book, which bears the title of <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p17.2"></span>Octavius, declares how suitable a
maintainer of the truth he might have been, if he had given himself
altogether to that pursuit. <span id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923)
<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p18.4"></span>Septimius Tertullianus also was
skilled in literature of every kind; but in eloquence he had little
readiness, and was not sufficiently polished, and very obscure. Not even
therefore did he find sufficient renown. <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p18.5"></span>Cyprianus, therefore, was above all
others <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) distinguished and
renowned, since he had sought great glory to himself from the profession
of the art of oratory, and he wrote very many things worthy of
admiration in their particular class. For he was of a turn of mind which
was ready, copious, agreeable, and (that which is the greatest
excellence of style) plain and open; so that you cannot determine
whether he was more embellished in speech, or more ready in explanation,
or more powerful in persuasion. And yet he is unable to please those who
are ignorant of the mystery except by his words; inasmuch as the things
which he spoke are mystical, and prepared with this object, that they
may be heard by the faithful only: in short, he is accustomed to be
derided by the learned men of this age, to whom his writings have
happened to be known. I have heard of a certain man who was skilful
indeed, who by the change of a single letter called him <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p19.2"></span>Coprianus, <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) as though he were one who had applied
to old women’s fables a mind which was elegant and fitted for better
things. But if this happened to him whose eloquence is <span
id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span id="iii.ii.v.i-Page_137"></span>not
unpleasant, what then must we suppose happens to those whose discourse
is meagre and displeasing, who could have had neither the power of
persuasion, nor subtlety in arguing, nor any severity at all for
refuting?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_912"></span>[135:913](0070114.htm#fr_912) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p2"></span> These words are omitted in some
editions. The chapter is a kind of preface to the whole book, in which
he complains that punishment has been inflicted on the Christians,
without due inquiry into their cause. \[Religious = <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>superstitious. See p. 131, <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p2.3"></span>supra.\]  

<span id="fn_913"></span>[135:914](0070114.htm#fr_913) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p2.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p3"></span> <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p3.1"></span>Jure
humanitatis.  

<span id="fn_914"></span>[135:915](0070114.htm#fr_914) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p6"></span> Coacervant, “they heap up.”  

<span id="fn_915"></span>[136:916](0070114.htm#fr_915) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p7.1"></span>Mella.  

<span id="fn_916"></span>[136:917](0070114.htm#fr_916) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p9"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p9.1"></span>Virgil, <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p9.2"></span>Bucol., x. 8.  

<span id="fn_917"></span>[136:918](0070114.htm#fr_917) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p11"></span> There is a reference here to a
well-known passage of <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p11.1"></span>Lucretius, i.
935: “As physicians, when they purpose to give nauseous wormwood to
children, first smear the rim round the bowl with the sweet yellow juice
of honey, that the unthinking age of children may be fooled as far as
the lips, but though beguiled, not be betrayed.”  

<span id="fn_918"></span>[136:919](0070114.htm#fr_918) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p12"></span> <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p12.1"></span>Sub
prætextu.  

<span id="fn_919"></span>[136:920](0070114.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p13"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p13.1"></span>Sordida.  

<span id="fn_920"></span>[136:921](0070114.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p14"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p14.1"></span>Incutere. So <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p14.2"></span>Lucretius, i. 19, “<span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p14.3"></span>incutiens amorem.”  

<span id="fn_921"></span>[136:922](0070114.htm#fr_921) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p15"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p15.1"></span>Ponderat.  

<span id="fn_922"></span>[136:923](0070114.htm#fr_922) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p16"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p16.1"></span>Sine fuco.  

<span id="fn_923"></span>[136:924](0070114.htm#fr_923) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p18"></span> \[Vol iv. 173. Note our author’s
reference to the founders of Latin Christianity, all North-Africans,
like <span id="iii.ii.v.i-p18.2"></span>Arnobius and himself. See vol.
iv. pp. 169, 170.\]  

<span id="fn_924"></span>[136:925](0070114.htm#fr_924) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p18.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p19"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p19.1"></span>Unus.  

<span id="fn_925"></span>[136:926](0070114.htm#fr_925) <span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v.i-p20"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p20.1"></span>κοπρι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p20.2"></span>́</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.v.i-p20.3"></span>ας</span> is applied to sycophants and low
buffoons and jesters, who, for the sake of exciting laughter, made
boastful and extravagant promises.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. II.—To what an extent the Christian truth has been assailed
by rash men](0070115)
