[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070177)  [Next](0070179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chap. XIV.—Of the First and Last Times of the World.

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p1"></span>Since we have spoken of the
immortality of the soul, it follows that we teach how and when it is
given to man; that in this also they may see the errors of their
perverseness and folly, who imagine that some mortals have become gods
by the decrees and dogmas of mortals; either because they had invented
arts, or because they had taught the use of certain productions of the
earth, or because they had discovered things useful for the life of men,
or because they had slain savage beasts. How far these things were from
deserving immortality we have both shown in the former books, and we
will now show, that it may be evident that it is righteousness alone
which procures for man eternal life, and that it is God alone who
bestows the reward of eternal life. For they who are said to have been
immortalized by their merits, inasmuch as they possessed neither
righteousness nor any true virtue, did not obtain for themselves
immortality, but death by their sins and lusts; nor did they deserve the
reward of heaven, but the punishment of hell, which impends over them,
together with all their worshippers. And I show that the time of this
judgment draws near, that the due reward may be given to the righteous,
and the deserved punishment may be inflicted on the wicked.  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p2"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Plato and many others of the
philosophers, since they were ignorant of the origin of all things, and
of that primal period at which the world was made, said that many
thousands of ages had passed since this beautiful arrangement of the
world was completed; and in this they perhaps followed the Chaldeans,
who, as <span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p2.2"></span>Cicero has related in his
first book respecting divination, <span
id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381) foolishly say <span
id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382) that they possess comprised in
their memorials four hundred and seventy thousand years; in which
matter, because they thought that they could not be convicted, they
believed that they were at liberty <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383) to speak falsely. But we, whom the
Holy Scriptures instruct to the knowledge of the truth, know the
beginning and the end of the world, respecting which we will now speak
in the end of our work, since we have explained respecting the beginning
in the second book. Therefore let the philosophers, who enumerate
thousands of ages from the beginning of the world, know that the six
thousandth year is not yet completed, and that when this number is
completed the consummation must take place, and the condition of human
affairs be remodelled for the better, the proof of which must first be
related, that the matter itself may be plain. God completed the world
and this admirable work of nature in the space of six days, as is
contained in the secrets of Holy Scripture, and consecrated the seventh
day, on which He had rested from His works. But this is the Sabbath-day,
which in the language of the Hebrews received its name from the
number, <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) whence the seventh is
the legitimate and complete number. For there are seven days, by the
revolutions of which in order the circles of years are made up; and
there are seven stars which do not set, and seven luminaries which are
called planets, <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) whose
differing and unequal movements are believed to cause the varieties of
circumstances and times. <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p9"></span>Therefore, since all the works of
God were completed in six days, the world must continue in its present
state through six ages, that is, six thousand years. For the great day
of God is limited by a circle of a thousand years, as the prophet shows,
who says <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) “In Thy sight, O
Lord, a thousand years are as one day.” And as God laboured during those
six days in creating such great works, so His religion and truth must
labour during these six thousand years, while wickedness prevails and
bears rule. And again, since God, having finished His works, rested the
seventh day and blessed it, at the end of the six thousandth year all
wickedness must be abolished from the earth, and righteousness reign for
a thousand years; and there must be tranquillity and rest from the
labours which the world now has long endured. But how that will come to
pass I will explain in its order. We have often said that lesser things
and things of small importance are figures and previous shadowings forth
of great things; as this day of ours, which is bounded by the rising and
the setting of the sun, is a representation <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) of that great day to which the
circuit of a thousand years affixes its limits. <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389)  

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p13"></span>In the same manner also the
fashioning of the earthly man held forth to the future the formation of
the heavenly people. For as, when all things were completed which were
contrived for the use of man, last of all, on the sixth day, He <span
id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-Page_212"></span>made man also, and introduced him
into this world as into a home now carefully prepared; so now on the
great sixth day the true man is being formed by the word of God, that
is, a holy people is fashioned for righteousness by the doctrine and
precepts of God. And as then a mortal and imperfect man was formed from
the earth, that he might live a thousand years in this world; so now
from this earthly age is formed a perfect man, that being quickened by
God, he may bear rule in this same world through a thousand years. But
in what manner the consummation will take place, and what end awaits the
affairs of men, if any one shall examine the divine writings he will
ascertain. But the voices also of prophets of the world, agreeing with
the heavenly, announce the end and overthrow of all things after a short
time, describing as it were the last old age of the wearied and wasting
world. But the things which are said by prophets and seers to be about
to happen before that last ending comes upon the world, I will subjoin,
being collected and accumulated from all quarters.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[211:1382](0070178.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p3"></span> i. 19.  

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[211:1383](0070178.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p4"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p4.1"></span>Delirant.  

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[211:1384](0070178.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p5"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>Liberum esse.  

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[211:1385](0070178.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p6"></span> The word Sabbath means rest. \[He
derives it from <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>שֶׁבַצ</span>: but one wonders how these
divers etymologies came into the use of Gentile believers. Compare vol.
ii. Elucidation VIII. p. 443.\]  

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[211:1386](0070178.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p7"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>Errantia.  

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[211:1387](0070178.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p8"></span> \[<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p8.1"></span>Efficere <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p8.2"></span>creduntur. Our author seems to guard
himself against affirming the verity of the science of his times.\]  

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[211:1388](0070178.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p10"></span> [Ps. xc.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004)<span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>; see also 2 Pet. iii. 8.  

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[211:1389](0070178.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p11.1"></span>Speciem gerere.  

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[211:1390](0070178.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p12"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>Determinat. \[Compare p. 220, <span
id="iii.ii.vii.xiv-p12.3"></span>infra.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XV.—Of the devastation of the world and change of the
empires](0070179)
