[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070239)  [Next](0070241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LII.—The Hope of the Salvation of Men Consists in the Knowledge of the True God, and of the Hatred of the Heathens Against the Christians.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p1"></span>There is therefore but one hope
of life for men, one harbour of safety, one refuge of liberty, if,
laying aside the errors by which they were held, they open the eyes of
their mind and recognise God, in whom alone is the abode of truth;
despise earthly things, and those made from the ground esteem as nothing
philosophy, which is foolishness with God; and having undertaken true
wisdom, that is, religion, become heirs of immortality. But indeed they
are not so much opposed to the truth as to their own safety; and when
they hear these things, they abominate them as some inexpiable
wickedness. But they do not even endure <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564) to hear: they think that their ears
are polluted with impiety <span id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565) if
they hear; nor do they now refrain from reproaches, but assail them with
the most insulting words; and also, if they have obtained the power,
persecute them as public enemies, yea, even as worse than enemies; for
enemies, when they have been vanquished, are punished with death or
slavery; nor is there any torturing after the laying down of arms,
although those deserved to suffer all things who wished so to act, that
piety might have place among swords.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p4"></span>Cruelty, combined with
innocence, is unheard of, nor is it worthy of the condition of
victorious enemies. What is the so powerful cause of this fury?
Doubtless, because they cannot contend on the ground of reason, they
urge forward their cause by means of violence; and, with the subject not
understood, they condemn those as most pernicious persons who have
declined to make a stand respecting the fact of their innocence. Nor do
they deem it sufficient that those whom they unreasonably hate should
die by a speedy and simple death; but they lacerate them with refined
tortures, that they may satisfy their hatred, which is not produced by
any fault, but by the truth, which is hateful to those who live
wickedly, because they take it ill that there are some whom their deeds
cannot please. They desire in every way to destroy these, that they may
be able to sin without restraint in the absence of any witness.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[243:1565](0070240.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p2"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>Ne audire quidem patiuntur; others
read “<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p2.2"></span>patienter.”  

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[243:1566](0070240.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p3"></span> <span
id="iii.ii.viii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>Sacrilegio.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LIII.—The reasons of the hatred against the Christians are
examined and refuted](0070241)
