[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070258)  [Next](0070260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p0.1"></span>Chap. LXXI.—Of the Last Times.

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p1"></span>These things are said by the
prophets, but as seers, to be about to happen. When the last end shall
begin to approach to the world, wickedness will increase; all kinds of
vices and frauds will become frequent; justice will perish; faith,
peace, mercy, modesty, truth, will have no existence; violence and
daring will abound; no one will have anything, unless it is acquired by
the hand, and defended by the hand. If there shall be any good men, they
will be esteemed as a prey and a laughing-stock. No one will exhibit
filial affection to parents, no one will pity an infant or an old man;
avarice and lust will corrupt all things. There will be slaughter and
bloodshed. There will be wars, and those not only between foreign and
neighbouring states, but also intestine wars. States will carry on wars
among themselves, every sex and age will handle arms. The dignity of
government will not be preserved, nor military discipline; but after the
manner of robbery, there will be depredation and devastation. Kingly
power will be multiplied, and ten men will occupy, portion out, and
devour the world. There will arise another by far more powerful and
wicked, who, having destroyed three, will obtain Asia, and having
reduced and subdued the others under his own <span id="page_254">p.
254</span> <span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-Page_254"></span>power, will
harass all the earth. He will appoint new laws, abrogate old ones; he
will make the state his own, and will change the name and seat of the
government.  

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p2"></span>Then there will be a dreadful and
detestable time, in which no one would choose to live. In fine, such
will be the condition of things, that lamentation will follow the
living, and congratulation the dead. Cities and towns will be destroyed,
at one time by fire and the sword, at another by repeated earthquakes;
now by inundation of waters, now by pestilence and famine. The earth
will produce nothing, being barren either through excessive cold or
heat. All water will be partly changed into blood, partly vitiated by
bitterness, so that none of it can be useful for food, or wholesome for
drinking. To these evils will also be added prodigies from heaven, that
nothing may be wanting to men for causing fear. Comets will frequently
appear. The sun will be overshadowed with perpetual paleness. The moon
will be stained with blood, nor will it repair the losses of its light
taken away. All the stars will fall, nor will the seasons preserve their
regularity, winter and summer being confused. Then both the year, and
the month, and the day will be shortened. And <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p2.1"></span>Trismegistus has declared that this
is the old age and decline of the world. And when this shall have come,
it must be known that the time is at hand in which God will return to
change the world. But in the midst of these evils there will arise an
impious king, hostile not only to mankind, but also to God. He will
trample upon, torment, harass and put to death those who have been
spared by that former tyrant. Then there will be ever-flowing tears,
perpetual wailings and lamentations, and useless prayers to God; there
will be no rest from fear, no sleep for a respite. The day will always
increase disaster, the night alarm. Thus the world will be reduced
almost to solitude, certainly to fewness of men. Then also the impious
man will persecute the just and those who are dedicated to God, and will
give orders that he himself shall be worshipped as God. For he will say
that he is Christ, though he will be His adversary. <span
id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) That he may be believed, he will
receive the power of doing wonders, so that fire may descend from
heaven, the sun retire from his course, and the image which he shall
have set up may speak. And by these prodigies he shall entice many to
worship him, and to receive his sign in their hand or forehead. And he
who shall not worship him and receive his sign will die with refined
tortures. Thus he will destroy nearly two parts, the third will flee
into desolate solitudes. But he, frantic and raging with implacable
anger, will lead an army and besiege the mountain to which the righteous
shall have fled. And when they shall see themselves besieged, they will
implore the aid of God with a loud voice, and God shall hear them, and
shall send to them a deliverer.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[254:1603](0070259.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p3"></span> \[See <span
id="iii.ii.viii.lxvii-p3.1"></span>Hippolytus , vol. v. pp. 190–250.\]  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. LXXII.—Of Christ descending from heaven to the general
judgment, and of the millenarian reign](0070260)
