[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070008)  [Next](0070010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p0.1"></span>Chap. III.—Whether the universe is governed by the power of one god or of many.

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p1"></span>Let the commencement of our work
therefore be that inquiry which closely follows and is connected with
the first: Whether the universe is governed by the power of one God or
of many. There is no one, who possesses intelligence and uses
reflection, who does not understand that it is one Being who both
created all things and governs them with the same energy by which He
created them. For what need is there of many to sustain the government
of the universe? unless we should happen to think that, if there were
more than one, each would possess less might and strength. And they who
hold that there are many gods, do indeed effect this; for those gods
must of necessity be weak, since individually, without the aid of the
others, they would be unable to sustain the government of so vast a
mass. But God, who is the Eternal Mind, is undoubtedly of excellence,
complete and perfect in every part. And if this is true, He must of
necessity be one. For power or excellence, which is complete, retains
its own peculiar stability. But that is to be regarded as solid from
which nothing can be taken away, that as perfect to which nothing can be
added.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p2"></span>Who can doubt that he would be a most
powerful king who should have the government of the whole world? And not
without reason, since all things which everywhere exist would belong to
him, since all resources from all quarters would be centred in him
alone. But if more than one divide the government of the world,
undoubtedly each will have less power and strength, since every one must
confine himself <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i.iv-Page_12"></span>within his prescribed portion. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) In the same manner also, if there are
more gods than one, they will be of less weight, others having in
themselves the same power. But the nature of excellence admits of
greater perfection in him in whom the whole is, than in him in whom
there is only a small part of the whole. But God, if He is perfect, as
He ought to be, cannot but be one, because He is perfect, so that all
things may be in Him. Therefore the excellences and powers of the gods
must necessarily be weaker, because so much will be wanting to each as
shall be in the others; and so the more there are, so much the less
powerful will they be. Why should I mention that this highest power and
divine energy is altogether incapable of division? For whatever is
capable of division must of necessity be liable to destruction also. But
if destruction is far removed from God, because He is incorruptible and
eternal, it follows that the divine power is incapable of division.
Therefore God is one, if that which admits of so great power can be
nothing else: and yet those who deem that there are many gods, say that
they have divided their functions among themselves; but we will discuss
all these matters at their proper places. In the meantime, I affirm
this, which belongs to the present subject. If they have divided their
functions among themselves, the matter comes back to the same point,
that any one of them is unable to supply the place of all. He cannot,
then, be perfect who is unable to govern all things while the others are
unemployed. And so is comes to pass, that for the government of the
universe there is more need of the perfect excellence of one than of the
imperfect powers of many. But he who imagines that so great a magnitude
as this cannot be governed by one Being, is deceived. For he does not
comprehend how great are the might and power of the divine majesty, if
he thinks that the one God, who had power to create the universe, is
also unable to govern that which He has created. But if he conceives in
his mind how great is the immensity of that divine work, when before it
was nothing, yet that by the power and wisdom of God it was made out of
nothing—a work which could only be commenced and accomplished by one—he
will now understand that that which has been established by one is much
more easily governed by one.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p4"></span>Some one may perhaps say that so
immense a work as that of the universe could not even have been
fabricated except by many. But however many and however great he may
consider them,—whatever magnitude, power, excellence, and majesty he may
attribute to the many,—the whole of that I assign to one, and say that
it exists in one: so that there is in Him such an amount of these
properties as can neither be conceived nor expressed. And since we fail
in this subject, both in perception and in words—for neither does the
human breast admit the light of so great understanding, nor is the
mortal tongue capable of explaining such great subjects—it is right that
we should understand and say this very same thing. I see, again, what
can be alleged on the other hand, that those many gods are such as we
hold the one God to be. But this cannot possibly be so, because the
power of these gods individually will not be able to proceed further,
the power of the others meeting and hindering them. For either each must
be unable to pass beyond his own limits, or, if he shall have passed
beyond them, he must drive another from his boundaries. They who believe
that there are many gods, do not see that it may happen that some may be
opposed to others in their wishes, from which circumstance disputing and
contention would arise among them; as Homer represented the gods at war
among themselves, since some desired that Troy should be taken, others
opposed it. The universe, therefore, must be ruled by the will of one.
For unless the power over the separate parts be referred to one and the
same providence, the whole itself will not be able to exist; since each
takes care of nothing beyond that which belongs peculiarly to him, just
as warfare could not be carried on without one general and commander.
But if there were in one army as many generals as there are legions,
cohorts, divisions, <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) and squadrons,
first of all it would not be possible for the army to be drawn out in
battle array, since each would refuse the peril; nor could it easily be
governed or controlled, because all would use their own peculiar
counsels, by the diversity of which they would inflict more injury than
they would confer advantage. So, in this government of the affairs of
nature, unless there shall be one to whom the care of the whole is
referred, all things will be dissolved and fall to decay.  

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p6"></span>But to say that the universe is
governed by the will of many, is equivalent to a declaration that there
are many minds in one body, since there are many and various offices of
the members, so that separate minds may be supposed to govern separate
senses; and also the many affections, by which we are accustomed to be
moved either to anger, or to desire, or to joy, or to fear, or to pity,
so that in all these affections as many minds may be supposed to
operate; and if any one should say this, he would appear to be destitute
even of that very mind, which is one. But <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> <span id="iii.ii.i.iv-Page_13"></span>if in one body one mind
possesses the government of so many things, and is at the same time
occupied with the whole, why should any one suppose that the universe
cannot be governed by one, but that it can be governed by more than one?
And because those maintainers of many gods are aware of this, they say
that they so preside over separate offices and parts, that there is
still one chief ruler. The others, therefore, on this principle, will
not be gods, but attendants and ministers, whom that one most mighty and
omnipotent appointed to these offices, and they themselves will be
subservient to his authority and command. If, therefore, all are not
equal to one another, all are not gods; for that which serves and that
which rules cannot be the same. For if God is a title of the highest
power, He must be incorruptible, perfect, incapable of suffering, and
subject to no <span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p6.1"></span>other being; therefore
they are not gods whom necessity compels to obey the one greatest God.
But because they who hold this opinion are not deceived without cause,
we will presently lay open the cause of this error. Now, let us prove by
testimonies the unity of the divine power.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[12:26](0070009.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.ii.i.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p3"></span> \[A hint to Cæsar himself, the force
of which began soon after very sorely to be felt in the empire.\]  

<span id="fn_26"></span>[12:27](0070009.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.ii.i.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i.iv-p5"></span> Cunei; properly, soldiers arranged in
the shape of wedge.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IV.—That the one God was foretold even by the
prophets](0070010)
