[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070443)  [Next](0070445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>Sec. II.—On Deacons and Deaconesses, the Rest of the Clergy, and on Baptism.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p1"></span>Let not therefore either a bishop, or a
presbyter, or a deacon, or any one else of the sacerdotal catalogue,
defile his tongue with calumny, lest he inherit a curse instead of a
blessing; and let it also be the bishop’s business and care that no lay
person utter any curse: for he ought to take care of all,—of the clergy,
of the virgins, of the widows, of the laity. For which reason, O bishop,
do thou ordain thy fellow-workers, the labourers for life and for
righteousness, such deacons as are pleasing to God, such whom thou
provest to be worthy among all the people, and such as shall be ready
for the necessities of their ministration. Ordain also a deaconess who
is faithful and holy, for the ministrations towards women. For sometimes
he cannot send a deacon, who is a man, to the women, on account of
unbelievers. Thou shalt therefore send a woman, a deaconess, on account
of the imaginations of the bad. For we stand in need of a woman, a
deaconess, for many necessities; and first in the baptism of women, the
deacon shall anoint only their forehead with the holy oil, and after him
the deaconess shall anoint them: <span
id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) for there is no necessity that the
women should be seen by the men; but only in the laying on of hands the
bishop shall anoint her head, as the priests and kings were formerly
anointed, not because those which are now baptized are ordained priests,
but as being Christians, or anointed, from Christ the Anointed, “a royal
priesthood, and an holy nation, the Church of God, the pillar and ground
of the marriage-chamber,” <span id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) who
formerly were not a people, but now are beloved and chosen, upon whom is
called His new name <span id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920) as Isaiah
the prophet witnesses, saying: “And they shall call the people by His
new name, which the Lord shall name for them.” <span
id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>Concerning the Sacred Initiation of Holy Baptism.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>XVI</span>. Thou therefore, O bishop,
according to that type, shalt anoint the head of those that are to be
baptized, whether they be men or women, with the holy oil, for a type of
the spiritual baptism. After that, either thou, O bishop, or a presbyter
that is under thee, shall in the solemn form name over them the Father,
and Son, and Holy Spirit, and shall dip them in the water; and let a
deacon receive the man, and a deaconess the woman, that so the
conferring of this inviolable seal may take place with a becoming
decency. And after that, let the bishop anoint those that are baptized
with ointment.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>What is the Meaning of Baptism into Christ, and on What Account Everything is There Said or Done.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>XVII</span>. This baptism, therefore, is given
into the death of <span id="ix.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>Jesus: <span
id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) the water is instead of the burial,
and the oil instead of the Holy Ghost; the seal instead of the cross;
the ointment is the confirmation of the confession; the mention of the
Father as of the Author and Sender; the joint mention of the Holy Ghost
as of the witness; the descent into the water the dying together with
Christ; the ascent out of the water the rising again with Him. The
Father is the God over all; Christ is the only-begotten God, the beloved
Son, the Lord of glory; the Holy Ghost is the Comforter, who is sent by
Christ, land taught by Him, and proclaims Him.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p8.3"></span>Of What Character He Ought to Be Who is Initiated.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>XVIII</span>. But let him that is to be
baptized be free from all iniquity; one that has left off to work sin,
the friend of God, the enemy of the devil, the heir of God the Father,
the fellow-heir of His Son; one that has renounced Satan, and the
demons, and Satan’s deceits; chaste, pure, holy, beloved of God, the son
of God, praying as a son to his father, and saying, as from the common
congregation of the faithful, thus: “Our Father, which art in heaven,
hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, as it
is in heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our
debts, as we forgive our debtors; and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from the evil <span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="ix.iv.ii-Page_432"></span>one: for Thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923)  

##### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p10.2"></span>What are the Characters of a Deacon.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>XIX</span>. Let the deacons be in all things
unspotted, as the bishop himself is to be, only more active; in number
according to the largeness of the Church, that they may minister to the
infirm as workmen that are not ashamed. And let the deaconess be
diligent in taking care of the women; but both of them ready to carry
messages, to travel about, to minister, and to serve, as spake Isaiah
concerning the Lord, saying: “To justify the righteous, who serves many
faithfully.” <span id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) Let every one
therefore know his proper place, and discharge it diligently with one
consent, with one mind, as knowing the reward of their ministration; but
let them not be ashamed to minister to those that are in want, as even
our “Lord <span id="ix.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>Jesus Christ came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister and to give His life a ransom for
many.” <span id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) So therefore ought
they also to do, and not to scruple it, if they should be obliged to lay
down their life for a brother. For the Lord and our Saviour <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p13.2"></span>Jesus Christ did not scruple to “lay down His
life,” as Himself says, “for His friends.” <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) If, therefore, the Lord of heaven
and earth underwent all His sufferings for us, how then do you make a
difficulty to minister to such as are in want, who ought to imitate Him
who underwent servitude, and want, and stripes, and the cross for us? We
ought therefore also to serve the brethren, in imitation of Christ. For
says He: “He that will be great among you, let him be your minister; and
he that will be first among you, let him be your servant.” <span
id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) For so did He really, and not in
word only, fulfil the prediction of, “serving many faithfully.” <span
id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) For “when He had taken a towel, He
girded Himself. Afterward He puts water into a bason; and as we were
sitting at meat, He came and washed the feet of us all, and wiped them
with the towel.” <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929) By doing
this He demonstrated to us His kindness and brotherly affection, that so
we also might do the same to one another. If, therefore, our Lord and
Master so humbled Himself, how can you, the labourers of the truth, and
administrators of piety, be ashamed to do the same to such of the
brethren as are weak and infirm? Minister therefore with a kind mind,
not murmuring nor mutinying; for ye do not do it on the account of man,
but on the account of God, and shall receive from Him the reward of your
ministry in the day of your visitation. It is your duty who are deacons
to visit all those who stand in need of visitation. And tell your bishop
of all those that are in affliction; for you ought to be like his soul
and senses—active <span id="ix.iv.ii-p17.2"></span>and attentive in all
things to him <span id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) as to your
bishop, <span id="ix.iv.ii-p18.2"></span>and father <span
id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) and master.  

##### <span id="ix.iv.ii-p19.2"></span>That a Bishop Ought to Be Ordained by Three or by Two Bishops, But Not by One; For that Would Be Invalid.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p20.1"></span>XX</span>. We command that a bishop be
ordained by three bishops, or at least by two; but it is not lawful that
he be set over you by one; for the testimony of two or three witnesses
is more firm and secure. But a presbyter and a deacon are to be ordained
by one bishop and the rest of the clergy. Nor must either a presbyter or
a deacon ordain from the laity into the clergy; but the presbyter is
only to teach, to offer, to baptize, to bless the people, and the deacon
is to minister to the bishop, and to the presbyters, that is, to do the
office of a ministering deacon, but not to meddle with the other
offices.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[431:2919](0070444.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p2"></span> \[Compare [Jas. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>.\]
 

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[431:2920](0070444.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p3"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>; [1
Tim. iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[431:2921](0070444.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p4"></span> The words from “upon whom” to the end of
the chapter are omitted in one V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[431:2922](0070444.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p5"></span> [Isa. lxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>  

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[431:2923](0070444.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p8"></span> <span id="ix.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>Vid [Rom.
vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p8.2"></span>
 

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[432:2924](0070444.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p10"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[432:2925](0070444.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p12"></span> [Isa. liii.
11](../../../bib/sep/isa053.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>,
LXX.  

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[432:2926](0070444.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p13"></span> [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[432:2927](0070444.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p14"></span> [John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[432:2928](0070444.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p15"></span> [Matt.
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[432:2929](0070444.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p16"></span> [Isa. liii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[432:2930](0070444.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p17"></span> [John
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[432:2931](0070444.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p18"></span> The portions in italics are not in one
V. <span class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>ms</span>.  

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[432:2932](0070444.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="ix.iv.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p19"></span> The portions in italics are not in one
V. <span class="sc"><span id="ix.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>ms</span>.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](0070445)
