[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0070467)  [Next](0070469) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p0.1"></span>Sec. III.—Ordination and Duties of the Clergy.

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p0.2"></span>Concerning the Ordination of Presbyters—The Constitution of John, Who Was Beloved by the Lord.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>XVI</span>. Concerning the ordination of
presbyters, I <span id="fr_3681"></span>[3682](#fn_3681) who am loved by
the Lord make this constitution for you the bishops: <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.6"></span>When thou ordainest a presbyter, O bishop,
lay thy hand upon his head, <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="ix.ix.iii-Page_492"></span><span id="ix.ix.iii-p2.7"></span>in the
presence of the presbyters and deacons, <span
id="fr_3682"></span>[3683](#fn_3682) and pray, saying: O Lord Almighty,
our God, who hast created all things by Christ, and dost in like manner
take care of the whole world by Him; for He who had power to make
different creatures, has also power to take care of them, according to
their different natures; on which account, O God, Thou takest care of
immortal beings by bare preservation, but of those that are mortal by
succession—of the soul by the provision of laws, of the body by the
supply of its wants. Do Thou therefore now also look down upon Thy holy
Church, and increase the same, and multiply those that preside in it,
and grant them power, that they may labour both in word and work for the
edification of Thy people. Do Thou now also look down upon this Thy
servant, who is put into the presbytery by the vote and determination of
the whole clergy; and do Thou replenish him with the Spirit of grace and
counsel, to assist and govern Thy people with a pure heart, in the same
manner as Thou didst look down upon Thy chosen people, and didst command
<span id="ix.ix.iii-p3.1"></span>Moses to choose elders, whom Thou didst
fill with Thy Spirit. <span id="fr_3683"></span>[3684](#fn_3683) Do Thou
also now, O Lord, grant this, and preserve in us the Spirit of Thy
grace, that this person, being filled with the gifts of healing and the
word of teaching, may in meekness instruct Thy people, and sincerely
serve Thee with a pure mind and a willing soul, and may fully discharge
the holy ministrations for Thy people, through Thy Christ, with whom
glory, honour, and worship be to Thee, and to the Holy Ghost, for ever.
Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p4.3"></span>Concerning the Ordination of Deacons—The Constitution of Philip.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p5.1"></span>XVII</span>. Concerning the ordination of
deacons, I Philip <span id="fr_3684"></span>[3685](#fn_3684) make this
constitution: Thou shalt ordain a deacon, O bishop, by laying thy hands
upon him in the presence of the whole presbytery, and of the deacons,
and shall pray, and say:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p6.5"></span>The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Deacon.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p7.1"></span>XVIII</span>. O God Almighty, the true and
faithful God, who art rich unto all that call upon Thee in truth, who
art fearful in counsels, and wise in understanding, who art powerful and
great, hear our prayer, O Lord, and let Thine ears receive our
supplication, and “cause the light of Thy countenance to shine upon this
Thy servant,” who is to be ordained for Thee to the office of a deacon;
and replenish him with Thy Holy Spirit, and with power, as Thou didst
replenish <span id="ix.ix.iii-p7.2"></span>Stephen, who was Thy martyr,
and follower of the sufferings of Thy Christ. <span
id="fr_3685"></span>[3686](#fn_3685) Do Thou render him worthy to
discharge acceptably the ministration of a deacon, steadily,
unblameably, and without reproof, that thereby he may attain an higher
degree, through the mediation of Thy only begotten Son, with whom glory,
honour, and worship be to Thee and the Holy Spirit for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p8.3"></span>Concerning the Deaconess—The Constitution of Bartholomew.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p9.1"></span>XIX</span>. Concerning a deaconess, I <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p9.2"></span>Bartholomew <span
id="fr_3686"></span>[3687](#fn_3686) make this constitution: O bishop,
thou shalt lay thy hands upon her in the presence of the presbytery, and
of the deacons and deaconesses, and shall say:—  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p10.4"></span>The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Deaconess.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.1"></span>XX</span>. O Eternal God, the Father of our
Lord <span id="ix.ix.iii-p11.2"></span>Jesus Christ, the Creator of man
and of woman, who didst replenish with the Spirit <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.3"></span>Miriam, and <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.4"></span>Deborah, and <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.5"></span>Anna, and <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.6"></span>Huldah; <span
id="fr_3687"></span>[3688](#fn_3687) who didst not disdain that Thy only
begotten Son should be born of a woman; who also in the tabernacle of
the testimony, and in the temple, didst ordain women to be keepers of
Thy holy gates,—do Thou now also look down upon this Thy servant, who is
to be ordained to the office of a deaconess, and grant her Thy Holy
Spirit, and “cleanse her from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,” <span
id="fr_3688"></span>[3689](#fn_3688) that she may worthily discharge the
work which is committed to her to Thy glory, and the praise of Thy
Christ, with whom glory and adoration be to Thee and the Holy Spirit for
ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p13.2"></span>Concerning the Sub-Deacons—The Constitution of <span id="ix.ix.iii-p13.3"></span>Thomas.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p14"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p14.1"></span>XXI</span>. Concerning the sub-deacons, I
<span id="ix.ix.iii-p14.2"></span>Thomas <span
id="fr_3689"></span>[3690](#fn_3689) make this constitution for you the
bishops: <span id="fr_3690"></span>[3691](#fn_3690) When thou dost
ordain a sub-deacon, <span id="fr_3691"></span>[3692](#fn_3691) O
bishop, thou shalt lay thy hands upon him, and say: O Lord God, the
Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things that are therein; who
also in the tabernacle of the testimony didst appoint overseers and
keepers of Thy holy vessels; <span id="fr_3692"></span>[3693](#fn_3692)
do Thou now look down upon this Thy servant, appointed <span
id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span id="ix.ix.iii-Page_493"></span>a
sub-deacon; and grant him the Holy Spirit, that he may worthily handle
the vessels of Thy ministry, and do Thy will always, through Thy Christ,
with whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee and to the Holy Spirit
for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p18.3"></span>Concerning the Readers—The Constitution of Matthew.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p19"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p19.1"></span>XXII</span>. Concerning readers, <span
id="fr_3693"></span>[3694](#fn_3693) I <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p20.2"></span>Matthew, also called <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p20.3"></span>Levi, who was once a tax-gatherer, make a
constitution: Ordain a reader by laying thy hands upon him, and pray
unto God, and say: O Eternal God, who art plenteous in mercy and
compassions, who hast made manifest the constitution of the world by Thy
operations therein, and keepest the number of Thine elect, do Thou also
now look down upon Thy servant, who is to be entrusted to read Thy Holy
Scriptures to Thy people, and give him Thy Holy Spirit, the prophetic
Spirit. Thou who didst instruct <span id="ix.ix.iii-p20.4"></span>Esdras
Thy servant to read Thy laws to the people, <span
id="fr_3694"></span>[3695](#fn_3694) do Thou now also at our prayers
instruct Thy servant, and grant that he may without blame perfect the
work committed to him, and thereby be declared worthy of an higher
degree, through Christ, with whom glory and worship be to Thee and to
the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p21.2"></span>Concerning the Confessors—The Constitution of James the Son of Alpheus.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p22"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p22.1"></span>XXIII</span>. And I <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p22.2"></span>James, the son of Alphæus, make a
constitution in regard to confessors: <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p22.3"></span>A confessor is not ordained; for he is so by
choice and patience, and is worthy of great honour, as having confessed
the name of God, and of His Christ, before nations and kings. But if
there be occasion, he is to be ordained <span
id="fr_3695"></span>[3696](#fn_3695) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p23.1"></span>either a bishop, priest, or deacon. But if
any one of the confessors who is not ordained snatches to himself any
such dignity upon account of his confession, let the same person be
deprived and rejected; for he is not in such an office, since he has
denied the constitution of Christ, and is “worse than an infidel.” <span
id="fr_3696"></span>[3697](#fn_3696)  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p24.2"></span>The Same Apostle’s Constitution Concerning Virgins.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p25.1"></span>XXIV</span>. I, the same, make a
constitution in regard to virgins: <span id="ix.ix.iii-p25.2"></span>A
virgin is not ordained, for we have no such command from the Lord; <span
id="fr_3697"></span>[3698](#fn_3697) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p26.2"></span>for this is a state of voluntary trial, not
for the reproach of marriage, but on account of leisure for piety.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p26.3"></span>The Constitution of Lebbæus, Who Was Surnamed Thaddæus, Concerning Widows.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p27"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p27.1"></span>XXV</span>. And I <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p27.2"></span>Lebbæus, <span
id="fr_3698"></span>[3699](#fn_3698) surnamed <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.6"></span>Thaddæus, make this constitution in regard
to widows: <span id="ix.ix.iii-p28.7"></span>A widow is not ordained;
yet if she has lost her husband a great while, and has lived soberly and
unblameably, and has taken extraordinary care of her family, as
Judith <span id="fr_3699"></span>[3700](#fn_3699) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p29.2"></span>and <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p29.3"></span>Anna <span
id="fr_3700"></span>[3701](#fn_3700) —<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p30.2"></span>those women of great reputation—let her be
chosen into the order of widows. But if she has lately lost her
yokefellow, let her not be believed, but let her youth<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p30.3"></span> be judged of by the time; for the
affections do sometimes grow aged with men, if they be not restrained by
a better bridle.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p30.4"></span>The Same Apostle Concerning the Exorcist.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p31.1"></span>XXVI</span>. I the same make a constitution
in regard to an exorcist. <span id="ix.ix.iii-p31.2"></span>An exorcist
is not ordained. For it is a trial of voluntary goodness, and of the
grace of God through Christ by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. For
he who has received the gift of healing is declared by revelation from
God, the grace which is in him being manifest to all. But if there be
occasion for him, he must be ordained <span
id="fr_3701"></span>[3702](#fn_3701) <span id="ix.ix.iii-p32.1"></span>a
bishop, or a presbyter, or a deacon.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p32.2"></span>Simon the Canaanite Concerning the Number Necessary for the Ordination of a Bishop.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p33"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p33.1"></span>XXVII</span>. <span
id="fr_3702"></span>[3703](#fn_3702) And I <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p34.2"></span>Simon the Canaanite <span
id="fr_3703"></span>[3704](#fn_3703) make a constitution to determine by
how many a bishop ought to be elected. Let a bishop be ordained by three
or two bishops; but if any one be ordained by one bishop, let him be
deprived, both himself and he that ordained him. But if there be a
necessity that he have only one to ordain him, because more bishops
cannot come together, as in time of persecution, or for such like
causes, let him bring the suffrage of permission from more bishops.  

##### <span id="ix.ix.iii-p35.3"></span>The Same Apostle’s Canons Concerning Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and the Rest of the Clergy.

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p36"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p36.1"></span>XXVIII</span>. Concerning <span
id="fr_3704"></span>[3705](#fn_3704) the canons I the same make a
constitution. A bishop blesses, but does not receive the blessing. He
lays on hands, ordains, <span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="ix.ix.iii-Page_494"></span>offers, receives the blessing from
bishops, but by no means from presbyters. A bishop deprives any
clergyman who deserves deprivation, excepting a bishop; for of himself
he has not power to do that. A presbyter blesses, but does not receive
the blessing; yet does he receive the blessing from the bishop or a
fellow-presbyter. In like manner does he give it to a fellow-presbyter.
He lays on hands, but does not ordain; he does not deprive, yet does he
separate those that are under him, if they be liable to such a
punishment. A deacon does not bless, does not give the blessing, but
receives it from the bishop and presbyter: he does not baptize, he does
not offer; but when a bishop or presbyter has offered, he distributes to
the people, not as a priest, but as one that ministers to the priests.
But it is not lawful for any one of the other clergy to do the work of a
deacon. A deaconess does not bless, nor perform anything belonging to
the office of presbyters or deacons, but only is to keep the doors, and
to minister to the presbyters in the baptizing of women, on account of
decency. A deacon separates a sub-deacon, a reader, a singer, and a
deaconess, if there be any occasion, in the absence of a presbyter. It
is not lawful for a sub-deacon to separate either one of the clergy or
laity; nor for a reader, nor for a singer, nor for a deaconess, for they
are the ministers to the deacons.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3681"></span>[491:3682](0070468.htm#fr_3681) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p2"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> has this note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.2"></span>John the evangelist, the brother of <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.3"></span>James, was banished by <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.4"></span>Domitian to the island of Patmos, and there
composed the Gospel according to him. He died a natural death, in the
third year of <span id="ix.ix.iii-p2.5"></span>Trajan’s reign, in
Ephesus. His remains were sought, but have not been found.”  

<span id="fn_3682"></span>[492:3683](0070468.htm#fr_3682) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p2.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p3"></span> The Coptic adds: “While you pray, he is
ordained; and thou shalt ordain the deacon also according to this
constitution alone.”  

<span id="fn_3683"></span>[492:3684](0070468.htm#fr_3683) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p4"></span> [Ex.
xviii](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#000)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p4.1"></span>., [Ex.
xxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#000)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p4.2"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3684"></span>[492:3685](0070468.htm#fr_3684) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p6"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p6.1"></span>ms.</span> has the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p6.2"></span>Philip having proclaimed the life-giving word
to the Asiatic diocese, has been buried in Hierapolis of Phrygia along
with his daughters, having been crowned with martyrdom in the reign of
the Emperor <span id="ix.ix.iii-p6.3"></span>Domitian. <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p6.4"></span>Philip, who has the daughters, is one of the
seven; it was he also who baptized the eunuch.”  

<span id="fn_3685"></span>[492:3686](0070468.htm#fr_3685) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p8"></span> [Acts
vi](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p8.1"></span>.
and [Acts vii.](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#000)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p8.2"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3686"></span>[492:3687](0070468.htm#fr_3686) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p10"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> has the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p10.2"></span>Bartholomew preached the Gospel according to
<span id="ix.ix.iii-p10.3"></span>Matthew to the Indians, who also has
been buried in India.”  

<span id="fn_3687"></span>[492:3688](0070468.htm#fr_3687) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p12"></span> [Ex. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p12.1"></span>;
[Judg. iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p12.2"></span>; [Luke ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p12.3"></span>;
[2 Kings xxii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p12.4"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3688"></span>[492:3689](0070468.htm#fr_3688) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p13"></span> [2 Cor. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p13.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3689"></span>[492:3690](0070468.htm#fr_3689) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p15"></span> One V <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p15.1"></span>ms.</span> has the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p15.2"></span>Thomas preached to the Parthians, Medes,
Persians, Germans, Hyrcanians, Bactrians, Bardians, who also, having
been a martyr, lies in Edessa of Osdroene.”  

<span id="fn_3690"></span>[492:3691](0070468.htm#fr_3690) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p16"></span> The words “for you the bishops” are
omitted in the Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p16.1"></span>ms.</span>  

<span id="fn_3691"></span>[492:3692](0070468.htm#fr_3691) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p17"></span> \[See vol. v. Elucidation XIV. p.
417.\]  

<span id="fn_3692"></span>[492:3693](0070468.htm#fr_3692) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p18"></span> [Num.
iii](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#000)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p18.1"></span>.; [1 Chron.
vi](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#000)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p18.2"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3693"></span>[493:3694](0070468.htm#fr_3693) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p20"></span> The Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p20.1"></span>ms.</span> has no part of this chapter. It
reads: “A reader is appointed when the bishop gives him a book; for
there is no imposition of hands.”  

<span id="fn_3694"></span>[493:3695](0070468.htm#fr_3694) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p21"></span> [Neh.
viii](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#000)<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p21.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3695"></span>[493:3696](0070468.htm#fr_3695) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p23"></span> The Coptic reads, “let him be
ordained.”  

<span id="fn_3696"></span>[493:3697](0070468.htm#fr_3696) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p24"></span> [1 Tim. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p24.1"></span>.  

<span id="fn_3697"></span>[493:3698](0070468.htm#fr_3697) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p26"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p26.1"></span>.
 

<span id="fn_3698"></span>[493:3699](0070468.htm#fr_3698) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p28"></span> The two V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.1"></span>mss.</span> have the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.2"></span>Thaddæus, also called <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.3"></span>Lebbæus, and who was surnamed <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.4"></span>Judas the Zealot, preached the truth to the
Edessenes and the people of Mesopotamia when <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.5"></span>Abgarus ruled over Edessa, and has been
buried in Berytus of Phoenicia.”  

<span id="fn_3699"></span>[493:3700](0070468.htm#fr_3699) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p28.8"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p29"></span> [Jdt.
16:21](../../../bib/apo/jdt016.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/apo/jdt016.htm#023)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p29.1"></span>
 

<span id="fn_3700"></span>[493:3701](0070468.htm#fr_3700) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p30"></span> [Luke ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span id="ix.ix.iii-p30.1"></span>,
etc.  

<span id="fn_3701"></span>[493:3702](0070468.htm#fr_3701) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p32"></span> The Coptic has, “let him be ordained.”
 

<span id="fn_3702"></span>[493:3703](0070468.htm#fr_3702) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p34"></span> Ch. xxvii., xxviii., xxx.-xxxiv., and
ch. xlii.-xlvii., occur in Syriac and Coptic, as well as in the Greek
<span class="sc"><span id="ix.ix.iii-p34.1"></span>mss.</span>  

<span id="fn_3703"></span>[493:3704](0070468.htm#fr_3703) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p35"></span> One V. <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p35.1"></span>ms.</span> has the following note: “<span
id="ix.ix.iii-p35.2"></span>Simon the Canaanite, preacher of the truth,
is crowned with martyrdom in Judea in the reign of Domitian.”  

<span id="fn_3704"></span>[493:3705](0070468.htm#fr_3704) <span
id="ix.ix.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix.iii-p37"></span> The words from “concerning” to
“constitution” are omitted in the Oxford <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.ix.iii-p37.1"></span>ms.</span>, in Syriac, and Coptic.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sec. IV.—Certain Prayers and Laws](0070469)
