[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crv102)  [Next](crv104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 20.

Lao-tze continues to criticize Confucianism as represented by the
learned ones, the literati. According to Confucius conventional
propriety is a great virtue, and it is very important that people reply
according to the properly established modes of speaking. There are two
forms of affirmation in Chinese: One is pronounced *wei*, and being
straightforward and manly it is proper for men and boys to use; the
other, pronounced *o*, is modest, and it behooves women and girls to
employ no other form of expressing assent. Lao-tze would not insist on
the significance of such externalities, and so he says, "What is the
difference between 'yea' and 'yes'? There is none. But there is a
difference between bad and good."

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

In times of disorder lives are constantly endangered and the people
become indifferent to death. This is not the natural state of things and
ought to be avoided. Lao-tze's warning is illustrated in modern history
by the French Revolution when the prisoners of the terrorist government
actually joked about the guillotine and went to the place of execution
with absolute unconcern. Similar conditions prevailed in China in the
days of Lao-tze.

In this chapter, as well as further down (Chapters 72 and 74), the old
philosopher makes reference to the prevalence of great disturbances
which make the people restless. A Chinese Jeremiah, forlorn among people
who only thought of enjoying themselves, he burst out into bitter
lamentation, and we cannot read these lines without feeling compassion
for the sage who differed so much from the rest of the world.

The fourth and eighth sections of this chapter recall Christ's saying
(Matt. viii. 20): "The foxes have holes, and the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay
his head."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](crv104.md)
