[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aes181)  [Next](aes183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Eagle, the Cat, and the Wild Sow

AN EAGLE made her nest at the top of a lofty oak; a Cat, having found a
convenient hole, moved into the middle of the trunk; and a Wild Sow,
with her young, took shelter in a hollow at its foot. The Cat cunningly
resolved to destroy this chance-made colony. To carry out her design,
she climbed to the nest of the Eagle, and said, "Destruction is
preparing for you, and for me too, unfortunately. The Wild Sow, whom you
see daily digging up the earth, wishes to uproot the oak, so she may on
its fall seize our families as food for her young." Having thus
frightened the Eagle out of her senses, she crept down to the cave of
the Sow, and said, "Your children are in great danger; for as soon as
you go out with your litter to find food, the Eagle is prepared to
pounce upon one of your little pigs." Having instilled these fears into
the Sow, she went and pretended to hide herself in the hollow of the
tree. When night came she went forth with silent foot and obtained food
for herself and her kittens, but feigning to be afraid, she kept a
lookout all through the day. Meanwhile, the Eagle, full of fear of the
Sow, sat still on the branches, and the Sow, terrified by the Eagle, did
not dare to go out from her cave. And thus they both, along with their
families, perished from hunger, and afforded ample provision for the Cat
and her kittens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thief and the Innkeeper](aes183)
