[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cuts01)  [Next](cuts03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIYAY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud Upon the Sanctuary*, by Karl Eckartshausen, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">Apart</span> from "The Cloud upon the
Sanctuary," Eckartshausen is a name only to the Christian
Transcendentalists of England. He wrote much, and at his period and in
his place, he exercised some considerable influence; but his other works
are practically unknown among us, while in Germany the majority at least
seem forgotten, even among the special class to which some of them might
be assumed to appeal. "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary" has, I believe,
always remained in the memory of a few, and is destined still to
survive, for it carries with it a message of very deep significance to
all those who look beneath the body of religious doctrine for the one
principle of life which energizes the whole organism. This translation
has offered it for the first time to English readers, and it enters here
upon the third phase of its existence. It appeared originally in the
pages of "The Unknown World," a magazine devoted to the deeper
understanding of philosophical and mystical religion, and it was
afterwards republished in volume form, of which edition this is a new
issue. It has attracted very considerable attention and deserved it; it
has even been translated into French, under the auspices of the late
Countess of Caithness, for the pages of *L’Aurore*. These few words of
bibliography are not unnecessary because they establish the fact that
there has been some little sentiment of interest working within a
restricted circle, as one may hope, towards a more general diffusion and
knowledge of a document which is at once suggestive from the literary
standpoint and profoundly moving from other and higher considerations.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It encourages me
to think that many persons who know and appreciate it now, or may come
under its influence in the future, will learn with pleasure the little
that I can tell them of its author, the Councillor Eckartshausen, and of
certain other books not of his writing, which, as I think, connect
therewith, and the study of which may help us to understand its message.

Perhaps the most interesting thing that I can say at the beginning
concerning Eckartshausen is that he connects with that group of
Theosophists of which Lavater was so important a figure, the Baron
Kirchberger an accomplished and interesting recorder, and Louis Claude
de Saint-Martin a correspondent in France and a certain source of
leading. In his letters to Saint-Martin, Kirchberger says that
Eckartshausen, with whom he was in frequent communication, was a man of
immense reading and wonderful fertility; he regarded him in other
respects as an extraordinary personage, "whatever way providence may
have led him." It would appear that at this period, namely, in 1795,
Eckartshausen was looking for and obtaining his chief light from the
mystical study of numbers, but was also, to use the veiled and cautious
language of the correspondence, in enjoyment of more direct favours.
Saint-Martin confesses on his own part that he was more interested in
Eckartshausen than he could express. Kirchberger must have held him in
even higher estimation, and undertook a journey to the Swiss frontier
actually for the purpose of receiving from him the personal
communication of the Lost Word; but the illness of the proposed
communicator frustrated this project. The point is important because it
establishes the pretensions of Eckartshausen. As to the Councillor of
Berne so to us, he comes speaking with authority; and whatever may be
our opinion as to the kind of sacramentalism or economy which was
conveyed in a proposal to

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

communicate the incommunicable name, there are some of us who know, at
least within certain limits, that the little book which I am here
introducing is not one of vain pretension. Saint-Martin acknowledges
that part of the numerical system of Eckartshausen was in astonishing
agreement with things that he had learned long ago in his own school of
initiation—that of Martines de Pasqually. Altogether the French mystic
had formed the best opinion possible of his German brother, and his
Swiss correspondent further tells us that Eckartshausen, although a
courtier, walked in the narrow way of the inner life. In a letter to
Kirchberger dated March 19th, 1795, Eckartshausen bears witness to his
own personal experience and instructions received from above, his
consciousness of a higher presence, the answers which he had received
and the visions, with the steps by which he had advanced even to the
attainment of what he terms "the Law in its fullness." I have thought it
well to give these data derived from private correspondence, the
publication of which was never designed or expected at the time, because
they constitute a sketch of Eckartshausen taken to some extent unawares,
when there could be the least reason to suppose that he was adopting an
attitude. Let us now compare the very strong claim which they
incorporate with that of "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary" itself, and the
little analysis which I shall give here will, I think, be otherwise
serviceable to readers as a summary of the chief purport of the work. It
is possible by seeking inwardly to approach the essential wisdom, and
this wisdom is Jesus Christ who is also the essence of love within us.
The truth of this statement can be experimentally proved by any one, the
condition of the experience being the awakening within us of a spiritual
faculty cognizing spiritual objects as objectively and naturally as the
outward senses perceive natural

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

phenomenon. This organ is the intuitive sense of the transcendental
world, and its awakening, which is the highest object of religion, takes
place in three stages: (*a*) morally, by the way of inspiration; (*b*)
intellectually, by the way of illumination; (*c*) spiritually, by the
way of revelation. The awakening of this organ is the lifting of the
cloud from the sanctuary, enabling our hearts to become receptive of
God, even in this world. The knowledge of these mysteries has been
always preserved by an advanced school, illuminated inwardly by the
Saviour, and continued from the beginning of things to the present time.
This community is the Invisible Celestial Church, founded immediately
after the Fall, and receiving a first-hand revelation for the raising of
humanity. But the weakness of men as they multiplied necessitated an
external society, namely, the Outward Church, which, in the course of
time, became separated from the Inner Church, also through human
weakness. The external church was originally consecrated in Abraham, but
received its highest perfection in the mystery of Jesus Christ. The
Interior Church is invisible and yet governs all; it is perpetuated in
silence but in real activity, "and united the science of the temple of
the ancient alliance with the spirit of the Saviour," or of the interior
alliance. This community of light is the reunion of all those capable of
receiving light, and is known as the Communion of Saints. It possesses
its school, its chair, its doctor, and a rule for students, with forms
and objects of study, and in short a method by which they study,
together with degrees for successive development to higher altitudes. We
must not, however, regard it as a secret society, meeting at certain
times, choosing its elders and members, and united by special objects;
for even the chief does not invariably know all the members, and those
who are ripe are joined to the general members when they

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

thought least likely, and at a point of which they knew nothing. The
society forms a theocratic republic, which one day will be the
Regent-Mother of the whole world. Its members are exactly acquainted
with the innermost of religions and of the Holy Mysteries, but these
treasures are concealed in so simple a manner that they baffle
unqualified research.

This doctrine of the interior church must be interpreted by everyone
after his own lights; it is presented by Eckartshausen as one having
full knowledge and ambassadorial powers, as one speaking from the
centre. My purpose is solely to show that he was sincere, and this
sincerity furnishes us with one more proof, out of many which are to be
derived from other and independent sources, that there is a great
experiment possible, and that some have performed it. The sincerity of
which I speak is I think illustrated by his life, which I will now
summarise briefly. Carl Von Eckartshausen was born on June 28th, 1752,
at the Castle of Haimbhausen in Bavaria, and was the natural son of
Count Carl of Haimbhausen by Marie Anne Eckhart, the daughter of the
overseer of the estates. His mother died in giving birth to him, and he
appears to have been the subject of the most solicitous affection on the
part of his father, being educated with the utmost pains. However, from
the earliest years, his illegitimacy is said to have filled him with
perpetual melancholy and an inclination to retire from the world,
characteristics which at the same time endeared him to his family and
friends. Through all his life he remained less or more a prey to the
painful consequences of his original disqualification. He was destined
notwithstanding to a career of some public importance. His first
education was received at the college of Munich, and he afterwards
proceeded to Ingoldsladt for the study of philosophy and law,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

which he pursued with marked success. His university course at an end,
his father procured him the title of Aulic Councillor; and in 178o he
was appointed censor of the library at Munich. This, in spite of the
rectitude and goodness which characterised him, made him many enemies,
but the favour of the Elector Carl Theodore sustained him against all
combinations. In 1784 he was nominated Keeper of the Archives of the
Electoral House, an appointment said to have been conferred upon him
through the desire of the Elector to keep him near his person. He
published in all some sixty-nine works, embracing many classes of
literature, including science, the fine arts, the drama, politics,
religion, history, and, in particular, certain contributions of great
merit to the occult sciences. As already indicated, the majority of
these are now forgotten, though some of his plays seem to have been
successful in their day. "The Prejudice of Birth " in particular, his
first published drama, is described as abounding in felicitous
situations and interest. He even attempted a comedy, and this also
received considerable approbation. One only of his books, under the
title "God is the Purest Love," commanded wide popularity. Sixty
editions are said to have been published in Germany, and it was
translated into most languages of Europe, as well as into Latin. It is a
small collection of Catholic prayers and meditations on the fear of God,
the love of God, the elevation of man's sentiments towards his Creator,
the knowledge of the Eternal, etc. There are also devotional exercises
for use at Mass, before and after Confession, and at Communion, with
acts of penance and adoration to the Blessed Virgin. In a word, I fail
to see wherein or how far it differs from the innumerable
[manuals](errata.htm#0) of piety which have been produced during the
last two or three centuries for the use of the Catholic laity. I
believe, however, that it still circulates in Germany, and perhaps even
in France; it is

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

said to have a wonderful charm, though its intense mysticism is also
stated to have puzzled some of its admirers; it has indeed been
described as speaking the language and expressing the soul of Fenelon.
Eckartshausen, however, as already indicated, wrote other and very
different books, some on magic and some on the properties of numbers,
and he is even accredited with a certain knowledge of Alchemy. Finally,
he was the author of "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary," though the
biographers to whom I am indebted almost for the words of this notice
have scarcely mentioned this last and crowning production of his
intellectual life. In his private capacity he was exceedingly amiable
and charitable, devoting every month the result of his economies to the
poor, and his whole time to the practice of virtue. He was married three
times, and left several children. He died on May 13th, 1813, after a
painful illness. The monographs of his period mention him as one of the
best writers of Bavaria.

There are two matters to which before concluding I wish to draw
attention briefly, and, as regards the first, in a very particular
manner. The point of view from which "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary"
should be regarded is important from the claim which it makes. What is
this inner church of which Eckartshausen speaks, is a question which
readers must answer for themselves, according to their best direction.
One thing which it is not has been indicated by Eckartshausen himself.
It is not any corporate body existing merely within the church and
controlling and leading it from a specific local centre. This
possibility being negatived by the best of all authority on the subject,
I should like on my own responsibility to negative also its most direct
and clearest antithesis. It does not answer to the collective mind or
oversoul of the most advanced members of the visible church, nor is it
the *consensus* 

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

*omnium sanctorum* which, according to the old church maxim, is *sensus
spiritus Sancti*. Despite the absence of all corporate bonds, there is
in the claim itself too direct a suggestion of conscious association
occurring somehow in this present physical life. We must take the key
which Eckartshausen himself offers, namely, that there is within all of
us a dormant faculty, the awakening of which within us gives entrance,
as it develops, into a new world of consciousness, which is one of the
initial stages of that state which he, in common with all other mystics,
terms union with the Divine. In that union, outside all formal sects,
all orthodox bonds of fellowship and veils and webs of symbolism, we
shall form or do form actually a great congregation, the first fruits of
immortality, and in virtue of the solidarity of humanity, and in virtue
of the great doctrine of the communication of all things holy with all
that seeks for holiness, the above and the below, this congregation is,
in very truth, the leader of the visible church of faith, aspiration and
struggle, the church triumphant over-watching the church militant, and
the channel through which the graces and the benedictions of the holy
and glorious Zion are administered to the Zion which is on earth.

The second point concerns certain books which I have promised to mention
as connecting with the claim of Eckartshausen, and perhaps in some
measure assisting us to get in touch with that claim. Unfortunately, in
this restricted notice, I can do little more than name them. The first
is "The Mystery of the Cross," originally published in 1732,
anonymously, in the French language, but evidently written by a
foreigner. It is a profound and beautiful work which, unknown to the
world at large, has in private, if I may so speak, influenced many to
their advancement, and to the deeper understanding and fruition of the
hidden truth. Strongly embedded in this

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

book will be found several of the governing ideas and aspirations of
schools of mystic thought which became illustrious in later years. I may
add that I am acquainted with the existence of a translation made many
years ago, but still remaining in manuscript. The next books which I
would note come at first sight a little strangely in the professed
connection, but they enter none the less into the series; they are the
two dramatic poems of the German poet, Werner, namely, "The Templars in
Cyprus" and "The Brothers of the Cross." They are the work of a man who
was intimately acquainted with the occult movement of his period—that of
the French Revolution—and a participant therein. After all his
experience he carried his great genius and exceptional knowledge into
the fold of the Latin Church and became a priest. His two plays convey
many moving suggestions of a guiding but unknown hand leading the
Christian Church. The next book is of Russian origin, but was translated
into French and published in Paris in 1801; of this translation a
reprint was issued recently at Lyons. It is entitled "Some
Characteristics of the Interior Church." It connects the point of view
which is met with in "The Mystery of the Cross " with that of
Eckartshausen, and is interesting on account of its origin, and also for
certain Martinistic associations, but it is less suggestive and less
profound. Finally, there is a very remarkable and I may add a very rare
series of works published at Berleburg in the province of Westphalia in
seven volumes, dated 1738. It is entitled "New Spiritual Discourses on
various matters of the Interior Life and the Doctrines of the Christian
Religion, or testimony of a Child of Truth concerning the Ways of the
Spirit." These discourses occupy three volumes; two others contain a
commentary on the Apocalypse; the sixth volume is a literal and mystical
explanation of the epistle to the Romans,

with some supplementary papers and a catechism of the science of
Christian religion. The seventh volume is another commentary, verse for
verse, on the first three chapters of Genesis. The collection as a whole
may perhaps be best described as an appeal from external creeds with
their differences, their arguments and their justifications, to the
witness of the heart itself. It is an appeal also to the mystical
doctors of the church, and it cites many of the great mystics from
Tauler and Ruysbroek to Engelbrecht, Antoinette de Bourignon and Madame
de Guyon. The discourses on the union of the Church of Christ and the
spiritual union of the children of God, as also on a new church, in the
second volume, will be found very interesting to students of
Eckartshausen. There are also extraordinary analogies with Saint-Martin,
Eckartshausen and the "Mystery of the Cross" to be found in the third
volume, and having regard to the proximity of the date of publication to
that of the last work, I incline to the opinion that there may have been
some connection also in the authorship. When all these works have been
studied, not in the letter but in the spirit, along with "The Cloud upon
the Sanctuary," the spiritual truths which Eckartshausen has to some
extent veiled, and his motives for doing so, will not be beyond
discernment, nor the line of his experiences in all cases beyond
pursuit. I should add that, so far as I can trace, Eckartshausen always
remained in loyal communication with the external church in which he was
originally trained, and did not therefore regard apostasy and rebellion
as among the first evidences of personal illumination. Perhaps, like one
of the Eastern teachers, he thought that some things could be changed
from within, and essentially, without altering outward names and forms.

A. E. WAITE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter I](cuts03)
