[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Tibetan Buddhism](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Distributed Electronically by BUDDHANET  
PO Box K1020 Haymarket NSW 2000 Australia  

(For Free distribution)  
v.pannyavaro@uws.edu.au  

\* The Tibetan Buddhist Teachings on Death and Rebirth \*  
by Lama Ole Nydhal, Vajrayana Buddhist Lama  

The Tibetan Buddhist teachings on death and rebirth are unique and very
complete. They usually interest everybody who gets them. In order to
understand about death and rebirth, its important to begin by observing
the nature of our mind. Looking at the mind we often think that there
are two things. There is something seeing and there is something being
seen. There is a mirror there, the picture is in the mirror. There is
that which observes and that which is being observed. But if we look for
true duali ty this cannot be found. Where does every thought and feeling
and experience come from? It comes from the open clear space of the
mind. Who knows it? The open clear space of the mind. Where does it
change? It changes inside that open clear space and it al so returns to
it again. So, if we look for the mind we see that it's not two things,
the seer and the things seen, the experiencer and the experienced. They
are not two, but one totality manifesting in two ways. There is the
timeless aspect which is like the ocean and there is the changing aspect
inside time which is like the waves coming and going in the ocean. And
we cannot say that the things either are or are not the thoughts and
feelings, either are or are not the mind. They appear there they are kno
wn by it. They disappear there again. Of course they are felt to be
different and they are experienced as different. We see them as
something apart.

If we look at these two different aspects of mind we see that that which
is aware, that which is looking through our eyes, listening through our
ears, that which is hearing and feeling and experiencing now, is
timeless. It is open like space. It is rad iantly clear. It has no limit
or end anywhere. Something which is like open clear limitless space of
course is not bound inside time. It is not limited by time and place.
But if we look for the true nature of that which is aware, which is
experiencing the world right now this must be seen to be timeless and
limitless. Our own clear space and mind is without birth or death. It is
however very rarely that we experience our timeless nature. It is very
rarely that the mirror is aware of itself and the mind se es its own
nature. Usually we are caught in the things coming and going in the
mind. We are not seeing the ocean. We are seeing the waves which come
and go there. The few times when the mind experiences itself are the
moments of greatest intensity and joy that we can imagine. The way that
the radiance of the mirror is actually more than the images coming and
going in the mirror when the mind experiences its own nature are very
powerful, very exciting and unforgettable.

People may tell you about the clear light. They may tell you about the
peak experiences before the parachute opens in free fall or something
like that. You may actually also have had moments where you forgot to
expect anything or fear anything or live in the past or live in the
future, where there was time when nothing else was in the mind. Suddenly
you became exceedingly joyful, totally secure. You found yourself to be
very powerful, very kind. You saw suddenly that the experiencer itself,
that which is aware, really had some lasting qualities that we usually
don't see. Sometimes we know who is calling before we lift up the
receiver and that means that the nature of the space of our mind is
information. When we get happy on the inside for no outer rea son
because we forget to hope or fear or think of anything, it shows that
the space of our mind is joy. When we are kind and compassionate without
thinking that we are doing something to somebody else but simply because
they are not separate from us and t here is nothing else to do, it shows
that the space in our mind is kindness and unlimited love. Even though
we may have experiences like that for a few moments in this life most of
the time we are constantly caught in the things which come and go. We
are in the pictures in the mirror not in the mirror. We see what changes
all the time.

Seeing this then, different kinds of feelings will appear, attachment
and aversion, likes and dislikes. Hope and fear will follow most beings
during their lives. Instead of being here and now in the truth and the
intensity and the meaning of what happe ns in every moment, recognising
it to be true just because conditions come together like that, we are
thinking of the past of the future, we are somewhere else. Doing that we
experience the human life. The Buddha tells us that there is no one
thing which stays the same during this life, not one single thing. The
open clear limitless space is the same in everybody. It never changes,
is not born and doesn't die. But the pictures in the mirror, the stream
of experiences, even though they seem to be similar, are more like a
stream of water that flows all the time and new water is there in every
moment. If we really look we see that in the boy of seven and the man of
seventy there is no-one who has stayed the same. There is not one single
personal thing which stays the same from one moment to the next. All
things appear, change, disappear again, are born and die and come and
go.

On the other hand there is relative continuation because if there was no
child at seven there will not be a man at seventy. So we see that even
though no experience of the body or mind, no molecule, no atom stays the
same from one moment to the next, s till there is this continuation. One
thing brings about the next and becomes the cause of the next thing
again. Things move in a stream like that. We are aware of this stream.
We are aware of three so called Bardos or intermediary states while we
are livi ng here. The Tibetan word Bardo which is quite well known,
actually means something which is between something and something else.
For instance, if I haven't bored you too much now you are all in the
waking Bardo, the Bardo of being awake. After some hour s you will fall
asleep and you will be in the Bardo of sleep . While you are in this
Bardo of sleep you will have certain dreams. Each of these things are
intermediary states. They are states that follow one another all the
time. After a waking state come s a state of consciousness and inside
this again is another state: the dreaming state. And this is what we are
used to now. Every twenty four hours, if our lifestyle is not too
extreme, this is what we experience, these three Bardos.

But there are three further ones, which we only experience every time we
die. There is the process of death itself, there is the thing that
happens after death, the continuation of the experiences of our last
life and then there are the new experiences as our subconscious starts
to go into the shape, go into a certain structure which then leads into
our next birth, our reincarnation. And, before I tell you the whole
process as it happens I should tell you my credentials for telling you
this, why I can sit here and actually tell you this. You probably know
that in Tibetan Buddhism we have many incarnate Lamas. We have many
teachers who are recognised when they come back. They are clearly the
continuation of a stream of consciousness of a former teacher.

Nearly everybody knows the Dalai lama. Actually the first Dalai Lama was
a student of a student of the fourth of the Karmapas, who were the first
incarnate Lamas in Tibet around 1110. And among all the incarnate Lamas
in Tibet and there are about 110 s pecial ones, he is the first one to
actually start. His first one was in 1110 in Eastern Tibet and he is
also the only one who, before dying, writes down every detail of his new
rebirth, so other Lamas don't have to find him, they can actually read
the le tter he has left and then they can go out and find the child.
That child then has unbroken consciousness and memory from his last life
that he has brought over. So that's one reason, being a student of this
Lama and having his teaching is one of the reaso ns that I can talk
about this with confidence.

Another reason is teachings by other great teachers like Guru Rinpoche
who gave these explanations. He was the Lama who brought who brought
Buddhism to Tibet around 1250 years ago. And the third reason is that I
myself am a Powa Lama. Powa means consci ous dying. I teach conscious
dying. So far I have taught 3000 westerners how to die consciously. Its
not an academic study, its not something I'm telling you about that is
abstract. People accept that when they have the physical hole in their
head. When t hrough meditation they have actually knocked a physical
opening in the top of their skulls without even touching their heads.

Many have actually also experienced leaving their bodies during this
process and entering realms of great bliss and great joy. Some people
really lose their fear of death in the process. The biggest courses are
always in Poland, Russia, Germany and Cen tral and Eastern Europe, but
I've taught it here once. Its a process that takes about three to four
days with the instructions and everything else and the result is that
you actually come out of your body. You sent your mind out of your body.
I mean you g et a real physical sign and you also of course have many
mental transformations. Its a teaching which as far as I know is
practiced in a few places such as Burma but among the Tibetans in the
old schools in Tibetan Buddhism it is quite widely known. The w ord Powa
means 'a bird flying out of a skylight in a roof, this is actually the
meaning of it. I have also had the experience of beings who were dead
coming to me. They were there as real as you are here today. For all
these reasons I am telling you now w ith confidence, I am not just
repeating what I have read in a book or giving a summary of some other
teaching. I am totally convinced of what I am saying here myself.

So, what happens in the process of dying is always the same. If we look
at the death process from the outside it may look very different. Death
in people who step on a mine or get hit by a fast car looks very
different from death in someone who dies fr om Aids or Cancer in a
hospital somewhere. It doesn't look the same at all. But actually what
is happening is the same process. What happens is that the energy which
used to be spread all over the whole body begins to draw into a central
energy channel in side the body.

There are different kinds of energy and maybe I should say a little bit
about that also. We are all Western educated so we know about nerves,
those yellow strands going through the body, sometimes thick then
thinning out more and more, contracting musc les and bringing
information. They work with electricity and a hormone called serotonin.

Then some of you who are Asian probably know about acupuncture and
acupressure, where for example, you put a needle in a finger and it
brings a flow of energy and some more awareness to your kidneys or heart
or liver or something else. There is this ou ter flow of energy which
follows different meridians to the inner organs. Then you have probably
also heard the Hindu word kundalini where they talk about the nervous
energy which is in the spine.

In Buddhism we work with the central channel which starts four fingers
below the navel in the centre of the body and it rises to a place eight
fingers behind the original hair line on the top of the head. It is said
that this original energy line or en ergy channel appeared when the egg
and sperm met in the womb of our mother. At that time the egg had an
energy which in meditation is experienced as red and the sperm had an
energy which is experienced as being white.

The information in these two cells created the billions of cells which
form our bodies today. The red energy moved down to four fingers below
the navel and the white energy moved up to about eight fingers behind
our original hairline on the top of our head. Between these two then is
the central axis. It activates itself at five places. At the head thirty
two channels move out and activate the brain centre. They have to do
with the body, everything physical, everything sensual. With speech
there are six teen channels which fill the throat. With the heart there
are eight channels which became many channels and cover the upper body
and have to do with intuition and feeling and so on. At the navel there
are sixty four which spread out and go into the legs a nd cover the
lower body and which have to do with qualities such as artistic
abilities, creativity and so on. Four fingers below the navel there is
our power centre which the Chinese call Chi which can be sexual power or
ordinary physical power.

What happens in the process of dying is that these very spread out
networks of energy begin to draw into the central energy channel. The
different wheels collapse. The experience we have on the outer level is
that our sensory experiences become less an d less. We see but we are
not quite sure who, we hear sounds but its more like mumbling. Its not
distinct. We feel something but we are not sure what it is we are
feeling and actually our whole contact with the outer world begins to
disappear. While this is happening we are also having some inner
experiences. We begin to get confused and begin to drift in and out of
consciousness. Its difficult to focus and be aware. At the same time we
also have some physical experiences. First, is the feeling of pressur e.
That is the solid element moving into the water element. Then there is
the feeling of flowing. That is when the water element is moving into
the fire element. Then there is the feeling of dryness. Step by step as
the mind begins to withdraw from its ph ysical bases which are the
elements of solid and fluid and heat giving and airy moving and finally
space itself and consciousness. When we float and start getting cold and
our consciousness begins to disappear. During these different processes
which are r eally the process of death, all the energy comes into the
central channel. And here at a given time we breathe out three times and
the third time we forget to breathe in again.

Here people say now this is death but actually we say as a joke
sometimes that if people can afford a few days more in a hospital people
will come and put electrodes on their hearts and give them a shock and
then they will go on for a while longer. Any way even if we do hook
people up to the local electricity works, after a while they do die.
Everybody dies. So at the time when one dies, after the taking in of
oxygen and the exchange of energy with the world outside has stopped,
there is a twenty to thi rty minute period where the inner energies stop
moving. What then happens first is that the white energy from the top of
our head gradually begins to move down through our body to the heart
centre which is in the middle of the body not to the right or the left.
On the way down there thirty three kinds of feelings which come from
anger, which are usually based in anger, disappear. We see a very clear
light like a very clear moonlight. Then after that about ten or fifteen
minutes the energy begins to move u p from the lower centre, the centre
below the navel. As this begins to move up we actually experience red
light like a setting sun moving up and forty kinds of feelings which
were caused by attachment and greed disappear. And when twenty to thirty
minutes have elapsed after we stopped breathing, these two energies come
together in the heart. First everything becomes dark. This darkness is
where seven kinds of feeling base in stupidity disappear.

Then after that we experience an intense clear light. This is all the
awareness all the energy, everything that used to fill our whole body.
This is now in the heart centre. Everything has met there. This moment
is actually our best moment for enlighte nment. If we can hold this
state, if we can be aware twenty to thirty minutes after death that this
clear light is our true essence, that this is our awareness then we can
do what many great saints have done during this last time over the last
two thousan d five hundred years.

Here I would like to give an example from my own direct experience. It
was when the sixteenth Karmapa died in 1981. A year and a half before
that in 1980 he had told me on which day he was going to die. I met him
on the solstice in Colorado in America. He told us to come to him on the
first day of the eleventh month next year. He said that we could also
bring our friends. So we came out to seek him in the Himalayas. He
wanted to die in the West where scientists could examine his death
processes. Five d ays after his death his body was still warm and
supple. He was then put into the meditation position surrounded by a lot
of butter lamps. He stayed there for forty five days until the 19 of
December when he was taken from his meditation seat. He had made his
body very small. They put him in a box with a window that you could look
in. Most people didn't want to look but I did because I knew that I
would have to tell the story. I knew it would be my job. His head was
smaller but not much smaller but his who le body was like that of a
child. This man had been bigger than me. He was a massive big boned
Tibetan from a warrior tribe, a big strong man. When he was burnt the
next day there were outer signs, a double rainbow around the sun, which
is very unusual in Sikkim. There was also an enormous eagle that kept
turning high up around the burning place. When his heart came out of the
oven it rolled down to the students. There were many other things that
happened that were very unusual.

This is a case of what you call Thukdam. Thuk is the Tibetan word for
heart or deep mind and dam is bond. It is where one is able to bind the
consciousness in the heart. If one is capable of doing that and holding
that state then one can do all those t hings. Other things also happen
when teachers and Yogas and Lamas die. They sometimes change the whole
vibration of their bodies from solid to energy and they only leave their
hair and their teeth and their nails which have no nerves and which
cannot be t ransformed. These things are still happening. But if one
transforms everything like that its more difficult to be reborn because
there is nothing physical to pull one back again. It is always difficult
for high incarnates to come back because there are so many things
pulling them in other directions and only other peoples problems to
bring them down here again. So this was an example of somebody really
capable of staying in the clear light of the mind in the state called
Thukdam.

If you use meditations where you concentrate on Buddha forms
disappearing and you concentrate on being aware without being aware of
anything, concentrating on just naked awareness, totally conscious
without having to be conscious of anything, just havi ng awareness in
its own state resting like that, then that is the kind of meditation
which will develop into the power of staying aware as you are dying. It
is a period where awareness and energy and space inside and outside are
no longer separate, where one's mind, where awareness, clear light is
the same inside and outside, where there is no difference between
enlightenment here and there. Its just like space and awareness,
inseparable.

If one is not capable of holding that state and the normal taxpayer does
have difficulty holding that state, then one becomes unconscious. Here
the text usually says that one is unconscious for three and a half to
four days. My own experience is that e very time people who died came
back to me it was exactly sixty eight hours. It happened with my mother
and a few other times also. I don't know what meaning it has but I know
that when they are there as close as you are its very clear that they
are there. Every time checking afterwards it was 68 hours. So it may be
that modern big city people, very intellectually trained people and so
on go through some processes more quickly than less neurotic farmers or
people like that. Anyway this has been my own expe rience.

Then when one wakes up from this state of unconsciousness then usually
one does not know that one is dead. If ones death process has been very
long, if one has been dying for a long time one has some idea but if one
has just been hit by something and h as had no time to prepare then one
really has no idea. One is also confused because one has no solid body
and that means that whatever we think then that's where we are. If we
think England or India or Thailand or Burma or Cambodia or Denmark,
whatever we think, the moment we think it our awareness is there because
like space and awareness, there is not anything to move. Its also a
difficult situation because nobody can see us. So we try to make contact
with people. We try to find out why all our friends are unhappy and our
enemies are happy. We can't really understand these things. Any time we
try to talk to them they walk away and when we sit in a chair they come
and sit on us and so on. It feels very strange. After about a week in
this state and that m eans about ten days after we died, then mind
really faces the fact that we are dead. Then we really understand 'Oh I
must be dead.' Here again if you meditate on the process where after a
meditation everything arises as a pure realm, everybody is a Buddha ,
you are a Buddha, every thing is a pure realm, that aims for the second
phase, the phase of waking up again. An ordinary person who is used to
seeing the world in an ordinary way will in that situation see ordinary
things everywhere, while somebody who is trained in this process of
having the whole world appear as a pure land and seeing Buddha nature
everywhere will at that time when one wakes from the shock of dying,
again see Buddhas and pure states of mind and one will run there and do
what the Tibet ans say, change bodies with the different Buddhas.

It is like a child seeing her mother and running there. When we see
these different Buddha forms that we are used to meditating on, we run
there and we mix into them and we enter their mental level. This is not
the state of Dharmakaya or the state of h ighest truth. It is a state of
Sambhogakaya. Its a state of blissful joy and richness of the mind. But
this state is also without any kind of falling down or suffering again.
If we don't make it to that state then as I said mind will discover that
it is a ctually dead and this is such a big shock that we become
unconscious once more. When you wake up from that unconsciousness then
the stream of experiences from the last life has been broken, the stream
of experiences from the last life is over and now our subconscious
begins to come up. The things that were planted inside, the pleasant,
the unpleasant, the friendly and unfriendly thoughts and feelings now
come up because no new impressions are coming to the mind from the
outside. There is no new sensory in put. All the subconscious things
start coming up and depending on what is the strongest tendency inside
us then one out of six worlds begins to predominate.

For instance its possible that we've done a lot of good things but we
were also aware that we were doing them. In that case of course we fill
the mind with good impressions but always thinking I do this for you. We
don't remove the separation between u s. We don't remove the things that
block us. Though the things are positive and give good dreams, they
don't make us wake up into the experience that everything that the open
clear space is the same. So, if we've done that. If we've filled the
mind with g ood impressions but still think that I do something for you
then the result is what we call Gods world. Buddha tells us that there
are six levels where we experience spontaneous joy, all desires are
spontaneously fulfilled. There are seventeen levels wher e we experience
aesthetic joy, like beautiful sunsets and fine art and so on, and there
are four levels where we experience abstraction. Buddha called them
Arupadhatu, Rupadhatu and Karmadatu, that is, the formless, the formed
and the desire worlds. These three are the psychological states that we
enter if a lot of positive Karma is there but we still believe that
there is a me doing it for you.

Then there is also another stage which is much less pleasant. That is if
jealousy is the strongest feeling in us. Then in that case we reach what
is called the half-god realms. Half-gods are not having such a good
time. They are always jealous, they ar e always fighting to get what
others have, they are always experiencing looking for weapons and so on
and they are not experiencing joy. They also get hurt more easily than
the gods. The gods minds function in such a way that that they only
think that the y die if their heads are cut off. But the half-gods also
think that they die if they are shot through with an arrow. So their
minds work differently. Also in these half-god states beings are usually
very angry and in those states when they die they really fall down
because their minds are charged with negative impressions, anger and
hate.

Then there is also the possibility that the mind has really clouded its
potential. This can bring about a situation where one is so confused
when one dies that one tries to hide between rocks or in bushes and here
one can actually appear the next time with four legs and a nice fur
coat. Its possible for mind to unite with the animal body at least for
one life. I know at least three cases in my own experience, for some
reason always with big yellow dogs, where they have come right up to me
put their paw s on my chest, looked into my eyes and mentally said What
happened? Suddenly the light went out and now I'm in this state. One dog
in Malta was actually following me all the time. It was so embarrassed
about having that body. It was really a contact. I wo n't say that it
happens often. If we look at the world there are so many miserable and
poor and suppressed and suffering human lives that one doesn't even need
to become an animal to suffer today. Look at Africa and South America
and so many poor parts of the world where people have nothing. In my own
experience I have made contact across that barrier and it does exist.

Its possible that greed and avarice have been the strongest feelings. At
that time the desires, wishes which were always tormenting us,
concentrate on food and drink. There again, beings may have very strange
experiences. They may have the experience o f having a very small mouth.
Whatever one tries to eat is very difficult to get down. In this dream
state one is in a body as big as a town and its impossible to get what
one needs. There are other states where one experiences outer
hindrances, where when ever one reaches for something then some demon or
disturbing influence always takes it away. Or, things become fire and
burn us and so on.

Finally, if we have mainly charged the mind with anger and hate then the
result is paranoia. When the subconscious impressions come up from the
mind the mind cannot stand them and the main feelings then are cold and
heat. Buddha tells us that there are eight levels of feeling extreme
cold and eight levels of feeling extreme heat. Then there are also
stages which come from time to time like when people suddenly start
drinking like mad and destroy their lives once or twice or four times a
year, make a sh ambles of their lives and then gradually they have to
get together again.

Actually we can see it all if we look in a mental institution or at
human beings living in extreme situations. All these things can happen
while there are physical bodies. We see human beings experiencing all
these things in different places. All this can happen even more strongly
when there is no physical body. Right now if one is depressed or unhappy
one can eat pills, but when we die there is no body to distract the
mind. The experiences are very strong. So for that reason Buddha really
advises us t o do, think and say useful things. Otherwise we create
problems for ourselves.

These other realms, even though they may be experienced for a very long
time, are realms where one gets rid of karma, where one works out karma.
If one is in the god realms one is spending the money, the good energy
one created. If one is in the parano ia or suffering states one is
working off one's debt. But the place where one comes back to the really
important place is this human life. If we return to a human life then
seven weeks after dying we find some parents making love and we go down
from the t op of the fathers head and follow his sperm into the mother.
We wait until the sperm and egg meet and then a new life starts. Or, we
go from this life into one of the other pleasant or unpleasant states.
But after some time again we reunite with a human l ife like this and
this human life is where the most things can really be done. Here we
have a physical body. We can understand that things are positive and
negative. We have very strong feelings, desires and attachments and
expectations.

If we look at the continuation of our last life or this one then the
first thing to consider is what happens after we die. What structures
come up, where we go. And then when we are reborn human again there are
three more results. First there are many kinds of human birth.
Australia, North Europe are some of the most pleasant places one can be
today. So, there is the place one is born. One can be born in a place
where there is collective good karma, where the poor are taken care of,
where there are tra nsparent political processes and where one can be
free have a useful life to develop oneself and think of others. Or one
is born in a place with a lot of suffering, oppression and hunger, which
is actually the majority of the world.

Then there is also what kind of body we get. We may get a body that is
healthy and long lived, brings joy and is popular, or we may get one
that is sick and not functional is short lived and has many problems.
And the third thing is the tendencies we h ave, that is if we naturally
like to share, if we like to be good with others, if we like to benefit
others, or if we like to put others down and stand on them and suppress
them.

What after that next life when we die the whole inner roulette starts
again. The outer impressions disappear then once again we get into new
states. Buddha tells us is that there is no beginning to all this. He
says that mind is like space and space ha s no beginning. Mind has been
timelessly been playing with itself, expressing its qualities,
experiencing, producing situations inside and outside. And there are
many more births in states of pain and suffering than in states of joy
and bliss. Even when w e are born here as human beings as we are now in
a nice country, healthy and so on still when we were born we didn't
smile when we came out of our mothers, we screamed because it hurt. Some
day we will get old, sick and die.

While we are here in our best years like we are today, we are always
trying to get things we like and avoid things we don't like. We try to
hold onto what we have and arrange ourselves with things we can't avoid.
In all conditioned states no matter whe re we are there is either the
suffering of everything collapsing and landing on our heads or there the
suffering of things being impermanent and changing and being unable to
hold them, or there is the suffering of being ignorant, of simply not
knowing, of hardly remembering yesterday and having no idea about
tomorrow.

That is why Buddha is always advising us to shift our values from the
bank that gives less and less interest because out life is getting
shorter and we cannot take things along, to the bank that gives more and
more. To shift our values from things that change and disappear, that
are born and die, that come and go and shift them into something which
is timeless and cannot disappear, something which is more joyful, more
happy, more powerful, more compassionate. And that basically means
shifting our value s from the thoughts and feelings and projections of
the mind into the open feeling of the space of the mind itself. It means
to try to rest in our awareness and doing that, see the one who sees and
not just do the things that are seen, trying to be aware of the one who
is aware.

We will see three things that will make us very joyful. First we will
see that that which is aware is not a thing. That is, it has no colour
weight smell or size, it really like space. And recognising that it is
like space we do become fearless, I mean really fearless. Nothing can
disturb us. Nothing can hurt us again. Being fearless we can see that
everything is interesting because it happens, because it shows the
qualities and the abilities and the richness of the mind. Finally we can
see that other beings are like us. They want happiness, want to avoid
suffering, and that their mind is like clear space. And then we become
loving and kind. So actually all these different qualities, all these
different mental tendencies are really important. We actual ly saw quite
a few of them demonstrated by a red-headed policeman on our way into
Canberra. He stopped us for doing 90 kilometres per hour in a 60 zone,
and he was actually completely happy that while he had to book us to
keep up his quota we were going t o leave the country and nobody would
suffer. This feeling of sharing and being with us was a really wonderful
human reaction. These tendencies exist everywhere in everybody and
everybody can bring them out. There is something seeing and there is
something being seen. There is a mirror there.
