[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup02)  [Next](tup04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Earth's crammed with heaven,  
And every common bush afire with God;  
But only he who sees takes off his shoes,  
The rest sit round it and pluck blackberries.  
--Elizabeth Browning  
</span>

</div>

OMNIPRESENCE, omniscience, omnipotence are verities of Being and are
facts of existence.

The Mind of God, creative Mind, is perpetually moving upon supermind
ideas and through them bringing man and the universe into existence.

Creative Mind is everywhere present; yet while it is within the mind of
man it lies beyond the consciousness of sense.

Omnipresence is that spiritual realm which can be penetrated only
through the most highly accelerated mind action, as in prayer. Thus in
unfolding this inner kingdom we are dealing with a reality beyond the
ordinary comprehension of man.

To the superbly tuned mind and brain of Jesus Divine Mind was a soil
eager with vibrant life and light and substance, which He used to
produce the finest of materials for both character and body building.

Spiritual character building is from within outward.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Spiritual character lives in man; it is what God has engraved on man's
soul, ready for development through man's spiritual efforts. It is a
reserve force of organized victory over carnality.

Man builds spiritual character by consciously functioning in God-Mind,
where, laying hold of spiritual ideas, through Christ he realizes the
Truth they contain; and as he thus weaves them into his soul
consciousness they become a part of his very nature.

Our most effective prayers are those in which we rise above all
consciousness of time and space. In this state of mind we automatically
contact the Spirit of God. Indeed when we elevate our consciousness to
that of Jesus Christ, the God presence becomes as meaningful to us as it
was to Him. It is in this state of at-one-ment that we truly become
aware of His sublimity and power.

"I go to prepare a place for you." By getting acquainted with the one
Mind as integral substance, we move with it and it moves with us, and
thus are established within us new spiritual states of consciousness, a
"place" where we are aware of the God presence as reality.

Jesus said: "My Father is the husbandman." "I am the true vine." "Ye are
the branches." "As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it
abide in the vine; so neither can ye, except ye abide in me."

"Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh away: and every
branch that beareth fruit, he cleanseth it, that it may bear more
fruit."

In this scripture Jesus is revealing to us that

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

through Him we are born anew, born of God, and that through Him we may
be consciously attached to God--as the branch is attached to the
tree--so that we may not wither and be cast away.

Through Christ we are consciously attached to the parent stem. It
behooves us to retain this attachment so that we may go forward in
spiritual unfoldment and be crowned with eternal life.

Many good people think that God is a person located in a place in the
skies called heaven. They pray to Him for what they want and are
satisfied. This is the prayer of the primitive, personal man, and it
meets his needs; but this is not direct communion of the Father and the
Son, the communion with reference to which Jesus said, "I and the Father
are one." We must have this more intimate acquaintanceship or communion
with creative Mind if we are in all ways to do His will.

God presence establishes us in ideas of honesty, strength, intelligence,
spiritual manhood, perfect womanhood, all needed factors in the
unfoldment of the redeemed man, all builders of the indestructible body
temple.

Thus we must understand the nature of the God to whom we pray and awaken
in ourselves that divine nature through which we effect our union with
God.

God is power: man is powerful. God is wisdom: man is wise. God is
substance: man is form and shape. God is love: man is loving. God is
life: man is the living. God is mind: man is the thinker. God is truth:
man is truthful.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Many people pray to God in the same manner as they talk to some distant
friend over the telephone. We talk too much about God, too much as
though He were a third person in the God-man relationship instead of the
first. It is unthinkable that the Creator should cause to exist a
creation so inferior to Himself as to remove it beyond the pale of
fellowship with Him. In his saner moments man knows that this is not
logical or true. It is man's exalted ideas of God and his disparaging
ideas of himself that have built the mental wall that separates them.

In our prayers we must meet God face to face and realize that we are
getting that inner assurance which is the real answer to our petitions.

A minister, after twenty years of faith preaching, once was persuaded by
a friend to try the Truth way of prayer, the way of scientific silence.
Afterwards he confessed that when he touched God and found Him alive he
was startled.

To Jesus the God presence was an abiding flame, a flame of life, of life
everlasting that He felt in every cell and fiber of His being, making
Him more and more alive, cleansing and purifying until He became every
whit perfect. During our higher realizations of Truth we are often
conscious of this abiding flame working in us and through us.

To Jesus God-Mind was a treasure field within Him in which could be
found the fulfillment of every need He could possibly have. The Spirit
of God in Him was constantly working, yes, steadily

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and persistently working, to transmute every natural impulse of mind and
soul into a spiritual realization of life. To Him the Spirit of God was
working to satisfy His inner craving with living substance and
intelligence, thus rounding out soul and body consciousness into the
perfect expression of Divine Mind itself. What a glorious satisfaction
God must feel in His perfect Son Jesus who acknowledged His inner
consciousness as one with, and as consciously expressing, God's will and
wisdom. God Spirit, God-Mind, is not in any way confined or limited; it
is everywhere present. The "ether" of science corresponds to "the
kingdom of the heavens" taught by Jesus. Light and other forms of
radiant energy, the objective expression of the invisible spiritual
forces, compose an omnipresent world more marvelous than the old-time
heaven. All the forces of modern scientific discovery are but parts of
"the kingdom of the heavens" described in the many parables of Jesus.
Science recognizes the physical phases of the kingdom, ignores the
mental, and utterly fails to comprehend the spiritual.

The announcement of Jesus to the obtuse Nicodemus, "Ye must be born
anew," gives us a clue to the shortsightedness of physicists. They have
not developed the faculties of mind necessary to the discernment of the
spiritual intelligence that moves the physical universe, consequently
they see its material aspects only. A new school of science must be
developed in which the mind of the Spirit will be given first place.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: True Prayer](tup04)
