[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup06)  [Next](tup08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Prosperity through Prayer 

"NOW THERE cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the
prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou
knowest that thy servant did fear Jehovah: and the creditor is come to
take unto him my two children to be bondmen. And Elisha said unto her,
What shall I do for thee? tell me; what hast thou in the house? And she
said, Thy handmaid hath not anything in the house, save a pot of oil.
Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbors, even
empty vessels; borrow not a few. And thou shalt go in, and shut the door
upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels; and
thou shalt set aside that which is full. So she went from him, and shut
the door upon her and upon her sons; they brought the vessels to her,
and she poured out. And it came to pass, when the vessels were full,
that she said unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her,
There is not a vessel more. And the oil stayed. Then she came and told
the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and
live thou and thy sons of the rest."

The story of Elisha and the little pot of oil that at his command and
with her co-operation filled all

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the vessels in her house and also those of all her neighbors so that she
had enough oil to pay all her debts, free her children from bondage, and
provide a living for herself and her sons, reveals the working of a
mighty law.

Metaphysically the meaning of the name Elisha is "God is a saviour; God
of deliverance; to whom God gives victory; God is rich." The widow
typifies a belief in lack, a thought or a line of thought in
consciousness that has fallen away from that inner union with the divine
source (husband) and as a result is suffering from lack of supply.

Elisha (meaning also "God is rich") showed this woman how to shut the
door and realize that her supply came from within. Then he revealed to
her how to pour out the oil (love) of plenty, and how it would prove a
permanent supply. Any thought is a prayer in which we realize that our
desires, God directed, are answered the very moment they are expressed.

Christian metaphysicians find that words that express thanks, gratitude,
and praise, release energies of mind and spirit, and their use is
usually followed by effects so pronounced that they are quickly
identified with the originating words, effect being merged in cause.

Let your words of praise and blessing be to Spirit and the increase will
be even greater than it is when they are addressed to man. The resources
of Spirit are beyond our highest flights of imagination. You can praise
a weak body into strength; a fearful

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

heart into peace and trust; shattered nerves into poise and power; a
failing business into prosperity and success; want and insufficiency
into supply and support.

Do not beg in your prayers, but praise and give thanks for the new
self-manifesting God of abundance fulfilling every desire of your heart.

Make a "date" daily with God and keep it. He will never fail you. Some
persons are overtimid about their religion. They fear ridicule and
misunderstanding. A certain banker had established a certain time each
day for going into the silence to pray. His bank, which was located in a
country town, needed to borrow what it considered a large sum of money,
and he was in New York City negotiating for the loan, but without
apparent success. However he was strong in the silence and trusted God
regardless of appearances. While he was talking the matter of the loan
over with the New York City banker his "silence hour" approached, and
our country banker was puzzled what to do. He finally decided to be
honest with God, and in the midst of the apparently unfavorable
discussion in regard to the loan, he quietly announced that he always
devoted a few moments to prayer at that hour and begged to be excused.

The face of the city banker at once lighted up. He instantly recognized
that this country friend had something that he did not have: he was
poised, peaceful, trustful in the face of defeat. So the city banker
hesitatingly replied that he also was in the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

habit of observing a daily moment of prayer and that he would gladly
join him. Then and there they entered the silence together and had a
high realization of God's power to supply and to bless. At the
conclusion of their prayer session the city banker informed the country
banker that he was satisfied that his securities were good and that the
loan would be made without delay.

Emerson's inspiration or comment on prayer was "Prayer is the
contemplation of the facts of life from the highest point of view.
Prayer is the soliloquy of a beholding and jubilant soul. It is the
Spirit of God pronouncing His works good. But prayer as a means of
effecting a private end is theft and meanness. It presupposes dualism
and not unity in nature and consciousness. As soon as a man is at one
with God he does not beg. He then sees prayer in all action."

Father Almighty! We bow before Thine infinite goodness, and invoke in
prayer Thine all-merciful presence of love.

We ask, and as we ask we give thanks that Thy power and presence are
here in love and that we are tightly held in Thine all-embracing arms,
where our every need is supplied and where we shall ever rest secure
from all the buffets of the world.

Open to us the inner chambers of peace and harmony, which divinely
belong to us as Thy children.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

We come as little children into the sacred and trustful presence of Thy
love, knowing full well that only love can draw and hold us in peace and
harmony and prosperity.

Every fear falls away as we enter into Thee and Thy glory of love and as
we bask in the sunshine of love, Thy love, Thy never-failing love!

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contacting Spiritual Substance](tup08.md)
