[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup03)  [Next](tup05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise  
From outward things, whate'er you may believe.  
There is an inmost center in us all,  
Where truth abides in fulness;  
. . . and, to know,  
Rather consists in opening out a way  
Whence the imprisoned splendor may escape,  
Than in effecting entry for a light  
Supposed to be without.  
--Robert Browning  
</span>

</div>

ALL DOWN the ages man has been making the spiritual effort to realize
conscious union with that innermost center where Truth in all its glory
abides eternally. This realization can be accomplished only through true
prayer.

The disciples of Jesus earnestly importuned, "Lord, teach us to pray."
Today, as disciples of the Master, we are asking of Him to be taught the
way of unifying our consciousness with God-Mind. We would find that
inner Truth which sets us free.

His instructions to the disciples were "But thou, when thou prayest,
enter into thine inner chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy
Father who is in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret shall
recompense thee." It is difficult to improve upon

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

this simple method. Quietly entering the inner chamber within the soul,
shutting the door to the external thoughts of daily life, and seeking
conscious union with God is the highest form of prayer we know.

The purpose of the silence is to still the activity of the individual
thought so that the still small voice of God may be heard. For in the
silence Spirit speaks Truth to us and just that Truth of which we stand
in need.

Prayer is man's steady effort to know God. There is an intimate
connecting spirit that logically unites man and his source. This
connecting spirit is the divine Logos, the Word of God, which in truth
reveals the logic of Scripture. Because of this fact man instinctively
feels and knows whence his help comes.

God-Mind, composed of radiant ideas, vibrant life, glorious new
inspiration, is ours to use. Since we are the I will man in the supreme
Godhead, let us through Jesus Christ realize our spiritual importance.
Let us think deeply on the divine Logos, the Word of God! In it is the
living impetus that is bound to vitalize the soul of man and enable him
to develop his latent powers.

When we awaken even a very slight consciousness of this co-operative
spirit, we become cocreators with God, and we find we can adjust any
condition that comes into our life. Jesus was so completely unified with
God-Mind that He could claim the words He spoke to be not His but those
of the Father dwelling within Him.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Through prayer we gain the intimate relationship with God that Jesus
must have enjoyed when He said, "I and the Father are one." Jesus Christ
is our teacher and helper. In prayer what should be our attitude, our
interest, as we approach the divine presence? If we knew that right now
we were about to be ushered into the presence of Christ, to what extent
would our spiritual expectancy be aroused? No doubt we should be
thrilled through and through at the mere thought. Let us feel this same
intense interest, this same concern, as we approach the divine presence
within ourselves. It will add much to the readiness with which we
receive Truth.

ENTERING THE SILENCE

When entering the silence, according to Hosea, the command is "Take with
you words, and return unto Jehovah." After many centuries this
instruction still stands approved today. To the metaphysician it means
to close the eyes and ears to the without, to go within and hold the
mind steadily on the word "Jehovah" until that word illumines the whole
inner consciousness. Then affirm a prayer such as "Thy vitalizing energy
floods my whole consciousness, and I am healed."

Think what the mighty vitalizing energy of God, released through Jesus
Christ, really is. Penetrate deeper into God consciousness within you
and hold the prayer steadily until you attain spiritual realization and
the logic of your own mind is satisfied.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

To realize an idea in the silence is to clothe it with life, substance,
and intelligence. To realize a prayer is to actualize it. To realize it
is to clothe it with soul, to know there is fulfillment.

The word of prayer has in it a living seed that is bound to impregnate
the soil of the mind and cause it to bring forth fruit after its kind.

Through Christ man has the power to realize that as I AM or I AM
"vitalizing health" he is the great central magnet functioning in
omnipresence, around which all the healing powers of Spirit revolve. He
has the power to realize this truth until the most sacred ethers
respond, and he beholds himself as powerful, peaceful, perfect: healed
through and through. It is after this fashion that we engraft the
healing word into our very souls.

When we were in Florida a few years ago a citrus fruit grower told us
many interesting things about the growth of his orchards. There are many
swamps in Florida. He had instructed his men to go out into these
swamps, into the muddy black waters infested with creeping things, there
to dig up the wild-lemon saplings with their strong, vigorous roots, to
transplant them into well-prepared soil, and then to graft into them
buds from his prize domestic fruit trees. Thus new trees laden with
golden fruit appeared in due time. The strong, vigorous root of the wild
lemon gave the new fruit added flavor and quality.

Metaphysically the law is "If the root is holy, so are the branches." At
least the branches are potentially

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

holy. We find that the natural man is usually physically strong and
vigorous just as the root of the wild-lemon tree is. The natural man
also struggles in a murky, negative, swampy atmosphere without power to
bring forth spiritually, just as the wild-lemon sapling does.

But the natural man can take a word of Truth and through "one-pointed"
mind concentration can penetrate into the invisible, can unite his
consciousness with the mind of God, and can hold a realizing prayer
until the truth it contains is engrafted into his very soul. Thus just
as the citrus fruit is developed through the grafting process, so man,
through the engrafted word, becomes a strong, positive spiritual
character.

There is only one God, only one ruling power in all the universe; and
the highest avenue through which God can express Himself is man. The
hungering for God that is felt by man in his soul is really God
hungering to express eternal life through man. God is always seeking to
awaken man's very soul to His mighty presence. He thus expands the
consciousness, offering man an opportunity more fully and more perfectly
to express Him.

There is a partial unity with Spirit and there is a complete unity with
Spirit. Whenever we wholly merge our mind with creative Mind we meet
Christ in our consciousness, and it is when we are in this consciousness
that our prayers are fulfilled. The ability to merge our mind into the
one Mind makes a great man of us.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Every person hungers for eternal life, and in his effort to satisfy this
hunger every soul makes its own concept of God. The ancients said that
an honest man is the noblest work of God. Ingersoll said, "An honest God
is the noblest work of man."

In deed and in truth prayer is man's spiritual approach to God, and
effective prayer does not agonize. Neither Jesus nor any man who has
fused his soul with the soul of God has suffered or agonized. The
suffering comes as a result of separation and the effort to return to
the consciousness of Omnipresence, "my Father's house."

Carlyle said, "Consider the significance of silence: it is boundless,
never by meditating to be exhausted, unspeakably profitable to thee!
Cease that chaotic hubbub, wherein thy own soul runs to waste, to
confused suicidal dislocation and stupor; out of silence comes thy
strength. Speech is silvern, silence is golden; speech is human, silence
is divine.

"Fool! thinkest thou that because no one stands near with parchment and
black lead to note thy jargon, it therefore dies and is harmless?
Nothing dies, nothing can die. No idlest word thou speakest but is a
seed cast into Time, and grows through all eternity. The recording
angel, consider it well, is no fable, but the truest of truths; the
paper tablets thou canst burn; of the 'iron leaf' there is no burning."

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Intellectual Silence and Spiritual Silence](tup05.md)
