[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup04)  [Next](tup06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Intellectual Silence and Spiritual Silence 

IT IS MAN'S concept of God that makes prayer intellectual or spiritual.
There is a vast difference between mere intellectual silence and that
constructive silence which always gives the victory within the soul. The
intellectual silence, which is limited in its power, is the silence
where one's whole attention is fixed on the intellect.

Herbert Spencer once said that he would gladly turn his life over to
anyone who would live it for him and relieve him of its burdens. This no
doubt can be said of hundreds of other weary ones. It reveals however
the fact that man lacks the true vision of life and is not living it as
God intended. Man should lift his eyes "unto the hills, from whence
cometh" his help. He should dwell much on the truths taught by Jesus and
make them a part of his very nature.

Jesus ushered into the race consciousness a thought atmosphere that we
contact in the silence by just affirming in spirit and in truth the name
"Jesus Christ." There is true magic in this name.

When He said, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest," He was mentally freeing man from his many trials
and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

tribulations, and leading him into the broad highway of spiritual
freedom, and joy, and abundance. To accept Jesus Christ as Saviour means
to take His way of thinking and acting and make it ours.

There is a popular teaching that just accepting Jesus Christ as one's
Saviour will set into operation a spiritual magic that will save the
soul from all past and future sins. The word "magic" implies
accomplishing something with the assistance of the supernatural. We find
that in deed and in truth there is magic in adopting the way of life
taught by Jesus. But this is not mysterious to those who study the
transforming power of thoughts and words. It is all contained in the
formula stated by Paul "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind."
Instead of doubting, distrusting, and hating man, which is the fruit of
the intellect, Jesus taught us to love man with all our mind, soul, and
strength. Instead of fighting life and struggling to compete with
millions of others in the same foolish war, as the intellectual man
does, Jesus taught man to co-operate. Instead of wasting energy in
tearing down, Jesus taught man to conserve his energy in building up.
Jesus does not load on man's back all the burdens of humanity; in fact
He shows humanity how to love life, how to love the Author of life, and
how to love life's activities. In this state of consciousness man
automatically drops the burdens of the intellect and enters into the
freedom of real living. In the past the intellect has thought its power
supreme. But while it is a wonderful faculty, it is in truth the tool of
Spirit,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and as such it needs discipline if it is to be able to perform its
perfect work.

The intellect is always busy, jumping from one thing to another, much of
the time dwelling on the daily routine of the workaday world or on
conditions in the world at large. The first step in scientific silence
is simply to still these outer intellectual thoughts so that the
consciousness may become subservient to the Spirit within.

In I Peter 2:2 we read, "As newborn babes, long for the spiritual milk
which is without guile, that ye may grow thereby unto salvation." Those
who are seeking and receiving spiritual understanding are born anew
every day, and every day the milk of the spiritual word continues to
feed and nourish the soul.

Moses was commanded by Jehovah to make all things after the pattern
shown him on the mount. In the heavens of the mind, the spiritual center
in the crown of the head, the Lord keeps ever before man life's perfect
pattern. But man must have the spiritual ability to discern this pattern
if he is to fulfill the requirements of scientific prayer.

By quieting the mental man, by passing through the discipline of
intellectual silence, man arrives at the very threshold of God's
workshop, the threshold of Being. As he passes into the inner chamber he
finds he is entering the holy of holies, where noiselessly, silently a
mighty work is always going on but where there is "neither hammer nor
axe nor any tool of iron heard." God works in the stillness. As man
comes into the presence of God with his

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

prayer in the form of an affirmation of Truth, holding the prayer
steadily in mind and consciously unifying his mind with the mind of God,
he is aware only of the soundlessness of God's word as it weaves itself
in and out through the whole soul and body consciousness, illumining,
redeeming, and restoring him according to his faith and trust, according
to his strength and power to receive. This is quite different from mere
intellectual silence that does not know the way of spiritual unfoldment.
In this spiritual silence man's realization is established in his heart
and he has the assurance that his prayer is answered and that the law of
demonstration brings forth the fruit.

The realization is not only written in the soul but in the intellect,
whose seat of action is in the front forehead. The intellect always
perceives what has taken place within and has power to retain its
perception and to express itself accordingly. Thus the intellect serves
Spirit, and as it unfolds it becomes more and more like Spirit, and it
becomes in deed and in truth the instrument of God.

Carlyle must have had an intellectual understanding as well as a
spiritual understanding of divine law when he wrote, referring to the
kingdom within: "Art not thou the living government of God? O Heaven, is
it not in very deed He then that ever speaks through thee--that lives
and loves in thee--that lives and loves in me?"

Constructive thought force is a great and mighty power, but when it is
realized in the silence it becomes

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the one and only power in all the earth. The understanding of this made
Jesus an adept in the domain of scientific prayer.

"The God that made the world and all things therein, he, being Lord of
heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands." Jesus was
born down among the animals in the manger at Bethlehem. There is a truth
symbolized in this; for not only the intellect in man is to be redeemed
through prayer but also the body; even every animal propensity must be
redeemed and lifted up through Jesus Christ. "In the name of Jesus every
knee should bow . . . and . . . every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Healing through the Prayer of Faith](tup06)
