[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup14)  [Next](tup16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Spirit life quickens mind and body, and I am
whole.  
Spirit substance fills my mind and floods my affairs.  
</span>

</div>

WE UNDERSTAND that the worlds were framed by the word of God spoken in
faith. This in substance is the comment of the author of Hebrews. If God
created by the power of His word it is fair to assume that He gave like
power to man, who has in miniature all the abilities of His Father.
Jesus confirmed this power of man's word when He said that we should be
held accountable for our lightest word and that our words would both
justify and condemn us.

Our words are so interwoven with our thoughts and acts that we do not
discern the relation between cause and effect, in fact we do not as a
rule see any connection between them. We are so concerned with effects
that we have no consciousness of causes. So in explaining the law by
which man builds his

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

character, body, and environment, we must repeatedly call attention to
the source of these things, Spirit and its outlet in man, the word.
Thought and word are so intimately allied that we usually count them as
one. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Get a deep
conviction of the truth of your cause; then speak it forth in strong
words, and it will surely come to pass.

The process through which the idea--conceived in mind, formed in
thought, and made manifest in body and affairs--passes in its various
stages is not always clear, and we are not usually concerned about the
manner in which the end is accomplished. The fulfillment of our
objective is the principal thing.

However it is within the province of man to understand and witness the
whole process of creative thought in his own organism. It requires soul
culture of an advanced order to do this, and but few persons are willing
to undertake the necessary study and discipline. It is not taught in any
of the metaphysical schools, because the instructions cannot be put in
words. No words have yet been invented to express the attitudes of mind
and body required to raise the cell life in man's body to the required
potency. The spiritual ether in which we float has a rate of vibration
millions of times greater than matter. This is the kingdom of Spirit
life, which Jesus brought to our attention and of which we must lay hold
if we would attain eternal or continuous life. The individuality or I AM
must give concentrated attention to this inner life energy and

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

introduce it into mind and body continually until the whole nervous
system is aflame with Spirit life. We may not be conscious of it, but we
are all seeking this inner life flame, because its energy is the only
source upon which we can draw to raise our atomic vibration to the point
where it will overcome the slow disintegrating flow of human nature.

There are souls in the heavens who have accomplished this and so attuned
their bodies to the spiritual life that they are no longer subject to
death. Jesus of Nazareth is the illumined soul appointed to save our
race from the disintegrating effects of broken law, and through Him we
are dynamically infused with life.

Every time we listen to a radio program we have in the diffusion of
intelligence an illustration of what Jesus accomplished in the diffusion
of life. In the 1st chapter of John we read, "In him was life; and the
life was the light of men."

Here light (intelligence) and life are treated as one. Like all the
attributes of Spirit, intelligence or the knowing quality is united with
the active quality, life. There is a spiritual ether corresponding to
the radio ether, into which Jesus merged His soul and body at His
disappearance in the heavens (hoi ouranoi). Here awaiting our
appropriation is a radiant intelligence and life. When we turn our
attention within and give ourselves up wholly to Spirit, we are
quickened with a life and intelligence of superexcellence.

When the blood stream becomes depleted our

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

physicians hasten to make a blood transfusion, overlooking the fact that
Jesus made it possible for all of us to receive from Him a life
transfusion that not only revives us in temporal ills but, above all,
begins in our body a purifying and energizing process that will finally
save us from death.

When we strive to be like Jesus in thought and word we are quickened by
Him and are lifted up. This results in healing; but far more important,
we are inoculated with the germs of soul and body cleansing.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thou Shalt Decree](tup16.md)
