[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup12)  [Next](tup14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">God's pure life and substance are constantly
renewing and  
rebuilding His holy temple, my body.  
New and rich ideas arise in my mind, and I demonstrate  
prosperity.  
</span>

</div>

"UNITY claims that the Bible teaches evolution; just where is the
evolution of Jesus taught?"

The evolution of Jesus was a combination of mind and body unfoldment.

The body of Jesus developed from germs planted in Mary, His mother.
Science says that all stages of unfoldment from the most primitive
animal to man are illustrated in the development of the human organism.
So we must conclude that the body of Jesus was an unfoldment from sense
to Spirit.

However Unity teaches the evolution of both soul and body; an evolution
summarized in the 1st chapter of John under the head of the unfoldment
of the Word. Bible authorities say that "Word" is a poor translation of
the Greek word Logos. Logos

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

conveys the idea of implanted God--Mind in man--from which the perfect
man logically evolves.

God is Spirit. In creation Spirit takes the form of mind, implanting
itself in substance and becoming manifest as perfect man. Here is
condensed in a few words what would take volumes to describe. Here are
epitomized all books on physiology and evolution, mental science and
psychology, religion and spiritual philosophy.

In the rocks beneath our feet are preserved the bones of mammoth
creatures that have been succeeded by finer types of animal life. Here
is evidence of evolution from lower to higher types of life.
Anthropology teaches that the earth has been inhabited by man for at
least half a million years. Many hold that the present body of man has
within it natural forces that would transform it if they were released.
Those who read between the lines have discovered that the Bible veils
evolution in rites, ceremonies, and acts of personalities.

As all words in every language have their root in the thoughts and acts
of man, so all the rites and ceremonies of religion represent man's
relation to his source, God, and the development of his soul.

The two baptisms, that of John and Jesus, represent the two common steps
in the growth of the soul, denial and affirmation, the dropping of the
old and the laying hold of the new. This is evolution.

In totality John the Baptist represents the perfected natural man who
recognizes his finality and his willingness to surrender his personality
so that

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the superman Christ may supplant him, thus symbolizing the evolution of
the soul from the personal to the spiritual.

It is essential that a clear understanding be had of the principles
involved in the transition from the natural to the spiritual, otherwise
the way will be difficult.

Jesus praised John as the most perfect of those born of women--that is,
of the Adam or natural man--but He explained that John even in his
perfection was not to be compared with the spiritual man. He also
commented on the futile efforts of those on the natural plane who
attempt by will force (violence) to attain the spiritual ("kingdom of
heaven").

In the process of developing out of the natural into the spiritual not
only the mind but the body also is affected. The energy locked up in the
cells of the physical are released and the body of flesh is transformed
into a radiant body of light. This is a day-by-day transformation of the
cells until the whole body is "electrified" and passes over into the
fourth dimension or kingdom of the heavens. Jesus accomplished this
transformation of His body and it became an electrical dynamo
broadcasting life germs through our race consciousness. We are to follow
Him in this transformation.

These life germs of Jesus' body form the nucleus of a new race organism
for all people. All persons everywhere may partake of (eat) the radiant
body (bread) of Jesus by exercising faith in Him as the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

great source of pure Spirit substance, sown as soul seed for the saving
of humanity from sense consciousness.

Not only may one eat of this superbody substance but one may also drink
through faith of His transcendent life. Such eating of His body and
drinking of His life or blood is the "Holy Communion" of which sincere
Christians partake daily.

The understanding that this very intimate relation exists between Jesus
and His true followers is transforming the body of thousands of
Christians who formerly labored under the thought that the new body in
Christ was to be attained after death.

"I am the resurrection, and the life." "If a man keep my word, he shall
never see death."

When man understands that he is always right in the presence of a
supermind force that is perpetually pushing him into higher states of
consciousness and finer physical radiations, he cannot help co-operating
with it in the divine urge toward higher things.

No man can retard this universal upward sweep of the whole creation, but
in the exercise of his inherent free will man can insulate his soul and
body, separate himself from it, and thus become lost in the delusions of
sense. To join the Holy Spirit in its efforts to gain the attention and
co-operation of all men we make it a practice to join with people of
like mind in every walk of life in affirming words that bind us to the
mighty moving Spirit of Jesus Christ.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thought Images](tup14.md)
