[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup26)  [Next](tup28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">By Thy light and life I am strengthened and
healed.  
"Every good gift and every perfect gift" cometh from above,  
from the Father of light, and I am in all ways prospered.  
</span>

</div>

BIBLE WRITERS use the word "light" to represent intelligence. When Jesus
said, "I am the light of the world," He undoubtedly meant that He was
the expresser of Truth in all of its aspects. In the 1st chapter of John
light and Truth are synonymous.

"There was the true light, even the light which lighteth every man,
coming into the world." This does not mean that He was the light of all
those who come into the physical world, but of those who are born of
Spirit into the world of reality. Those who live in physical
consciousness regard the light as a radiation of the sun through which
people discern the outline of things. But within this light that chases
away the darkness is a principle hidden from the sense man. "And the
light shineth in the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not." Materiality is
unillumined and has no power in itself to overcome its ignorance. So all
attempts of intellect to lift man and the human family to higher states
of consciousness will prove futile. There must be an influx of spiritual
energy and inspiration from the "Father of lights."

Yet it is interesting to note how the discoveries of modern science are
demonstrating phases of truth without bringing forth a single principle
that will raise man spiritually. For example, light has been probed to
its physical source and properties have been revealed of a world that
was nonexistent to the physical man. Yet with all the marvelous
knowledge acquired about light no quality has been revealed that man can
apply to his moral or health-restoring needs. The argument that light is
a property of electricity that is being successfully applied to heal
human ills is not borne out by facts.

Yet the Scriptures treat light and intelligence as one. In the very
first chapter of the Bible we are told that Mind became manifest as
light. "And God said, Let there be light: and there was light" But the
mind that judges according to appearance never discerns the inner truth
about light or anything else.

We must know the Truth about the omnipresence of the one intelligence in
the light; then we shall be made free from our intellectual darkness.
Science agrees with James that "every good gift and every perfect gift
is from above, coming down from the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Father of lights." Science says light is a very orderly and exceedingly
productive wave motion in the ether, but science does not tell us that
light is God intelligence in action and that we can link our mind with
the light and reap the benefit of its marvelous potentialities.

Some Christian metaphysicians are shy about using the scientists'
approach to their problems, fearing that they themselves will fall into
a materialistic trend of thought. However when we see scientists telling
in physical terms of the properties of God-Mind, needing only to add the
assumption of an intelligent moving power, we have found the cooperation
of a very earnest and convincing lot of truth seekers.

So do not be afraid of the true physical scientist, but give his
discoveries the light of mind. Then you will find that the substance and
life will become more obedient to your word of command.

Remember that Moses received his great command from Jehovah when he
turned aside to see why the bush that burned was not consumed. Jehovah
spoke to him "out of the midst of the bush"; that is, God was in the
fire that lighted an ordinary bush. Open your mind to the light of
Spirit wherever you are. See with the eye of the mind that God is
omnipresent Spirit, "over all, and through all, and in all."

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thought Substance](tup28.md)
