[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup23)  [Next](tup25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Thine harmonizing love is mine, and I am restored to
peace  
and health.  
Divine love, like a magnet, charges my mind and prospers my  
affairs.  
</span>

</div>

AMONG PEOPLE who observe and think there is no question about love's
being the greatest harmonizing principle known to man. The question is
how to get people to use love in adjusting their discords. Where for a
lifetime there has been continuous agitation for lawmaking and force as
panaceas for the discords of humanity, the simple and easy methods of
love seem childish and silly. The minds of reformers have as a rule been
charged and surcharged with pictures of the unjust conditions in the
world and their righteous indignation has often been excited to the
boiling point. Their uppermost thought is how to outlaw or crush the
oppressors. They fairly explode with indignation when love or some of
its attributes is proposed as a remedy. This brings up the matter of the
component parts of love, what the elements are that

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

constitute that very quiet and apparently powerless thing called love.

Paul says (I Cor. 13) that love is patience, kindness, generosity,
contentment, modesty, goodness and good temper, truth, burden-bearing
capacity, faith in everything, a hope for the happy outcome of
everything, and never a thought of failure. These are some of the
working parts of love, but not all. The fact is that love is fundamental
in every activity of life, not only in the spiritual and mental but in
the mechanical and physical as well.

Scientists describe gravitation as the force with which bodies attract
each other. This definition holds good in the mental, in the physical,
and for all we know, in the spiritual realm. So what the physicist calls
gravitation is one of the activities of love. Withdraw for one instant
the steady pull of love from mother earth and we, her children, would be
plunged into the depths of space and darkness. We should remember this
when we are tempted to think that no one loves us. The spiritually
developed soul gives thought and attention to these apparently invisible
yet powerful forces, and by repeated mental contacts it unifies spirit,
soul, and body in the one Mind, which sustains and unifies all things.

It is through this process of unfolding love that great souls are
developed. Men are not created great but with the capacity to become
great. Many factors enter into soul growth, some minor and some major,
but a soul never attains supermind

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

power without love. The reason why love is essential in a great soul is
that love is the binding power, the factor so necessary to strengthening
or fortifying the soul. Hate and antagonism are disintegrating, and they
destroy the cohesion of the spiritual electrons and protons of which the
soul is built.

There are metaphysicians who think that this earth is a temporary
abiding place of the soul, a kind of kindergarten, where lessons are
learned in a single lifetime that fit the soul at death to fly away to
paradise or some beautiful place in the skies. This line of thought
separates the soul from its source and builds a mental gulf between soul
and body. The body is the precipitation of the soul or thinking part of
man; if it has developed sensuality and separation, it must be redeemed
by being unified with the soul, and this unification is accomplished
through love. When like Jesus we have developed love for all things,
even for our enemies, then the body and all its elements become plastic
to thought and we have all power in heaven and in earth. The energy of
light, through which creative Mind rules heaven and earth, is amenable
to man when his mind of love synchronizes with creative Mind and he can
say, "I and the Father are one." According to physicists, nature in all
its forms is an electromagnetic "solution" in which the atoms spin like
cannon balls about one another; that is, nothing is solid, as it seems
to be, but everything floats in ethereal space, ready to fly about at
the impulse

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

of a directive mind of superenergy such as that of Jesus. With this
understanding we can see that Jesus was stating facts of superscience
when He said to His disciples, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard
seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and
it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you."

In his "Essay on Man" Pope must have had something akin to this
combination of gravitation and love in mind when he wrote,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When the loose mountain trembles from on high,
Shall  
gravitation cease, if you go by?"  
</span>

</div>

In us who are followers of Jesus in the regeneration, which engrafts
upon the natural man the spiritual genius that causes him to develop
superman power, it begins its work by inspiring us to do little things
in love. From this doing grows larger capacities until we attain the
full stature of the Christ man.

According to Revelations, Jesus said, "He that overcometh, I will give
to him to sit down with me in my throne."

We begin our overcoming by thought mastery. We begin to master thoughts
of hate and force by first thinking and doing the little component acts
that constitute love. Begin today to be a little more patient. Practice
kindness. Be generous in thought and act. When you are tempted to lose
your temper, say, "I have a good temper." Affirm your truthfulness

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

under all circumstances. If your burdens seem greater than you can bear,
remember what Jesus said: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest." Develop spiritual faith by believing
in spiritual forces capable of accomplishing for you the seemingly
impossible. Affirm a propitious outcome for everything you plan or do,
and never admit failure in anything.

"He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with me in my
throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father in his throne.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches."

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Casting Out Fear](tup25)
