[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup28)  [Next](tup30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The zeal of God quickens, vivifies, and vitalizes
both mind  
and body and makes me every whit whole.  
My zeal for spiritual things increases, and I am abundantly  
prospered, praise God!  
</span>

</div>

PERSONS with poise and purpose, holding themselves well in hand, regard
with some suspicion those who are unduly zealous. When zeal runs away
with judgment, energy is wasted and confidence blasted. The fires of
zeal are soon burned out and the cause of its champion may be
slightingly referred to as "flashes in the pan." Nevertheless, zeal,
intensity, enthusiasm, is essential to the achievement of any and every
great purpose.

We usually judge zeal by the noise it makes. But noise is not
characteristic of the zeal that overcomes seemingly insurmountable
obstacles and wheels them into line with its quiet yet mighty energy of
purpose. When you see men and women working steadily and unselfishly
toward some cherished goal, do not conclude that they are moved by some
selfish

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

motive, the attainment of which will give them personal pleasure. They
are fired by an impulse of soul that boils with an inward flame and
urges them onward, regardless of the outer mind of caution and
conservatism.

The trait of man named variously zeal, enthusiasm, intensity of soul, is
a prime faculty of spiritual man. It is found in one of the disciples of
the type man Jesus, and its character is revealed in his name, Simon the
Zealot.

Zeal's throne or center of activity in the body is at the base of the
brain, in the medulla. It is the seat of the animal soul, and its office
is to vaporize the fine nerve fluid and distribute it to the senses. The
medulla performs in the body the work of the carburetor in a motorcar.

An intense desire to carry out some idea forces the nerve fluid into the
medulla, where it is atomized with inspiration (air) and then flared
through the optic nerve to the eye, where the Spirit ignites it, and it
flashes into light. "It is the Spirit that giveth life."

When the Spirit moves a man from within to the accomplishment of some
cherished ideal and the intellect steps in and says it can't be done, a
conflict ensues and the natural flow of the volatile body is impeded.
Congestions and clots form in the circulation, the man gradually slows
down, and what are called the marks of old age appear. This is why man
should never give up the quest for greater and better expression of
God-given abilities.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

The hop, skip, and jump, the buoyancy and joy of youth, should be
cultivated and continued more enthusiastically as the years advance. The
idea that man grows feeble with years is a foolish fallacy. The longer
one lives the better one should know how to live.

The attention of the followers of Jesus in the regeneration is called to
the many lessons and warnings that He gave regarding man's zeal for
commercialism. He rebuked Satan, the adverse mind, for suggesting that
He demonstrate how to turn stones into bread. He warned, "Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon the earth." One of His earliest works was
putting the commercial activities out of His body temple. "Take these
things hence; make not my Father's house a house of merchandise."

Then His disciples remembered that it was written, "Zeal for thy house
shall eat me up." Jesus explained that the "house" He referred to was
His body. He was cleansing His body of a dominant race thought, the
desire to accumulate money.

The people of the world today are so zealous for the solution of
economic problems that they have forgotten God. They do not ask for
wisdom to guide them in the nation's industrial affairs, but they plan
and scheme and wrangle and get deeper and deeper in debt; that is, into
the clutches of the beast of greed that puts its mark of slavery upon
all who worship it.

Be zealous for spiritual realities. Lay up for yourselves treasures in
the heavens.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Unreality of Error](tup30.md)
