[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup20)  [Next](tup22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">My health is in Thee, and I affirm Thee and Thy life
as the  
one and only source of my healing.  
Thou art my resource, and in Thee I am bountifully supplied  
with all things.  
</span>

</div>

GOD IS SPIRIT, and Spirit is located and appears wherever it is
recognized by an intelligent entity. It thus follows that whoever gives
his attention to Spirit and seals his identification with it by his
word, starts a flow of Spirit life and all the attributes of Spirit in
and through his consciousness. To the extent that he practices
identifying himself with the one and only source of existence he becomes
Spirit, until finally the union attains a perfection in which he can say
with Jesus, "I and the Father are one."

Many persons who have been taught that God exists in a realm separate
from His creations and that He has parts and passions like man discount
the claim that He is the essence of man's body. But that Spirit is the
essence of all things is good logic,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

and those who have made the contact with Spirit life testify that it has
revealed itself to them as the very source of their existence; that is,
as creative Mind, God.

Jesus was undoubtedly the most radical of all the thousands who have
claimed that God revealed Himself to them right out of omnipresence.

The same thought stuff that God used to create man is accessible to man
at all times and in all places. In fact we are using this all-potential
thought stuff with every mental concept. Thus we plant ideas in the same
soil in which God-Mind plants its ideas, and the offspring or fruit is
of the same kind. "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap."

Following the creative law that works constantly in Spirit substance and
life, we find that we are creating permanent thought forms when our
ideals are in harmony with divine law. We thus see that our immortal
body is formed when our thoughts harmonize with what we intuitively know
to be God thoughts, and the perishable body is formed when we think and
speak words that are out of line with Truth as established in divine
principle.

God is Spirit. God is the source of all that we are, hence the source of
life, substance, and intelligence. The one and only substance out of
which all things are formed is right here at all times, awaiting our
recognition of it in its spiritual freedom. When we do recognize it in
the simple faith that it will carry out our demands, we are doing just
what Jesus did.

In like manner the divine substance, out of which

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

all things are formed, in its spiritual freedom is here in our midst
waiting for us to form it into whatever we may decree. Thus it follows
that God has actually planted man in a garden or paradise of potential
substance (mental soil), out of which he can grow his prosperity.

Thousands are testifying in this day that a greater work is being done
in His name than was done in Palestine.

Your health and prosperity will surely be demonstrated if you are
faithful in your open-mindedness; in holding fast to healing and
prosperity thoughts.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thoughts Are Things](tup22)
