[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tup35)  [Next](tup37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

HEALING by the power of the word did not originate with Jesus of
Nazareth, although it is from Him that we get our modern inspiration. In
every age where man has realized the perfection of the original essence
of Being and has spoken forth that realization, the result has been a
restoration of things to their inherent harmony and order.

Whoever realizes that God is the underlying creative perfection and that
man is His mouthpiece has laid the foundation for performing miracles of
healing through the power of the word. But in order to do the miracles
he must speak the word that he knows to be true.

Thousands in every age have caught sight of the truth of God's perfect
being, but they have not been sure enough of their ground to go forth
and proclaim it to a waiting world. Jesus of Nazareth was counted the
Saviour of mankind because He freely proclaimed the truth about God and
man. He not only proclaimed it, but He had faith in the power of His
word to redeem men from the mental lethargy into which they had fallen.

"And Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of disease
and all

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

manner of sickness among the people." The method of Jesus' healing has
always been a theme that many have learnedly discussed and written
about. The theories have been numerous, but they have nearly always been
theories. The claim that He was the only Son of God, begotten in a
certain manner to do a miraculous work, is also a theory to him who has
not a clear understanding of what constitutes a son of God; hence it
would be futile to discuss the things of Spirit with one who has not
been quickened by Spirit.

Whatever these various theories of Jesus' remarkable healing power may
be, none disputes one point: He used words as the vehicle of the healing
potency. He always spoke to the patient "as one having authority." He
had a certain assurance, an inner conviction, that He was speaking the
truth when He said, "Thou art made whole"; and the result of His
understanding carried conviction to the mind of the patient and opened
the way for the "virtue" that went forth from the speaker.
Notwithstanding this very apparent use of words by Jesus there has been
a failure on the part of His followers to grasp their vitally important
office in demonstrations. There has always been a belief in the
religious world that there was somewhere a lost word that when found and
spoken would set all things right. The Jews say this lost word is veiled
in the name "Yahveh" and that its correct pronunciation is no longer
known to men. They claim it was once known to their priesthood, and when
it

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

was used all the powers of God were manifest and mighty works were
accomplished by it in brief moments of time.

All are familiar with the "God said" of Genesis in connection with the
creation of the heavens and the earth.

Here at the very beginning the word is the creative agent, and John,
personifying it, corroborates this. He says that in the beginning "the
Word was with God" that it was God, and that all things were made by it,
and without it was not anything made that has been made. The term that
John used and that is translated "Word" in the King James New Testament
has a much deeper significance than is usually given to it by Bible
readers. It has been assumed by the church that "the Word" meant the
personal Jesus Christ, and it has been so accepted.

The most thorough Greek scholars and all careful and honest Scripture
authorities tell us that the Greek term logos has no equivalent in the
English language; that it is untranslatable and should have stood in its
original form instead of the accepted translation, "the Word."

Even in Greek the term logos has an inner meaning that only those of
spiritual discernment can comprehend. Externally it covers both the
spoken word and the underlying reason or valid premise; both being so
intimately connected as to be one. This John conveys in saying that "the
Word was with God, and the Word was God." Here is implied a

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

distinction in office but a unity in purpose. With the early Fathers of
the Greek Church the divine Logos had a peculiar significance which only
those who had delved into the innermost of existence could comprehend.

Philo made the divine Logos the embodiment of all divine powers and
ideas. He distinguished between the Logos inherent in God, corresponding
to reason in man, and the Logos emanating from God, corresponding to the
spoken word that reveals the thought. The former contains the ideal
world; the latter is the first-begotten Son of God, the image of God,
the Creator, the preserver, the giver of life and light, the mediator
between God and the world. It is claimed that Philo wavered between a
personal and an impersonal conception of the Logos, but leaned more to
the impersonal.

Philip Schaff, speaking of the Logos, says:

"Saint John uses Logos (translated Word) four times as a designation of
the divine, pre-existent person of Christ, through whom the world was
made, and who became incarnate for our salvation (John 1:1-14; I John
1:1; 5:7, A.V.; Rev. 19:13). Philo may possibly have suggested the use
of the term (although there is no evidence that John read a single line
of Philo); but the idea was derived from the teaching of Christ, and
from the Old Testament, which makes a distinction between the hidden and
the revealed Being of God. There is an inherent propriety in this usage
in the Greek language, where Logos is masculine and has the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

double meaning of thought and speech. Christ as to His divine nature
bears the same relation to God as the word bears to the idea. The word
gives shape and form to the idea, and reveals it to the without. The
word is thought expressed; thought is the inward word. We cannot speak
without the faculty of reason, nor think without words, whether uttered
or not. The Christ-Logos is the Revealer and Interpreter of the Hidden
Being of God, the utterance, the reflection, the visible image of God,
and the organ of all His manifestations to the world (John 1:18; Comp.
Matt. 11:27). The Logos was one in nature or essence with God, yet
personally distinct from Him, and in closest communion with Him."

In plain, everyday language, we would say that Being, the original
fount, is an impersonal principle; but in its work of creation it puts
forth the idea that contains all ideas: the Logos, the Christ, the Son
of God, spiritual man. This idea is the creative power, the concrete
consciousness formulated by universal Principle.

It is written of God: "Thou . . . art of purer eyes than to behold
evil." "Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? and not one of them shall
fall on the ground without your Father." These passages seem
paradoxical. When we understand that in the first passage Principle is
referred to, and in the second the Logos or creative Father of Jesus,
then all is clear. Jesus always called the divine Logos "Father." He
never referred to it as an abstraction

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

but always as a being having intense love and compassion for all
creation.

So He will become to each one who makes the conscious connection with
Him. We shall realize that Being is not only principle so far as its
inherent and undeviating laws are concerned, but also person so far as
its relation to each one of us is concerned; that we as individuals do
actually become the focus of universal Spirit, of the all-pervading and
all-wise Logos, and that through us the universe is formed.

"And then shall they see the Son of man coming in clouds with great
power and glory." Each one of us is a son of man, and our glory and
power is in the keeping of the divine Logos.

We come into this power and glorify God just to the extent that we
recognize and use the Logos. Jesus of Nazareth recognized and used it in
its fullest sense. To Him it was not only an all-pervading principle of
goodness and power but it was very much more; it was a near and dear
Father, a Father whose interest in His children is greater than that of
any earthly parent.

"If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to
them that ask him?"

We may make little out of the Logos and live in the shadow of its glory,
or we may make much out of it and live in the sunshine of that glory.
Some ask sparingly and receive in like measure; others ask largely and
receive largely.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

The Logos is the preserver and transmitter of the original spiritual
ideas and essences of God. It is the sustainer upon which the universe
rests, and all its creations are spiritually sequential, that is,
logical. We are dependent upon it for every breath we draw. Its
substance and intelligence are at the beck and call of prince and
peasant alike, and in this sense it becomes the servant of all. All mold
it into consciousness in the one and only way--through thought. Whatever
you think about life or substance, that it becomes to you.

If you think the Logos will heal the sick through the power of your
magnetic hand, you will do your healing in that way. If you think it
will heal through your silent or spoken word, it will act accordingly.
It will work for the ignorant and the wise, the wicked and the good, the
poor and the rich. It is yours to use in whatsoever way you will.
However the permanent results you get will be proportioned to your
understanding of its whole nature. To grow in its grace and be glorified
in the ineffable glory of the everlasting God you must know who it is
you are dealing with.

Herein many are falling short in our day. They have been taught the
manipulation of the Logos in its healing aspect and they are using it as
a new therapeutic agent. To them it is a cold abstraction, a principle
having intelligence and substance without consciousness. These qualities
they handle as does the potter his clay. Instead of striving to attain
that loving relation to the Father which should

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

exist between parent and child, they are virtually introducing into
their business world a new factor for the attainment of selfish ends. Do
not let the icy hand of such a science grasp yours. Refuse to see the
Father as anything less than the all-compassionate One who is interested
in every act of your life, every thought you think; who has numbered
even the hairs of your head. This is our God, the Most High Good, which
dwells in our heart and soul and flames up into our mind with all the
power of cleansing, healing, and uplifting. To this dear Father nothing
is small, nothing is great. He does not ignore His creation; He does not
stand afar off and view with the cold, critical eye of a connoisseur.
His heart throbs with compassion; He sheds upon us the holy peace of His
presence in the turmoil of sense, and we joyously exclaim, "Though all
else fail me, in Thee I find rest."

Yet we must attain the full stature of the God-man. We must ultimately
understand that the Father cannot be circumscribed by any human idea of
Him or of what He should do for us. We must know that there is only good
and that the word of good is the only permanently healing word. So long
as we believe that the Father might heal at one time and not at another,
that He might be induced to give us His healing Spirit under certain
circumstances and not under others, we are misjudging His nature. If
there is ever any limit to the healing power of the word, it is of our
own manufacture.

The healing word is not a special creation to meet

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

an emergency. It is not a patent medicine prepared to cure specific
diseases. The idea that it is a healing word at all originates in our
limited notion that there is something that needs healing.

God is the supreme perfection; the Word is like unto that perfection.
All its creations are perfect. It takes cognizance of the perfect only.
When we realize this perfection and speak the words of Truth from that
plane of understanding, the Word goes forth and establishes that which
is. It does not heal anything--in its perfection there is nothing to
heal. Its office is to behold the perfection of its Being; and as we do
the works of the Father, we behold and restore that which is and always
was perfect.

Thus he who realizes most thoroughly that God is the supreme perfection
and that in Him can be no imperfection, and speaks forth that
realization with conviction, will cause all things to arrange themselves
in divine order.

This is being daily and hourly demonstrated by the faithful all over the
land, thus proving true the nature of the Logos or Word of God. The
meaning of the word logos is speech based upon reason. If the reasonable
premise that God is the omnipresent God is well grounded in you, you
cannot speak anything but healing and uplifting words. Your words must
be for the healing of the nations, because they are true words flowing
forth from a source in which Truth has no opposite.

If you believe that both good and evil conditions can be brought forth
from this divine Logos, that

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

both sweet and bitter waters can flow forth from the same spring, then
your healing will be mixed. The spring is pure, and by letting your mind
be an open way for its outpouring, you permit it to remain in its
original purity and to cleanse all in whom you quicken it. If however
you stop the flow here and there by an idea of limitation, by an idea of
imperfection in the fount or in him upon whom the fount is being poured,
you cut off its free currents to that extent.

Do not construe this to mean that you can pollute the stream by your
thinking. This cannot be done; you simply refuse to let its purity come
forth in its fullness. Like the lens that refracts the sunlight, you
receive some rays that you do not throw upon the screen. The white light
of Spirit is poured upon you, and your idea of limitation, in a given
direction makes you opaque to some of its colors.

You are nothing less than a child of God, and to you is intrusted the
creative power. When you realize this you can go forth forgiving men
their sins as you have forgiven your own.

The word of God is spoken through the Son of man. You are a son of man,
and it is your duty to be about your Father's business, healing the
sick, casting out demons, forgiving the sinful, and spreading the gospel
of a living God.

But the "word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth." Speak it forth and
demonstrate, as did Jesus, that "the Son of man hath authority on earth
to forgive sins." What is sin? It is anything other

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

than an erroneous way of attaining happiness? God is happy, and it is a
state natural to us all or we would not strive for it. There must also
be a way to reach it. If we have not reached it by the way we have
followed, we have but to turn about and seek another way. Repenting is
turning about, letting go of the sense way. As soon as we let go and
recognize that the way of Spirit is the way of pleasantness, we have
been forgiven our sins. The mental attitude has invited the word of God,
and it flows forth into our consciousness and erases the erroneous
concepts.

Anyone can speak true words and thus be the agent of God in forgiving
sin. The little child may do it; the ignorant disciple may do it. The
power does not inhere in the individual; the cleansing is through the
word. "Already ye are clean because of the word which I have spoken unto
you."

This living Word of God is a spiritual principle. It is omnipresent,
like the air we breathe.

One small grain of it is more powerful than many tons of dynamite. It is
the "assurance of things hoped for" that will remove mountains. It is
very nigh unto you, even "in thy mouth," as a wise one said. Its premise
is that God is good and that His offspring is like unto Him. You have
only to recognize this premise in all that you think and do and then
speak it forth to get the results promised. There is no respect of
persons in God; you are as near the Father as Jesus was if you recognize
the principle and speak the true word always.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Six-Day Prayer Treatments](tup37.md)
