[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cota05)  [Next](cota07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Consciousness of the Atom*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lect4"></span>

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### LECTURE IV.

### THE EVOLUTION OF MAN, THE THINKER.

This is the fourth in the series of talks which we have had the past
month, and perhaps by means of them we have been able to get an idea of
one of the fundamental principles which [underlie](errata.htm#1)
evolution, and which can be seen working out in the solar system.

Let us first briefly recapitulate, in order that we may approach our
subject tonight with certain ideas clearly formulated. We have seen that
our interpretation of the processes of nature necessitates a threefold
concept, which concerns itself with the life aspect, with the substance
aspect, and with their close interrelation through the faculty of
intelligence manifesting as consciousness of some kind or other. This
interrelation will produce, finally, the perfected expression (through
the medium of matter) of the conscious purpose of some indwelling
entity. I seek to emphasise the fact that the goal of my endeavour is to
put before you a hypothesis and a suggestion which may have within it
the germ of a possible truth, and which seems to some of us the clearest
way of explaining the mystery of the universe. We have seen that the
three parts of the one great whole are Spirit, or Life, manifesting
through a second factor which we call substance or matter, and utilising
a third factor, which we call the intelligence. In the gradual synthesis
of these three component aspects of deity can be seen the evolution of
consciousness.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

We next arrived at a more technical discussion of the subject of
substance itself, dealing not with the differentiated substances or
elements, but with the concept of a primordial substance, and
endeavouring to get back as far as possible toward that which has been
called by Sir William Crookes "protyle", or that which lies back of the
tangible, or objective. We considered the atom, and found that its
latest definition was that it was in reality a unit of force or energy
consisting of a positive charge of electricity energising a number of
negative particles. It became apparent to us that the tiny atom of the
chemist and the physicist was within itself a solar system, with the
same general conformation as the greater system, demonstrating a similar
activity and governed by analogous laws. We found that it had a central
sun, and that around this central sun, pursuing their definite orbits,
night be seen the electrons. We noted, also, the fact that the elements
differ only according to the number and the arrangement of these
electrons around the central positive charge. From this we passed on to
the consideration of the soul, or the psyche, of the atom, and found
that scientists recognise the truth that atoms themselves possess
quality, show symptoms of mind or intelligence, and can discriminate,
select, and choose.

We then proceeded to weave what appeared to be a fairytale. We pictured
the human being as an atom, and traced the resemblance of man to an
atom; we found that he attracted and held within his sphere of influence
the matter of his various bodies, mental, emotional and physical, in
exactly the same way as the electrons were held revolving around their
central focal point. The idea proved capable of still further expansion,
and we turned our attention to the planet, picturing it as similar in
its nature to the human atom, and to the ultimate atom of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

substance, being but the expression of a life manifesting through a
spheroidal form and working out an intelligent purpose. Then we reached
our consummation, and viewed the solar system as a cosmic atom,
energised by the life of the Logos.

We have, therefore, under consideration, four kinds of atoms:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

First, the atom of the chemist and physicist.

Secondly, the human atom, or man.

Thirdly, the planetary atom, energised by a planetary Logos, or the
Heavenly Man.

Fourthly, the solar atom, indwelt by the solar Logos, or the Deity.

</div>

If we are right in our fundamental concept, if there is a grain of
reality in our hypothesis, and if there is a substratum of truth in our
idea of the atom from which the elements are compounded, it is to be
recognised as a life working intelligently through the medium of a form.
Then it can perhaps be proven that man is equally a life or centre of
energy, manifesting through his bodies; then it can perhaps be
demonstrated that a planet is also the medium of expression of a still
greater centre of energy, and further, under the law of analogy, it may
perhaps be proven at some distant time that there is a God or central
life back of material nature, and an Entity Who functions consciously
through the solar system.

At our last lecture we took up another phase of manifestation. We
studied the atom itself, and considered it as it entered into
relationship with other atoms, and through their mutual coherence formed
groups or congeries of atoms. In other words, we considered the atom as
it was built into the different forms in the various kingdoms of nature,
and found that, in the process of evolution,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

atoms themselves gravitate towards other and greater central points,
becoming in their turn electrons. Thus, every form is but an aggregate
of smaller lives.

Very briefly then we touched upon the different kingdoms of nature, and
traced the development of the soul, or the psyche in all of them. Of the
atom we have already predicated intelligence, or discriminative power,
and we found that in the building up of forms in the mineral, vegetable,
and animal kingdoms what we understand as sensation begins to appear,
and we then have the rudiments of embryonic emotion, or feeling—the
physical plane reflection of love. Thus we have one aspect of the
threefold nature of God, intelligence, demonstrating through the atom;
and through the form we have the love, or attractive quality
manifesting. This can also be expressed in the recognition that in these
two aspects of the central divine life you have the third person of the
Logoic Trinity co-operating with the second; you have the intelligent
activity of divinity, or the Holy Spirit aspect, working in connection
with the second aspect, or the Son, Who is the builder of forms. This is
brought out in an interesting manner in Proverbs viii. where Wisdom
cries aloud (Wisdom in the Old Testament representing the Christ
aspect), and after pointing out that He was with God before ever there
was creation, goes on to say that when "He appointed the foundations of
the earth, then I was by Him as the master worker or builder". Students
would do well to study this chapter in connection with the ideas that we
are here formulating, being careful to ascertain the exact translation.

We now come to the consideration of our subject for tonight, that of the
evolution of man, the thinker. We shall see that in man comes in another
aspect of divinity. Browning, in Paracelsus, covers the subject that we
have

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

been considering in a most interesting manner, summing it up as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Thus He (God) dwells in all,  
 To man—the consummation of this scheme  
 Of being, the completion of this sphere  
 Of life: whose attributes had here and there  
 Been scattered o’er the visible world before,  
 Asking to be combined, dim fragments meant  
 To be united in some wondrous whole,  
 Imperfect qualities throughout creation,  
 Suggesting some one creature yet to make,  
 Some point where all those scattered rays should meet  
 Convergent in the faculties of man."

</div>

Having therefore discovered two aspects of divinity-in the atom and in
the form, we shall find the triplicity perfected in man. We have been
told that man is made in the image of God, and we would therefore expect
to see him reflecting the threefold nature of the Logos. He must
demonstrate intelligence, he must show forth love, and he must manifest
will. Let us consider some of the definitions of man as found in the
dictionary and elsewhere. The definition found in the Standard
Dictionary is a profoundly uninteresting one, and is as follows:—Man is
"an individual of the human race", and then follows a long list of
suggestive derivations of the word man, running through every known
tongue, and concluding with the statement that many of them are
improbable. That derivation which ascribes the definition of man to the
Sanskrit root 'man', the one who thinks, is to my mind the most
satisfying. Mrs. Besant, in one of her books, gives an exceptionally
clear definition as follows: "Man is that being in whom highest spirit
and lowest matter are linked together by intelligence." Man is here
pictured as

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the meeting place for all the three lines of evolution, spirit, matter,
and linking intellect; he is shown to be the one who unifies the self,
the not-self, and the relation between them, and he is seen to be the
knower, that which is known, and knowledge. What is the purpose of the
intellect, or of knowledge? Surely its purpose is to adapt the material
form to the need and requirements of the indwelling spirit; surely it is
to enable the thinker within the body to utilise it intelligently, and
for some definite purpose; and surely it exists in order that the
central energising unit may constructively control its negative aspect.
We are all of us entities, ensouling a form, and through the
intelligence endeavouring to utilise that form for a specific purpose
which exists within the conscious will of the true self.

In a very old occult book—so old that the date of it cannot be
ascertained—can be found a definition of man which is very illuminating,
and in line with the thought that we are seeking to develop tonight. Man
is there defined as: "the Life and the lives." We have seen that the
atom is a life, manifesting by means of the little sphere of which it is
the centre. We have seen that all forms are an aggregate of lives, built
up into the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. Now we can pass to
the next stage on this great ladder of evolution, and we will then find
that the human being is the logical sequence that grows out of all these
earlier developments. First, the primordial stuff, essentially
intelligent energy; next, atomic matter, in all its varying activity
forming the elemental combination; then the form, the aggregate of these
atoms, up to the dweller within the form, who is not only active
intelligence, not only inherent attraction and love, but is also a
purposeful will. This "dweller within" took possession of the form when
it had reached a certain

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

o stage of preparedness, and when the component lives had reached a
certain vibratory capacity; he is now utilising it, and repeating,
within his own sphere of influence, the work of the atom of matter; he
demonstrates, nevertheless, not in one way, nor in two, but in three. In
man, therefore, in deed and in truth, you have what the Christian would
term the "image of God." For, as must be apparent to all thinkers, the
only way in which we can know God is through the study of His nature, or
His psychic quality. We know that God is intelligence, we know that He
is love, or the great attractive force of the solar system, and we know
that He is the great will or purpose back of all manifestation. In every
Scripture in the world the Deity is pictured under these three aspects,
and manifests through nature in this triple manner.

The evolution of substance is a thing of gradual growth; it is in time
supplemented by the slow working out of the inner subjective quality of
the life of God, and thus His essential nature is demonstrated. First,
you have one aspect demonstrating, then another slowly appears, and
finally the third can be seen, and you have the stupendous combination
and consummation, the human being. He synthesises and blends the three
aspects, uniting them in himself. He is the totality of the divine
attributes, though as yet they are largely embryonic, and he has to
repeat within his cycle of evolution the identical processes that the
atom itself has followed. Just as the atom pursues its own internal
course, and just as it also has later to be drawn into and to merge and
blend with other atoms in the formation of a group, so the human atom
equally has to find his place within a greater form.

Let us, therefore, consider for a little what is the method of the
evolutionary process for a human being. We have seen that in him the
three lines converge, and that

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

he is a point of synthesis, with one aspect as yet predominant, that of
the intelligence, with the second aspect of love-wisdom just beginning
to make its presence felt, and with the highest aspect of spiritual will
as yet purely embryonic.

We have, nearly all of us, been brought up in the belief in what is
called "the fall of man". There are few these days who believe the story
of the fall as it is given in the first chapter of Genesis, and we most
of us credit it as having an allegorical interpretation. What is the
occult truth underlying this curious story? Simply that the truth about
the fall of the spirit into matter is conveyed by means of a picture to
the infant mentality of man. The process of the converging of these
lines is a twofold one. You have the descent into matter of the entity,
of the central life, and the incarnation of spirit, and then you have
the working up, out of matter, of that life or spirit, plus all that has
been gained through the utilisation of form. By experimenting with
matter, by dwelling within the form, by the energising of substance, by
the going out of the Garden of Eden (the place where there is no scope
for necessary development), and by the wandering of the Prodigal Son in
the far country, you have the various stages which are pictured in the
Christian. Bible where man makes the discovery that he is not the form,
but that he is the one who utilises it. He is intelligence, and
therefore he is made in the image of the third Person of the Trinity; he
is love, and through him the love aspect of the Deity will some day
perfectly manifest, and he will be able to say with his elder Brother,
the Christ, in reply to the demand "Lord, show us the Father", that "he
that hath seen me hath seen the Father", for God is Love; and finally,
through him the highest aspect, the will of God, will

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

become manifest, and he will be perfect, even as his Father in heaven is
perfect.

Just as in the evolution of substance three stages could be seen,—that
of atomic energy, of group coherence, and of eventual synthesis,—so in
the evolution of man will the same appear. You will have, in the early
stages of human evolution, that which we might call the atomic stage, in
which man comes to a gradual recognition that he is a selfconscious
unit, with an individuality all his own. Anyone who has brought up
children knows that stage well. It can be seen in that constant
utterance of "my, my, my," the stage of appropriation for himself, with
no thought of any other self. Children are naturally, advisedly, and
wisely selfish. It is the stage of the gradual recognition of separative
existence, and of the utilisation ever more potently by the human atom
of its own internal atomic force. The infant human being rebels against
the enforced guardianship of those who seek to protect it, and considers
itself sufficient unto itself. This can be seen in the individual and
the race.

Then, as life goes on, the man passes out of the atomic stage to a
higher and a better one, when he becomes cognisant of his group
relationships, when he becomes aware that he has group responsibilities,
and that he has functions to work out with other separate atoms. The
group consciousness begins to make itself felt. Thus the human atom
finds its place within the group, the larger unit to which it belongs,
and the love aspect begins to show itself. The man has passed out of the
atomic stage into that of group coherence.

Later comes the stage when the man begins to realise that he has not
only responsibilities to the group, but that there is something greater
still. He realises that he is a part of a great universal life which
underlies all groups,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

that he is not just a universal atom, that he is not just part of a
group, but that, after merging his identity with the group—although
never losing it—the group itself has to be blended again with the
consciousness of that great Identity Who is the synthesis of them all.
Thus he arrives at the final stage of intelligent appreciation of divine
unity.

This triple idea can be found summed up in the Bible in a rather
interesting phrase, where Jehovah says to Moses, the representative man,
"I am that I am". If you split this verse into its three parts you have
what I have been seeking to bring out tonight: First, the atomic
consciousness, I AM; then the group, I AM THAT; a consciousness that he
is not just a separated individual, not only a selfcentred unit, not
only a self-conscious entity, but that he is something still greater.
Man then reaches the recognition which will lead him to sacrifice his
identity in the service of the group, and to merge his consciousness in
that of the group. Of such a conscious union we know practically nothing
as yet. This is succeeded by the still greater stage, when I AM THAT I
AM will be for us not an impossible ideal, and a visionary concept, but
a fundamental reality, when man in the aggregate will recognise himself
as an expression of the universal life, and the group consciousness
itself will be merged in that of the Aggregate of all groups.

We suppose, and we hope, that we are passing rapidly out of the atomic
stage, and that our sphere of influence and interest is not bounded by
our atomic wall, but that we are becoming (to use a now familiar term)
radio-active. When this is the case we shall not be circumscribed and
limited within our own shell, and the narrow confines of our own
individual life, but we shall begin to radiate, and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

to contact other atoms, thus reaching the second stage, the attractive.

What, therefore, is the goal ahead for each one of us? What is the goal
for these different atoms with which we are concerning ourselves? We are
told in some of the old Eastern Scriptures, that the goal for the atom
of substance is selfconsciousness. What is, therefore, the goal for the
human atom, who is already selfconscious, who is already individualised,
and guiding himself by means of his will? What lies ahead for man?
Simply the expansion of his consciousness to include the consciousness
of the great life, or being, in whose body he is himself a cell. Our
physical body is, for instance, made up of innumerable lesser lives, or
atoms, each one of them separated from its neighbour, each one of them
distinguished by its own inherent activity, and each one forming a
sphere which holds within its periphery other lesser spheres or
electrons.

We have seen that man is the positive charge, and holds his multiplicity
of atoms, or lesser lives, energised and bound together into coherent
forms. At death, when the spirit aspect withdraws itself, the form
disintegrates, and is dissolved, and these little conscious lives,
having fulfilled their function, dissipate. The consciousness of the
atom within the body is a very different thing to the consciousness of a
man, and this we can realise with very little thought. If we concede
that man is a cell in a greater sphere, may it not be possible that
there is a consciousness which is to the man what his consciousness is
to the cell in his body? Is it not possible that we may have ahead of us
the achievement of that consciousness in the same sense as the atom of
substance may some day achieve the consciousness of a human being? May
it not be that this is what Browning had in his mind when he said:
"Mankind, made up of all the single men; in such a synthesis the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

story ends." Here he holds up before us a concept of a greater Man, who
is the synthesis or sum total of all the lesser units. Perhaps that
synthesis may be the great Life, or the planetary Entity Who lies back
of our planetary manifestation, and Who is the suns total of the group
consciousness. I suggest that just as *selfconsciousness* is the goal
for all the sub-human forms of life, and as *group consciousness*, or
the consciousness of the Heavenly Man, is the goal for the human being,
so for him, also, there may be a goal, and for him the achievement may
be the development of *God consciousness*. So for him comes the struggle
to evolve the realisation which is that of the solar Logos.

Thus can be seen the unity of consciousness from the most minute atom up
to the Deity Himself. Thus opens up before us a wonderful picture, and a
vista of possibility. Thus may the life of God be seen in its essential
triple manifestation, working out in an ever expanding consciousness;
demonstrating in the atom of substance, and expanding through the medium
of form, until it finds one point of culmination in man, then proceeding
on its course till it demonstrates as the planetary consciousness, which
is the sum total of all the states of consciousness upon our planet, the
earth, until we arrive at the fundamental basic Life, Who holds all the
planetary evolutions synthesised within His greater sphere, the solar
system. Thus, in summing up, we have four states of intelligent
activity, which we might term consciousness, selfconsciousness, group
consciousness, and God consciousness. These demonstrate through four
types of atoms, first, the chemical atom and all atomic forms; secondly,
the human atom; then, the planetary atom, and finally the
all-encompassing solar atom. Ensouling these atomic forms can be seen
manifesting all sub-human types of life, from the life of the atom of
substance to the informing life of the higher

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

animals, then that life which we call human, that of man, the thinker;
next, the Heavenly Man, and then the great Life of the solar system,
Whom the Christian calls God, or the Logos.

Browning expresses this idea of the gradual expansion of the
consciousness of a human being into something greater and vaster in the
following words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"When all the race is perfected alike  
 As man, that is; all tended to mankind,  
 And, man produced, all has its end thus far;  
 But in completed man begins anew  
 A tendency to God. Prognostics told  
 Man's near approach; so in man's self arise  
 August anticipations, symbols, types  
 Of a dim splendour ever on before  
 In that eternal circle life pursues.  
 For men begin to pass their nature's bound,  
 And find new hopes and cares which fast supplant  
 Their proper joys and griefs; they grow too great  
 For narrow creeds of right and wrong, which fade  
 Before the unmeasured thirst for good: while peace  
 Rises within them ever more and more.  
 Such men are even now upon the earth  
 Serene amid the half-formed creatures round  
 Who should be saved by them and joined with them."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture V. The Evolution of Consciousness](cota07)
