[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cota01)  [Next](cota03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Consciousness of the Atom*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page__006"></span> <span id="page__007"></span>

### FOREWORD

The lectures here presented were delivered in New York during the past
winter. The purpose of this series was to present to their auditors the
testimony of science as to the relation of matter and of consciousness;
to enable the hearers to observe the identical manifestation of these
relations and of certain basic laws in successively higher states of
being, and thus to bring to them a realization of the universality of
the evolutionary process and its actuality; and to deal somewhat with
the nature of the expanded states of consciousness and the enlarged life
toward which all mankind is traveling. They thus were intended to serve
as an introduction to the more detailed study and application of the
laws of life and human enfoldment generally included in the term of
"occultism."

It will be observed that there is in this series a considerable amount
of repetition, as each lecture briefly reviews the matters covered in
the preceding addresses. As newcomers were present at each lecture in
the series, it was found necessary on each occasion to present a bird's
eye view of the ground covered and the reasons for the position then
taken. A further advantage was found in the fixing in the minds of the
hearers of certain of these basic concepts which were new to many of
them, and which helped to enable them to grasp and to receive readily
the further expansion of the theme. In presenting the lectures in book
form it has been deemed advisable to retain the complete text of the
lectures as given. Those who are already students of the esoteric wisdom
will be able to follow the line of the argument of the lectures without
difficulty. For those however, who for the first time approach the
consideration of the matters here discussed, the occasional repetition
of the fundamental points may help to a ready apprehension, and it is
for this class of readers that the book is primarily intended.

ALICE A. BAILEY     

September, 1922.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture I. The Field of Evolution](cota03)
