<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob26)  [Next](lbob28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### The Second Book of HERMAS, called his COMMANDS.

#### *Introduction*.

WHEN I had prayed at home, and was sat down upon the bed, a certain man
came in to me with a reverend look, in the habit of a shepherd, clothed
with a white cloak, having his bag upon his back, and his staff in his
hand, and saluted me.

2 I returned his salutation, and immediately he sat down by me, and said
unto me, I am sent by that venerable messenger, that I should dwell with
thee all the remaining days of thy life.

3 But I thought that he was come to try me, and said unto him, Who are
you? For I know to whom I am committed. He said unto me, Do you not know
me? I answered no. I am, said he, that shepherd to whose care you are
delivered.

4 Whilst he was yet speaking, his shape was changed; and when I knew
that it was he to whom I was committed, I was ashamed, and a sudden fear
came upon me, and I was utterly overcome with sadness, because I had
spoken so foolishly unto him.

5 But he said unto me, Be not ashamed, but receive strength in thy mind,
through the commands which I am about to deliver unto thee. For, said
he, I am sent to shew unto thee all those things again, which thou hast
seen before, but especially such of them as may be of most use unto
thee.

6 And first of all write my Commands and Similitudes, the rest thou
shalt so write as I shall shew unto thee. But I therefore bid thee first
of all write my Commands and Similitudes, that by often reading of them
thou mayest the more easily  <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1](#fn_1214)
keep them in memory.

7 Whereupon I wrote his Commands and Similitudes, as he bade me.

8 Which things if when you have heard, ye shall observe to do them, and
shall walk according to them, and exercise yourselves in them with a
pure mind, ye shall receive from the Lord those things which be has
promised unto you.

9 But if having heard them ye shall not repent, but shall still go on to
add to your sins,  <span id="fr_1215"></span>[2](#fn_1215) ye shall be
punished by him.

10 All these things that Shepherd, the angel of repentance, commanded me
to write.

#### COMMAND I.

<span class="small">*Of*  <span id="fr_1216"></span>[3](#fn_1216)
*believing in one God*.</span>

FIRST of  <span id="fr_1217"></span>[4](#fn_1217) all believe that there
is one God who created and framed all things of nothing into a being.

2 He comprehends all things, and is only immense, not to be comprehended
by any.

3 Who can neither be defined by any words, nor conceived by the mind.

4 Therefore believe in him; and fear him; and fearing him  <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[5](#fn_1218) abstain from all evil.

5 Keep these things, and cast all  <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[6](#fn_1219) lust and iniquity far from thee, and
put on righteousness, and thou shalt live to God, if thou shalt keep
this commandment.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

#### COMMAND II.

<span class="small">*That we must avoid detraction, and do our
alms-deeds with simplicity*.</span>

HE said unto me,  <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1](#fn_1220) Be innocent
and without disguise; so shalt thou be like an infant who knows no
malice which destroys the life of man.

2 Especially see that thou speak evil of none, nor willingly hear any
one speak evil of any.

3  <span id="fr_1221"></span>[2](#fn_1221) For if thou observest not
this, thou also who hearest shalt be  <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[3](#fn_1222) partaker of the sin of him that
speaketh evil, by believing the slander, and thou also shalt have sin,
because thou believed-est him that spoke evil of thy brother.

4  <span id="fr_1223"></span>[4](#fn_1223) Detraction is a pernicious
thing; an inconstant,  <span id="fr_1224"></span>[5](#fn_1224) evil
spirit; that never continues in peace, but is always in discord.  <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[6](#fn_1225) Wherefore refrain thyself from it, and
keep peace ever more with thy brother.

5 Put on an holy  <span id="fr_1226"></span>[7](#fn_1226) constancy,
 <span id="fr_1227"></span>[8](#fn_1227) in which there are no sins, but
all is full of joy; and do good of thy labours.

6  <span id="fr_1228"></span>[9](#fn_1228) Give  <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[10](#fn_1229) without distinction to all that are
in want, not doubting to whom thou givest.

7 But give to all, for God will have us give to all, of  <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[11](#fn_1230) all his own gifts. They therefore
that receive shall give an account to God, both wherefore they received
and for what end.

8 And they that receive without a real need, shall give an account for
it; but he that gives shall be innocent.

9 For he has fulfilled his duty as he received it from God; not making
any choice to whom he should give, and to whom not. And this service he
did with simplicity and  <span id="fr_1231"></span>[12](#fn_1231) to the
glory of

10 Keep therefore this command according as I have delivered it unto
thee; that thy repentance may be found to be sincere, and that good may
come to thy house; and have a pure heart.

#### COMMAND III.

<span class="small">*Of avoiding lying, and the repentance of Hermas for
his dissimulation*.</span>

MOREOVER  <span id="fr_1232"></span>[13](#fn_1232) he said unto me, love
truth; and let all the speech be true which proceeds out of thy mouth.

2 That the spirit which the Lord hath given to dwell in thy flesh may be
found true towards all men; and the Lord be glorified, who hath given
such a spirit unto thee: because God is true in all his words, and in
him there is no lie.

3 They therefore that lie, deny the Lord,  <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[14](#fn_1233) and become robbers of the Lord,
 <span id="fr_1234"></span>[15](#fn_1234) not rendering to God what they
received from him.

4 For they received the spirit free from lying: If therefore they make
that a liar, they defile what was committed to them by the Lord, and
become deceivers.

5 When I heard this, I wept bitterly; and when he saw me weeping, he
said unto me, Why

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

weepest thou? And I said, Because, sir, I doubt whether I can be saved?

6 He asked me, Wherefore? I replied, because sir, I never spake a true
word in my life; but always lived in dissimulation, and affirmed a lie
for truth to all men; and no man contradicted me, but all gave credit to
my words. How then can I live, seeing I have done in this, manner?

7 And he said unto me, Thou thinkest well and truly. For thou oughtest,
as the servant of God, to have walked in the truth, and not have joined
an evil conscience with the spirit of truth, nor have grieved the holy
and true Spirit of God.

8 And I replied unto him, sir, I never before hearkened so diligently to
these things. He answered, Now thou hearest them: Take care from
henceforth, that even those things which thou hast formerly spoken
falsely for the sake of thy business, may,  <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1](#fn_1235) by thy present truth receive credit.

9 For even those things may be credited, if for the time to come thou
shalt speak the truth; and  <span id="fr_1236"></span>[2](#fn_1236) by
so doing thou mayest attain unto life.

10 And whosoever shall hearken unto this command, and do it, and shall
depart from all lying, he shall live unto God.

#### COMMAND IV.

<span class="small">*Of putting away one's wife for adultery*.</span>

FURTHERMORE, said he, I command thee, that thou keep  <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[3](#fn_1237) thyself chaste; and that thou suffer
not any thought of any other marriage, or of fornication, to enter into
thy heart: for such a thought produces great sin.

2 But be thou at all times mindful of the Lord, and thou shalt never
sin. For if such an evil thought should arise in thy heart, thou
shouldest be guilty of a great sin; and they who do such things follow
the way of death.

3 Look therefore to thyself, and keep thyself from such a thought; for
where chastity remains in the heart of a righteous man, there an evil
thought ought never to arise.

4 And I said unto him, Sir, suffer me to speak a little to you. He bade
me say on. And I answered, Sir, if a man that is faithful in the Lord
shall have a wife, and shall catch her in adultery; doth a man sin that
continues to live still with her?

5 And he said unto me, As long as he is ignorant of her sin, he commits
no fault in living with her; but if a man shall know his wife to have
offended, and she shall not repent of her sin, but go on still in her
fornication, and a man shall continue nevertheless to live with her, he
shall become guilty of her sin, and partake with her in her adultery.

6 And I said unto him, What therefore is to be done, if the woman
continues on in her sin? He answered, Let her husband put her away, and
let him continue by himself. But if he shall put away his wife, and
marry another  <span id="fr_1238"></span>[4](#fn_1238) he also doth
commit adultery.

7 And I said, What if the woman that is so put away, shall repent, and
be willing to return to her husband, shall she not be received by him?
He said unto me, Yes; and if her husband

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

shall not receive her, he will sin, and commit a great offence against
himself; but he ought to receive the offender, if she repents; only not
often.

8 For to the servants of God there is but one repentance. And for this
cause a man that putteth away his wife ought not to take another,
because she may repent.

9 This act is alike both in the man and in the woman. Now they commit
adultery, not only who pollute their flesh, but who also make an image.
 <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1](#fn_1239) If therefore a woman perseveres
in any thing of this kind, and repents not, depart from her, and live
not with her, otherwise thou also shalt be partaker of her sin.

10 But it is therefore commanded that both the man and the woman should
remain unmarried because such persons may repent.

11 Nor do I in this administer any occasion for the doing of these
things; but rather that whoso has offended, should not offend any more.

12 But for their former sins, God who has the power of healing will give
a remedy; for he has the power of all things.

13 ¶ I asked him again and said, Seeing the Lord hath thought me worthy
that thou shouldest dwell with me continually, speak a few words unto
me, because I understand nothing, and my heart is hardened through my
former conversation; and open my  <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[2](#fn_1240) understanding because I am very dull,
and apprehend nothing at all.

14 And he answering said unto me, I am the  <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[3](#fn_1241) minister of repentance, and give
 <span id="fr_1242"></span>[4](#fn_1242) understanding to all that
repent. Does it not seem to thee to be  <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[5](#fn_1243) a very wise thing to repent? Because
he that does so gets great understanding.

15 For he is sensible that he hath sinned and done wickedly in the sight
of the Lord, and he remembers  <span id="fr_1244"></span>[6](#fn_1244)
within himself that he has offended, and repents and does no more
wickedly, but does that which is good, and humbles his soul and afflicts
it, because he has offended. You see therefore that repentance is great
wisdom.

16 And I said unto him, For this cause, sir, I inquire diligently into
all things, because I am a sinner, that I may know what I must do that I
may live; because my sins are many.

17 And he said unto me, Thou shalt live if thou shalt keep these my
commandments. And whosoever shall hear and do these commands shall live
unto God.

18 ¶ And I said unto him, I have even now heard from certain teachers,
that there is no other repentance beside that of baptism; when we go
down into the water, and receive the forgiveness of our sins; and that
after that, we must sin no more, but live in  <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[7](#fn_1245) purity.

19 And he said unto me, Thou has been  <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[8](#fn_1246) rightly informed. Nevertheless seeing
now thou inquirest diligently into all things, I will manifest this also
unto thee: yet not so as to give any occasion of sinning either to those
who shall hereafter believe, or to those who have already believed in
the Lord.

20 For neither they who have  <span id="fr_1247"></span>[9](#fn_1247)
newly believed, or who shall

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

hereafter believe, have any repentance of sins, but forgiveness of them.

21 But as to those who have been called to the faith, and since that are
fallen into any gross sin, the Lord hath appointed repentance, because
God knoweth the thoughts of all men's hearts, and their infirmities, and
the manifold wickedness of the devil, who is always contriving something
against the servants of God, and maliciously lays snares for them.

22 Therefore our merciful Lord had compassion towards his creature, and
appointed that repentance, and gave unto me the power of it. And
therefore I say unto thee, if any one after that great and holy calling
shall be tempted by the devil and sin, he has one  <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1](#fn_1248) repentance. But if he shall often sin
and repent it shall not profit such a one; for he shall hardly live unto
God.

23 And I said, Sir, I am restored again to life since I have thus
diligently hearkened to these commands. For I perceive that if I shall
not hereafter add any more to my sins, I shall be saved.

24 And he said, Thou shalt be saved: and so shall all others, as many as
shall observe these commandments.

25 ¶ And again I said unto him, Sir, seeing thou hearest me patiently
shew me yet one thing more. Tell me, saith he, what it is.

26 And I said, If a husband or a wife die, and the party which survives
marry again, does he sin in so doing?  <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[2](#fn_1249) He that marries says he, sins not:
howbeit, if he shall remain single, he shall thereby gain to himself
great honour before the Lord.

27 Keep therefore thy chastity and modesty, and thou shalt live unto
God. Observe from henceforth those things which I speak with thee, and
command thee to observe, from the time  <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[3](#fn_1250) that I have been delivered unto thee,
and dwell in thy house.

28 So shall thy former sins be forgiven, if thou shalt keep these my
commandments. And in like manner shall alt others be forgiven, who shall
observe these my commandments.

#### COMMAND V.

<span class="small">*Of the sadness of the heart, and of
patience*.</span>

BE patient, says he, and  <span id="fr_1251"></span>[4](#fn_1251)
longsuffering; so shalt thou have dominion over all wicked works, and
shalt  <span id="fr_1252"></span>[5](#fn_1252) fulfil all righteousness.

2 For if thou shalt be patient, the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in thee
shall be pure, and not be darkened by any evil spirit; but being full of
joy shall be enlarged, and feast  <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[6](#fn_1253) in the body in which it dwells, and
 <span id="fr_1254"></span>[7](#fn_1254) serve the Lord with joy, and in
great peace.

3 But if any  <span id="fr_1255"></span>[8](#fn_1255) anger shall
overtake thee, presently the Holy Spirit which is in thee will be
straightened and seek to depart from thee.

4 For he is choked by the evil spirit, and has not the  <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[9](#fn_1256) liberty of  <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[10](#fn_1257) serving the Lord as he would for he
is grieved by  <span id="fr_1258"></span>[11](#fn_1258) anger.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span id="img_21700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE INTERMENT OF
CHRIST. FROM A FRESCO BY CIMABUE, THIRTEENTH CENTURY.](tn/21700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21700.jpg)  
THE INTERMENT OF CHRIST. FROM A FRESCO BY CIMABUE, THIRTEENTH CENTURY.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1](#fn_1259) When, therefore, both these spirits
dwell together, it is destructive to a man.

5 As if one should take a little wormwood, and put it into a vessel of
honey, the whole honey would be spoiled; and a great quantity of honey
is corrupted by a very little wormwood, and loses the sweetness of
honey, and is no longer acceptable to its Lord because the whole honey
is made bitter, and loses its use.

6 But if no wormwood be put into the honey, it is sweet and profitable
to its Lord. Thus is forbearance sweeter than honey, and profitable to
the Lord who dwelleth in it.

7 But anger is unprofitable. If therefore anger shall be mixed with
forbearance, the soul is distressed, and its prayer is not profitable
 <span id="fr_1260"></span>[2](#fn_1260) with God.

8 And I said unto him, Sir, I would know the sinfulness of anger, that I
may keep myself from it. And he said unto me, Thou shalt know it; and if
thou shalt not keep thyself from it, thou shalt lose thy hope with all
thy house. Wherefore depart from it.

9 For I the  <span id="fr_1261"></span>[3](#fn_1261) messenger of
righteousness am with thee; and all that depart from it, as many as
shall repent with all their hearts, shall live unto God; and I will be
with them, and will keep them all.

10 For all such as have repented have been justified by the most holy
messenger, who is a minister of salvation.

11 ¶ And now, says he, hear the wickedness of anger; how evil and
hurtful it is, and how it overthrows the servants of God; for it cannot
 <span id="fr_1262"></span>[4](#fn_1262) hurt those that are full of
faith because the  <span id="fr_1263"></span>[5](#fn_1263) power of God
is with them; but it overthrows the doubtful, and those that are
destitute of faith.

12 For as often as it sees  <span id="fr_1264"></span>[6](#fn_1264) such
men, it casts itself into their hearts; and so a man or woman is in
bitterness for nothing, for the things of life, or for sustenance, or
for a vain word, if any should chance to fall in; or by reason of any
friend, or for a debt, or for any other superfluous things of the like
nature.

13 For these things are foolish, and superfluous, and vain to the
servants of God. But equanimity is strong, and forcible; and of great
power, and sitteth in great enlargement; is cheerful, rejoicing in
peace; and glorifying God at all times  <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[7](#fn_1265) with meekness.

14 And this long-suffering dwells with those that are full of faith. But
anger is foolish, and light, and empty. Now bitterness is bred through
folly; by bitterness, anger; by anger, fury. And this fury arising from
so many evil principles, worketh a great and incurable sin.

15 For when all these things are in the same  <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[8](#fn_1266) man in which the Holy Spirit dwells,
the vessel cannot contain them, but runs over: and because the Spirit
being tender cannot tarry with the evil one; it departs and dwells with
him that is meek.

16 When, therefore, it is departed from the man in whom it

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

dwelt; that man becomes destitute of the Holy Spirit, and is afterwards
filled with wicked spirits,  <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1](#fn_1267) and
is blinded with evil thoughts. Thus doth it happen to all angry men.

17 Wherefore depart thou from anger and put on equanimity, and resist
wrath; so thou shalt be  <span id="fr_1268"></span>[2](#fn_1268) found
with modesty and chastity by God. Take good heed therefore that thou
neglect not this commandment.

18 For if thou shalt obey this command, then shalt thou also be able to
observe the other commandments, which I shall command thee.

19 Wherefore strengthen thyself now in these commands, that thou mayest
live unto God. And whosoever shall observe these commandments shall live
unto God.

#### COMMAND IV.

<span class="small">*That every man has two*  <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[3](#fn_1269) *angels, and of the suggestions of
both*.</span>

I COMMANDED thee, said he, in my first commandments, that thou shouldst
keep faith and fear, and  <span id="fr_1270"></span>[4](#fn_1270)
repentance. Yes, Sir, said I.

2 He continued: But now I will shew thee the virtues of these commands,
that thou mayest know their effects; how they are  <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[5](#fn_1271) prescribed alike to the just and
unjust.

3 Do thou therefore believe the righteous, but give no credit to the
unrighteous. For righteousness keepeth the right way, but
unrighteousness the wicked way.

4 Do thou therefore keep the right way, and leave that which is evil.
For the evil way has not a good end, but hath many stumbling-blocks; it
is rugged and full of thorns, and leads to destruction; and it is
hurtful to all such as walk in it.

5 But they who go in the right way, walk with evenness, and without
offence; because it is not rough nor thorny.

6 Thou seest therefore how it is best to walk in this way. Thou shalt
therefore go, says he, and all others, as many as believe in God with
all their heart, shall o through it.

7 ¶ And now, says he;  <span id="fr_1272"></span>[6](#fn_1272)
understand first of all what belongs to faith. There are two angels with
man; one of righteousness, the other of iniquity.

8 And I said unto him: Sir, how shall I know that there are two such
angels with man? Hear says he, and understand.

9 The angel of righteousness, is mild and modest, and gentle, and quiet.
When therefore, he gets into thy heart, immediately he talks with thee
of righteousness, of modesty, of chastity, of bountifulness, of
forgiveness, of charity, and piety.

10 When all these things come into thy heart, know then that the angel
of righteousness is with thee. Wherefore hearken to this angel and to
his works.

11 Learn also the works of

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the angel of iniquity. He is first of all bitter, and angry, and
foolish; and his works are pernicious, and overthrow the servants of
God. When therefore these things come into thy heart; thou shalt know by
his works, that this is the angel of [iniquity](errata.htm#12).

12 And I said unto him, Sir, how shall I understand these things? Hear
says he, and understand. When anger overtakes thee, or bitterness, know
that he is in thee:

13 As also, when the desire of many  <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1](#fn_1273) things, and of the best meats and of
drunkenness; when the love of what belongs to others, pride, and much
speaking and ambition, and the like things, come upon thee.

14 When therefore these things arise in thy heart, know that the angel
of iniquity is with thee. Seeing therefore thou knowest his works,
depart from them all, and give no credit to him: because his works are
evil, and become not the servants of God.

15 Here therefore thou hast the works of both these angels. Understand
now and believe the angel of righteousness, because his instruction is
good.

16 For let a man be never so happy; yet if the thoughts of the other
angel arise in his heart, that man or woman must needs sin.

17 But let man or woman be never so wicked, if the works of the angel of
righteousness come into his heart, that man or woman must needs do some
good.

18 Thou seest therefore how it is good to follow the angel of
righteousness. If therefore thou shall follow him, and  <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[2](#fn_1274) submit to his works, thou shalt live
unto God. And as many as shall  <span id="fr_1275"></span>[2](#fn_1274)
submit to his work, shall live also unto God.

#### COMMAND VII.

<span class="small">*That we must fear God, but not the Devil*.</span>

FEAR  <span id="fr_1276"></span>[3](#fn_1275) God, says he, and keep his
commandments. For if thou keepest his commandments thou shalt be
powerful in every work, and all thy works shall be  <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[4](#fn_1276) excellent. For by fearing God, thou
shalt do every thing well.

2 This is that fear with which thou must be affected that thou mayest be
saved. But fear not the devil: for if thou fearest the Lord, thou shalt
have dominion over him; because there is no power in him.

3 Now if there be no power in him, then neither is he to be feared. But
he in whom there is excellent power, he is to be feared: for every one
that has power, is to be feared. But he that has no power is despised by
every one.

4 Fear the works of the devil, because they are evil. For by fearing the
Lord, thou wilt fear and not do the works of the devil, but keep thyself
from them.

5 There is therefore a twofold fear; if thou wilt not do evil, fear the
Lord and thou shalt not do it. But if thou wilt do good,  <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[5](#fn_1277) the fear of the Lord is strong, and
great and glorious.

6 Wherefore, fear God and thou shalt live: and whosoever shall fear him,
and keep his commandments, their life is with the Lord. But they who
keep them not, neither is life in them.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

#### COMMAND VIII.

<span class="small">*That we must flee from evil, and do good*.</span>

I HAVE told thee, said he, that there are two kinds of creatures of the
Lord, and that there is a two-fold  <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1](#fn_1278) abstinence. From some things therefore
thou must abstain, and from others not.

2 I answered, Declare to me, sir, from what I must abstain, and from
what not. Hearken, said he. Keep thyself from evil, and do it not; but
abstain not from good, but do it. For if thou shalt abstain from what is
good, and not do it, thou shalt sin. Abstain therefore from all evil,
and thou shalt  <span id="fr_1280"></span>[2](#fn_1279) know all
righteousness.

3 I said, What evil things are they from which I must abstain? Hearken,
said he: from adultery, from drunkenness, from riots, from excess of
eating, from daintiness and dishonesty, from pride, from fraud, from
lying, from detraction, from hypocrisy, from remembrance of injuries,
and from all evil speaking.

4 For these are the works of iniquity, from which the servant of God
must abstain. For he that cannot keep himself from these things, cannot
live unto God.

5 But hear, said he, what follows of these kind of things: for indeed
many more there are from which the servant of God must abstain. From
theft, and cheating; from false witness, from covetousness, from
boasting, and all other things of the like nature.

6 Do these things seem to thee to be evil or not? Indeed they are very
evil to the servants of God. Wherefore the servant of God must abstain
from all these  <span id="fr_1281"></span>[3](#fn_1280) works.

7 Keep thyself therefore from them, that thou mayest live unto God, and
be written among those that abstain from them. And thus have I shown
thee what things thou must avoid: now learn from what thou must not
abstain.

8 Abstain not from any good works, but do them. Hear, said he, what the
virtue of those good works is which thou must do, that thou mayest be
saved. The first of all is faith; the fear of the Lord; charity;
concord; equity; truth; patience; chastity.

9 There is nothing better than these things in the life of man;  <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[4](#fn_1281) who shall keep and do these things in
their life. Hear next what follow these.

10 To minister to the widows; not to despise the fatherless and poor; to
redeem the servants of God from necessity; to be hospitable; (for in
hospitality there is sometimes  <span id="fr_1283"></span>[5](#fn_1282)
great fruit) not to be contentious, but be quiet.

11 To be humble above all men; to reverence the aged; to labour to be
righteous;  <span id="fr_1284"></span>[6](#fn_1283) to respect the
brotherhood; to bear affronts; to be long-suffering;  <span
id="fr_1285"></span>[7](#fn_1284) not to cast away those that have
fallen from the faith, but to convert them, and make them be of  <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[8](#fn_1285) good cheer; to admonish sinners; not
to oppress those that are our debtors; and all other things of a like
kind.

12 Do these things seem to thee to be good or not? And I

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

said, What can be better than these words? Live then, said he, in these
commandments, and do not depart from them. For if thou shalt keep all
these commandments, thou shalt live unto God. And all they that shall
keep these commandments shall live unto God.

#### COMMAND IX.

<span class="small">*That we must ask of God daily; and without
doubting*.</span>

AGAIN he said unto me;  <span id="fr_1287"></span>[1](#fn_1286) remove
from thee all doubting; and question nothing at all, when thou askest
anything of the Lord; saying within thyself: how shall I be able to ask
anything of the Lord and receive it, seeing I have so greatly sinned
against him?

2 Do not think thus, but turn unto the Lord with all thy heart, and ask
of him without doubting, and thou shalt know the mercy of the Lord; how
that he will not forsake thee, but will fulfil the request of thy soul.

3 For God is not as men, mindful of the injuries he has received; but he
forgets injuries, and has compassion upon his creature.

4 Wherefore purify thy heart from all the vices of this present world;
and observe the commands I have before delivered unto thee from God; and
thou shalt receive whatsoever good things thou shalt ask, and nothing
shall be wanting unto thee of all thy petitions; if thou shalt ask of
the Lord without doubting.

5  <span id="fr_1288"></span>[2](#fn_1287) But they that are not such,
shall obtain none of those things which they ask. For they that are full
of faith ask all things with confidence, and receive from the Lord,
because they ask without doubting. But he that doubts, shall hardly live
unto God, except he repent.

6 Wherefore purify thy heart from doubting, and put on faith, and trust
in God, and thou shalt receive all that thou shalt ask. But and if thou
shouldest chance to ask somewhat and not ( <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[3](#fn_1288) immediately) receive it, yet do not
therefore doubt, because thou hast not presently received the petition
of thy soul.

7 For it may be thou shalt not presently receive it for thy trial, or
else for some sin which thou knowest not. But do not thou leave off to
ask,  <span id="fr_1290"></span>[4](#fn_1289) and then thou shalt
receive. Else if thou shalt cease to ask, thou must complain of thyself,
and not of God, that he has not given unto thee what thou didst desire.

8 Consider therefore this doubting, how cruel and pernicious it is; and
how it utterly roots out many from the faith, who were very faithful and
firm. For this doubting is the daughter of the devil, and deals very
wickedly with the servants of God.

9 Despise it therefore, and thou shalt rule over it  <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[5](#fn_1290) on every occasion. Put on a firm and
powerful faith: for faith promises all things and perfects all things.
But doubting will not believe, that it shall obtain anything, by all
that it can do.

10 Thou seest therefore, says

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

he, how faith cometh from above, from God; and hath great power. But
doubting is an earthly spirit, and proceedeth from the devil, and has no
strength.

11 Do thou therefore keep the virtue of faith, and depart from doubting,
in which is no virtue, and thou shalt live unto God. And all shall live
unto God, as many as do these things.

#### COMMAND X.

<span class="small">*Of the sadness of the heart; and that we must take
heed not to grieve the spirit of God that is in us*.</span>

PUT all sadness far from thee; for it is the sister of doubting and of
anger. How, sir, said I, is it the sister of these? for sadness, and
anger, and doubting, seem to me to be very different from one another.

2 And he answered:  <span id="fr_1292"></span>[1](#fn_1291) Art thou
without sense that thou dost not understand it? For sadness is the most
mischievous of all spirits, and the worst to the servants of God:  <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[2](#fn_1292) It destroys the spirits of all men,
and torments the Holy Spirit; and again, it saves.

3 Sir, said I, I am very foolish, and understand not these  <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[3](#fn_1293) things. I cannot apprehend how it can
torment, and yet save. Hear, said he, and understand. They who never
sought out the truth, nor inquired concerning the majesty of God, but
only believed, are involved in the affairs of the heathen.

4 And there is another  <span id="fr_1295"></span>[4](#fn_1294) lying
prophet that destroys the  <span id="fr_1296"></span>[5](#fn_1295) minds
of the servants of God; that is of those that are doubtful, not of those
that fully trust in the Lord. Now those doubtful persons come to him, as
to a divine spirit, and inquire of him what shall befall them.

5 And this lying prophet having no power in him of the divine Spirit,
answers them according to their demands, and fills their souls with
promises according as they desire. Howbeit that prophet is vain, and
answers vain things to those who are themselves vain.

6 And whatsoever is asked of him by vain men, he answers them vainly.
Nevertheless he speaketh some things truly. For the devil fills him with
his spirit, that he may overthrow some of the righteous.

7 ¶ Whosoever therefore are strong in the faith of the Lord, and have
put on the truth: they are not joined to such spirits, but depart from
them. But they that are doubtful, and often repenting like the heathens,
consult them, and heap up to themselves great sin, serving idols.

8 As many therefore as are such, inquire of them upon every occasion;
worship idols; and are foolish, and void of the truth.

9 For every spirit that is given from God needs not to be asked; but
having the power of divinity speaks all things of itself; because he
comes from above, from the power of God.

10 But he that being asked speaks according to men's desires, and
concerning many other affairs of the present world, understands not the
things which relate unto God. For these spirits are darkened through
such affairs, and corrupted and broken.

11 As good vines if they are

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

neglected, are oppressed with weeds and thorns, and at last killed by
them; so are the men who believe such spirits.

12 They fall into many actions and businesses, and are void of sense,
 <span id="fr_1297"></span>[1](#fn_1296) and when they think of things
pertaining unto God, they understand nothing at all: but if at any time
they chance to hear anything concerning the Lord, their  <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[2](#fn_1297) thoughts are upon their business.

13 But they that have the fear of the Lord, and search out the truth
concerning God,  <span id="fr_1299"></span>[3](#fn_1298) having all
their thoughts towards the Lord; apprehend whatsoever is said to them,
and forthwith understand it, because they have the fear of the Lord in
them.

14 For where the spirit of the Lord dwells, there is also  <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[4](#fn_1299) much understanding added. Wherefore
join thyself to the Lord,  <span id="fr_1301"></span>[5](#fn_1300) and
thou shalt understand all things.

15 ¶ Learn now, O unwise man! how sadness  <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[6](#fn_1301) troubleth the Holy Spirit, and how it
saves. When a man that is doubtful is engaged in any affair, and does
not accomplish it by reason of his doubting, this sadness enters into
him, and grieves the Holy Spirit, and makes him sad.

16 Again, anger when it overtakes any man for any business he is greatly
moved;  <span id="fr_1303"></span>[7](#fn_1302) and then again sadness
entereth into the heart of him, who was moved with anger, and he is
troubled for what he hath done, and repenteth, because he hath done
amiss.

17 This sadness therefore seemeth to bring salvation, because he
repenteth of his evil deed. But both the other things, namely, doubting
and sadness, such as before was mentioned, vex the spirit: doubting,
because his work did not succeed: and sadness, because he angered the
Holy Spirit.

18  <span id="fr_1304"></span>[8](#fn_1303) Remove therefore sadness
from thyself,  <span id="fr_1305"></span>[9](#fn_1304) and afflict not
the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in thee, lest he  <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[10](#fn_1305) entreat God, and depart from thee.
For the spirit of the Lord  <span id="fr_1307"></span>[11](#fn_1306)
which is given to dwell in the flesh, endureth no such sadness.

19 Wherefore clothe thyself with cheerfulness, which has always favour
with the Lord, and thou shalt rejoice in it. For every cheerful man does
well; and relishes those things that are good, and despises  <span
id="fr_1308"></span>[12](#fn_1307) sadness.

20 But the sad man does always wickedly.  <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[13](#fn_1308) First, he doth wickedly, because he
grieveth the Holy Spirit, which is given to man, being of a cheerful
nature. And again he does ill, because he prays with sadness unto the
Lord,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

and maketh not a first thankful acknowledgment unto him of former
mercies, and obtains not of God what he asks.

21 For the prayer of a sad man has not always efficacy to come up to the
altar of God. And I said unto him, Sir, why has not the prayer of a sad
man virtue to come up to the altar of God? because, said he, that
sadness remaineth in his heart.

22 When therefore a man's prayer shall be accompanied with sadness, it
will not suffer his requests to ascend pure to the altar of God. For as
wine when it is mingled with vinegar, has not the sweetness it had
before; so sadness being mixed with the Holy Spirit, suffers not a man's
prayer to be the same as it would be otherwise.

23 Wherefore cleanse thyself from sadness, which is evil, and thou shalt
live unto God. And all others shall live unto God, as many as shall lay
aside [sadness](errata.htm#13) and put on cheerfulness.

#### COMMAND XI.

<span class="small">*That the spirits and prophets are to be tried by
their works; and of a twofold spirit*.</span>

HE shewed me certain men sitting upon benches, and one sitting in a
chair: and he said unto me seest thou who sit upon the benches? Sir,
said I, I see them. He answered, They are the faithful; and he who sits
in the chair is an earthly spirit.

2 For he cometh not into  <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1](#fn_1309) the
assembly of the faithful, but avoids it. But he joins himself to the
doubtful and empty; and prophesies to them in corners and hidden places;
and pleases them by speaking according to all the desires of their
hearts.

3 For he placing himself among empty vessels, is not broken, but the one
fitteth the other. But when he cometh into the company of just men,
 <span id="fr_1311"></span>[2](#fn_1310) who are full of the spirit of
God, and they pray unto the Lord; that man is  <span
id="fr_1312"></span>[3](#fn_1311) emptied because that earthly spirit
flies from him, and he is dumb, and cannot speak anything.

4 As if in a store-house you shall stop up wine or oil; and among those
vessels shall place an empty jar; and shall afterwards come to open it,
you shall find it empty as you stopped it up: so those empty prophets
when they come among the spirits of the just, are found to be such as
they came. <span id="fr_1313"></span>[4](#fn_1312)

5 ¶ I said, How then shall a man be able to discern them? Consider what
I am going to say considering both kinds of  <span
id="fr_1314"></span>[5](#fn_1313) men; and as I speak unto thee so shalt
thou prove the prophet of God, and the false prophet.

6 And first try the man who hath the spirit of God; because the spirit
which is from above is humble, and quiet; and departs from all
wickedness; and from the vain desires of the present world; and makes
himself more humble than all men; and answers to none when he is asked;
nor to every one singly: for the Spirit of God doth not speak to a man
when he will, but when God pleases.

7 When therefore a man who

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span id="img_22500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE RESURRECTION
OF CHRIST. FROM A ''BOOK OF THE EVANGELISTS.'' GREEK MANUSCRIPT OF THE
TWELFTH CENTURY.](tn/22500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22500.jpg)  
THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. FROM A ''BOOK OF THE EVANGELISTS.'' GREEK
MANUSCRIPT OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY.  
</span>

hath the Spirit of God shall come into the church of the righteous, who
have the faith of God, and they pray unto the Lord; then the holy angel
of God fills that man with the blessed Spirit, and he speaks in the
congregation as he is moved of God.

8 Thus therefore is the spirit of God known, because whosoever speaketh
by the Spirit of God, speaketh as the Lord will.

9 Hear now concerning the earthly spirit, which is empty and foolish,
and without virtue. And first of all the man who is supposed to have the
Spirit, (whereas he hath it not in reality), exalteth himself, and
desires to have the first seat, and is wicked, and full of words.

10 And spends his time in pleasure, and in all manner of voluptuousness;
and receives the reward of his divination; which if he receives not, he
does not divine.

11 Should the Spirit of God receive reward and divine? It doth not
become a prophet of God so to do.

12 Thus you see the life of each of these kind of prophets. Wherefore
prove that man by his life and works, who says that he hath the Holy
Spirit. And believe the Spirit which comes from God, and has power as
such. But believe not the earthly and empty spirit, which is from the
devil, in whom there is no faith nor virtue.

13 Hear now the similitude which I am about to speak unto thee. Take a
stone, and throw it up towards heaven; or take a spout of water, and
mount it up thitherward; and see if thou canst reach unto heaven.

14 Sir, said I, how can this be done? For neither of those things which
you have mentioned, are possible to be done. And he answered, Therefore
as these things cannot be done, so is the earthly spirit without virtue,
and without effect.

15 Understand yet farther the power which cometh from above, in this
similitude. The grains of hail that drop down are exceedingly small; and
yet when they fall upon the head of a man, how do they cause pain to it?

16 And again; consider the droppings of a house: how the little drops
falling upon the earth, work a hollow in the stones.

17 So in like manner the least things which come from above, and fall
upon the earth, have great force. Wherefore join thyself to this spirit,
which has the power; and depart from the other which is empty.

#### COMMAND XII.

<span class="small">*Of a two fold desire: that the commands of God are
not impossible: and that the devil is not to be feared by them that
believe*.</span>

AGAIN he said unto me;  <span id="fr_1315"></span>[1](#fn_1314) remove
from thee all evil desires, and put on good and holy desires. For having
put on a good desire, thou shalt hate that which is evil, and bridle it
as thou wilt. But an evil desire is dreadful and hard to be tamed.

2 It is very horrible and wild: and by its wildness consumes men. And
especially if a servant of God shall chance to fall into it, except he
be very wise, he  <span id="fr_1316"></span>[2](#fn_1315) is ruined by
it. For it destroys those who have not the garment of a good desire: and
 <span id="fr_1317"></span>[3](#fn_1316) are engaged in the affairs of

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

this present world; and delivers them unto death.

3  <span id="fr_1318"></span>[1](#fn_1317) Sir, said I, what are the
works of an evil desire, which bring men unto death? Shew them to me,
that I may depart from them. Hear said he, by what works an evil desire
bringeth the servants of God unto death.

4 First of all, it is an evil desire to covet another man's wife; or for
a woman to covet another's husband; as also to desire the dainties of
riches: and multitude of superfluous meats; and drunkenness; and many
delights.

5 For in much delicacy there is folly; and many pleasures are needless
to the servants of God. Such lusting therefore is evil and pernicious,
which brings to death the servants of God. For all such lusting is from
the devil.

6 Whosoever therefore shall depart from all evil desires, shall live
unto God; but they that are subject unto them shall die for ever. For
this evil lusting is deadly. Do thou therefore put on the desire of
righteousness, and being armed with the fear of the Lord, resist all
wicked lusting.

7 For this fear dwelleth in good desires; and when evil coveting shall
see thee armed with the fear of the Lord, and resisting it, it will fly
far from thee, and not appearing before thee, but be afraid of thy
armour.

8 And thou shalt have the victory, and be crowned for it; and shalt
attain to that desire which is good; and shalt give the victory which
thou hast obtained unto God, and shalt serve him in doing what thou
thyself wouldest do.

9 For if thou shalt serve good desires, and be subject to them; thou
shalt be able to get the dominion over thy wicked lustings; and they
shall be subject to thee as thou wilt.

10 ¶ And I said, Sir, I would know how to serve that desire which is
good? Hearken, saith he, Fear God and put thy trust in him, and love
truth, and righteousness, and do that which is good.

11 If thou shalt do these things, thou shalt be an approved servant of
God; and shalt serve him: and all others who shall in like manner serve
a good desire shall live unto God.

12 ¶ And when he had fulfilled these twelve commands, he said unto me,
Thou hast now these commands, walk in them; and exhort those that hear
them that repent, and that they keep their repentance pure all the
remaining days of their life.

13 And fulfil diligently this ministry which I commit to thee, and thou
shalt receive great advantage by it; and shalt find favour with all such
as shall repent, and shall believe thy words. For I am with thee, and
will force them to believe.

14 And I said unto him, Sir, those commands are great and excellent, and
able to cheer the heart of that man that shall be able to keep them.
But, Sir, I cannot tell, whether they can be observed by any man?

15 He answered, Thou shalt easily keep these commands, and they shall
not be hard: howbeit, if thou shalt suffer it once to enter into thy
heart that they cannot be kept by any one, thou shalt not fulfil them.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

16 But now I say unto thee if thou shalt not observe these commands, but
shall neglect them, thou shalt not be saved, nor thy children, nor thy
house; because thou hast judged that these  cannot be kept by man.

17 ¶ These things he spake very angrily unto me, insomuch that he
greatly affrighted me. Fur he changed his countenance, so that a matt
could not bear his anger.

18 And when he saw me altogether troubled and confounded, he began to
speak more moderately and cheerfully, saying, O foolish, and without
understanding!

19 Unconstant, not knowing the majesty of God how great and wonderful he
is; who created the world for man, and hath made every creature subject
unto him: and given him all power, that he should be able to  <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1](#fn_1318) fulfil all these commands.

20 He is able, said he, to  <span id="fr_1320"></span>[2](#fn_1319)
fulfil all these commands, who ha the Lord in his heart: but they who
have the Lord only in their mouths, and their heart is hardened, and
they are far from the Lord; to such persons these commands are hard and
difficult.

21 Put therefore, ye that are empty and light in the faith, the Lord
your God in your hearts and ye shall perceive how that nothing is more
easy than these commands, nor more pleasant, nor more gentle and holy.

22 And turn yourselves to the Lord your God, and forsake the devil and
his pleasures, because they are evil, and bitter, and impure. And fear
not the devil, because he has no power over you.

23 For I am with you, the messenger of repentance, who have the dominion
over him. The devil doth indeed affright men; but his terror is vain.
Wherefore fear him not, and he will flee from you.

24 And I said unto him; Sir, hear me speak a few words unto you. He
answered, Say on: A man indeed desires to keep the commandments of God:
and there is no one but what prays unto God, that he may be able to keep
his commandments.

25 But the devil is hard, and by his power rules over the servants of
God. And he said He cannot rule over the servants of God,  <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[3](#fn_1320) who trust in him with all their
hearts.

26 The devil may strive, but he cannot overcome them.

27 For if ye resist him, he will floe away with confusion from you. But
they that are not full in the faith, fear the devil, as if he had some
great power. For the devil tries the i servants of God and if he finds
them empty, he destroys them.

28 For as man, when he fills up vessels with good wine,  <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[4](#fn_1321) and among them puts a few vessels half
full, and comes to try and taste of the vessels, doth not try those that
are full, because ho knows that they are good; but tastes those that are
half full, lest they should grow sour; (for vessels half full soon grow
sour, and lose the taste of wine:) so the devil comes to the servants of
God to try them.

29 They that are full of faith resist him stoutly, and he departs from
them, because he finds no place where to enter into them: then he goes
to those that are not full of faith, and because he has place of
entrance,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

he goes into them, and does what he will with them, and they become his
servants.

30 ¶ But I,  <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1](#fn_1322) the messenger of
repentance, say unto you, fear not the devil, for I am sent unto you,
that I may he with you, as many as shall repent with your whole heart,
and that I may confirm you in the faith.

31  <span id="fr_1324"></span>[2](#fn_1323) Believe therefore, ye who by
reason of your transgressions have  <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[3](#fn_1324) forgot God, and your own salvation;
and  <span id="fr_1326"></span>[4](#fn_1325) adding to your sins have
made your life very heavy.

32 That if ye shall turn to the Lord with your whole hearts, and shall
serve him according to his will; he will heal you of your former sins,
and ye shall have dominion over all the works of the devil.

33 Be not then afraid in the least of his threatenings, for they are
without force, as the nerves of a dead man. But hearken unto me, and
fear the Lord Almighty, who is able to save and to destroy you; and keep
his commands, that ye may live unto God.

34 And I said unto him; Sir, I am now confirmed in all the commands of
the Lord whilst that you are with me, and I know that you will break all
the power of the devil.

35 And we also shall overcome him, if we shall be able, through the help
of the Lord, to keep these commands which you have delivered.

36 Thou shalt keep them, said he, if thou shalt purify thy heart towards
the Lord. And all they also shall keep them who shall cleanse their
hearts from the vain desires of the present world, and shall live unto
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[212:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1214) Observe them,
Custodite possiss. Lat.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[212:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1215) Adversa
recipietis.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[212:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1216) Faith.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[212:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1217) Irenæus l. 1, c.
3. Origen, de Princ. l. 1, c. 3. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 5, c. 8.
Athanas. de Incarn. Verb. &c.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[212:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1218) Habe abstinentiam.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[212:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1219) Omnem.
concupisceniam. MSS. Lamb. et Oxon.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[213:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1220) Lat. Have
simplicity and be innocent.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[213:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1221) Gr. Ἐι δε μη, και
συ σκονων ενοχος εσῃ.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[213:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1222) So the Gr. and
Lamb. MS. Particeps errs peccati male loquentis, credens: tu habebis
peccatum.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[213:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1223) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
xxix.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[213:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1224) Dæmon.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[213:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1225) The Greek hath
ουν.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[213:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1226) Rather Simplicity;
according to the Greek reading, preserved by Athanasius.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[213:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1227) Gr. in which there
is no evil offence, but all things smooth and delightful, εν οις ουδεν
προσκομμα εστι πονηρον, αλλα παντα ομαλα κγ ἱλαρα.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[213:9](lbob27.htm#fr_1228) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
xcviii.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[213:10](lbob27.htm#fr_1229) Simply.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[213:11](lbob27.htm#fr_1230) G. εκ των ιδιων
δορηματων. MS. Lamb. de suis dodis.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[213:12](lbob27.htm#fr_1231) Gloriously to
God.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[213:13](lbob27.htm#fr_1232) Antioch Hom.
lxvi.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[213:14](lbob27.htm#fr_1233) According to the
Gr.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[213:15](lbob27.htm#fr_1234) See III. Hermas
Simil. ix. v. 268 et seq.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[214:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1235) Through these
words. Lat. His verbis et illa fidem recipiant.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[214:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1236) If thou shalt keep
the truth.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[214:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1237) Chastity.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[214:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1238) Another man's.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[215:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1239) See 1 Cor. vii.
15.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[215:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1240) Sense.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[215:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1241) Prœpositus.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[215:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1242) See below, v. 18
et seq.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[215:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1243) Great wisdom.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[215:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1244) In his
understanding.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[215:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1245) Chastity.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[215:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1246) Rightly heard.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[215:9](lbob27.htm#fr_1247) MS. Lamb. Qui modo
crediderunt, Who have just now believed.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[216:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1248) Vid. Annot.
Coteler. in loc. pp. 60, 61.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[216:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1249) Vid. not. Coteler.
in loc. p. 64 B. C. Rom. vii. 3. Comp. 1 Cor. vii.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[216:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1250) SM. Lamb. medius;
Ex quo mihi traditus es, That thou host been delivered unto me, and I
dwell, etc.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[216:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1251) Gr. Μακροθυμος.
MS. Lam. Animæquus.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[216:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1252) Work.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[216:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1253) SM. Lamb. melius,
Cum. vase. Et Gr. μετα του σκευουσ, with the body or vessel.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[216:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1254) Gr. Λειτουργει τῳ
κυριῳ.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[216:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1255) Οξυχολια, Gr.
Bitterness of gall.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[216:9](lbob27.htm#fr_1256) Place.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[216:10](lbob27.htm#fr_1257) Gr.
᾽Λειτουργησαι.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[216:11](lbob27.htm#fr_1258) Ὀξυχολια.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[217:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1259) Both Athanasius
and Antiochus add these words, omitted in our copies: "For in
forbearance (or long suffering) the Lord dwelleth, but in bitterness the
Devil."

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[217:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1260) To.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[217:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1261) Angel.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[217:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1262) Gr. work upon
ενεργησαι; et MS. Lamb. facere.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[217:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1263) Virtue.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[217:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1264) Gr. Τοιουτους
ανθρωπους.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[217:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1265) In the Greek of
Athananius and Antiochus the sense is fuller: Having nothing of
bitterness in itself, and continuing always in meekness and quietness.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[217:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1266) Vessel.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[218:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1267) In the Greek of
Athanasius follow these words, omitted in the Lat. Vers. of Hermas: "And
is unstable in all his doings, being drawn hither and thither by wicked
men."

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[218:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1268) In the Greek of
Athanasius it runs better thus, "Applauded with reverence by those who
are beloved of God."

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[218:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1269) Vid. Coteler.
Annot. in loc. pp. 67, 68. Comp. Edit. Oxon. p. 61, Note a.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[218:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1270) Lat. Pœnitentiam;
it should rather be Abstinentiam; as in the Greek of Athanasius: as
appears by the first Commandment, which is here referred to.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[218:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1271) Place, Lat. Posita
sunt.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[218:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1272) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
lxi. Comp. Orig. l. iii. De Princip. et in Luc. Hom. xxxv.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[219:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1273) Works. Gr.
πραξεων.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[219:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1275) Gr. πιστευσῃς,
Lat. Credideris, Believe.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[219:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1276) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
cxxvii. Eccles. xii. 13.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[219:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1277) Ασυγκρατος,
Without comparison: or without mixture.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[219:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1278) In the Gr. of
Antioch these words follow, which make the connection more clear: "Fear
also the Lord, and thou shalt be able to do it, for."

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[220:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1279) Antioch. Hom.
lxxix.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[220:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1280) Do according to
the Greek, εργαζομενους.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[220:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1281) Vid. Coteler. in
loc.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[220:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1282) The sense here is
defective, and may be thus restored from the Greek of
Athanasius:—Whoever keeps these things, and doth not abstain from them,
shall he happy in his life. And so the Lamb. MS: Hæc qui custorierit.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[220:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1283) Gr. αγαθοποιησις,
good deed.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[220:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1284) συντηρειν.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[220:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1285) Add from the Gr.
of Athanasius and Antiochus: Not to remember injuries; To comfort those
who labour in their minds.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[220:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1286) Ευθυμους.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[221:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1287) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
lxxxiii. Confer. Fragm. D. Grabe. Spicileg. tom. i. page 303.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[221:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1288) Add from the Gr.
both of Athanasius and Antiochus: But if thou doubtest in thy heart,
thou shalt receive none of thy petitions. For those who distrust (or,
doubt of) God, are like the double-minded, who shall obtain none of
these things.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[221:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1289) So MS. Lamb.
Tardius accipias: and so the Gr. Βραδυτερον λαμβανεις.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[221:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1290) Asking the
petition of thy soul.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[221:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1291) In everything.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[222:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1292) Without sense thou
dost not understand it.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[222:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1293) So the Lat. Vers.
But the Gr. of Athanasius is better: And destroyeth more than any other
spirit.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[222:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1294) Questions.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[222:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1295) Vid. Epit. Oxon.
p. 70 b. Comp. 2 Cor. vii. 10.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[222:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1296) Lat. Sensus: from
the Greek Νους.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[223:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1297) And understand
nothing at all, thinking of riches. Lat.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[223:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1298) Senses.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[223:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1299) Gr. of Athanasius,
Καρδιαν εχοντες προς κυριον. So that the Latin should be Habentes, not
Habent.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[223:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1300) Gr. συνεσις πολλη.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[223:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1301) Gr. παντα νοησεις.
And so in the Lamb. MS. Omnia scies.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[223:6](lbob27.htm#fr_1302) Gr. εκτριβει. MS.
Lamb. Contribulat.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[223:7](lbob27.htm#fr_1303) In the Greek of
Athanasius, follows και ποιησῃ τι κακον, and he doth something which is
ill. Which letter agrees with what follows, Because he hath done amiss.
The text in this place being evidently corrupted, it has been
endeavoured to restore the true sense of it from the Greek of
Athanasius, which is as follows: παλιν η λυπη εισπορευεταί εις την
καρδιαν του ανθρωπον του οξυχολησαντος, και λυπειται επι τῃ πραξει αυτον
ᾑ επραξεν και μετανοει οτι πονηρον ειργασατο. Αυτη ουν η λυπη δοκει
σωτηριαν εχείν, οτι το πονηρον πραξας μετενοησεν. Αμφοτεραι δε των
πραξεων λυπουσι, &c.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[223:8](lbob27.htm#fr_1304) Antioch. Hom. xxv.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[223:9](lbob27.htm#fr_1305) Gr. Μη θλιβε, MS.
Lamb. Noli nocere.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[223:10](lbob27.htm#fr_1306) Gr. Μη εντευξηται
τῳ θεῳ, Comp. Rom. vii. 27.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[223:11](lbob27.htm#fr_1307) Gr. Το δοθεν εις
την σαρκα, ταυτην λυπην ουκ υποφερει.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[223:12](lbob27.htm#fr_1308) Gr. λυπης.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[223:13](lbob27.htm#fr_1309) So the Greek: ο
δε λυπηρος ανηρ παντοτε πονηρευεται, πρωτον μεν πονηρευται, &c.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[224:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1310) Church of the
living.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[224:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1311) Have the Spirit of
God in them.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[224:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1312) Exinanitur.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[224:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1313) Something was
wanting in this place to make the subject clear. and it was suggested to
Archbishop Wake, by Dr. Grabe, that what should have followed was
transposed into the next command. Accordingly the Archbishop reduced
both places to what he conceived should be their true order, and in that
state they now stand.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[224:5](lbob27.htm#fr_1314) Vessels.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[225:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1315) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
lxxiv.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[225:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1316) MS. Lamb.
Consumitur, et, Gr. Athanas. δαπαναται.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[225:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1317) Gr. Athænas.
εμπεφυρμενους τῳ ἀίωνι τουτῳ. Instead of implicateos, the Lat. Vers.
should be Implicatos.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[226:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1318) That the words
here inserted, and removed into their proper place in the foregoing
Command, do not belong to this Discourse, the Greek of Athanasius, in
which they are all omitted, clearly shews.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[227:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1319) Ut dominetur.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[227:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1320) Angel.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[227:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1321) Gr. ελπιζοντων εις
Ἀυτον.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[227:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1322) Origen. in Matt.
xxiv. 42.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[228:1](lbob27.htm#fr_1323) Angel.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[228:2](lbob27.htm#fr_1324) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
lxxvii.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[228:3](lbob27.htm#fr_1325) MS. Lamb. Qui
obliti estis Deum, et salutem vestram.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[228:4](lbob27.htm#fr_1326) What follows
should be corrected thus; Et qui adjicientes peccatis vestris, gravatis
vitam vestram.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Book of Hermas, Which Is Called His
Similitudes](lbob28)

</div>
