<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob16)  [Next](lbob18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_14500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![(Left) CHRIST
PRAYING THE GARDEN. (Right) PETER CUTTING OFF THE EAR OF MALCHUS, AND
THE KISS OF JUDAS. FROM A GREEK MANUSCRIPT, OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY, IN
THE LIBRARY OF THE VATICAN.](tn/14500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14500.jpg)  
(Left) CHRIST PRAYING THE GARDEN. (Right) PETER CUTTING OFF THE EAR OF
MALCHUS, AND THE KISS OF JUDAS. FROM A GREEK MANUSCRIPT, OF THE TWELFTH
CENTURY, IN THE LIBRARY OF THE VATICAN.  
</span>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### The GENERAL EPISTLE OF BARNABAS.

\[Barnabas was a companion and fellow-preacher with Paul. This Epistle
lays a greater claim to canonical authority than most others. It has
been cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Eusebius, and Jerome, and
many ancient Fathers. Cotelerius affirms that Origen and Jerome esteemed
it genuine and canonical; but Cotelerius himself did not believe it to
be either one or the other; on the contrary, he supposes it was written
for the benefit of the Ebionites (the christianized Jews,) who were
tenacious of rites and ceremonies. Bishop Fell feared to own expressly
what he seemed to be persuaded of, that it ought to be treated with the
same respect as several of the books of the present canon. Dr. Bernard,
Savilian professor at Oxford, not only believed it to be genuine, but
that it was read throughout, in the churches at Alexandria, as the
canonical scriptures were. Dodwell supposed it to have been published
before the Epistle of Jude, and the writings of both the Johns. Vossius,
Dupuis, Dr. Cane, Dr. Mill, Dr. S. Clark, Whiston, and Archbishop Wake
also esteemed it genuine: Menardus, Archbishop Laud, Spanheim, and
others, deemed it apocryphal.\]

#### CHAP. I.

*Preface to the Epistle*.

ALL happiness to you my sons and daughters, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who loved us, in peace.

2 Having perceived abundance of knowledge of the great and  <span
id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_543) excellent  <span
id="fr_544"></span>[2](#fn_544) laws of God to be in you, I exceedingly
rejoice in your blessed and admirable  <span
id="fr_545"></span>[3](#fn_545) souls, because ye have so worthily
received the grace which was  <span id="fr_546"></span>[4](#fn_546)
grafted in you.

3 For which cause I am full of joy, hoping the rather to he  <span
id="fr_547"></span>[5](#fn_547) saved; inasmuch as I truly see a spirit
infused into you, from the  <span id="fr_548"></span>[6](#fn_548) pure
fountain of God:

4 Having this persuasion, and being fully convinced thereof, because
that since I have begun to speak unto you, I have had a more than
ordinary good success in the way of  <span
id="fr_549"></span>[7](#fn_549) the law of the Lord which is in Christ.

5 For which cause  <span id="fr_550"></span>[8](#fn_550) brethren, I
also think verily that I love you above my own soul: because that
therein dwelleth the greatness of faith and charity, as also the hope of
that life which is to come.

6\. Wherefore considering this, that if I shall take care to communicate
to you a part of what I have received, it shall turn to my reward,
 <span id="fr_551"></span>[9](#fn_551) that I have served such good
souls; I gave diligence to write in a few words unto you; that together
with your faith,  <span id="fr_552"></span>[10](#fn_552) knowledge also
may be perfect.

7 There are therefore three  <span id="fr_553"></span>[11](#fn_553)
things ordained by the Lord; the hope of life;  <span
id="fr_554"></span>[12](#fn_554) the beginning and the completion of it.

8 For the Lord hath both declared unto us, by the prophets those things
that  <span id="fr_555"></span>[13](#fn_555) are past; and  <span
id="fr_556"></span>[14](#fn_556) opened to us the beginnings of those
that are to come.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

9 Wherefore, it will behoove us,  <span id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_557)
as he has spoken, to come  <span id="fr_558"></span>[2](#fn_558) more
holily, and nearer to his altar.

10 I therefore, not as a teacher, but as one  <span
id="fr_559"></span>[3](#fn_559) of you, will endeavour to lay before you
a few things by which you may, on  <span id="fr_560"></span>[4](#fn_560)
many accounts, become the more joyful.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">That God has abolished the legal sacrifices to
introduce the spiritual righteousness of the Gospel.</span>

SEEING then the days are exceeding evil, and the adversary has got the
power of this present  <span id="fr_561"></span>[5](#fn_561) world we
ought to give the more diligence to inquire into the  <span
id="fr_562"></span>[6](#fn_562) righteous judgments of the Lord.

2  <span id="fr_563"></span>[7](#fn_563) Now the assistants of our faith
are fear and patience; our fellow-combatants, long-suffering and
continence.

3 Whilst these remain pure in what relates unto the Lord, wisdom, and
understanding, and science, and knowledge, rejoice together with them.

4 For God has manifested to us by all the prophets, that he has no
occasion for our sacrifices, or burnt-offerings, or oblations: saying
thus;  <span id="fr_564"></span>[8](#fn_564) To what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices unto me, saith the Lord.

5 I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of  <span
id="fr_565"></span>[9](#fn_565) fed beasts; and I delight not in the
blood of bullocks, or of he-goats

6  <span id="fr_566"></span>[10](#fn_566) When ye come to appear before
me; who hath required this at your hands? Ye shall no more tread my
courts.

7 Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me; your
new moons and sabbaths; the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it
is iniquity, even the solemn meeting; your new moons and your appointed
feasts my soul hateth.

8 These things therefore hath God abolished, that the new law of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is without the yoke of any such necessity,
might have the spiritual offering of men themselves.

9 For so the Lord saith again to those heretofore;  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[11](#fn_567) Did I at all command your fathers when
they came out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt-offerings of
sacrifices?

10 But this I commanded them, saying,  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[12](#fn_568) Let none of you imagine evil in your
hearts against his neighbour, and love no false oath.

11 Forasmuch then as we are not without understanding, we ought to
apprehend the design  <span id="fr_569"></span>[13](#fn_569) of our
merciful Father. For he speaks to us, being willing that we who have
been in the same error about the sacrifices, should seek and find how to
approach unto him.

12 And therefore he thus bespeaks us,  <span
id="fr_570"></span>[14](#fn_570) The sacrifice of God (is a broken
spirit,) a broken and contrite heart God will not despise.

13 Wherefore brethren, we ought the more diligently to inquire after
these things that belong to our salvation, that the adversary may not
have any entrance into us, and deprive us of our spiritual life.

14 Wherefore he again speaketh to them, concerning these

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

things;  <span id="fr_571"></span>[1](#fn_571) Ye shall not fast as ye
do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

15 Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his
soul?  <span id="fr_572"></span>[2](#fn_572) Is it to bow down his head
like a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou
call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?

16 But to us he saith on this wise.  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[3](#fn_573) Is not this the fast that I have chosen,
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free; and that ye break every yoke?

17  <span id="fr_574"></span>[4](#fn_574) Is it not to deal thy bread to
the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?
When thou seest the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thyself from thine own flesh.

18  <span id="fr_575"></span>[5](#fn_575) Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily; and
thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be
thy reward.

19  <span id="fr_576"></span>[6](#fn_576) Then shalt thou call and the
Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry and he shall say, Here I am. If thou
put away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the
finger, and speaking vanity;  <span id="fr_577"></span>[7](#fn_577) and
if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry; and satisfy the afflicted soul.

20 In this therefore brethren, God has manifested his  <span
id="fr_578"></span>[8](#fn_578) foreknowledge and love for us; because
the people which he has purchased to his beloved Son were to believe in
 <span id="fr_579"></span>[9](#fn_579) sincerity; and therefore he has
shewn these things to all of us, that we should not run as proselytes to
 <span id="fr_580"></span>[10](#fn_580) the Jewish law.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">The prophecies of Daniel, concerning the ten kings,
and the coming of Christ.</span>

WHEREFORE it is necessary that searching diligently into those  <span
id="fr_581"></span>[11](#fn_581) things which are near to come to pass,
we should write to you what may serve to keep you whole.

2 To which end let us flee from every evil work and hate the errors of
the present time, that we may be  <span id="fr_582"></span>[12](#fn_582)
happy in that which is to come:

3 Let us not give ourselves the liberty of disputing with the wicked and
sinners; lest we should chance in time to become like unto them.

4 For the consummation of  <span id="fr_583"></span>[13](#fn_583) sin is
come, as it is written, as the prophet Daniel says. And for this end the
Lord hath shortened the times and the days, that his beloved might
hasten his coming to his inheritance.

5 For so the prophet speaks;  <span id="fr_584"></span>[14](#fn_584)
There shall ten kings reign in the heart, and there shall rise last of
all another little one, and he shall humble three kings.

6 And again Daniel speaks in like manner concerning the kingdoms;  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[15](#fn_585) and I saw the fourth beast dreadful and
terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had ten horns.  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[16](#fn_586) I considered the horns, and behold
there came up among them another little horn, before which were three of
the first horns plucked up by the roots. <span
id="fr_587"></span>[17](#fn_587)

7 We ought therefore to understand this also: And I beseech you as one
of your own brethren, loving you all beyond my own life, that you look
well to yourselves, and be not like to those who

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[1](#fn_588) add sin to sin, and say: That their
covenant is ours also. Nay, but it is ours only: for they have for ever
lost that which Moses received.

8 For thus saith the Scripture: And Moses continued fasting forty days
and forty nights in the Mount; and he received the covenant from the
Lord, even the two tables of stone, written by the hand of God.

9 But having turned themselves to idols they lost it; as the Lord also
said to Moses; Moses,  <span id="fr_589"></span>[2](#fn_589) go down
quickly, for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt, have
corrupted themselves, and turned aside from the way which I commanded
them.  <span id="fr_590"></span>[3](#fn_590) And Moses cast the two
tables out of his hands: and their covenant was broken; that the love of
Jesus might be sealed in your hearts, unto the hope of his faith.

10 Wherefore let us give heed unto the last times. For all the  <span
id="fr_591"></span>[4](#fn_591) time past of our life, and our faith
will profit us nothing; unless we continue to hate what is evil, and to
withstand the future temptations. So the Son of God tells us; Let us
resist all iniquity and hate it.

11 Wherefore consider the works of the evil way.  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[5](#fn_592) Do not withdraw yourselves from others,
as if you were already justified; but coming altogether into one place,
inquire what is agreeable to and profitable for the beloved of God. For
the Scripture saith;  <span id="fr_593"></span>[6](#fn_593) Wo unto them
that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their sight.

12 Let us become spiritual, a perfect temple to God. As much as in us
lies let us meditate upon the fear of God; and strive to the utmost of
our power to keep his commandments; that we may rejoice in his righteous
judgments.

13 For God will judge the world without respect of persons: and every
one shall receive according to his works.

14 If a man shall be good, his righteousness shall go before him; if
wicked, the reward of his wickedness shall follow him.

15 Take heed therefore lest sitting still, now that we are called, we
fall asleep in our sins; and the wicked one getting the dominion over
us, stir us up,  <span id="fr_594"></span>[7](#fn_594) and shut us out
of the kingdom of the Lord.

16 Consider this also: although you have seen so great signs and wonders
done among the people of the Jews, yet this notwithstanding the Lord
hath forsaken them.

17 Beware therefore, lest it happen to us; as it is written.  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[8](#fn_595) There may be many called, but few
chosen.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">That Christ was to suffer: proved from the
prophecies concerning him.</span>

FOR this cause did our Lord vouchsafe to give up his body to
destruction, that through the forgiveness of our sins we might be
sanctified; that is, by the sprinkling of his blood.

2 Now for what concerns the things that are written about him, some
belong to the people of the Jews, and some to us.

3 For thus saith the Scripture:  <span id="fr_596"></span>[9](#fn_596)
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, and by his blood we are

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

healed. He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before his
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.

4 Wherefore we ought the more to give thanks unto God, for that he hath
both declared unto us what is passed,  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[1](#fn_597) and not suffered us to be without
understanding of those things that are to come.

5 But to them he saith;  <span id="fr_598"></span>[2](#fn_598) The nests
are not unjustly spread for the birds.

6 This he spake, because a man will justly perish, if having the
knowledge of the way of truth, he shall nevertheless not refrain himself
from the way of darkness.

7 And for this cause the Lord was content to suffer for our souls,
although he be the Lord of the whole earth; to whom God said before the
beginning of the world,  <span id="fr_599"></span>[3](#fn_599) Let us
make man after our own image and likeness.

8 Now how he suffered for us, seeing it was by men that he underwent it,
 <span id="fr_600"></span>[4](#fn_600) I will shew you.

9 The prophets having received from him the gift of prophecy, spake
before concerning him:

10 But he, that he might abolish death, and make known the resurrection
from the dead, was content, as it was necessary, to appear in the flesh,
that he might make good the promise before given to our fathers, and
preparing himself a new people, might demonstrate to them whilst he was
upon earth, that after the resurrection he would judge the world.

11 And finally teaching the people of Israel, and doing many wonders and
signs among them, he preached to them, and shewed the exceeding great
love which he bare towards them.

12 And when he chose his apostles, which were afterwards to publish his
Gospel, he took men who had been very great sinners; that thereby he
might plainly shew, <span id="fr_601"></span>[5](#fn_601) That he came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.

13 Then he clearly manifested himself to be the Son of God. For had he
not come in the flesh, how should men have been able to look upon him,
that they might be saved?

14 Seeing if they beheld only the sun, which was the work of his hands,
and shall hereafter cease to be, they are not able to endure steadfastly
to look against the rays of it.

15 Wherefore the Son of God came in the flesh for this cause, that he
might fill up the measure of their iniquity, who have persecuted his
prophets unto death. And for the same reason also he suffered.

16 For God hath said of the  <span id="fr_602"></span>[6](#fn_602)
stripes of his flesh, that they were from them. And,  <span
id="fr_603"></span>[7](#fn_603) I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
of the flock shall be scattered.

17 Thus he would suffer, because it behooved him to suffer upon the
cross.

18 For thus one saith, prophesying concerning him;  <span
id="fr_604"></span>[8](#fn_604) Spare my soul from the sword. And again,
Pierce my flesh from thy fear.

19 And again, the congregation of wicked doers rose up against me,
 <span id="fr_605"></span>[9](#fn_605) (They have pierced my hands and
my feet).

20 And again he saith, I gave

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

my back to the smiters,  <span id="fr_606"></span>[1](#fn_606) and my
face I set as an hard rock.

#### CHAP. V.

<span class="small">The subject continued.</span>

AND when he had fulfilled the commandment of God, What says he?  <span
id="fr_607"></span>[2](#fn_607) Who will contend with me? Let him stand
against me: or who is he that will [impede](errata.htm#6) me? Let him
draw near to the servant of the Lord. Wo be to you!  <span
id="fr_608"></span>[3](#fn_608) Because ye shall all wax old as a
garment, the moth shall eat you up.

2 And again the prophet adds,  <span id="fr_609"></span>[4](#fn_609) He
is put for a stone for stumbling.  <span id="fr_610"></span>[5](#fn_610)
Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a precious stone, a choice corner
stone; an honourable stone. And what follows? And he that hopeth in him
shall live for ever.

3 What then? Is our hope built upon a stone? God forbid. But because the
Lord hath  <span id="fr_611"></span>[6](#fn_611) hardened his flesh
against sufferings, he saith,  <span id="fr_612"></span>[7](#fn_612) I
have put me as a firm rock.

4 And again the prophet adds;  <span id="fr_613"></span>[8](#fn_613) The
stone which the builders refused has become the head of the corner. And
again he saith;  <span id="fr_614"></span>[9](#fn_614) This is the great
and wonderful day which the Lord hath made.  <span
id="fr_615"></span>[10](#fn_615) I write these things the more plainly
to you that ye may understand:  <span id="fr_616"></span>[11](#fn_616)
For indeed I could be content even to die for your sakes.

5 But what saith the prophet again?  <span
id="fr_617"></span>[12](#fn_617) The counsel of the wicked encompassed
me about.  <span id="fr_618"></span>[13](#fn_618) They came about me, as
bees about the honey-comb: and,  <span id="fr_619"></span>[14](#fn_619)
Upon my vesture they cast lots.

6 Forasmuch then as our Saviour was to appear in the flesh and suffer,
his passion was hereby foretold.

7 For thus saith the prophet against Israel:  <span
id="fr_620"></span>[15](#fn_620) Wo be to their soul, because they have
taken wicked counsel against themselves, saying, let us  <span
id="fr_621"></span>[16](#fn_621) lay snares for the righteous, because
he is unprofitable to us.

8 Moses also in like manner speaketh to them;  <span
id="fr_622"></span>[17](#fn_622) Behold thus saith the Lord God; Enter
ye into the good land of which the Lord hath sworn to Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, that he would give it you, and possess it; a land
flowing with milk and honey.

9 Now what the spiritual meaning of this is, learn;  <span
id="fr_623"></span>[18](#fn_623) It is as if it had been said, Put your
trust in Jesus, who shall be manifested to you in the flesh. For man is
the earth which suffers: forasmuch as out of the  <span
id="fr_624"></span>[19](#fn_624) substance of the earth Adam was formed.

10 What therefore does he mean when he says, Into a good land flowing
with milk and honey? Blessed be our Lord, who has given us wisdom, and a
heart to understand his secrets. For so says the prophet,  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[20](#fn_625) Who shall understand the hard sayings
of the Lord?  <span id="fr_626"></span>[21](#fn_626) But he that

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

is wise, and intelligent, and that loves his Lord.

11 Seeing therefore he has renewed us by the remission of our sins, he
has  <span id="fr_627"></span>[1](#fn_627) put us into another frame,
that we should have souls  <span id="fr_628"></span>[2](#fn_628) like
those of children, forming us again himself  <span
id="fr_629"></span>[3](#fn_629) by the spirit.

12 For thus the Scripture saith concerning us,  <span
id="fr_630"></span>[4](#fn_630) where it introduceth the Father speaking
to the Son;  <span id="fr_631"></span>[5](#fn_631) Let us make man after
our likeness and similitude; and let them have dominion over the beasts
of the earth, and over the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea.

13 And when the Lord saw the man which he had formed, that behold he was
very good; he said,  <span id="fr_632"></span>[6](#fn_632) Increase and
multiply, and replenish the earth. And this he spake to his son.

14 I will now shew you, how he made us  <span
id="fr_633"></span>[7](#fn_633) a new creature, in the latter days.

15 The Lord saith;  <span id="fr_634"></span>[8](#fn_634) Behold I will
make the last as the first. Wherefore the prophet thus spake,  <span
id="fr_635"></span>[9](#fn_635) Enter into the land flowing with milk
and honey, and have dominion over it.

16 Wherefore ye see how we are again formed anew; as also he speaks by
another prophet;  <span id="fr_636"></span>[10](#fn_636) Behold saith
the Lord, I will take from them, that is, from those whom the spirit of
the Lord foresaw, their hearts of stone, and I will put into them hearts
of flesh.

17 Because he was about to be made manifest in the flesh and to dwell in
us.

18 For, my brethren, the habitation of our heart is a  <span
id="fr_637"></span>[11](#fn_637) holy temple unto the Lord. For the Lord
saith again.  <span id="fr_638"></span>[12](#fn_638) In what place shall
I appear before the Lord my God, and be glorified?

19 He answers I will confess unto thee in the congregation in the midst
of my brethren; and will sing unto thee in the church of the saints.

20 Wherefore we are they whom he has brought into that good land.

21  <span id="fr_639"></span>[13](#fn_639) But what signifies the milk
and honey? Because as the child is nourished first with milk, and then
with honey; so we being kept alive by the belief of his promises, and
his word, shall live and have dominion over the land.

22 For he foretold above, saying, increase and multiply, and have
dominion over the fishes, etc.

23 But who is there that is now able to have this dominion over the wild
beasts, or fishes, or fowls of the air? For you know that to rule is to
have power, that a man should be set over what he rules.

24 But forasmuch as this we have not now, he tells us when we shall have
it; namely, when we shall become perfect, that we may be made the
inheritors of the covenant of the Lord.

#### CHAP. VI.

<span class="small">*The scape-goat an evident type of this*.</span>

UNDERSTAND then my beloved children, that the good God hath before
manifested all things unto us, that we might know to whom we ought
always to give thanks and praise.

2 If therefore the Son of God whet is the Lord of all, and shall

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

come to judge both the quick and dead, hath suffered, that by his
stripes we might live: let us believe that the Son of God could not have
suffered but for us. But being crucified, they gave him vinegar and gall
to drink.

3 Hear therefore how the priests of the temple did foreshew this also:
 <span id="fr_640"></span>[1](#fn_640) the Lord by his command which was
written, declared that whosoever did not fast the appointed fast he
 <span id="fr_641"></span>[2](#fn_641) should die the death: because he
also was himself one day to offer up his  <span
id="fr_642"></span>[3](#fn_642) body for our sins; that so the type of
what was done in  <span id="fr_643"></span>[4](#fn_643) Isaac might be
fulfilled, who was offered upon the altar.

4 What therefore is it that he says by the prophet?  <span
id="fr_644"></span>[5](#fn_644) And let them eat of the goat which is
offered in the day of the fast for all their sins. Hearken diligently
(my brethren,) and all the priests, and they only shall eat the inwards
not washed with vinegar.

5 Why so? because  <span id="fr_645"></span>[6](#fn_645) I know that
when I shall hereafter offer my flesh for the sins of a new people, ye
will give me vinegar to drink mixed with gall; therefore do ye only eat,
the people fasting the while, and lamenting in sackcloth and ashes.

6 And that he might foreshew that he was to suffer for them, hear then
how he appointed it.

7  <span id="fr_646"></span>[7](#fn_646) Take, says he, two goats, fair
and alike, and offer them, and let the high priest take one of them for
a burnt offering. And what must be done with the other? Let it says he
be accursed.

8 Consider how exactly this appears to have been a type of Jesus.  <span
id="fr_647"></span>[8](#fn_647) And let all the congregation spit upon
it, and prick it; and put the scarlet wool about its head, and thus let
it be carried forth into the wilderness.

9 And this being done, he that was appointed to convey the goat, led it
into the wilderness,  <span id="fr_648"></span>[9](#fn_648) and took
away the scarlet wool, and put it upon a thorn bush, whose  <span
id="fr_649"></span>[10](#fn_649) young sprouts when we find them in the
field we are wont to eat: so the fruit of that thorn only is sweet.

10 And to what end was this ceremony? Consider; one was offered upon the
altar, the other was accursed.

11 And why was that which was accursed crowned? Because they shall see
Christ in that day having a scarlet garment about his body; and shall
say: Is not this he whom we crucified; having despised him, pierced him,
mocked him? Certainly, this is he, who then said, that he was the Son of
God.

12  <span id="fr_650"></span>[11](#fn_650) As therefore he shall be then
like to what he was on earth, so were the Jews heretofore commanded, to
take two goats fair and equal. That when they shall see (our Saviour)
hereafter coming (in the clouds of heaven), they may be amazed at the
likeness of the goats.

13 Wherefore  <span id="fr_651"></span>[12](#fn_651) ye here again see a
type of Jesus who was to suffer for us.

14 But what then signifies this. That the wool was to be put into the
midst of the thorns?

15 This also is a figure of Jesus, sent out to the church. For as

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span id="img_15300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST BEARING HIS
CROSS TO GOLGOTHA, FOLLOWED BY HOLY WOMEN. The Drawings on each side of
the Engraving are Enlargements of the Heads of the Principal Figures.
FROM A FRESCO OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY IN THE CHURCH OF ST. STEPHEN AT
BOLOGNA.](tn/15300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15300.jpg)  
CHRIST BEARING HIS CROSS TO GOLGOTHA, FOLLOWED BY HOLY WOMEN. The
Drawings on each side of the Engraving are Enlargements of the Heads of
the Principal Figures. FROM A FRESCO OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY IN THE
CHURCH OF ST. STEPHEN AT BOLOGNA.  
</span>

he who would take away the scarlet wool must undergo many difficulties,
because that thorn was very sharp, and with difficulty get it:  <span
id="fr_652"></span>[1](#fn_652) So they, says Christ, that will see me,
and come to my kingdom, must through many afflictions and troubles
attain unto me.

#### CHAP. VII.

<span class="small">*The red heifer, another type of Christ*.</span>

BUT what  <span id="fr_653"></span>[2](#fn_653) type do ye suppose it to
have been, where it is  <span id="fr_654"></span>[3](#fn_654) commanded
to the people of Israel, that grown persons in whom sins are come to
perfection, should offer an heifer, and after they had killed it should
burn the same.

2 But then young men should take up the ashes and put them in vessels;
and tie a piece of scarlet wool and hyssop upon a stick, and so the
young men should sprinkle every one of the people, and they should be
clear from their sins.

3 Consider how all these are delivered in a  <span
id="fr_655"></span>[4](#fn_655) figure to us.

4 This heifer is Jesus Christ; the wicked men that were to offer it are
those sinners who brought him to death: who afterwards have no more to
do with it; the sinners have no more the honour of handling of it:

5 But the young men that performed the sprinkling, signified those who
preach to us the forgiveness of sins and the purification of the heart,
to whom the Lord gave authority to preach his Gospel: being at the
beginning twelve,  <span id="fr_656"></span>[5](#fn_656) to signify the
tribes, because there were twelve tribes of Israel.

6 But why were there three young men appointed to sprinkle? To denote
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, because they were great before God.

7 And why was the wool put upon a  <span id="fr_657"></span>[6](#fn_657)
stick? Because the kingdom of Jesus was founded upon the cross; and
therefore they that put their trust in him, shall live for ever.

8 But why was the wool and hyssop put together? To signify that in the
kingdom of Christ there shall be evil and filthy days, in which however
we shall be saved; and  <span id="fr_658"></span>[7](#fn_658) because he
that has any disease in the flesh by some filthy humours is cured by
hyssop.

9 Wherefore these things being thus done, are to us indeed evident, but
to the  <span id="fr_659"></span>[8](#fn_659) Jews they are obscure;
because they hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

#### CHAP. VIII.

<span class="small">*Of the circumcision of the ears; and how in the
first institution of circumcision Abraham, mystically foretold Christ by
name*.</span>

AND therefore the Scripture again speaks concerning our ears, that God
has circumcised them, together with our hearts For thus saith the Lord
by the holy prophets:  <span id="fr_660"></span>[9](#fn_660) By the
hearing of the ear they obeyed me.

2 And again,  <span id="fr_661"></span>[10](#fn_661) whey who are afar
off, shall hear and understand what things I have done. And again,
 <span id="fr_662"></span>[11](#fn_662) Circumcise your hearts, saith
the Lord.

3 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_663"></span>[12](#fn_663) Hear O
Israel! For thus saith the Lord thy God. And again the

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spirit of God
prophesieth, saying:  <span id="fr_664"></span>[1](#fn_664) Who is there
that would live for ever,  <span id="fr_665"></span>[2](#fn_665) let him
hear the voice of my Son.

4 And again,  <span id="fr_666"></span>[3](#fn_666) Hear, O Heaven and
give ear O Earth! Because the Lord has spoken these things for a
witness.

5 And again he saith  <span id="fr_667"></span>[4](#fn_667) Hear the
word of the Lord, ye princes of the people. And again  <span
id="fr_668"></span>[5](#fn_668) Hear O Children! The voice of one crying
in the wilderness.

6 Wherefore he has circumcised our ears that we should hear his word,
and believe. But as for that circumcision, in which the Jews trust, it
is abolished. For the circumcision of which God spake, was not of the
flesh;

7 But they have transgressed his commands, because the evil  <span
id="fr_669"></span>[6](#fn_669) one hath deceived them. For thus God
bespeaks them;  <span id="fr_670"></span>[7](#fn_670) Thus saith the
Lord your God (Here I find the new law) Sow not among thorns; but
circumcise yourselves to the Lord your God. And what doth he mean by
this saying? Hearken unto your Lord.

8 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_671"></span>[8](#fn_671) Circumcise
the hardness of your heart, and harden not your neck. And again,  <span
id="fr_672"></span>[9](#fn_672) Behold, saith the Lord, all the nations
are uncircumcised, (they have not lost their fore-skin): but this people
is uncircumcised in heart.

9 But you will say  <span id="fr_673"></span>[10](#fn_673) the Jews were
circumcised for a sign.  <span id="fr_674"></span>[11](#fn_674) And so
are all the Syrians and Arabians, and all the idolatrous priests: but
are they therefore of the covenant of Israel? And even the Egyptians
themselves are circumcised.

10 Understand therefore, children, these things more fully, that
Abraham, who was the first that brought in circumcision, looking forward
in the Spirit to Jesus, circumcised, having received the mystery of
three letters.

11 For the Scripture says that Abraham circumcised three hundred and
eighteen men of his house.  <span id="fr_675"></span>[12](#fn_675) But
what therefore was the mystery that was made known unto him?

12 Mark, first the eighteen, and next the three hundred. For the numeral
letters of ten and eight are I H. And these denote Jesus.

13 And because the cross was that by which we were to find grace;
therefore he adds, three hundred; the note of which is T (the figure of
his cross). Wherefore by two letters he signified Jesus, and by the
third his cross.

14 He who has put the engrafted gift of his doctrine within us, knows
that I never taught to any one a more  <span
id="fr_676"></span>[13](#fn_676) certain truth; but I trust that ye are
worthy of it.

#### CHAP. IX.

<span class="small">*That the commands of Moses concerning clean and
unclean beasts, &c., were all designed for a spiritual
signification*.</span>

BUT why did Moses say  <span id="fr_677"></span>[14](#fn_677) Ye shall
not eat of the swine, neither the eagle nor the hawk; nor the crow; nor
any fish that

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

has not a scale upon him?—answer, that in the spiritual sense, he
comprehended three doctrines, that were to be  <span
id="fr_678"></span>[1](#fn_678) gathered from thence.

2 Besides which he says to them in the book of Deuteronomy, And I will
give my statutes unto this people. Wherefore it is not the command of
God that they should not eat these things; but Moses in the spirit spake
unto them.

3 Now the sow he forbade them to eat; meaning thus much; thou shalt not
join thyself to such persons as are like unto swine; who whilst they
live in pleasure, forget their God; but when any want pinches them, then
they know the Lord; as the sow when she is full knows not her master;
but when she is hungry she makes a noise; and being again fed, is
silent.

4 Neither, says he, shalt thou eat the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the
kite, nor the crow; that is thou shalt not keep company with such kind
of men as know not how by their labour and sweat to get themselves food:
but injuriously ravish away the things of others; and watch how, to lay
snares for them; when at the same time they appear to live in perfect
innocence.

5 ( <span id="fr_679"></span>[2](#fn_679) So these birds alone seek not
food for themselves, but) sitting idle seek how they may eat of the
flesh others have provided; being destructive through their wickedness.

6 Neither, says he, shalt thou eat the lamprey, nor the polypus, nor the
cuttle-fish; that is, thou shalt not be like such men, by using to
converse with them; who are altogether wicked and adjudged to death. For
so those fishes are alone accursed, and wallow in the mire, nor swim as
other fishes, but tumble in the dirt at the bottom of the deep.

7 But he adds, neither shalt thou eat of the hare. To what end?—To
signify this to us; Thou shalt not be an adulterer; nor liken thyself to
such persons. For the hare every year multiplies the places of its
conception; and so many years as it lives, so many it has.

8 Neither shalt thou eat of the hyena; that is, again, be not an
adulterer, nor a corruptor of others; neither be like to such. And
wherefore so?—Because that creature every year changes its kind, and is
sometimes male and sometimes female.

9 For which cause also he justly hated the weasel; to the end that they
should not be like such persons who with their mouths commit wickedness
by reason of their uncleanness; nor join themselves with those impure
women, who with their mouths commit wickedness. Because that animal
conceives with its mouth.

10 Moses, therefore, speaking as concerning meats, delivered indeed
three great precepts to them in the spiritual signification of those
commands. But they according to the desires of the flesh, understood him
as if he had only meant it of meats.

11 And therefore David took aright the knowledge of his threefold
command, saying in like manner.

12 Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the counsel of

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the ungodly; as the fishes before mentioned in the bottom of the deep in
darkness.

13 Nor stood in the way of sinners, as they who seem to fear the Lord,
but yet sin, as the sow.

14 And hath not sat in the seat of the scorners; as those birds who sit
and watch that they may devour.

15 Here you have the law concerning meat perfectly set forth, and
according to the true knowledge of it.

16 But, says Moses, ye shall eat all that divideth the hoof, and cheweth
the cud. Signifying thereby such an one as having taken his food, knows
him that nourisheth him; and resting upon him, rejoiceth in him.

17 And in this he spake well, having respect to the commandment. What,
therefore, is it that he says?—That we should hold fast to them that
fear the Lord; with those who meditate on the command of the word which
they have received in their heart; with those that declare the righteous
judgments of the Lord, and keep his commandments;

18 In short, with those who know that to meditate is a work of pleasure,
and therefore exercise themselves in the word of the Lord.

19 But why might they eat those that clave the hoof?—Because the
righteous liveth in this present world; but his expectation is fixed
upon the other. See, brethren, how admirably Moses commanded these
things.

20 But how should we thus know all this, and understand it? We,
therefore, understanding aright the commandments, speak as the Lord
would have us. Wherefore he has circumcised our ears and our hearts,
that we might know these things.

#### CHAP. X.

<span class="small">*Baptism and the Cross of Christ foretold in figures
under the law*.</span>

LET us now inquire whether the Lord took care to manifest anything
beforehand concerning water and the cross.

2\. Now for the former of these, it is written to the people of Israel
how they shall not receive that baptism which brings to forgiveness of
sins; but shall institute another to themselves that cannot.

3 For thus saith the prophet:  <span id="fr_680"></span>[1](#fn_680) Be
astonished, O Heaven! and let the earth tremble at it, because this
people have done two great and wicked things; they have left me, the
fountain of living water, and have digged for themselves broken
cisterns, that can hold no water.

4 Is my holy mountain a  <span id="fr_681"></span>[2](#fn_681) Zion, a
desolate wilderness?  <span id="fr_682"></span>[3](#fn_682) For ye shall
be as a young bird when its nest is taken away.

5 And again the prophet saith,  <span id="fr_683"></span>[4](#fn_683) I
will go before thee, and will make plain the mountains, and will break
the gates of brass, and will snap in sunder the bars of iron; and will
give thee dark, and hidden, and invisible treasures, that they may know
that I am the Lord God.

6 And again: He shall dwell  <span id="fr_684"></span>[5](#fn_684) in
the high den of the strong rock. And then, what follows in the same
prophet? His water is faithful; ye shall see the king

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

with glory, and your soul shall learn the fear of the Lord.

7 And again he saith in another prophet: He that does these things;
 <span id="fr_685"></span>[1](#fn_685) shall be like a tree, planted by
the currents of water, which shall give its fruit in its season. Its
leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he doth it shall prosper.

8 As for the wicked it is not so with them; but they are as the dust
which the wind scattereth away from the face of the earth.

9 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, neither the
sinners in the council of the righteous. For the Lord knoweth the way of
the righteous and the way of the ungodly shall perish.

10 Consider how he has joined both the cross and the water together.

11 For thus he saith: Blessed are they who put their trust in the cross,
descend into the water; for they shall have their reward in due time;
then, saith he, will I give it them.

12 But as concerning the present time, he saith, their leaves shall not
fall; meaning thereby that every word that shall go out of your mouth,
shall through faith and charity be to the conversion and hope of many.

13 In like manner doth another prophet speak.  <span
id="fr_686"></span>[2](#fn_686) And the land of Jacob was the praise of
all the earth;  <span id="fr_687"></span>[3](#fn_687) magnifying thereby
the  <span id="fr_688"></span>[4](#fn_688) vessel of his spirit.

14 And what follows?—And there was a river running on the right hand,
and beautiful trees grew up by it; and he that shall eat of them shall
live for ever. The signification of which is this: that we go down into
the water full of sins and pollutions; but come up again, bringing forth
fruit; having in our hearts the fear and hope which is in Jesus, by the
spirit. And whosoever shall eat of them shall live for ever.

15 That is, whosoever shall hearken to those who call them, and shall
believe, shall live for ever.

#### CHAP. XI.

<span class="small">*The subject continued*.</span>

IN like manner he determines concerning the cross in  <span
id="fr_689"></span>[5](#fn_689) another prophet, saying: And when shall
these things be fulfilled?

2 The Lord answers; When the tree that has fallen shall rise, and when
blood shall drop down from the tree. Here you have again mention made,
both of the cross, and of him that was to be crucified upon it.

3  <span id="fr_690"></span>[6](#fn_690) And yet farther he saith by
Moses; (when Israel was fighting with, and beaten by, a strange people;
to the end that God might put  <span id="fr_691"></span>[7](#fn_691)
them in mind how that for their sins they were delivered unto death)
yea, the holy spirit put it into the heart of Moses, to represent both
the sign of the cross, and of him that was to suffer; that so they might
know that if they did not believe in him, they should be overcome for
ever.

4 Moses therefore  <span id="fr_692"></span>[8](#fn_692) piled up armour
upon armour in the middle of a rising ground, and

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

standing up high above all of them, stretched forth his arms, and so
Israel again conquered.

5 But no sooner did he let down his hands, but they were again slain.
And why so?—To the end they might know, that except they trust in him
they cannot be saved.

6 And in another prophet, he saith,  <span
id="fr_693"></span>[1](#fn_693) I have stretched out my hands all the
day long to a people disobedient, and speaking against my righteous way.

7 And again Moses makes a  <span id="fr_694"></span>[2](#fn_694) type of
Jesus, to show that he was to die, and then that he, whom they thought
to be dead, was to give life to others; in the  <span
id="fr_695"></span>[3](#fn_695) type of  <span
id="fr_696"></span>[4](#fn_696) those that fell in Israel.

8 For God caused all sorts of serpents to bite them, and they died;
forasmuch as by a serpent transgression began in Eve: that so he might
convince them that for their transgressions they shall be delivered into
the pain of death.

9 Moses then himself, who had commanded them, saying,  <span
id="fr_697"></span>[5](#fn_697) Ye shall not make to yourselves any
graven or molten image, to be your God; yet now did so himself, that he
might represent to them the figure of the Lord Jesus.

10 For he made a brazen serpent, and set it up on high, and called the
people together by a proclamation; where being come, they entreated
Moses that he would make an atonement for them, and pray that they might
be healed.

11 Then Moses spake unto them, saying: when any one among you shall be
bitten, let him come unto the serpent that is set upon the pole; and let
him assuredly trust in him, that though he be dead, yet he is able to
give life, and presently he shall be saved; and so they did. See
therefore how here also you have in this the glory of Jesus; and that
 <span id="fr_698"></span>[6](#fn_698) in him and to him are all things.

12 Again; What says Moses to Jesus the son of Nun, when he gave that
name unto him, as being a prophet that all the people might hear him
alone,  <span id="fr_699"></span>[7](#fn_699) because the father did
manifest all things concerning his son Jesus, in  <span
id="fr_700"></span>[8](#fn_700) Jesus the Son of Nun; and gave him that
name when he sent him to spy out the land of Canaan;  <span
id="fr_701"></span>[9](#fn_701) he said: Take a book in thine hands, and
write what the Lord saith: Forasmuch as Jesus the Son of God shall in
the last days cut off by the roots all the house of Amalek. See here
again Jesus, not the son of man, but the Son of God, made manifest in a
type and in the flesh.

13 But because it might hereafter be said, that Christ was the Son of
David;  <span id="fr_702"></span>[10](#fn_702) therefore David fearing
and well knowing the errors of the wicked, saith;  <span
id="fr_703"></span>[11](#fn_703) the Lord saith unto my Lord, sit thou
on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

14 And again Isaiah speaketh on this wise. The Lord said unto  <span
id="fr_704"></span>[12](#fn_704) Christ my Lord, I have laid hold on his
right hand, that the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

nations should obey before him, and I will break the strength of kings.

15 Behold, how doth  <span id="fr_705"></span>[1](#fn_705) David and
Isaiah call him Lord, and the Son of God.

#### CHAP. XII.

<span class="small">*The promise of God not made to the Jews only, but
to the Gentiles also, and fulfilled to us by Jesus Christ*.</span>

BUT let us go yet farther, and inquire whether this people be the heir,
or the former; and whether the covenant be with us or with them.

2 And first, as concerning the people, hear now what the Scripture
saith.

3  <span id="fr_706"></span>[2](#fn_706) Isaac prayed for his wife
Rebekah, because she was barren; and she conceived. Afterwards Rebekah
went forth to inquire of the Lord.

4 And the Lord said unto her; There are two nations in thy womb, and two
people shall come from thy body; and the one shall have power over the
other, and the greater shall serve the lesser. Understand here who was
Isaac; who Rebekah; and of whom it was foretold, this people shall be
greater than that.

5 And in another prophecy Jacob speaketh more clearly to his son Joseph
saying;  <span id="fr_707"></span>[3](#fn_707) Behold the Lord hath not
deprived me of seeing thy face, bring me thy sons that I may bless them.
And he brought unto his father  <span id="fr_708"></span>[4](#fn_708)
Manasseh and Ephraim, desiring that he should bless Manasseh, because he
was the elder.

6 Therefore Joseph brought him to the right hand of his father Jacob.
But Jacob by the spirit foresaw the figure of the of the people that was
to come.

7 And what saith the Scripture? And Jacob crossed his hands, and put his
right hand upon Ephraim, his second, and the younger son, and blessed
him. And Joseph said unto Jacob; Put thy right hand upon the head of
Manasseh, for he is my first-born son. And Jacob said unto Joseph; I
know it, my son, I know it; but the greater shall serve the lesser;
though he also shall be blessed.

8 Ye see of whom he appointed it, that they should be the first people,
and heirs of the covenant.

9 If therefore God shall have yet farther taken notice of this by
Abraham too; our understanding of it will then be perfectly established.

10 What then saith the Scripture to Abraham, when he  <span
id="fr_709"></span>[5](#fn_709) believed, and it was imputed unto him
for righteousness? Behold I have made thee a father of the nations,
which without circumcision believe in the Lord.

11 Let us therefore now inquire whether God has fulfilled the covenant,
which he sware to our fathers, that he would give this people? Yes,
verily, he gave it: but they were not worthy to receive it by reason of
their sins.

12 For thus saith the prophet:  <span id="fr_710"></span>[6](#fn_710)
And Moses continued fasting in mount Sinai, to receive the covenant of
the Lord with the people, forty days and forty nights.

13  <span id="fr_711"></span>[7](#fn_711) And he received of the Lord
two tables written with the finger of the Lord's hand in the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spirit. And Moses
when he had received them brought them down that he might deliver them
to the people.

14 And the Lord said unto Moses;  <span id="fr_712"></span>[1](#fn_712)
Moses, Moses, get thee down quickly, for the people which thou
broughtest out of the land of Egypt have done wickedly.

15 And Moses understood that they had again set up a molten image: and
he cast the two tables out of his hands; and the tables of the covenant
of the Lord were broken. Moses therefore received them, but they were
not worthy.

16 Now then learn how we have received them. Moses, being a servant,
took them; but the Lord himself has given them unto us, that we might be
the people of his inheritance, having suffered for us.

17 He was therefore made manifest; that they should fill up the measure
of their sins, and that we  <span id="fr_713"></span>[2](#fn_713) being
made heirs by him, should receive the covenant of the Lord Jesus.

18 And again the prophet saith;  <span id="fr_714"></span>[3](#fn_714)
Behold, I have set thee for a light unto the Gentiles, to be  <span
id="fr_715"></span>[4](#fn_715) the saviour of all the ends of the
earth, saith the Lord the God who hath redeemed thee.

19 Who for that very end was prepared, that by his own appearing he
might redeem our hearts, already devoured by death, and delivered over
to the irregularity of error, from darkness; and establish a covenant
with us by his word.

20 For so it is written that the father commanded him by delivering us
from darkness, to prepare unto himself a holy people.

21 Wherefore the prophet saith:  <span id="fr_716"></span>[5](#fn_716) I
the Lord thy God have called thee in righteousness, and I will take thee
by thy hand and will strengthen thee. And give thee for a covenant of
the people, for a light of the Gentiles.  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[6](#fn_717) To open the eyes of the blind, to bring
out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of
the prison house.

22 Consider therefore from whence we have been redeemed. And again the
prophet saith:  <span id="fr_718"></span>[7](#fn_718) The spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me: he hath sent me to preach
glad tidings to the lowly; to heal the broken in heart; to preach
remission to the captives, and sight unto the blind; to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of restitution; to comfort all
that mourn.

#### CHAP. XIII.

<span class="small">*That the sabbath of the Jews was but a figure of a
more glorious sabbath to come, and their temple, of the spiritual
temples of God*.</span>

FURTHERMORE it is written concerning the sabbath, in the Ten  <span
id="fr_719"></span>[8](#fn_719) Commandments, which God spake in the
Mount Sinai to Moses,  <span id="fr_720"></span>[9](#fn_720) face to
face; Sanctify the sabbath of the Lord with pure hands, and with a clean
heart.

2 And elsewhere he saith;  <span id="fr_721"></span>[10](#fn_721) If thy
children shall keep my sabbaths, then will I put my mercy upon them.

3 And even in the beginning of the creation he makes mention

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span id="img_16100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![VERONICA AFFLICTED
WITH AN ISSUE OF BLOOD.](tn/16100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16100.jpg)  
VERONICA AFFLICTED WITH AN ISSUE OF BLOOD.  
</span>

of the sabbath.  <span id="fr_722"></span>[1](#fn_722) And God made in
six days the works of his hands; and he finished them on the  <span
id="fr_723"></span>[2](#fn_723) seventh day, and he rested the seventh
day, and sanctified it.

4 Consider, my children, what that signifies, he finished them in six
days. The meaning of it is this; that in  <span
id="fr_724"></span>[3](#fn_724) six thousand years the Lord God will
bring all things to an end.

5 For with him one day is a thousand years; as himself testifieth,
saying, Behold this day shall be as a thousand years. Therefore,
children, in six days, that is, in six thousand years, shall  <span
id="fr_725"></span>[4](#fn_725) all things be accomplished.

6 And what is that he saith, And he rested the seventh day: he meaneth
this; that when his Son shall come, and abolish the season of the  <span
id="fr_726"></span>[5](#fn_726) Wicked One, and judge the ungodly; and
shall change the sun and the moon, and the stars; then he shall
gloriously rest in that seventh day.

7 He adds lastly; Thou shalt sanctify it with clean hands and a pure
heart. Wherefore we are greatly deceived if we imagine that any one can
now sanctify that day which God has made holy, without having a heart
pure in all things.

8 Behold therefore he will then truly sanctify it with blessed rest,
when we (having received the righteous promise, when iniquity shall be
no more, all things being renewed by the Lord) shall be able to sanctify
it, being ourselves first made holy.

9 Lastly, he saith unto them:  <span id="fr_727"></span>[6](#fn_727)
Your new moons and you: sabbaths I cannot bear them. Consider what he
means by it; the sabbaths, says he, which ye now keep are not acceptable
unto me, but those which I have made; when resting from all things I
shall  <span id="fr_728"></span>[7](#fn_728) begin the eighth day, that
is, the beginning of the other world.

10 For which cause we observe the eighth day with gladness, in which
Jesus rose from the dead; and having manifested himself to his
disciples, ascended into heaven.

11 ¶ It remains yet that I speak to you concerning the temple how these
miserable men being deceived have put their trust in the house,  <span
id="fr_729"></span>[8](#fn_729) and not in God himself who made them, as
if it were the habitation of God.

12 For much after the same manner as the Gentiles, they consecrated him
in the temple.

13 But learn therefore how the Lord speaketh, rendering the temple vain:
 <span id="fr_730"></span>[9](#fn_730) Who has measured the heaven with
a span, and the earth with his hand? Is it not I? Thus saith the
Lord, <span id="fr_731"></span>[10](#fn_731) Heaven is my throne, and
the earth is my footstool. What is the house that ye will build me? Or
what is the place of my rest? Know therefore that all their hope is
vain.

14 And again he speaketh after this manner:  <span
id="fr_732"></span>[11](#fn_732) Behold they

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

that destroy this temple, even they shall again build it up. And so it
came to pass; for through their wars it is now destroyed by their
enemies; and the servants of their enemies built it up.

15 Furthermore it has been made manifest, how both the city and the
temple, and the people of Israel should be given up. For the Scripture
saith;  <span id="fr_733"></span>[1](#fn_733) And it shall come to pass
in the last days, that the Lord will deliver up the sheep of his
pasture, and their fold, and their tower into destruction. And it is
come to pass, as the Lord hath spoken.

16 Let us inquire therefore, whether there be any temple of God? Yes
there is; and that there, where himself declares that he would both make
and perfect it. For it is written; And it shall be that as soon as the
week shall be completed, the temple of the Lord shall be gloriously
built in the name of the Lord.

17 I find therefore that there is a temple. But how shall it be built in
the name of the Lord? I will shew you.

18 Before that we believed in God, the habitation of our heart was
corruptible, and feeble, as a temple truly built with hands.

19 For it was a house full of idolatry, a house of devils; inasmuch as
there was done in it whatsoever was contrary unto God. But it shall be
built in the name of the Lord.

20 Consider, how that the temple of the Lord shall be very gloriously
built; and by what means that shall be, learn. <span
id="fr_734"></span>[2](#fn_734)

21 Having received remission of our sins, and trusting in the name of
the Lord, we are become renewed, being again created as it were from the
beginning. Wherefore God truly dwells in our house, that is, in us.

22 But how does he dwell in us? The word of his faith, the calling of
his promise, the wisdom of his righteous judgments, the commands of his
doctrine; he himself prophesies within us, he himself dwelleth in us,
and openeth to us who were in bondage of death the gate of our  <span
id="fr_735"></span>[3](#fn_735) temple, that is, the mouth of wisdom,
having given repentance unto us; and by this means has brought us to be
an incorruptible temple.

23 He therefore that desires to be saved looketh not unto the man, but
unto him that dwelleth in him, and speaketh by him; being struck with
wonder, forasmuch as he never either heard him speaking such words out
of his mouth, nor ever desired to hear them.

24 This is that spiritual temple that is built unto the Lord.

#### CHAP. XIV.

<span class="small">*Of the way of light; being a summary of what a
Christian is to do, that he may be happy for ever*.</span>

AND thus, I trust, I have declared to you as much, and with as great
simplicity as I could, those things which make for your salvation, so as
not to have omitted anything that might be requisite thereunto.

2 For should I speak further of the things that  <span
id="fr_736"></span>[4](#fn_736) now are, and of those that are to come,
you would not yet understand them, seeing they lie in parables. This
therefore shall suffice as to these things.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

3 Let us now go on to the other kind of knowledge and doctrine There are
two ways of doctrine and power; the one of light, the other of darkness.

4 But there is a great deal of difference between these two ways: for
over one are appointed the  <span id="fr_737"></span>[1](#fn_737) angels
of God, the leaders of the way of light; over the other, the angels of
Satan. And the one is the Lord from everlasting to everlasting; the
other is the prince of the time of unrighteousness.

5 Now the way of light is this, if any one desires to attain to the
place that is appointed for him, and will hasten thither by his works.
And the knowledge that has been given to us for walking in it, to this
effect: Thou shalt love him that made thee: thou shalt glorify him that
hath redeemed thee from death.

6 Thou shalt be simple in heart, and rich in the spirit. Thou shalt not
cleave to those that walk in the way of death. Thou shalt hate to do
anything that is not pleasing unto God. Thou shalt abhor all
dissimulation. Thou shalt not neglect any of the commands of the Lord.

7 Thou shalt not exalt thyself, but shalt be humble. Thou shalt not take
honour to thyself. Thou shalt not enter into any wicked counsel against
thy neighbour. Thou shalt not be over-confident in thy heart.

8 Thou shalt not commit fornication, nor adultery. Neither shalt thou
corrupt thyself with mankind. Thou shalt not make use of the word of
God, to any impurity.

9 Thou shalt not accept any man's person, when thou reprovest any one's
faults. Thou t shalt be gentle. Thou shalt be quiet. Thou shalt tremble
at the words which thou hast heard. Thou shalt not keep any hatred in
thy heart against thy brother. Thou shalt not entertain any doubt
whether it shall be or not.

10 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in vain. Thou shalt love thy
neighbour above thy own soul.

11 Thou shalt not destroy thy conceptions before they are brought forth;
nor kill them after they are born.

12 Thou shalt not withdraw thy hand from thy son, or from thy daughter;
but shall teach them from their youth the fear of the Lord.

13 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's goods; neither shalt thou be
 <span id="fr_738"></span>[2](#fn_738) an extortioner. Neither shall thy
heart be joined to proud men; but thou shalt be numbered among the
righteous and the lowly. Whatever  <span id="fr_739"></span>[3](#fn_739)
events shall happen unto thee, thou shalt receive them as good.

14 Thou shalt not he double-minded, or double-tongued; for a double
tongue is the snare of death. Thou shalt be subject unto the Lord and to
inferior masters as to the representatives of God, in fear and
reverence.

15 Thou shalt not be bitter in thy commands towards any of thy servants
that trust in God; lest thou chance not to fear him who is over both;
because he came not to call any with respect of persons, but whomsoever
the spirit had prepared.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

16 Thou shalt communicate to thy neighbour of all thou hast; thou shalt
not call anything thine own: for if ye partake in such things as are
incorruptible, how much more should you do it in those that are
corruptible?

17  <span id="fr_740"></span>[1](#fn_740) Thou shalt not be forward to
speak; for the mouth is the snare of death.  <span
id="fr_741"></span>[2](#fn_741) Strive for thy soul with all thy might.
 <span id="fr_742"></span>[3](#fn_742) Reach not out thine hand to
receive, and withhold it not when thou shouldest give.

18 Thou shalt love, as the apple of thine eye, every one that speaketh
unto thee the Word of the Lord.  <span id="fr_743"></span>[4](#fn_743)
Call to thy remembrance, day and night, the future judgment.

19 Thou shalt seek out every day the persons of the  <span
id="fr_744"></span>[5](#fn_744) righteous: and both consider and go
about to exhort others by the, word, and meditate how thou mayest save a
soul.

20 Thou shalt also labour with thy hands to give to the poor,  <span
id="fr_745"></span>[6](#fn_745) that thy sins may be forgiven thee. Thou
shalt not deliberate whether thou shouldst give: nor, having given,
murmur at it.

21 Give to every one that asks: so shalt thou know who is the good
rewarder of thy gifts.

22 Keep what thou hast received; thou shalt neither add to it nor take
from it.

23 Let the wicked be always thy aversion. Thou shalt judge righteous
judgment. Thou shalt never cause divisions; but shalt make peace between
those that are at variance, and bring them together.

24 Thou shalt confess thy sins; and not come to thy prayer with an evil
conscience.

25 This is the way of light.

#### CHAP. XV.

<span class="small">*Of the way of darkness; that is, what kind of
persons shall be for ever cast out of the kingdom of God*.</span>

BUT the way of darkness is crooked and full of cursing. For it is the
way of eternal death, with punishment; in which they that walk meet
those things that destroy their own souls.

2 Such are; idolatry, confidence, pride of power, hypocrisy,
double-mindedness, adultery, murder, rapine, pride, transgression,
deceit, malice, arrogance, witchcraft, covetousness, and the want of the
fear of God.

3 In this walk those who are the persecutors of them that are good;
haters of truth; lovers of lies; who know not the reward of
righteousness, nor cleave to any thing that is good.

4 Who administer not righteous judgment to the widow and orphan; who
watch for wickedness, and not for the fear of the Lord:

5 From whom gentleness and patience are far off; who love vanity, and
follow after rewards; having no compassion upon the poor; nor take any
pains for such as are heavy laden and oppressed.

6 Ready to evil speaking, not

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

knowing him that made them; murderers of children; corrupters of the
creatures of God; that turn away from the needy; oppress the afflicted;
are the advocates of the rich, but unjust judges of the poor; being
altogether sinners.

7 It is therefore fitting that learning the just commands of the Lord,
which we have before mentioned, we should walk in them. For he who does
such things shall be glorified in the kingdom of God.

8 But he that chooses the other part, shall be destroyed, together with
his works. For this cause there shall be both a resurrection, and a
retribution.

9 I beseech those that are in high estate among you, (if so be you will
take the counsel which with a good intention I offer to you,) you have
those with you towards whom you may do good; do not forsake them.

10 For the day is at hand in which all things shall be destroyed,
together with the wicked one. The Lord is near, and his reward is with
him.

11 I beseech you, therefore, again, and again, be as good lawgivers to
one another; continue faithful counsellors to each other; remove from
among you all hypocrisy.

12 And may God, the Lord of all the world give you wisdom, knowledge,
counsel, and understanding of his judgments in patience.

13 Be ye taught of God; seeking what it is the Lord requires of you, and
doing it; that ye may be saved in the day of judgment.

14 And if there be among you any remembrance of what is good, think of
me; meditating upon these things, that both my desire and my watching
for you may turn to a good account.

15 I beseech you; I ask it as a favour of you; whilst you are in this
beautiful  <span id="fr_746"></span>[1](#fn_746) tabernacle of the body,
be wanting in none of these things; but without ceasing seek them, and
fulfil every command. For these things are fitting and worthy to be
done.

16 Wherefore I have given the more diligence to write unto you,
according to my ability, that you might rejoice. Farewell, children, of
love and peace.

17 The Lord of glory and of all grace, be with your spirit, Amen.

¶ *The end of the Epistle of Barnabas, the Apostle, and fellow-traveller
of St. Paul the Apostle*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[145:1](lbob17.htm#fr_543) Honestarum.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[145:2](lbob17.htm#fr_544) Æquitatum,
Δικαιωματων, righteous judgments.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[145:3](lbob17.htm#fr_545) Spiritibus,
Disposition.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[145:4](lbob17.htm#fr_546) Natural, Gr.
ἐμφυτον. See chap. xix. ἐμφυτον δορεαν διδαχης: which the Lat. Int.
renders. Naturale donum Doctrinæ. Comp. Jam. i. 21.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[145:5](lbob17.htm#fr_547) Liberari: Gr. at
videtur σωθηναι.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[145:6](lbob17.htm#fr_548) Honesto from the Gr.
καλης.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[145:7](lbob17.htm#fr_549) Comp. Psalm 119, 33,
viz. either by preaching or fulfilling the same.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[145:8](lbob17.htm#fr_550) Vid. Annot. Vos. in
loc.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[145:9](lbob17.htm#fr_551) Talibus spiritibus
servienti. Usser.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[145:10](lbob17.htm#fr_552) Γνωσις.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[145:11](lbob17.htm#fr_553) Δογματα κυριου,
Constitutions of the Lord.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[145:12](lbob17.htm#fr_554) Viz. faith and
Charity. See before.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[145:13](lbob17.htm#fr_555) Namely, which we
are to believe.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[145:14](lbob17.htm#fr_556) That is, which are
to be hoped for, and end in love.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[146:1](lbob17.htm#fr_557) Given us to know.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[146:2](lbob17.htm#fr_558) Honestinus et
Altius: he more honestly and highly.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[146:3](lbob17.htm#fr_559) Like yourselves.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[146:4](lbob17.htm#fr_560) In many things.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[146:5](lbob17.htm#fr_561) Age.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[146:6](lbob17.htm#fr_562) Equitus.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[146:7](lbob17.htm#fr_563) Comp. Græc. Clem.
Alex.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[146:8](lbob17.htm#fr_564) Isaiah i. 11.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[146:9](lbob17.htm#fr_565) Lambs.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[146:10](lbob17.htm#fr_566) Isaiah, i. 12, 13,
14.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[146:11](lbob17.htm#fr_567) Jer. vii. 22, 23.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[146:12](lbob17.htm#fr_568) Zech. viii. 17.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[146:13](lbob17.htm#fr_569) Of the mercy of Our
Father.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[146:14](lbob17.htm#fr_570) Psalm i. 19.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[147:1](lbob17.htm#fr_571) Isa. lviii. 4.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[147:2](lbob17.htm#fr_572) V. 5.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[147:3](lbob17.htm#fr_573) V. 6.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[147:4](lbob17.htm#fr_574) V. 7.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[147:5](lbob17.htm#fr_575) V. 8.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[147:6](lbob17.htm#fr_576) V. 9.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[147:7](lbob17.htm#fr_577) V. 10.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[147:8](lbob17.htm#fr_578) Providence.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[147:9](lbob17.htm#fr_579) Simplicity.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[147:10](lbob17.htm#fr_580) Their.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[147:11](lbob17.htm#fr_581) Histantibus: read
Instantibus.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[147:12](lbob17.htm#fr_582) Beloved.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[147:13](lbob17.htm#fr_583) Temptation. Dan.
ix.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[147:14](lbob17.htm#fr_584) Dan. vii.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[147:15](lbob17.htm#fr_585) V. 7.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[147:16](lbob17.htm#fr_586) V. 8.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[147:17](lbob17.htm#fr_587) Heap up sins.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[148:1](lbob17.htm#fr_588) Exod. xxxi. xxxiv.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[148:2](lbob17.htm#fr_589) Exod. xxxvii. 7.
Deut. ix. 12.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[148:3](lbob17.htm#fr_590) V. 19.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[148:4](lbob17.htm#fr_591) Days.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[148:5](lbob17.htm#fr_592) Heb. x. 25.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[148:6](lbob17.htm#fr_593) Vid. Gr. Clem. Alex.
Isa. v., 21.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[148:7](lbob17.htm#fr_594) Matt. xxv. 7-10.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[148:8](lbob17.htm#fr_595) Matt. xxii. 14.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[148:9](lbob17.htm#fr_596) Isa. lii. 5-7.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[149:1](lbob17.htm#fr_597) Vid. Ed. Ox., p. 21.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[149:2](lbob17.htm#fr_598) Prov. i. 17.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[149:3](lbob17.htm#fr_599) Gen. i. 26.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[149:4](lbob17.htm#fr_600) Learn.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[149:5](lbob17.htm#fr_601) Matt. ix. 13.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[149:6](lbob17.htm#fr_602) Namely, from the
Jews.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[149:7](lbob17.htm#fr_603) Zach. xiii. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[149:8](lbob17.htm#fr_604) According to the
LXX. Psalm xxii. 20. Psalm cxix. 120. Psalm xxii. 16, 17.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[149:9](lbob17.htm#fr_605) These words <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> were doubtless cited thus by Barnabas,
because that without them, those foregoing do not prove the Crucifixion
of Christ. But through the repetition of the same preposition, this
latter part was so early omitted, that it was not in the Latin
interpreter's copy.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[150:1](lbob17.htm#fr_606) Isaiah 1. 6.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[150:2](lbob17.htm#fr_607) Isa. 1. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[150:3](lbob17.htm#fr_608) Rep. In.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[150:4](lbob17.htm#fr_609) Isa. viii. 14.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[150:5](lbob17.htm#fr_610) Isa. xxviii. 16.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[150:6](lbob17.htm#fr_611) Gr. put in strength,
or strengthened.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[150:7](lbob17.htm#fr_612) Isa. 1. 7.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[150:8](lbob17.htm#fr_613) Ps. cxviii. 22.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[150:9](lbob17.htm#fr_614) V. 24. Clem. Alex.
Strom. v.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[150:10](lbob17.htm#fr_615) This is not in the
Old Latin Version.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[150:11](lbob17.htm#fr_616) Vid. Ed. Ox., p.
29, a. περιψημα της αγαπης υμων.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[150:12](lbob17.htm#fr_617) Ps. xxii. 16.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[150:13](lbob17.htm#fr_618) Ps. cxviii. 12.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[150:14](lbob17.htm#fr_619) Ps. xxii. 18.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[150:15](lbob17.htm#fr_620) Is. iii. 9.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[150:16](lbob17.htm#fr_621) Bind.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[150:17](lbob17.htm#fr_622) Exod. xxxiii. 1.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[150:18](lbob17.htm#fr_623) Vid. Cot. An. Marg.
ex Clem. Alex.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[150:19](lbob17.htm#fr_624) προσωπου.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[150:20](lbob17.htm#fr_625) Osee, xiv. ult.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[150:21](lbob17.htm#fr_626) Prov. i. 6. Ec. i.
10.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[151:1](lbob17.htm#fr_627) Gr. made us another
form.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[151:2](lbob17.htm#fr_628) Vid. Ed. Ox., p. 30,
b.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[151:3](lbob17.htm#fr_629) Vid. Vet. Lat. In.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[151:4](lbob17.htm#fr_630) As he saith to the
Son.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[151:5](lbob17.htm#fr_631) Gen. i. 26. &c.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[151:6](lbob17.htm#fr_632) Gen. i. 28.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[151:7](lbob17.htm#fr_633) Gr. a second
formation.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[151:8](lbob17.htm#fr_634) Isa, xliii. 18, 19,
&c.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[151:9](lbob17.htm#fr_635) Heb. iii.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[151:10](lbob17.htm#fr_636) Ezek. xi. 19.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[151:11](lbob17.htm#fr_637) So St. Paul, i Cor.
iii. 16, 17.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[151:12](lbob17.htm#fr_638) Ps. xlii. 2.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[151:13](lbob17.htm#fr_639) Jer. xxxii. 22.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[152:1](lbob17.htm#fr_640) In same manner
applied Heb. ix.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[152:2](lbob17.htm#fr_641) Lev. xxiii. 29.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[152:3](lbob17.htm#fr_642) The vessel of his
spirit.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[152:4](lbob17.htm#fr_643) Gen. xxii.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[152:5](lbob17.htm#fr_644) Numb. xxix., &c.,
Vic. Cot. in Marg. et Annot. in loc.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[152:6](lbob17.htm#fr_645) Vid. Annot. Cot.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[152:7](lbob17.htm#fr_646) Levit xi. Vid.
Maimon, tract. de die Exv. Edit. du Veil, p. 350, &c.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[152:8](lbob17.htm#fr_647) Vid. Edit. Ox. p. 40
a. 41. b.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[152:9](lbob17.htm#fr_648) Vid. Maim. ib. p.
341. &c.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[152:10](lbob17.htm#fr_649) Vid. Voss. in loc.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[152:11](lbob17.htm#fr_650) The Greek is
imperfect.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[152:12](lbob17.htm#fr_651) Vid. Lat. Ver.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[153:1](lbob17.htm#fr_652) Acts xiv. 22.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[153:2](lbob17.htm#fr_653) Numb. xix.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[153:3](lbob17.htm#fr_654) That this was also a
type of Christ, see Heb. ix. 13.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[153:4](lbob17.htm#fr_655) Vid. Vet. Lat.
Interpr. Simplicity, Gr.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[153:5](lbob17.htm#fr_656) Gr. to testify.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[153:6](lbob17.htm#fr_657) Wood.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[153:7](lbob17.htm#fr_658) Vid. Coteler. in
loc.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[153:8](lbob17.htm#fr_659) Them.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[153:9](lbob17.htm#fr_660) Septuag. Psalm xvii.
45.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[153:10](lbob17.htm#fr_661) Isaiah xxxiii. 13.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[153:11](lbob17.htm#fr_662) Jer. iv. 4.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[153:12](lbob17.htm#fr_663) Jer. vii. 2.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[154:1](lbob17.htm#fr_664) Psalms xxxiii.
xxxiv.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[154:2](lbob17.htm#fr_665) Isaiah, l. 10.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[154:3](lbob17.htm#fr_666) Isaiah, i. 2.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[154:4](lbob17.htm#fr_667) Isaiah l. 10.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[154:5](lbob17.htm#fr_668) Isaiah, xl. 3.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[154:6](lbob17.htm#fr_669) Angel.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[154:7](lbob17.htm#fr_670) Jer. iv. 3, 4.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[154:8](lbob17.htm#fr_671) Jer. iv. 4.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[154:9](lbob17.htm#fr_672) Deut. x. 16.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[154:10](lbob17.htm#fr_673) That people.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[154:11](lbob17.htm#fr_674) Vid. Cot. in loc.
conter. Orig. ad Rom cap. ii. 25.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[154:12](lbob17.htm#fr_675) That many others of
the ancient Fathers have concurred with him in this, see Cot. in loc.
Add. Eund. p. 31, 85, ibid. Ed., &c., &c.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[154:13](lbob17.htm#fr_676) Genuine.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[154:14](lbob17.htm#fr_677) That in this he
goes on the received opinion of the RR. Vid. Annot. Cot. and Ed. Ox. in
loc. Lev. xi. Deut. xiv. Add. Ainsworth on Lev. xi. 1, and Deut. Liv. 4.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[155:1](lbob17.htm#fr_678) In the
understanding. Deut. iv.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[155:2](lbob17.htm#fr_679) Vid. antiq. Lat.
Vers.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[156:1](lbob17.htm#fr_680) Jeremiah, ii. 12.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[156:2](lbob17.htm#fr_681) Vid. Annot. Coteler.
and Ed. Oxon. in loc.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[156:3](lbob17.htm#fr_682) Isaiah xvi. 1, 2.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[156:4](lbob17.htm#fr_683) Isaiah xlv. 2.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[156:5](lbob17.htm#fr_684) Isaiah, xxxiii. 16,
17.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[157:1](lbob17.htm#fr_685) Psalm, i.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[157:2](lbob17.htm#fr_686) Zeph. iii. 19.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[157:3](lbob17.htm#fr_687) For τουτο λεγει and
ο, the Old Interpreter did not read; and Clemens Alex. lib. iii. Strom.
p. 463, transcribing this passage hath them not.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[157:4](lbob17.htm#fr_688) *i.e.*, the body of
Christ.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[157:5](lbob17.htm#fr_689) Vid. Conject. Edit.
Oxon. Comp. iv. Esdr. v. 4, et Obs. Cotel. in loc.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[157:6](lbob17.htm#fr_690) See St. Hier. in
like manner. Annot. D. Bernard, p. 124, Edit. Oxon. Exod. xvii.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[157:7](lbob17.htm#fr_691) That were so beaten.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[157:8](lbob17.htm#fr_692) Again set them in
array, being armed. Lat. Vers.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[158:1](lbob17.htm#fr_693) Isaiah, lxv.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[158:2](lbob17.htm#fr_694) So Irenæus, Just.
Mart. St. Chrysost., &c. Edit. Oxon. p. 77, a.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[158:3](lbob17.htm#fr_695) Sign.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[158:4](lbob17.htm#fr_696) Israel falling.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[158:5](lbob17.htm#fr_697) Deut. xvii. 15.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[158:6](lbob17.htm#fr_698) Rom. xi. 36.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[158:7](lbob17.htm#fr_699) Deut. xviii. 15, 18.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[158:8](lbob17.htm#fr_700) So the other
Fathers. Just. Mart. &c. Vid. Edit. Oxon. page 79.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[158:9](lbob17.htm#fr_701) Vid. Interp. Vet.
Lat. Exod. xvii. 14.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[158:10](lbob17.htm#fr_702) Comp. Vet. Lat.
Interp.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[158:11](lbob17.htm#fr_703) Psalm cix. 3.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[158:12](lbob17.htm#fr_704) Vid. Annot.
Coteler, in loc. Edit. Oxon. page 78, c. Isaiah xlv. 1.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[159:1](lbob17.htm#fr_705) Comp. Vet. Lat.
Interp.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[159:2](lbob17.htm#fr_706) Gen. xxv. 21. Comp.
St. Paul Rom. ix. Just. Mart. Tert. &c. Vid. Ed. Oxon. p. 11, a.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[159:3](lbob17.htm#fr_707) Gen. xlviii.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[159:4](lbob17.htm#fr_708) Vid. Lat. Interp.
Vet.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[159:5](lbob17.htm#fr_709) Gen. xv. 17. So St.
Paul himself applies this: Rom. iv. 3.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[159:6](lbob17.htm#fr_710) Exod. xxiv. 18.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[159:7](lbob17.htm#fr_711) Deut. ix. 10. Exod.
xxxi. 12.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[160:1](lbob17.htm#fr_712) Exod. xxxii. 7.
Deut. ix. 12.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[160:2](lbob17.htm#fr_713) Vid. Lat. Interpret.
Vet.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[160:3](lbob17.htm#fr_714) Isaiah xlix. 6.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[160:4](lbob17.htm#fr_715) For salvation unto.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[160:5](lbob17.htm#fr_716) Isaiah xlii. 6.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[160:6](lbob17.htm#fr_717) Verse 7.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[160:7](lbob17.htm#fr_718) Isaiah lxi. 1, 2.
Comp. Luke, iv. 18.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[160:8](lbob17.htm#fr_719) Words.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[160:9](lbob17.htm#fr_720) Exod. xx. 8.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[160:10](lbob17.htm#fr_721) Jer. xvii. 24

<span id="fn_722"></span>[161:1](lbob17.htm#fr_722) Gen. ii. 2. Exod.
xx. 11, xxxi. 17.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[161:2](lbob17.htm#fr_723) Vid. Coteler. Annot.
in loc.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[161:3](lbob17.htm#fr_724) How general this
tradition then was. See Coteler. Annot. in loc. Edit. Oxon, page 90, a.
Psalm lxxxix. 4.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[161:4](lbob17.htm#fr_725) That is, to the time
of the Gospel, says Dr. Bernard, q. v. Annot. p. 127, Ed. Oxon.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[161:5](lbob17.htm#fr_726) So the Lat. Vers.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[161:6](lbob17.htm#fr_727) Isaiah, i. 13.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[161:7](lbob17.htm#fr_728) So the other
Fathers, q. v. apud. Coteler. Annot. in loc. p. 36.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[161:8](lbob17.htm#fr_729) Vid. Edit. Oxon. et
Vet. Lat. Interp.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[161:9](lbob17.htm#fr_730) Isaiah, xl. 12.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[161:10](lbob17.htm#fr_731) Isaiah, lxvi. 1.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[161:11](lbob17.htm#fr_732) Isaiah, xlix. 17.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[162:1](lbob17.htm#fr_733) Zeph. ii. 6. just.
Heb.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[162:2](lbob17.htm#fr_734) Dan. ix. Haggai, ii.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[162:3](lbob17.htm#fr_735) Vid. Lat. Ver.
Interp.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[162:4](lbob17.htm#fr_736) So the old Lat.
Interp.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[163:1](lbob17.htm#fr_737) Vid. Coteler. in
loc. et Basil. in Psalm i.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[163:2](lbob17.htm#fr_738) Greedy, πλεονεκτης.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[163:3](lbob17.htm#fr_739) Effects.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[164:1](lbob17.htm#fr_740) See Eccles. iv. 29.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[164:2](lbob17.htm#fr_741) Ibid., ver. 28. For
so I choose to read it, υπερ της ψυχης σου αγωνευσεις, according to the
conjecture of Cotelerius.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[164:3](lbob17.htm#fr_742) Ibid., ver. 36.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[164:4](lbob17.htm#fr_743) And remember him
night and day. The words πμερας κριϛεως, seem to have been erroneously
inserted, and pervert the sense.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[164:5](lbob17.htm#fr_744) Gr. Saints.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[164:6](lbob17.htm#fr_745) Gr. For the
redemption of thy sins. Comp. Dan. iv. 24. See LXX.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[165:1](lbob17.htm#fr_746) Vessel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians](lbob18)

</div>
