<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob18)  [Next](lbob20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The EPISTLE of IGNATIUS to the MAGNESIANS.

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">4 *Mentions the arrival of Damon, their bishop, and
others,* 6 *whom he exhorts them to reverence, notwithstanding he was a
young man*.</span>

IGNATIUS who is also called Theophorus; to the blessed  <span
id="fr_844"></span>[1](#fn_844) (church)  <span
id="fr_845"></span>[2](#fn_845) by the grace of God the Father in  <span
id="fr_846"></span>[3](#fn_846) Jesus Christ our Saviour: in whom I
salute the church which is at Magnesia near the Mæander: and wish it all
joy in God the Father and in Jesus Christ.

2 When I heard of your well ordered love and charity in God, being full
of joy, I desired much to speak unto you in the faith of Jesus Christ.

3 For having  <span id="fr_847"></span>[4](#fn_847) been thought worthy
to obtain a most excellent name,  <span id="fr_848"></span>[5](#fn_848)
in the bonds which I carry about, I  <span
id="fr_849"></span>[6](#fn_849) salute the churches; wishing in them a
union both of the body and spirit of Jesus Christ, our eternal life: as
also of faith and charity, to which nothing is preferred: but especially
of Jesus and the Father in whom  <span id="fr_850"></span>[7](#fn_850)
if we undergo all the injuries of the prince of this pre sent world, and
escape, we shall enjoy God.

4 Seeing then I have been judged worthy to see you, by Damas your  <span
id="fr_851"></span>[8](#fn_851) most excellent bishop; and by your very
worthy presbyters, Bassus and Apollonius; and by my fellow-servant
Sotio, the deacon;

5 In whom  <span id="fr_852"></span>[9](#fn_852) I rejoice, forasmuch as
he is the subject unto his bishop as to the grace of God, and to the
presbytery as to the law of Jesus Christ;  <span
id="fr_853"></span>[10](#fn_853) I determined to write unto you.

6 Wherefore it will become you also not  <span
id="fr_854"></span>[11](#fn_854) to use your bishop too familiarly upon
the account of his youth; but to yield all reverence to him according to
the power of God the Father; as also I perceive that your holy
presbyters do: not considering is  <span
id="fr_855"></span>[12](#fn_855) age, which indeed to appearance is
young; but as becomes those who are prudent in God, submitting to him,
or rather not to him, but to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
bishop of us all.

7 It will therefore  <span id="fr_856"></span>[13](#fn_856) behoove you
 <span id="fr_857"></span>[14](#fn_857) with all sincerity, to obey your
bishop; in honour him  <span id="fr_858"></span>[15](#fn_858) whose
pleasure it is that ye should do so.

8 Because he that does not do so, deceives not the bishop whom

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

he sees, but  <span id="fr_859"></span>[1](#fn_859) affronts him that is
invisible.  <span id="fr_860"></span>[2](#fn_860) For whatsoever of this
kind is done, it reflects not upon  <span
id="fr_861"></span>[3](#fn_861) man, but upon God, who knows the secrets
of our hearts.

9 It is therefore fitting, that we should not only be called Christians,
but be so.

10 As some call indeed their governor, bishop; but yet do all things
without him.

11 But I can never think that such as these have a good conscience,
seeing that they are not gathered together  <span
id="fr_862"></span>[4](#fn_862) thoroughly according to God's
commandment.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">1 *That as all must die,* 4 *he exhorts them to live
orderly and in unity*.</span>

SEEING then all things have an end, there are these two  <span
id="fr_863"></span>[5](#fn_863) indifferently set before us, death and
life: and every one shall depart unto his proper place.

2 For as there are two sorts of coins, the one of God, the other of the
world; and each of these has its proper  <span
id="fr_864"></span>[6](#fn_864) inscription engraven upon it; so also is
it here.

3 The unbelievers are of this world; but the faithful, through charity,
have the character of God the Father by Jesus Christ: by whom if we are
not readily disposed to die after the likeness of his passion, his life
is not in us.

4 Forasmuch, therefore, as I have in the persons before mentioned seen
 <span id="fr_865"></span>[7](#fn_865) all of you in faith and charity;
I exhort you that ye study to do all things in  <span
id="fr_866"></span>[8](#fn_866) divine concord:

5 Your bishop presiding in the place of God; your presbyters in the
place of the council of the Apostles; and your deacons most  <span
id="fr_867"></span>[9](#fn_867) dear to me being entrusted with the
ministry of Jesus Christ; who was the Father before all ages, and
appeared in the  <span id="fr_868"></span>[10](#fn_868) end to us.

6 Wherefore taking the same  <span id="fr_869"></span>[11](#fn_869) holy
course, see that ye all reverence one another: and let no one look upon
his neighbour after the flesh; but do ye all mutually love each other in
Jesus Christ.

7 Let there be nothing that may be able to make a division among you;
but be ye united to your bishop, and those who preside over you, to be
your pattern and direction in the way to immortality.

8  <span id="fr_870"></span>[12](#fn_870) As therefore the Lord did
nothing without the Father, being united to him; neither by himself nor
yet by his Apostles, so neither do ye do anything without your bishop
and presbyters:

9 Neither endeavour to let anything appear rational to yourselves apart;

10 But being come together into the same place  <span
id="fr_871"></span>[13](#fn_871) have one common prayer; one
supplication; one mind; one hope; one in charity, and in joy undefiled.

11 There is one Lord Jesus Christ, than whom nothing is better.
Wherefore  <span id="fr_872"></span>[14](#fn_872) come ye all together
as unto one temple of God; as to one  <span
id="fr_873"></span>[15](#fn_873) altar, as to one Jesus Christ; who
proceeded from one Father, and exists in one, and is returned to one.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">1 *He cautions them against false opinions.* 4
*Especially those of*  <span id="fr_874"></span>[16](#fn_874) *Ebion and
the Judaizing Christians*.</span>

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

BE not deceived with  <span id="fr_875"></span>[1](#fn_875) strange
doctrines; nor with old fables which are unprofitable. For if we still
continue to live according to the Jewish law, we do confess ourselves
not to have received grace. For even the most <span
id="fr_876"></span>[2](#fn_876) holy prophets lived according to Christ
Jesus.

2 And for this cause were they persecuted, being inspired by his grace,
 <span id="fr_877"></span>[3](#fn_877) to convince the unbelievers and
disobedient that there is one God who has manifested himself by Jesus
Christ his Son; who is his  <span id="fr_878"></span>[4](#fn_878)
eternal word, not coming forth from silence, who in all things pleased
him that sent him.

3 Wherefore if they who were brought up in these ancient  <span
id="fr_879"></span>[5](#fn_879) laws came nevertheless to the newness of
hope: no longer observing sabbaths,  <span
id="fr_880"></span>[6](#fn_880) but keeping the Lord's day in which also
our life is sprung up by him, and through his death,  <span
id="fr_881"></span>[7](#fn_881) whom yet some deny:

4 (By which mystery we have  <span id="fr_882"></span>[8](#fn_882) been
brought to believe and therefore wait that we may be found the disciples
of Jesus Christ, our only master:)

5 How shall we be able to live  <span id="fr_883"></span>[9](#fn_883)
different from him whose disciples the very prophets themselves being,
did by the spirit expect him as their master.

6  <span id="fr_884"></span>[10](#fn_884) And therefore he whom they
justly waited for, being come, raised them up from the dead.

7 Let us not then be insensible of his goodness; for should he  <span
id="fr_885"></span>[11](#fn_885) have dealt with us according to our
works, we had not no had a being.

8 Wherefore being become his disciples, let us learn to live according
to the rules of Christianity; for whosoever is called by any other name
 <span id="fr_886"></span>[12](#fn_886) besides this, he is not of God.

9 Lay aside therefore the old and sour and evil leaven; and be ye
changed into the new leaven, which is Jesus Christ.

10 Be ye salted in him, lest any one among you should be corrupted; for
by your savour ye shall be  <span id="fr_887"></span>[13](#fn_887)
judged.

11 It is absurd to name Jesus Christ, and to Judaize. For the Christian
religion did not  <span id="fr_888"></span>[14](#fn_888) embrace the
Jewish, but the Jewish the Christian; that so every tongue that believed
might be gathered together unto God.

12 These things, my beloved, I write unto you; not that I know of any
among you that  <span id="fr_889"></span>[15](#fn_889) lie under this
error; but as  <span id="fr_890"></span>[16](#fn_890) one of the least
among you, I am desirous to forewarn you, that ye fall not into the
 <span id="fr_891"></span>[17](#fn_891) snares of false doctrine.

13 But that ye be fully instructed in the birth, and suffering, and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, our hope; which was accomplished in the
time of the government of Pontius Pilate, and that most truly and  <span
id="fr_892"></span>[18](#fn_892) certainly and from which God forbid
that any among you should be turned aside.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *Commends their faith and piety; exhorts them to
persevere;* 10 *desires their prayers for himself and the church at
Antioch*.</span>

MAY I therefore have joy of you in all things, if I shall

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

be worthy of it. For though I am bound, yet I am not worthy to be
compared to one of you that are at liberty.

2 I know that ye are not puffed up; for ye have Jesus Christ  <span
id="fr_893"></span>[1](#fn_893) in your hearts.

3 And especially when I commend you, I know that ye are ashamed, as it
is written,  <span id="fr_894"></span>[2](#fn_894) The just man
condemneth himself.

4 Study therefore to be confirmed in the doctrine of our Lord, and of
his Apostles; that so whatever ye do, ye may prosper both in body and
spirit, in faith and charity, in the Son, and in the Father and in the
Holy Spirit: in the beginning, and in the end.

5 Together with your most worthy bishop, and the  <span
id="fr_895"></span>[3](#fn_895) well-wrought spiritual crown of your
presbytery, and your deacons, which are according to God.

6 Be subject to your bishop, and to one another, as Jesus Christ to the
Father, according to the flesh: and the Apostles both to Christ, and to
the Father, and to the Holy Ghost: that so ye may  <span
id="fr_896"></span>[4](#fn_896) be united both in body and spirit.

7  <span id="fr_897"></span>[5](#fn_897) Knowing you to be full of God,
I have the more briefly exhorted you.

8 Be mindful of me in your prayers, that I may  <span
id="fr_898"></span>[6](#fn_898) attain unto God, and of the Church that
is in Syria, from  <span id="fr_899"></span>[7](#fn_899) which I am not
worthy to be called.

9 For I stand in need of your joint prayers in God, and of your charity,
that the church which is in Syria may be thought worthy to be  <span
id="fr_900"></span>[8](#fn_900) nourished by your church.

10 The Ephesians  <span id="fr_901"></span>[9](#fn_901) from Smyrna
salute you, from which place I write unto you: (being present here to
the glory of God, in like manner as you are,) who have in all things
refreshed me, together with Polycarp, the bishop of the Smyrnæans.

11 The rest of the churches in the honour of Jesus Christ, salute you.

12  <span id="fr_902"></span>[10](#fn_902) Farewell, and be ye
strengthened in the concord of God:  <span
id="fr_903"></span>[11](#fn_903) enjoying his inseparable spirit, which
is Jesus Christ.

¶ *To the Magnesians*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_844"></span>[172:1](lbob19.htm#fr_844) Vid. Interp. Lat.
Epist. Interpol.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[172:2](lbob19.htm#fr_845) In.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[172:3](lbob19.htm#fr_846) According to.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[172:4](lbob19.htm#fr_847) Been vouchsafed a
name carrying a great deal of divinity in it.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[172:5](lbob19.htm#fr_848) See Bishop Pearson.
Vind. Ign. par. ii. cap. 12, p. 146.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[172:6](lbob19.htm#fr_849) Sing, commend.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[172:7](lbob19.htm#fr_850) Undergoing,
escaping.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[172:8](lbob19.htm#fr_851) Worthy of God.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[172:9](lbob19.htm#fr_852) Whom may I enjoy.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[172:10](lbob19.htm#fr_853) Apud. Vet. Lat.
Interp. Glorificato Deum Patrem D. nostri Jesu Christi.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[172:11](lbob19.htm#fr_854) Vid. Voss. Annot.
in loc. Pearson Præf. ad Vind. Ignat.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[172:12](lbob19.htm#fr_855) Seeming youthful
state.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[172:13](lbob19.htm#fr_856) It is becoming.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[172:14](lbob19.htm#fr_857) Without any
hypocrisy.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[172:15](lbob19.htm#fr_858) Who willeth it.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[173:1](lbob19.htm#fr_859) Deludes.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[173:2](lbob19.htm#fr_860) Vid. Epist. Interp.
ad loc.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[173:3](lbob19.htm#fr_861) Flesh.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[173:4](lbob19.htm#fr_862) Firmly.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[173:5](lbob19.htm#fr_863) Together.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[173:6](lbob19.htm#fr_864) Character set.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[173:7](lbob19.htm#fr_865) Your whole
multitude.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[173:8](lbob19.htm#fr_866) The concord of God.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[173:9](lbob19.htm#fr_867) Sweet.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[173:10](lbob19.htm#fr_868) Was made manifest.
Heb. ix. 26.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[173:11](lbob19.htm#fr_869) Habit of God.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[173:12](lbob19.htm#fr_870) John x. 30, xiv.
11, 12, xvii. 21, 22.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[173:13](lbob19.htm#fr_871) Eph. iv. 3, 4, 5,
6.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[173:14](lbob19.htm#fr_872) Run.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[173:15](lbob19.htm#fr_873) John xvi. 28.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[173:16](lbob19.htm#fr_874) Pearson, Vind. Ign.
par. 2, cap. 4.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[174:1](lbob19.htm#fr_875) Heterodox.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[174:2](lbob19.htm#fr_876) Most divine.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[174:3](lbob19.htm#fr_877) Fully to satisfy.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[174:4](lbob19.htm#fr_878) John, i. 1.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[174:5](lbob19.htm#fr_879) Things.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[174:6](lbob19.htm#fr_880) Or, living according
to.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[174:7](lbob19.htm#fr_881) Or, which.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[174:8](lbob19.htm#fr_882) Received.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[174:9](lbob19.htm#fr_883) Without.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[174:10](lbob19.htm#fr_884) Matt. xxvii. 52.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[174:11](lbob19.htm#fr_885) Vid. Annot. Voss.
in loc. should he have imitated our works, Gr.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[174:12](lbob19.htm#fr_886) More than.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[174:13](lbob19.htm#fr_887) Convicted,
overthrown.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[174:14](lbob19.htm#fr_888) Believe.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[174:15](lbob19.htm#fr_889) Have yourselves so.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[174:16](lbob19.htm#fr_890) Lesser than you.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[174:17](lbob19.htm#fr_891) Hooks.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[174:18](lbob19.htm#fr_892) Firmly.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[175:1](lbob19.htm#fr_893) In yourselves.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[175:2](lbob19.htm#fr_894) Prov. xviii. 17
Sept.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[175:3](lbob19.htm#fr_895) Worthily
complicated.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[175:4](lbob19.htm#fr_896) There may be a union
both fleshly and spiritual.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[175:5](lbob19.htm#fr_897) Eph. iii. 4.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[175:6](lbob19.htm#fr_898) Find, enjoy.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[175:7](lbob19.htm#fr_899) Whence.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[175:8](lbob19.htm#fr_900) Bedewed. Vid. Epist.
Inter. in loc.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[175:9](lbob19.htm#fr_901) Which came to Smyrna
upon my account.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[175:10](lbob19.htm#fr_902) Ἔρρωσθε.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[175:11](lbob19.htm#fr_903) Possessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of Ignatius to the Trallians](lbob20)

</div>
