<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob19)  [Next](lbob21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The EPISTLE of IGNATIUS to the TRALLIANS.

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">1 *Acknowledges the coming of their bishop.* 5
*Commends them for their subjection to their bishop, priests, and
deacons; and exhorts them to continue in it:* 15 *is afraid even of his
over-great desire to suffer, lest it should be prejudicial to
him*.</span>

IGNATIUS, who is also called Theophorus, to the holy church which is at
Tralles in Asia: beloved of God the Father of Jesus Christ, elect and
worthy of God, having peace  <span id="fr_904"></span>[12](#fn_904)
through the flesh and blood, and passion of Jesus Christ our hope, in
the resurrection which is  <span id="fr_905"></span>[13](#fn_905) by
him: which also I salute in its fulness, continuing in the apostolical
character, wishing all joy and happiness unto it.

2 I have  <span id="fr_906"></span>[14](#fn_906) heard of your blameless
and  <span id="fr_907"></span>[15](#fn_907) constant disposition through
patience, which  <span id="fr_908"></span>[16](#fn_908) not only appears
in your outward

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

conversation, but is naturally rooted and grounded in you.

3 In like manner as Polybius your bishop has declared unto me, who came
to me to Smyrna, by the will of God and Jesus Christ, and so rejoiced
together with me  <span id="fr_909"></span>[1](#fn_909) in my bonds for
Jesus Christ, that in effect I saw your whole  <span
id="fr_910"></span>[2](#fn_910) church in him.

4 Having therefore received  <span id="fr_911"></span>[3](#fn_911)
testimony of your good will towards me  <span
id="fr_912"></span>[4](#fn_912) for God's sake, by him;  <span
id="fr_913"></span>[5](#fn_913) I seemed to find you, as also I knew
that ye were the  <span id="fr_914"></span>[6](#fn_914) followers of
God.

5 For  <span id="fr_915"></span>[7](#fn_915) whereas ye are subject to
your bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye appear to me to live not after the
manner of men, but according to Jesus Christ; who died for us, that so
believing in his death, ye might  <span id="fr_916"></span>[8](#fn_916)
escape death.

6 It is therefore necessary, that as ye do, so without your bishop, you
should do nothing: also be ye subject to your presbyters, as to the
Apostles of Jesus Christ our hope; in whom if we walk, we shall be found
in him.

7  <span id="fr_917"></span>[9](#fn_917) The deacons also, as being the
ministers of the mysteries of Jesus Christ, must by all means please ye.
For they are not the  <span id="fr_918"></span>[10](#fn_918) ministers
of meat and drink, but of the church of God. Wherefore they must avoid
all offences, as they would do fire.

8 In like manner let us reverence the deacons  <span
id="fr_919"></span>[11](#fn_919) as Jesus Christ; and the bishop as the
father; and the presbyters as the Sanhedrim of God, and college of the
Apostles.

9 Without these there is no  <span id="fr_920"></span>[12](#fn_920)
church. Concerning all which I am persuaded that ye  <span
id="fr_921"></span>[13](#fn_921) think after the very same manner: for I
have received, and even now have with me, the pattern of your love, in
your bishop.

10 Whose very  <span id="fr_922"></span>[14](#fn_922) look is
instructive; and whose mildness  <span id="fr_923"></span>[15](#fn_923)
powerful:  <span id="fr_924"></span>[16](#fn_924) whom I am persuaded,
the very Atheists themselves cannot but reverence.

11 But because I have a love towards you, I will not write any more
sharply unto you about this matter, though I very well might; but now I
have done so; lest being a condemned man, I should seem to prescribe to
you as an Apostle.

12 I have  <span id="fr_925"></span>[17](#fn_925) great knowledge in
God; but I  <span id="fr_926"></span>[18](#fn_926) refrain myself, lest
I should perish in my boasting.

13 For now I ought the more to fear; and not to hearken to those that
would puff me up.

14 For they that speak to me, in my praise, chasten me.

15 For I indeed  <span id="fr_927"></span>[19](#fn_927) desire to
suffer, but I cannot tell whether I am worthy so to do.

16  <span id="fr_928"></span>[20](#fn_928) And this desire, though to
others it does not appear, yet to myself it is for that very reason the
more violent. I have, therefore, need of  <span
id="fr_929"></span>[21](#fn_929) moderation; by which the prince of this
world is destroyed.

17 Am I not able to write to you of heavenly things?—But I

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span id="img_17700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST ON THE
CROSS BETWEEN THE TWO MALEFACTORS. FROM A FRESCO PAINTING BY MASACCIO,
IN THE CHURCH OF ST. CLEMENT, AT ROME.](tn/17700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17700.jpg)  
CHRIST ON THE CROSS BETWEEN THE TWO MALEFACTORS. FROM A FRESCO PAINTING
BY MASACCIO, IN THE CHURCH OF ST. CLEMENT, AT ROME.  
</span>

fear lest I should harm you, who are yet but babes in Christ: (excuse me
this care;) and lest per chance being not able to receive them, ye
should be choken with them.

13 For even I myself, although I am in bonds,  <span
id="fr_930"></span>[1](#fn_930) yet am not therefore able to understand
heavenly things:

19 As the places of the angels, and the several companies of them, under
their respective princes; things visible and invisible; but in these I
am yet a learner.

20 For many things are wanting to us, that we come not short of God.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">1 *Warns them against heretics,* 4 *exhorts them to
humility and unity,* 10 *briefly sets before them the true doctrine
concerning Christ*.</span>

I EXHORT you therefore, or rather not I, but the love of Jesus Christ;
that ye use none but Christian nourishment; abstaining from pasture
which is of another kind, I mean heresy.

2  <span id="fr_931"></span>[2](#fn_931) For they that are heretics,
confound together the doctrine of Jesus Christ, with their own poison:
 <span id="fr_932"></span>[3](#fn_932) whilst they seem worthy of
belief:

3 As men give a deadly potion mixed with sweet wine; which he who drinks
of, does with the treacherous pleasure sweetly drink in his own death.

4 Wherefore guard yourselves against such persons. And that you will do
if you are not puffed up; but continue inseparable from Jesus Christ our
God, and from your bishop, and from the commands of the Apostles.

5  <span id="fr_933"></span>[4](#fn_933) He that is within the altar is
pure; but he that is without, that is, that does anything without the
bishop, the presbyters, and deacons, is not pure in his conscience.

6 Not that I know there is any thing of this nature among you; but I
fore-arm you, as being greatly beloved by me, foreseeing the snares of
the devil.

7 Wherefore putting on meekness, renew yourselves in faith, that is, the
flesh of the Lord; and in charity, that is, the blood of Jesus Christ.

8 Let no man have any  <span id="fr_934"></span>[5](#fn_934) grudge
against his neighbour. Give no occasion to the Gentiles; lest by means
of a few foolish men, the whole congregation of God be evil spoken of.

9 For woe to that man  <span id="fr_935"></span>[6](#fn_935) through
whose vanity my name is blasphemed by any.

10 Stop your ears therefore, as often as any one shall  <span
id="fr_936"></span>[7](#fn_936) speak contrary to Jesus Christ; who was
of the race of David, of the Virgin Mary.

11 Who was truly born and did eat and drink; was truly persecuted under
Pontius Pilate; was truly crucified and dead; both those in heaven and
on earth,  <span id="fr_937"></span>[8](#fn_937) being spectators of it.

12 Who was also truly raised from the dead  <span
id="fr_938"></span>[9](#fn_938) by his Father. after the same manner as
 <span id="fr_939"></span>[10](#fn_939) he will also raise up us who
believe in him by Christ Jesus; without whom we have no true life.

13 But if, as some who are

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Atheists, that is
to say infidels, pretend, that he only seemed to suffer: (they
themselves only seeming to exist) why then am I bound?—Why do I desire
to fight with beasts?—Therefore do I die in vain: therefore I will not
speak falsely against the Lord.

14 Flee therefore these evil  <span
id="fr_940"></span>[1](lbob21.htm#fn_940) sprouts which bring forth
deadly fruit; of which if any one taste, he shall presently die.

15 For these are not the plants of the Father; seeing if they were, they
would appear to be the branches of the cross, and their fruit would be
incorruptible; by which he invites you through his passion, who are
members of him.

16 For the head cannot be without its members, God having promised a
union, that is himself.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">*He again exhorts to unity: and desires their
prayers for himself and for his church at Antioch*.</span>

I SALUTE you from Smyrna,  <span
id="fr_941"></span>[2](lbob21.htm#fn_941) together with the churches of
God that are present with me; who have refreshed me in all things, both
in the flesh and in the spirit.

2 My bonds, which I carry about me for the sake of Christ, beseeching
him that I may attain unto God) exhort you, that you continue in  <span
id="fr_942"></span>[3](lbob21.htm#fn_942) concord among yourselves and
in prayer with one another.

3 For it becomes every one of you, especially the presbyters, to refresh
the bishop, to the honour of the Father of Jesus Christ and of the
Apostles.

4 I beseech you, that you hearken to me in love; that I may not  <span
id="fr_943"></span>[4](lbob21.htm#fn_943) by those things which I write,
rise up in witness against you.

5 Pray also for me; who through the mercy of God stand in need of your
prayers, that I may be worthy of the portion which I am about to obtain
that I be not found a reprobate.

6 The love of those who are at Smyrna and Ephesus salute you. Remember
in your prayers the church of Syria, from which I am not worthy to be
called, being one of the least  <span
id="fr_944"></span>[5](lbob21.htm#fn_944) of it.

7 Fare ye well in Jesus Christ; being subject to your bishop as to the
command of God; and so likewise to the presbytery.

8 Love every one his brother with an  <span
id="fr_945"></span>[6](lbob21.htm#fn_945) unfeigned heart.  <span
id="fr_946"></span>[7](lbob21.htm#fn_946) My soul be your expiation, not
only now, but when I shall have attained unto God; for I am yet under
danger.

9 But the Father is faithful in Jesus Christ, to fulfil both mine and
your petition; in whom may ye be found unblamable.

¶ *To the Trallians*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_904"></span>[175:12](lbob20.htm#fr_904) In.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[175:13](lbob20.htm#fr_905) Unto.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[175:14](lbob20.htm#fr_906) Known.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[175:15](lbob20.htm#fr_907) Inseparable mind.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[175:16](lbob20.htm#fr_908) Which you have not
according to use, but according to possession.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[176:1](lbob20.htm#fr_909) Who am bound.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[176:2](lbob20.htm#fr_910) Multitude.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[176:3](lbob20.htm#fr_911) Your benevolence.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[176:4](lbob20.htm#fr_912) According to God.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[176:5](lbob20.htm#fr_913) Vid. Vossium in loc.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[176:6](lbob20.htm#fr_914) Imitators.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[176:7](lbob20.htm#fr_915) When.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[176:8](lbob20.htm#fr_916) Flee from.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[176:9](lbob20.htm#fr_917) Vid Vossium in loc.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[176:10](lbob20.htm#fr_918) Deacons.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[176:11](lbob20.htm#fr_919) As also the bishop
like Jesus Christ the Son of the Father. Vossius in loc. vid. aliter
Cotelerium.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[176:12](lbob20.htm#fr_920) A church is not
called.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[176:13](lbob20.htm#fr_921) So do.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[176:14](lbob20.htm#fr_922) Habit of body is
great instruction.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[176:15](lbob20.htm#fr_923) Power.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[176:16](lbob20.htm#fr_924) Vid. Vossium et
Usserium in loc.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[176:17](lbob20.htm#fr_925) I understand many
things.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[176:18](lbob20.htm#fr_926) Measure.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[176:19](lbob20.htm#fr_927) Love.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[176:20](lbob20.htm#fr_928) Vid. Annot. Vossii
in loc.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[176:21](lbob20.htm#fr_929) Mildness.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[177:1](lbob20.htm#fr_930) Orders.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[177:2](lbob20.htm#fr_931) Vid. de hoc loco
conjecturas Vossii, Cotelerii, et Junii spud Usserium. Comp. Epist.
Intercol. in loc. et Voss. Annot. in Epist. ad Phil. p. 281.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[177:3](lbob20.htm#fr_932) Being believed for
their dignity.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[177:4](lbob20.htm#fr_933) Vid. Usserii Obs.
Marg. Comp Coteler. ib.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[177:5](lbob20.htm#fr_934) Any thing.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[177:6](lbob20.htm#fr_935) Through whom in
vanity: Isaiah lii. 5.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[177:7](lbob20.htm#fr_936) Without.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[177:8](lbob20.htm#fr_937) Seeing, or looking
on.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[177:9](lbob20.htm#fr_938) His Father raising
him.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[177:10](lbob20.htm#fr_939) The Father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans](lbob21)

</div>
