<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob08)  [Next](lbob10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE EPISTLES of JESUS CHRIST and ABGARUS KING of EDESSA.

\[The first writer who makes any mention of the Epistles that passed
between Jesus Christ and Abgarus, is Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, in
Palestine, who flourished in the early part of the fourth century. For
their genuineness, he appeals to the public registers and records of the
City of Edessa in Mesopotamia, where Abgarus reigned, affirms that he
found them written, in the Syriac language. He published a Greek
translation of them, in his Ecclesiastical History. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) The learned world have been much divided
on this subject; but, notwithstanding that the erudite Grabe, with
Archbishop Cave, Dr. Parker, and other divines, has strenuously
contended for their admission into the canon of Scripture, they are
deemed apocryphal. The Rev. Jeremiah Jones observes, that the common
people in England have this Epistle in their houses, in many places,
fixed in a frame, with the picture of Christ before it; and that they
generally, with much honesty and devotion, regard it as the word of God,
and the genuine Epistle of Christ.\]

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">*A copy of a letter written by King Abgarus to
Jesus, and sent to him by Ananias, his footman, to Jerusalem,* 5
*inviting him to Edessa*.</span>

ABGARUS, king of Edessa, to Jesus the good Saviour, who appears at
Jerusalem, greeting.

2 I have been informed concerning you and your cures, which are
performed without the use of medicines and herbs.

3 For it is reported, that you cause the blind to see, the lame to walk,
do both cleanse lepers, and cast out unclean spirits and devils, and
restore them to health

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

who have been long diseased, and raisest up the dead;

4 All which when I heard, I was persuaded of one of these two, viz:
either that you are God himself descended from heaven, who do these
things, or the son of God.

5 On this account therefore I have wrote to you, earnestly to desire you
would take the trouble of a journey hither, and cure a disease which I
am under.

6 For I hear the Jews ridicule you, and intend you mischief.

7 My city is indeed small, but neat, and large enough for us both.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">*The answer of Jesus by Ananias the footman to
Abgarus the king,* 3 *declining to visit Edessa*.</span>

ABGARUS, you are happy, forasmuch as you have believed on me, whom ye
have not seen.

2 For it is written concerning me, that those who have seen me should
not believe on me, that they who have not seen might believe and live.

3 As to that part of your letter, which relates to my giving you a
visit, I must inform you, that I must fulfil all the ends of my mission
in this country, and after that be received up again to him who sent me.

4 But after my ascension I will send one of my disciples, who will cure
your disease, and give life to you, and all that are with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[62:1](lbob09.htm#fr_35) L. i. c. 13.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gospel of Nicodemus, Formerly Called the Acts of Pontius
Pilate](lbob10)

</div>
