<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob14)  [Next](lbob16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

### The FIRST EPISTLE of CLEMENT to the CORINTHIANS.

Clement was a disciple of Peter, and afterwards Bishop of Rome. Clemens
Alexandrinus calls him an apostle. Jerome says he was an apostolical
man, and Rufinus that he was almost an apostle. Eusebius calls this the
wonderful Epistle of St. Clement, and says that it was publicly read in
the assemblies of the primitive church. It is included in one of the
ancient collections of the Canon Scripture. Its genuineness has been
much questioned, particularly by Photius, patriarch of Constantinople in
the ninth century, who objects that Clement speaks of worlds beyond the
ocean; that he has not written worthily of the divinity of Christ; and
that to prove the possibility of a future resurrection, he introduces
the fabulous story of the phœnix's revival from its own ashes. To the
latter objection, Archbishop Wake replies that the generality of the
ancient Fathers have made use of the same instance in proof of the same
point; and asks if St. Clement really believed that there was such a
bird, and that it did revive out of the cinders of the body after
burning, where was the great harm either in giving credit to such a
wonder, or, believing it, to make such a use as he here does of it?—The
present is the Archbishop's translation from the ancient Greek copy of
the Epistle, which is at the end of the celebrated Alexandrine MS. of
the Septuagint and New Testament, presented by Cyril, patriarch of
Alexandria, to King Charles the First, now in the British Museum. The
Archbishop, in prefacing his translation, esteems it a great blessing
that this "Epistle" was at last so happily found out for the increase
and confirmation both of our faith and our charity.

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">*He commends them for their excellent order and
piety in Christ, before their schism broke out*.</span>

THE Church of God which  <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) is at
Rome, to the Church of God which is at Corinth,  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) elect, sanctified  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) by the will of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord: grace and peace from the Almighty God, by Jesus Christ be
multiplied unto you. <span id="fr_140"></span>[4](#fn_140)

2 ¶ Brethren, the  <span id="fr_141"></span>[5](#fn_141) sudden and
unexpected dangers and calamities that have fallen upon us, have, we
fear, made us the more slow in our consideration of those things which
you inquired of us:

3  <span id="fr_142"></span>[6](#fn_142) As also of that wicked and
detestable sedition, so  <span id="fr_143"></span>[7](#fn_143)
unbecoming the elect of God, which a few heady and self-willed men have
fomented to such a degree of madness, that your venerable and renowned
name, so worthy of all men to be beloved, is greatly blasphemed thereby.

4 For who that has  <span id="fr_144"></span>[8](#fn_144) ever been
among you has not experimented the firmness of your faith,  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[9](#fn_145) and its fruitfulness in all good works;
and admired the temper and moderation of your religion in Christ; and
published abroad the magnificence of your hospitality, and thought you
happy in your perfect and certain knowledge of the Gospel?

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span id="img_11300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST'S ENTRY
INTO JERUSALEM, AND CHRIST BEFORE PILATE. FROM INTAGLIOS IN A BOX OF
ROCK CRYSTAL, BY A EARLY VENETIAN ARTIST.](tn/11300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11300.jpg)  
CHRIST'S ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM, AND CHRIST BEFORE PILATE. FROM INTAGLIOS
IN A BOX OF ROCK CRYSTAL, BY A EARLY VENETIAN ARTIST.  
</span>

5 For ye did all things without respect of persons and walked  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146) according to the laws of God; being
subject to those who had the rule over you, and giving the honour that
was fitting to the  <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147) aged among
you.

6 Ye commanded the young men to think those things that were modest and
grave.

7 The women ye exhorted to do all things with an unblameable and seemly,
and pure conscience; loving their own husbands, as was fitting: and that
keeping themselves within the  <span id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_148)
bounds of a due obedience, they should <span
id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_149) order their houses gravely, with all
 <span id="fr_150"></span>[5](#fn_150) discretion.

8\.  <span id="fr_151"></span>[6](#fn_151) Ye were all of you humble
minded, not  <span id="fr_152"></span>[7](#fn_152) boasting of any
thing: desiring rather to be subject than to govern; to  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[8](#fn_153) give than to receive; being  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[9](#fn_154) content with the portion God hath
dispensed to you;

9 And hearkening diligently to his word, ye  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[10](#fn_155) were enlarged in your bowels, having
his  <span id="fr_156"></span>[11](#fn_156) suffering always before your
eyes.

10 Thus a firm, and  <span id="fr_157"></span>[12](#fn_157) blessed and
profitable peace was given unto you; and an unsatiable desire of doing
good; and a plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost was upon all of you.

11 And being full of <span id="fr_158"></span>[13](#fn_158) good
designs, ye did with  <span id="fr_159"></span>[14](#fn_159) great
readiness of mind, and with a religious confidence stretch forth your
hands to God Almighty; beseeching him to be merciful unto you, if in any
thing ye had unwillingly sinned against him.

12 Ye contended day and night for the whole brotherhood; that  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[15](#fn_160) with compassion and a good conscience,
the number of his elect might be saved.

13 Ye were sincere, and without offence towards each other; not mindful
of injuries; all sedition and schism was an abomination unto you.

14 Ye bewailed every one his neighbour's sins, esteeming their defects
your own.

15 Ye <span id="fr_161"></span>[16](#fn_161) were kind one to another
without grudging; being ready to every good work. And being adorned with
a conversation altogether virtuous and religious, ye did all things in
the fear of God; whose  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[17](#fn_162)commandments were written upon the
tables of your heart.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">*How their divisions began*.</span>

ALL honour and enlargement was given unto you; and so was fulfilled that
which is written,  <span id="fr_163"></span>[18](#fn_163) my beloved did
eat and drink, he was enlarged and waxed fat, and he kicked.

2 From hence came emulation, and envy, and strife, and sedition;
persecution and  <span id="fr_164"></span>[19](#fn_164) disorder, war
and captivity.

3 So they who were of no renown, lifted up themselves against the
honourable; those of no reputation, against those who were in respect;
the foolish against the wise; the young men against the aged.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

4 Therefore righteousness and peace are departed from you, because every
one hath forsaken the fear of God; and is grown blind in his faith; nor
walketh by the rule of God's commandments nor liveth as is fitting in
Christ:

5 But every one  <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) follows his own
wicked lusts: having taken up an unjust and wicked envy, by which death
first entered into the world.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">Envy and emulation the original of all strife and
disorder. Examples of the mischiefs they have occasioned.</span>

FOR thus it is written,  <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) And in
process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the
ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of the
firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof:

2 And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering. But unto Cain
and unto his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very sorrowful,
and his countenance fell.

3 And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou sorrowful? And why is thy
countenance fallen?  <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) If thou shalt
offer aright, but not divide aright, hast thou not sinned? Hold thy
peace: unto thee shall be his  <span id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_168)
desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

4 And Cain said unto Abel his brother, Let us go down into the field.
And it came to pass, as they were in the field, that Cain rose up
against Abel his brother, and slew him.

5 Ye see, brethren, how envy and emulation wrought  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[5](#fn_169) the death of a brother. For  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[6](#fn_170) this our father  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[7](#fn_171) Jacob fled from the face of his brother
Esau.

6 It was this that caused  <span id="fr_172"></span>[8](#fn_172) Joseph
to be persecuted even unto death, and to come into bondage. Envy forced
 <span id="fr_173"></span>[9](#fn_173) Moses to flee from the face of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, when he heard his own countrymen ask him,  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[10](#fn_174) Who made thee a Judge, and a ruler over
us? Wilt thou kill me as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday?

7 Through envy Aaron and Miriam were  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[11](#fn_175) shut out of the camp, from the rest of
the congregation seven days.

8  <span id="fr_176"></span>[12](#fn_176) Emulation  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[13](#fn_177) sent Dathan and Abiram quick into the
 <span id="fr_178"></span>[14](#fn_178) grave because they raised up a
sedition against Moses the servant of God.

9 For this David  <span id="fr_179"></span>[15](#fn_179) was not only
hated of strangers, but was persecuted even by Saul the king of Israel.

10 But  <span id="fr_180"></span>[16](#fn_180) not to insist upon
antient examples, let us come to those  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[17](#fn_181) worthies that have been nearest to us;
and take the brave examples of our own age.

11 Through zeal and envy,  <span id="fr_182"></span>[18](#fn_182) the
most faithful and righteous  <span id="fr_183"></span>[19](#fn_183)
pillars of the church have been persecuted even to the most grievous
deaths.

12 Let us set before our eyes the holy Apostles; Peter by unjust envy
underwent not one or

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

two, but many  <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184) sufferings;  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_185) til at last being martyred, he went to
the place of glory that was due unto him.

13  <span id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_186) For the same cause did Paul in
like manner receive the reward of his patience. Seven times  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[4](#fn_187) he was in bonds; he was whipped, was
stoned; he preached both in the East and in the West;  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[5](#fn_188) leaving behind him the glorious report
of his faith:

14 And so having taught the whole world righteousness, and for that end
travelled even to the utmost bounds of the West; he at last suffered
martyrdom  <span id="fr_189"></span>[6](#fn_189) by the command of the
governors,

15 And departed out of the world, and went unto his holy place; being
become a most eminent pattern of patience unto all ages.

16 To these  <span id="fr_190"></span>[7](#fn_190) Holy Apostles were
joined a very great number of others, who having through envy undergone
in like manner many pains and torments, have  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[8](#fn_191) left a glorious example to us.

17 For  <span id="fr_192"></span>[9](#fn_192) this not only men but
women have been persecuted:  <span id="fr_193"></span>[10](#fn_193) and
having suffered very grievous and  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[11](#fn_194) cruel punishments, have finished the
course of their faith with firmness; and though weak in body, yet
received a glorious reward.

18  <span id="fr_195"></span>[12](#fn_195) This has alienated the minds
even of women from their husbands; and changed what was once said by our
father Adam;  <span id="fr_196"></span>[13](#fn_196) This is now bone of
my bone, and flesh of my flesh.

19 In a word, envy and strife, have overturned  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[14](#fn_197) whole cities, and rooted out great
nations from off the earth.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *He exhorts them to live by the rules, and repent
of their divisions, and they shall be forgiven*.</span>

THESE things, beloved, we  <span id="fr_198"></span>[15](#fn_198) write
unto you, not only  <span id="fr_199"></span>[16](#fn_199) for your
instruction, but also for our own remembrance.

2 For we are all in the same  <span id="fr_200"></span>[17](#fn_200)
lists, and the same combat is  <span id="fr_201"></span>[18](#fn_201)
prepared for us all.

3 Wherefore let us lay aside all vain and empty cares; and let us come
up to the glorious and venerable rule of our holy calling.

4  <span id="fr_202"></span>[19](#fn_202) Let us consider what is good,
and acceptable and well-pleasing in the sight of him that made us.

5 Let us look steadfastly to the blood of Christ, and see how precious
his blood is in the sight of God: which being shed for our
salvation, <span id="fr_203"></span>[20](#fn_203) has obtained the grace
of repentance for all the world.

6 Let us  <span id="fr_204"></span>[21](#fn_204) search into all the
ages that have gone before us; and let us learn that our Lord has  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[22](#fn_205) in every one of them still given place
for repentance to all such as would  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[23](#fn_206) turn to him.

7  <span id="fr_207"></span>[24](#fn_207) Noah preached repentance; and
as many as hearkened to him were saved.  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[25](#fn_208) Jonah denounced

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

destruction against the Ninevites:

8 Howbeit they repenting of their sins, appeased God by their prayers:
and  <span id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209) were saved, though they were
strangers to the covenant of God.

9 ¶ Hence we find how all the ministers of the grace of God have spoken
by the Holy Spirit of repentance. And even the Lord of all has himself
 <span id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_210) declared with an oath concerning
it;

10  <span id="fr_211"></span>[3](#fn_211) As I live, saith the Lord, I
desire not the death of a sinner,  <span id="fr_212"></span>[4](#fn_212)
but that he should repent. Adding farther this good sentence, saying:
 <span id="fr_213"></span>[5](#fn_213) Turn from your iniquity, O house
of Israel.

11  <span id="fr_214"></span>[6](#fn_214) Say unto the children of my
people, Though your sins should reach from earth to heaven; and though
they shall be redder than scarlet, and blacker than sackcloth; yet if ye
shall turn to me with all your heart, and shall call me father, I will
hearken to you, as to a holy people.

12 And in another place he saith on this wise:  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[7](#fn_215) Wash ye, make you clean; put away  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[8](#fn_216) the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

13 Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins
be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they he red as
crimson,  <span id="fr_217"></span>[9](#fn_217) they shall be as wool.

14 If ye he willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but
if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword; for the
mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

15 These things has God established by his Almighty will, desiring that
all his beloved should come to repentance.

#### CHAP. V.

<span class="small">1 *He sets before them the examples of holy men,
whose piety is recorded in the Scriptures*.</span>

WHEREFORE let us obey his excellent and glorious will; and  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[10](#fn_218) imploring his mercy and goodness, let
us fall down upon our faces before him, and  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[11](#fn_219) cast ourselves upon his mercy; laying
aside all  <span id="fr_220"></span>[12](#fn_220) vanity, and
contention, and envy which leads unto death.

2 Let us look up to those who have the most perfectly ministered to his
excellent glory. Let us take Enoch for our example; who being found
righteous in obedience, was <span id="fr_221"></span>[13](#fn_221)
translated, and his death was not  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[14](#fn_222) known.

3 Noah  <span id="fr_223"></span>[15](#fn_223) being proved to be
faithful, did by his ministry preach  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[16](#fn_224) regeneration to the world; and the Lord
saved by him all the living creatures, that went  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[17](#fn_225) with one accord into the ark.

4  <span id="fr_226"></span>[18](#fn_226) Abraham, who was called God's
friend, was in like manner found faithful; inasmuch as he obeyed the
 <span id="fr_227"></span>[19](#fn_227) commands of God.

5 By obedience  <span id="fr_228"></span>[20](#fn_228) he went out of
his own country, and from

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

his own kindred, and from his father's house: that so forsaking a small
country, and a weak affinity, and a little house, he might inherit the
promises of God.

6 For thus God said unto him;  <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) get
thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's
house, unto a land that I will show thee.

7 And I will make thee a great nation, and will bless thee, and make thy
name great, and thou shalt be blessed. And I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee shall all families of
the earth be blessed.

8 And again when he separated himself from Lot, God said unto him;
 <span id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230) Lift up now thine eyes, and look
from the place where thou art northward and southward and eastward and
 <span id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_231) westward for all the land which
thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

9 And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man
can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

10 And again he saith: and  <span id="fr_232"></span>[4](#fn_232) God
brought forth Abraham, and said unto him; Look now toward heaven, and
tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: so shall thy seed be.

11 And Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness.

12 Through faith and hospitality,  <span id="fr_233"></span>[5](#fn_233)
he had a son given him in his old age; and through obedience he offered
him up in sacrifice to God, upon one of the mountains which God showed
unto him.

#### CHAP. VI.

<span class="small">1 *And particularly such as have been eminent for
their kindness and charity to their neighbours*.</span>

BY  <span id="fr_234"></span>[6](#fn_234) hospitality and godliness was
Lot saved out of Sodom, when all the country round about was  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[7](#fn_235) destroyed by fire and brimstone:

2 The Lord thereby making it manifest, that he will not forsake those
that trust in him; but  <span id="fr_236"></span>[8](#fn_236) will bring
the disobedient to punishment and correction.

3 For his wife who went out with him, being of a different mind,  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[9](#fn_237) and not continuing in the same
obedience, was for that reason  <span id="fr_238"></span>[10](#fn_238)
set forth for an example, being turned into a pillar of salt unto this
day.

4 That so all men may know, that those who are double minded, and
distrustful of the power of God, are  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[11](#fn_239) prepared for condemnation, and to be a
sign to all succeeding ages.

5  <span id="fr_240"></span>[12](#fn_240) By faith and hospitality was
Rahab the harlot saved. For when the spies were sent by Joshua the son
of Nun, to search out Jericho and the king of Jericho knew that they
were come to spy out his country;  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[13](#fn_241) he sent men to take them, so that they
might be put to death.

6  <span id="fr_242"></span>[14](#fn_242) Rahab therefore being
hospitable, received them, and hid

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

them under the stalks of flax, on the top of her house.

7 And when the  <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_243) messengers that
were sent by the king came unto her, and asked her, saying,  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[2](#fn_244) There came men unto thee to spy out the
land, bring them forth, for so hath the king commanded: She answered,
 <span id="fr_245"></span>[3](#fn_245) The two men whom ye seek came
unto me, but presently they departed, and are gone:  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[4](#fn_246) Not discovering them unto them.

8 Then she said to the  <span id="fr_247"></span>[5](#fn_247) spies,
 <span id="fr_248"></span>[6](#fn_248) I know that the Lord your God
 <span id="fr_249"></span>[7](#fn_249) has given this city into your
hands; for the fear of you is fallen upon all that dwell therein. When,
therefore, ye shall have taken it  <span id="fr_250"></span>[8](#fn_250)
ye shall save me and my father's house.

9 And they answered her, saying, It shall be as thou hast spoken to us.
 <span id="fr_251"></span>[9](#fn_251) Therefore, when thou shalt know
that we are near thou shalt gather all thy family together upon the
housetop, and they shall be saved: but all that shall be found without
thy house, shall be destroyed.

10  <span id="fr_252"></span>[10](#fn_252) And they gave her moreover a
sign: that she should hang out of her house a scarlet rope;  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[11](#fn_253) sheaving thereby, that by the blood of
our Lord, there should be redemption to all that believe and hope in
God. Ye see, beloved, how there was not only faith, but prophecy too in
this woman.

#### CHAP. VII.

<span class="small">1 *What rules are given for this purpose*.</span>

LET us, therefore, humble ourselves, brethren, laying aside all pride,
and boasting, and foolishness, and anger: And let us do as it is
written.

2 For thus saith the Holy Spirit;  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[12](#fn_254) Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his
riches; but let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord, to seek him, and
to do judgment and justice.

3 Above all, remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, which he spake
 <span id="fr_255"></span>[13](#fn_255) concerning equity and long
suffering,  <span id="fr_256"></span>[14](#fn_256) saying,

4  <span id="fr_257"></span>[15](#fn_257) Be ye merciful and ye shall
obtain mercy; forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: as ye do, so shall it
be done unto you: as ye give, so shall it be given unto you: as ye
judge, so shall ye be judged; as ye are kind to others so shall God be
kind to you: with what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be
measured to you again.

5 By this command, and by these rules, let us establish ourselves, that
so we may always walk obediently to his holy words; being humble minded:

6 For so says  <span id="fr_258"></span>[16](#fn_258) the Holy
Scripture;  <span id="fr_259"></span>[17](#fn_259) upon whom shall I
look, even upon him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and that
trembles at my word.

7 ¶ It is, therefore, just and  <span id="fr_260"></span>[18](#fn_260)
righteous, men and brethren, that we should become obedient unto God,
rather than follow

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

such as  <span id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_261) through pride and
sedition, have made themselves the ring-leaders of a detestable
emulation.

8 For it is not an ordinary harm that we shall do ourselves but rather a
very great danger that we shall run, if we shall rashly give up
ourselves to the wills of men who  <span id="fr_262"></span>[2](#fn_262)
promote strife and seditions, to turn us aside from that which is
fitting.

9 But let us be kind to one another, according to the compassion and
sweetness of him that made us.

10 For it is written,  <span id="fr_263"></span>[3](#fn_263) The
merciful shall inherit the earth; and they that are without evil shall
be left upon it:  <span id="fr_264"></span>[4](#fn_264) but the
transgressors shall perish from off the face of it.

11 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_265"></span>[5](#fn_265) I have
seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself like the cedar of
Libanus. I passed by, and lo! he was not; I sought his place, but it
could not be found.

12 Keep innocently, and do the thing that is right, for there shall be a
remnant to the peaceable man.

13 Let us, therefore, hold fast to those who  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[6](#fn_266) religiously follow peace; and not to
such as  <span id="fr_267"></span>[7](#fn_267) only pretend to desire.

14 For he saith in a certain place,  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[8](#fn_268) This people honoureth me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me.

15 And again, They  <span id="fr_269"></span>[9](#fn_269) bless with
their mouths,  <span id="fr_270"></span>[10](#fn_270) but curse in their
hearts.

16 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_271"></span>[11](#fn_271) They
loved him with their mouths, and with their tongues they lied to him.
For their heart was not r right with him, neither were they, faithful in
his covenant.

17  <span id="fr_272"></span>[12](#fn_272)  Let all deceitful lips
become dumb, and the tongue that speaketh proud things. Who have said,
 <span id="fr_273"></span>[13](#fn_273) with our tongue will we prevail;
our lips are our own, who is Lord over us.

18 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise saith the Lord; I will set him in safety, I will deal
confidently with him.

#### CHAP. VIII.

<span class="small">*He advises them to be humble; and that from the
examples of Jesus and of holy men in all ages*.</span>

FOR Christ is theirs who are humble, and not who exalt themselves over
his flock. The sceptre of the majesty of God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
came not in the  <span id="fr_274"></span>[14](#fn_274) shew of pride
and arrogance,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[15](#fn_275) though he could
have done so; but with humility as the Holy Ghost had before spoken
concerning him.

2 For thus he saith, Lord,  <span id="fr_276"></span>[16](#fn_276) who
hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of
a dry ground.

3 He hath no form or comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

4 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief.

5 And we hid, as it were, our faces from him; he was despised, and we
esteemed him not.

6 Surely he hath born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

7 But he was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed.

8 All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

9 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth:
he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

10 He was taken from prison, and from judgment; and who shall declare
his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the living, for
the transgressions of my people was he stricken.

11 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
mouth.

12 Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief; when
thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days; and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand.

13 He shall see of the travail of his soul and shall be satisfied; by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear
their iniquities.

14 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul
into death; and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the
sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

15 And again he himself saith,  <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277) I
am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people. All
they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out their lips, they
shake their heads, saying: He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver
him, let him deliver him seeing he delighted in him.

16 Ye see, beloved, what the pattern is that has been given to us. For
if the Lord thus humbled himself, what should we do who are
brought <span id="fr_278"></span>[2](#fn_278) by him under the yoke of
his grace?

17 Let us be followers of those who went about in goat-skins and
sheep-skins; preaching the coming of Christ.

18  <span id="fr_279"></span>[3](#fn_279) Such were Elias, and Elisæus,
and Ezekiel the prophets.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[4](#fn_280) And let
us add to these such others as have received the like testimony.

19 Abraham has been greatly witnessed of; having been called the friend
of God. And yet he steadfastly beholding the glory of God, says with all
humility,  <span id="fr_281"></span>[5](#fn_281) I am dust and ashes.

20 Again of Job it is thus written,  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[6](#fn_282) That he was just and without blame,
true; one that served God, and abstained from all evil. Yet he accusing
himself, says,  <span id="fr_283"></span>[7](#fn_283) No man is free
from pollution, no not though he should live but one day.

21 Moses was called faithful

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="img_12100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TWO SPIES SENT
BY JOSHUA TO JERICHO, AND THEIR ESCAPE FROM THE HOUSE FROM RAHAB. FROM
MOSAICS OF THE FIRST CENTURY IN THE CHURCH OF ST. MARIA MAGGIORE,
ROME.](tn/12100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12100.jpg)  
THE TWO SPIES SENT BY JOSHUA TO JERICHO, AND THEIR ESCAPE FROM THE HOUSE
FROM RAHAB. FROM MOSAICS OF THE FIRST CENTURY IN THE CHURCH OF ST. MARIA
MAGGIORE, ROME.  
</span>

in all God's House; and by his conduct <span
id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_284) the Lord punished Israel by stripes and
plagues.

22 And even this man, though thus greatly honoured, spake not greatly of
himself; but when the oracle of God was delivered to him out of the bush
he said,  <span id="fr_285"></span>[2](#fn_285) Who am I, that thou dost
send me? I am of a slender voice, and a slow tongue.

23 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[3](#fn_286) I am as
the smoke of the pot.

24 And what shall we say of David, so highly testified of in the Holy
Scriptures? To whom God said  <span id="fr_287"></span>[4](#fn_287) I
have found a man after my own heart, David the son of Jesse, with my
holy oil have I anointed him.

25 But yet be himself saith unto God,  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[5](#fn_288) Have mercy upon me, O God, according to
thy loving kindness; according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies,
blot out my transgressions.

26 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin!
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

27 Against Thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight,
that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when
thou judgest.

28 Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.

29 Behold, thou desireth truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden
part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

30 Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be
whiter than snow.

31 Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast
broken may rejoice.

32 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

33 Create in me a clean heart O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

34 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from
me.

35 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

36 Then I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

37 Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation,
and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

38 O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

39 For thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it; thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.

40 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite
heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

#### CHAP. IX.

<span class="small">He again persuades them to compose their
divisions.</span>

THUS has the humility and  <span id="fr_289"></span>[6](#fn_289) godly
fear of these <span id="fr_290"></span>[7](#fn_290) great and excellent
men,  <span id="fr_291"></span>[8](#fn_291) recorded in the Scriptures,
through obedience, made not only us, but also the generations before us
better; even as many as have received his holy oracles  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[9](#fn_292) with fear and truth.

2 Having therefore so many,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and such great and glorious <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_293)
examples, <span id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_294) let us return to that
peace which was the mark that from the beginning was set before us;

3 Let us look up to the Father and Creator of the whole world; and let
us hold fast to his glorious and exceeding gifts and benefits of peace.

4 Let us <span id="fr_295"></span>[3](#fn_295) consider and behold with
the eyes of our <span id="fr_296"></span>[4](#fn_296) understanding his
long-suffering will; and think how gentle and patient he is towards his
whole creation.

5 The heavens moving by his appointment, are subject to him in peace.

6 Day and night accomplish the courses that he has allotted unto them,
not disturbing one another.

7 The sun and moon, and all the several <span
id="fr_297"></span>[5](#fn_297) companies and constellations of the
stars, run the  <span id="fr_298"></span>[6](#fn_298)courses that he has
appointed to them in concord, without departing in the least from them.

8 The fruitful earth yields its food plentifully in due season both to
man and beast, and to all animals that are upon it, according to his
will; not <span id="fr_299"></span>[7](#fn_299) disputing, nor altering
any thing of what was ordered by him.

9 So also the unfathomable and unsearchable floods of the deep, are kept
in by his command;

10  <span id="fr_300"></span>[8](#fn_300) And the  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[9](#fn_301) conflux of the vast sea, being brought
together by his order into its several collections, passes not the
bounds that he has set to it;

11 But as he  <span id="fr_302"></span>[10](#fn_302) appointed it, so it
remains. For he said, <span id="fr_303"></span>[11](#fn_303) Hitherto
shalt thou come, and thy floods shall be broken within thee.

12 The ocean, unpassable to mankind, and the worlds that are beyond it,
are governed by the same commands of their great master.

13 Spring and summer, autumn and winter, give place peaceably to each
other.

14 The several  <span id="fr_304"></span>[12](#fn_304) quarters of the
winds fulfil their <span id="fr_305"></span>[13](#fn_305) work in their
seasons, without offending one another.

15 The ever-flowing fountains, made both for pleasure and health, never
fail to reach out their breasts to support the life of men.

16 Even the smallest creatures  <span id="fr_306"></span>[14](#fn_306)
live together in peace and concord with each other.

17 All these has the Great Creator and Lord of all, commanded to observe
peace and concord; being good to all.

18 But especially to us who flee to his mercy through our Lord Jesus
Christ; to whom be glory and majesty for ever and ever. Amen.

#### CHAP. X.

<span class="small">*He exhorts them to obedience, from the
consideration of the goodness of God, and of his presence in every
place*.</span>

TAKE heed, beloved, that his many blessings be not to <span
id="fr_307"></span>[15](#fn_307) us to condemnation; except we shall
walk worthy of him, doing with <span id="fr_308"></span>[16](#fn_308)
one consent what is good and pleasing in his sight.

2  <span id="fr_309"></span>[17](#fn_309) The spirit of the Lord is a

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

candle, searching out the inward of the belly.

3 Let us therefore consider how near he is to us; and how that none of
our thoughts, or reasonings which we frame with in ourselves, are <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310) hid from him.

4 It is therefore just that we should not forsake our rank, by doing
contrary to his will.

5 Let us choose to offend a few foolish and inconsiderate men, lifted up
and glorying <span id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311) in their own pride,
rather than God.

6 Let us reverence our Lord Jesus Christ whose blood was given for us.

7 Let us honour those who are set over us; let us respect the aged that
are amongst us; and let us instruct the younger men, in the discipline
and fear of the <span class="smallcaps">Lord</span>.

8 Our wives let us <span id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_312) direct to do
that which is good.

9 Let them show forth a lovely habit of purity in all their
conversation; with a sincere <span id="fr_313"></span>[4](#fn_313)
affection of meekness.

10 Let the <span id="fr_314"></span>[5](#fn_314) government of their
tongues <span id="fr_315"></span>[6](#fn_315) be made manifest by their
silence.

11 Let their charity be without respect of persons alike towards all
such as religiously fear God.

12 Let your children <span id="fr_316"></span>[7](#fn_316) be bred up in
the instruction of Christ:

13 And especially let them learn how great a power humility has with
God; how much a pure and holy charity avails with him; how excellent and
great his fear is; and how it will <span id="fr_317"></span>[8](#fn_317)
save all such as turn to him with holiness in a pure mind.

14 For he is the searcher of the thoughts and counsels of the heart;
whose breath is in us, and when he pleases he can take it from us.

#### CHAP. XI.

<span class="small">Of faith, and particularly what we are to believe as
to the resurrection.</span>

BUT all these things <span id="fr_318"></span>[9](#fn_318) must be
confirmed by the faith which is in Christ; for so he himself bespeaks us
by the Holy Ghost.

2  <span id="fr_319"></span>[10](#fn_319) Come ye children and hearken
unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is there
that desireth life, and loveth to see good days?

3 Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

4 Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and ensue it.

5 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open
unto their prayers.

6 But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth.

7 The righteous cried, and the Lord heard him, and delivered him out of
all his troubles.

8 Many are the troubles of the wicked; but they that trust in the Lord,
mercy shall encompass them about.

9 Our all-merciful and beneficent Father hath bowels of compassion
towards them that fear him; and kindly and lovingly bestows his graces
upon all such as come to him with a simple mind.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

10 Wherefore let us not  <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_320) waver,
neither let us have any doubt in our hearts, of his excellent and
glorious gifts.

11  <span id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_321) Let that be far from us which
is written,  <span id="fr_322"></span>[3](#fn_322) Miserable are the
double-minded, and those who are doubtful in their hearts.

12 Who say these things have we heard, and our fathers have told us
these things. But behold we are grown old, and none of them has happened
unto us.

13 O ye fools!  <span id="fr_323"></span>[4](#fn_323) consider the
trees: take the vine for an example. First it sheds its leaves; then it
buds; after that it spreads its leaves; then it flowers; then come the
sour grapes; and after them follows the ripe fruit. Ye see how in a
little time the fruit of the tree comes to maturity.

14 Of a truth, yet a little while and his will shall suddenly be
accomplished.

15 The Holy Scripture itself bearing witness, That  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[5](#fn_324) He shall quickly come and not tarry, and
that the Lord shall suddenly come to his temple, even the  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[6](#fn_325) holy ones whom ye look for.

16 Let us consider, beloved, how the Lord does continually shew us, that
there shall be a future resurrection; of which he has made our Lord
Jesus Christ the first fruits, raising him from the dead.

17 Let us <span id="fr_326"></span>[7](#fn_326) contemplate, beloved,
the resurrection that is <span id="fr_327"></span>[8](#fn_327)
continually made before our eyes.

18 Day and night manifest a resurrection to us. The night lies down, and
the day arises: main the day departs, and the night comes on.

19 Let us behold the fruits of the earth. Every one sees how the seed is
sown. The sower  <span id="fr_328"></span>[9](#fn_328) goes forth, and
casts it upon the earth; and the seed which when it was sown fell upon
the earth dry and naked, in time dissolves.

20 And from the dissolution, the great power of the providence of the
Lord raises it again; and of one seed many arise, and bring forth fruit.

#### CHAP. XII.

<span class="small">*The Resurrection further proved*.</span>

LET us consider that wonderful  <span id="fr_329"></span>[10](#fn_329)
type of the resurrection which is seen in the Eastern countries; that is
to say, in Arabia.

2 There is a certain bird called a Phœnix; of this there is never but
one at a time: and that lives five hundred years. And when the time of
its dissolution draws near, that it must die, it makes itself a nest of
frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices into which when its time is
fulfilled it enters and dies.

3 But its flesh putrifying, breeds a certain worm, which being nourished
with the juice of the dead bird brings forth feathers; and when it is
grown to a perfect state, it takes up the nest in which the bones of its
parents lie, and carries it from Arabia into Egypt, to a city called
Heliopolis:

4 And flying in open day in the sight of all men, lays it upon the altar
of the sun, and so returns from whence it came.

5 The priests then search into the records of the time; and find that it
returned precisely at the end of five hundred years.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

6 And  <span id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_330) shall we then think it to
be any very great and strange thing for the Lord of all to raise up
those that religiously him in the assurance of good faith, when even by
a bird he shews us the greatness of his power to fulfil his promise?

7 For he says in a certain place, Thou shalt raise me up, and I shall
confess unto thee.

8 And again  <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_331) I laid me down and
slept, and awaked, because thou art with me.

9 And again, Job says,  <span id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_332) Thou shalt
raise up this flesh of mine, that has suffered all these things.

10 Having therefore this hope, let us  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[4](#fn_333) hold fast to him who is faithful in all
his promises, and righteous in all his judgments; who has commanded us
not to lie: how much more will he not himself lie?

11 For nothing is impossible with God but to lie.

12 Let his faith then be stirred up again in us; and let us consider
that all things are nigh unto him.

13 By the word of his  <span id="fr_334"></span>[5](#fn_334) power he
made all things; and by  <span id="fr_335"></span>[6](#fn_335) the same
word he is able (whenever he will), to destroy them.

14 Who shall say unto him, what dost thou? or who shall resist the power
of his strength? <span id="fr_336"></span>[7](#fn_336)

15 When, and as he pleased, <span id="fr_337"></span>[8](#fn_337) he
will do all things; and nothing shall pass away of all that has been
determined by him.

16 All things are open before him; nor can anything be hid from his
council.

17  <span id="fr_338"></span>[9](#fn_338) The heavens declare the glory
of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy work. Day unto day uttereth
speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. There is no speech nor
language where their voice is not heard.

#### CHAP. XIII.

<span class="small">*It is impossible to escape the vengeance of God, if
we continue in sin*.</span>

SEEING then all things are seen and heard by God; let us fear him, and
let us lay aside our wicked works which proceed from ill desires; that
through his mercy we may be  <span id="fr_339"></span>[10](#fn_339)
delivered from the  <span id="fr_340"></span>[11](#fn_340) condemnation
to come.

2 For whither can any of us flee from his mighty hand? Or what world
shall receive any of those who run away from him?

3 For thus saith the Scripture in a certain place,  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[12](#fn_341) Whither shall I flee from thy Spirit,
or where shall I hide myself from thy presence?

4 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I shall go to the
utmost part of the earth, there is thy right hand: If I shall make my
bed in the deep, thy Spirit is there.

5 Whither then shall any one go; or whither shall he run from him that
comprehends all things?

6 Let us therefore come to him with holiness of  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[13](#fn_342) heart, lifting up chaste and undefiled
hands unto him; loving our gracious and merciful Father, who has made us
 <span id="fr_343"></span>[14](#fn_343) to partake of his election.

7 For so it is written,  <span id="fr_344"></span>[15](#fn_344) When the
Most High divided the nations, when he separated the sons of Adam, he
set the bounds of the nations, according to the number of his angels;
 <span id="fr_345"></span>[16](#fn_345) his people

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jacob became the
portion of the Lord, and Israel the lot of his inheritance.

8 And in another place he saith,  <span id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_346)
Behold the Lord taketh unto himself a nation, out of the midst of the
nations, as a man taketh the first-fruits of his flower; <span
id="fr_347"></span>[2](#fn_347) the Most Holy shall come out of that
nation.

#### CHAP. XIV.

<span class="small">*How we must live that we may please God*.</span>

WHEREFORE we being a part of the Holy One, let us do all those things
that pertain unto holiness:

2 Fleeing all evil-speaking against one another; all filthy and impure
embraces, together with all drunkenness, youthful lusts, abominable
concupiscences, detestable adultery, and execrable pride.

3  <span id="fr_348"></span>[3](#fn_348) For God, saith he, resisteth
the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.

4 Let us therefore hold fast to those to whom <span
id="fr_349"></span>[4](#fn_349) God has given His grace.

5 And let us put on concord, being humble, temperate; free from all
whispering and detraction; and justified by our <span
id="fr_350"></span>[5](#fn_350) actions, not our words.

6 For he saith, <span id="fr_351"></span>[6](#fn_351) Doth he that
speaketh and heareth many things, and that is of a ready tongue, suppose
that he is righteous? <span id="fr_352"></span>[7](#fn_352) Blessed is
he that is born of a woman, that liveth but a few days:  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[8](#fn_353) use not therefore much speech.

7 Let our praise be of God, not of ourselves; for God hateth those
that <span id="fr_354"></span>[9](#fn_354) commend themselves.

8 Let the witness of our good actions be given to us of others, as it
was given to the holy men that went before us.

9 Rashness, and arrogance, and confidence, belong to them who are
accursed of God: but equity, and humility, and mildness, to such as are
blessed by him.

10 Let us then lay hold of his blessing, and let us <span
id="fr_355"></span>[10](#fn_355) consider what are the ways by which we
may attain unto it.

11 Let us <span id="fr_356"></span>[11](#fn_356) look back upon those
things that have happened from the beginning.

12 For what was our father Abraham blessed? Was it not because that
through faith he wrought righteousness and truth?

13 Isaac being <span id="fr_357"></span>[12](#fn_357) fully persuaded of
what he knew was to come, cheerfully yielded himself up for a sacrifice.
Jacob with humility departed out of his own country, fleeing from his
brother, and went unto Laban and served him; and so the sceptre of the
twelve tribes of Israel was given unto him.

14 Now what the greatness of  <span id="fr_358"></span>[13](#fn_358)
this Gift was, will plainly appear, if we shall take the pains
distinctly to consider all the parts of it.

15 For from him came the priests and Levites, who all ministered at the
altar of God.

16 From him came our Lord Jesus Christ according to the flesh.

17 From him came the kings, and princes, and rulers in Judah.

18 Nor were the rest of his

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_359) tribes in any small glory: God having
promised that <span id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_360) thy seed (says he)
shall be as the stars of heaven.

19 They were all therefore  <span id="fr_361"></span>[3](#fn_361)
greatly glorified, not for their own sake, or for their own works, or
for the righteousness that they themselves wrought, but through his
will.

20 And we also being called by the same will in Christ Jesus, are not
justified by ourselves, neither by our own wisdom, or knowledge, or
piety, or the works which we have done  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[4](#fn_362) in the holiness of our hearts:

21 But by that faith by which God Almighty has justified all men from
the beginning; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

#### CHAP. XV.

<span class="small">*We are justified by faith; yet this must not lessen
our care to live well, nor our pleasure in it*.</span>

WHAT shall we do therefore, brethren? Shall we be slothful in
well-doing, and lay aside our charity? God forbid that any such thing
should be done by us.

2 But rather let us hasten with all earnestness and readiness of mind,
to perfect every good work. For even the Creator and Lord of  all things
himself rejoices in his own works.

3 By his <span id="fr_363"></span>[5](#fn_363) Almighty power he fixed
the heavens, and by his incomprehensible wisdom he adorned them.

4 He also divided the earth from the water, with which it is
encompassed; and fixed it as a secure tower, upon the foundation of his
own will.

5 He also by his appointment, commanded all the living creatures that
are upon it, to exist.

6 So likewise the sea, and all the creatures that are in it; having
first created them, he enclosed them therein by his power.

7 And above all, he with his holy and pure hands, formed man, the most
excellent, and, as to his understanding, truly the greatest of all other
creatures, the character of his own image.

8 For so God says,  <span id="fr_364"></span>[6](#fn_364) Let us make
man in our image, after our own likeness So God created man, male and
female created he them.

9 And having thus finished all these things, he commended all that he
had made, and blessed them, and said,  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[7](#fn_365) increase and multiply.

10 We see how all righteous men have been adorned with good works:
Wherefore even the Lord himself, having adorned himself with his works,
rejoiced.

11 Having therefore  <span id="fr_366"></span>[8](#fn_366) such an
example, let us without delay,  <span id="fr_367"></span>[9](#fn_367)
fulfil his will; and with all our strength, work the work of
righteousness.

#### CHAP. XVI.

<span class="small">*This enforced from the examples of the holy angels,
and from the exceeding greatness of that reward which God has prepared
for us.*</span>

THE good workman with confidence receives the bread of his  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[10](#fn_368) labour; but the sluggish and lazy
cannot look him in the face that set him on work.

2 We must therefore be ready and forward in well doing; for from him are
all things.

3 And thus he foretells us,  <span id="fr_369"></span>[11](#fn_369)
behold the Lord cometh, and

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

his reward is with him, even before his face, to render to every one
according to his work.

4 He warns us therefore beforehand, with all his heart to this end, that
we should not be slothful and negligent in <span
id="fr_370"></span>[1](#fn_370) well doing.

5 Let our boasting, therefore, and our confidence be in <span
id="fr_371"></span>[2](#fn_371) God: let us submit ourselves to his
will. Let us consider the whole multitude of his angels, how ready they
stand to minister unto his will.

6 As saith the scripture,  <span id="fr_372"></span>[3](#fn_372)
thousands of thousands stood before him and ten thousand times ten
thousand ministered unto him.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[4](#fn_373) And
they cried, saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Sabaoth:  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[5](#fn_374) The whole earth is full of his glory.

7 Wherefore let us also, being conscientiously gathered together in
concord with one another; as it were with one mouth, cry earnestly unto
him, that he would make us partakers of his great and glorious promises.

8 For he saith,  <span id="fr_375"></span>[6](#fn_375) Eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that wait for him.

#### CHAP. XVII.

<span class="small">1 *We must attain unto this reward by faith and
obedience, which we must carry on in an orderly pursuing of the duties
of our several stations, without envy or contention.* 24 *The necessity
of different orders among men.* 33 *We have none of us anything but what
we received of God: whom therefore we ought in every condition
thankfully to obey*.</span>

HOW blessed and wonderful, beloved, are the gifts of God.

2 Life in immortality! brightness in righteousness! truth in full
assurance! faith in confidence! temperance in holiness!

3 And all this has  <span id="fr_376"></span>[7](#fn_376) God subjected
to our understandings:

4 What therefore shall those things be which he has prepared for them
that wait for him? <span id="fr_377"></span>[8](#fn_377)

5 The Creator and Father of spirits, the Most Holy; he only knows both
the  <span id="fr_378"></span>[9](#fn_378) greatness and beauty of them.

6 Let us therefore strive with all earnestness, that we may be found in
the number of those that wait for him, that so we may receive the <span
id="fr_379"></span>[10](#fn_379) reward which he has promised.

7 But how, beloved, shall we do this? <span
id="fr_380"></span>[11](#fn_380) We must fix our minds by faith towards
God, and seek those things that are pleasing and acceptable unto him.

8 We must <span id="fr_381"></span>[12](#fn_381) act conformably to his
holy will; and follow the way of truth, casting off from us all
unrighteousness and iniquity, together with all covetousness, strife,
evil manners, deceit, whispering, detractions; all hatred of God, pride
and boasting; vainglory and ambition;

9 For they that do these things are odious to God; and not only they
that do them, but also  <span id="fr_382"></span>[13](#fn_382) all such
as approve of those that do them.

10 For thus saith the Scripture,  <span id="fr_383"></span>[14](#fn_383)
But unto the wicked, God said, What hast thou to do to declare my
statute, or that thou shouldst take my covenant in the mouth? Seeing
that thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.

11 When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him; and hast
been partaker with adulterers.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span id="img_12900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST IN THE
PRÆTORIUM AND MOCKED, AND HIS DESCENT INTO HELL. FROM INTAGLIOS IN A BOX
OF ROCK CRYSTAL, BY AN EARLY VENETIAN ARTIST.](tn/12900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12900.jpg)  
CHRIST IN THE PRÆTORIUM AND MOCKED, AND HIS DESCENT INTO HELL. FROM
INTAGLIOS IN A BOX OF ROCK CRYSTAL, BY AN EARLY VENETIAN ARTIST.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thou givest thy
mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. Thou sittest and speakest
against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son.

12 These things hast thou done and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that
I was altogether such a one as thyself: but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thine eyes.

13 Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver.

14 Whoso offereth praise, glorifieth me: and to him that disposeth his
way aright, will I shew the salvation of God.

15 This is the way, beloved, in which we may find  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[1](#fn_384) our Saviour, even Jesus Christ the
high-priest of all our offerings, the defender and helper of our
weakness.

16 By him we look up to the <span id="fr_385"></span>[2](#fn_385)
highest heavens; and behold, as in a glass, his spotless and most
excellent visage.

17 By him are the eyes of our hearts opened; by him our foolish and
darkened understanding rejoiceth to behold his wonderful light.

18 By him would God have us to taste the knowledge of immortality:
 <span id="fr_386"></span>[3](#fn_386) who being the brightness of his
glory, is by so much greater than the angels, as he has by inheritance
obtained a more excellent name than they.

19 For so it is written,  <span id="fr_387"></span>[4](#fn_387) who
maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire:

20 But to his son, thus saith the Lord,  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[5](#fn_388) Thou art my Son, today have I begotten
thee.

21  <span id="fr_389"></span>[6](#fn_389) Ask of me, and I will give
thee the heathen for thy inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth
for thy possession.

22 And again he saith unto him,  <span id="fr_390"></span>[7](#fn_390)
Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies my footstool.

23 But who are his enemies? even the wicked, and such who oppose their
own wills to the will of God.

24 Let us therefore  <span id="fr_391"></span>[8](#fn_391) march on, men
and brethren, with all earnestness in his holy laws.

25 Let us consider those who fight under our earthly governors: How
orderly, how readily, and with what exact obedience they perform those
things that are commanded them.

26 All are not  <span id="fr_392"></span>[9](#fn_392) generals, nor
 <span id="fr_393"></span>[10](#fn_393) colonels, nor  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[11](#fn_394) captains, nor  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[12](#fn_395) inferior officers:

27 But every one in his respective rank does what is commanded him by
the king, and those who have the authority over him.

28 They who are great, cannot subsist without those that are little; nor
the little without the great.

29 But there must be a mixture in all things, and then there will be use
and profit too.

30 Let us,  <span id="fr_396"></span>[13](#fn_396) for example, take our
body: the head without the feet is nothing, neither the feet without the
head.

31 And even the smallest members of our body are yet both necessary and
useful to the whole body.

32 But all conspire together, and  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[14](#fn_397) are subject to one common

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

use, namely, the preservation of the whole  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_398) body.

33 Let therefore our whole body be saved in Christ Jesus; and let every
one be subject to his neighbour,  <span id="fr_399"></span>[2](#fn_399)
according to the order in which he is placed by the  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[3](#fn_400) gift of God.

34 Let not the strong man despise the weak; and let the weak see that he
reverence the strong.

35 Let the rich man distribute to the necessity of the poor: and let the
poor bless God, that he has given one unto him, by whom his want may be
supplied.

36 Let the wise man shew forth his wisdom, not in words, but in good
works.

37 Let him that is humble, not bear witness to himself, but let him
leave it to another to bear witness of him.

38 Let him that is pure in the flesh, not grow proud of it, knowing that
it was  <span id="fr_401"></span>[4](#fn_401) from another that he
received the gift of continence.

39 Let us consider therefore, brethren,  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[5](#fn_402) whereof we are made; who, and what kind
of men we came into the world, as it were out of a sepulchre, and from
outer darkness.

40 He that made us, and formed us, brought us into his own world; having
 <span id="fr_403"></span>[6](#fn_403) presented us with his benefits,
even before we were born.

41 Wherefore, having received all these things from him, we ought in
everything to give thanks unto him; to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

#### CHAP. XVIII.

<span class="small">*From whence he exhorts them to do everything
orderly in the Church, as the only way to please God*.</span>

FOOLISH and unwise men  <span id="fr_404"></span>[7](#fn_404) who have
neither prudence nor learning may mock and deride us; being willing to
set up themselves in their own conceits;

2  <span id="fr_405"></span>[8](#fn_405) But what can a mortal man do?
Or what strength is there in him that is made out of the dust?

3 For it is written, there was no shape before mine eyes; only I heard a
 <span id="fr_406"></span>[9](#fn_406) sound and a voice.

4  <span id="fr_407"></span>[10](#fn_407) For what? Shall man be pure
before the Lord? Shall he be blameless in his works?

5 Behold, he trusteth not in his servants; and his angels he chargeth
with folly.

6 Yes, the heaven is not clean in his sight, how much less they that
dwell in houses of clay; of which also we ourselves were made?

7 He smote them as a moth: and from morning even unto the evening they
endure not. Because they were not able to help themselves, they
perished; he breathed upon them and they died, because they had no
wisdom.

8  <span id="fr_408"></span>[11](#fn_408) Call now if there be any that
will answer thee; and to which of the angels wilt thou look?

9 For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth him that is in
error.

10 I have seen the foolish taking root, but lo, their habitation was
presently consumed.

11 Their children were far from safety, they  <span
id="fr_409"></span>[12](#fn_409) perished at the gates of those who were
lesser than themselves; and there was no man to  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[13](#fn_410) help them.

12 For what was prepared for them, the righteous  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[14](#fn_411) did eat: and they shall not be
delivered from evil.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

13 Seeing then these things are manifest unto us, it will behoove us, to
take care that looking into the depths of the divine knowledge, we do
all things in order, whatsoever our Lord has commanded us to do.

14 And particularly, that we perform our offerings and service to God,
at their appointed seasons: for these he has commanded to be done, not
 <span id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412) rashly and disorderly, but at
certain determinate times and hours.

15 And therefore he has ordained by his supreme will and authority, both
where, and by what persons, they are to be performed; that so all things
being piously done unto all well-pleasing, they may be acceptable unto
 <span id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_413) him.

16 They therefore who make their offerings at the appointed seasons, are
happy and accepted: because that obeying the commandments of the Lord,
they are free from sin.

17 And the same care must be had of the persons that minister unto him.

18  <span id="fr_414"></span>[3](#fn_414) For the chief-priest has his
proper services; and to the priests their proper place is appointed; and
to the Levites appertain their proper ministries: and the layman is
confined within the bounds of what is commanded to laymen.

19 Let every one of you therefore, brethren, bless God in his proper
station, with  <span id="fr_415"></span>[4](#fn_415) a good conscience,
and with all gravity, not exceeding the rule of his service that is
appointed to him.

20 The daily sacrifices are not offered everywhere; nor the
peace-offerings, nor the sacrifices appointed for sins and
transgressions; but only at Jerusalem: nor in any place there, but only
at the altar before the temple; that which is offered being first
diligently examined by the high-priest and the other minister we before
mentioned.

21 They therefore who do anything which is not agreeable to His will are
punished with death.

22  <span id="fr_416"></span>[5](#fn_416) Consider, brethren, that by
how much the better knowledge God has vouchsafed unto us by so much the
greater danger are we exposed to.

#### CHAP. XIX.

<span class="small">*The orders of Ministers in Christ's Church
established by the Apostles according to Christ's command,* 7 *after the
example of Moses.* 16 *Therefore they who have been duly placed in the
ministry according to their order cannot without great sin be put out of
it*.</span>

THE Apostles have preached to us from the Lord Jesus Christ; Jesus
Christ from God.

2 Christ therefore was sent by God, the Apostles by Christ; so both were
orderly  <span id="fr_417"></span>[6](#fn_417) sent, according to the
will of God.

3 For having received their command, and being thoroughly assured by the
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ;  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[7](#fn_418) and convinced by the word of God, with
the  <span id="fr_419"></span>[8](#fn_419) fulness of the Holy Spirit,
they went abroad, publishing, That the kingdom of God was at hand.

4 And thus preaching through countries and cities,  <span
id="fr_420"></span>[9](#fn_420) they appointed the first fruits of their
conversion to be bishops and ministers over such as should afterwards
believe, having first proved them by the Spirit.

5 Nor was this any new thing:

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

seeing that long before it was written concerning bishops and deacons.

6 For thus saith the Scripture, in a certain place:  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_421) I will appoint their  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_422) overseers in righteousness, and their
ministers in faith.

7 And what wonder if they, to whom such a work was committed by God in
Christ, established such officers as we before mentioned; when even that
blessed and faithful servant in all his house, Moses,  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[3](#fn_423) set down in the Holy Scriptures all
things that were commanded him.

8 Whom also all the rest of the prophets followed, bearing witness with
one consent to those things that were appointed by him.

9 For he, perceiving an  <span id="fr_424"></span>[4](#fn_424) emulation
to arise among the tribes concerning the priesthood, and that there was
a strife about it, which of them should be adorned with that glorious
name; commanded their twelve captains to bring to him  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[5](#fn_425) twelve rods; every tribe being written
upon its rod, according to its name.

10 And he took them and bound them together, and sealed them with the
seals of the twelve princes of the tribes; and laid them up in the
tabernacle of witness, upon the table of God.

11 And when he had shut the door of the tabernacle he sealed up the keys
of it, in like manner  <span id="fr_426"></span>[6](#fn_426) as he had
done the rods; and said unto them, Men and brethren, whichsoever tribe
shall have its rod blossom, that tribe has God chosen to perform the
office of a priest, and  <span id="fr_427"></span>[7](#fn_427) to
minister unto him in holy things.

12 And when the morning was come, he called together all Israel, six
hundred thousand men; and shewed to the princes their seals; and opened
the tabernacle of witness; and brought forth the rods.

13 And the rod of Aaron was found not only to have blossomed, but also
to have fruit upon it.

14 What think you, beloved? Did not Moses before know  <span
id="fr_428"></span>[8](#fn_428) what should happen?

15 Yes verily: but to the end there might be no division, nor tumult in
Israel, he did in this manner, that the name of the true and only God
might be glorified, to him be honour for ever and ever, Amen.

16 So likewise our Apostles knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there
should contentions arise,  <span id="fr_429"></span>[9](#fn_429) upon
account of the ministry.

17 And therefore having a perfect fore-knowledge of this, they appointed
persons, as we have before said, and then  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[10](#fn_430) gave direction, how, when they should
die, other chosen and approved men should succeed in their ministry.

18 Wherefore we cannot think that those may justly be thrown out of
their ministry, who were either appointed by them, or afterwards chosen
by other eminent men, with the consent of the whole church; and who have
with all lowliness and innocency

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

ministered to the flock of Christ, in peace, and without self-interest,
and were for a long time commended by all.

19 For it would be no small sin in us, should we cast off those from
their  <span id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_431) ministry who holily and
without blame  <span id="fr_432"></span>[2](#fn_432) fulfil the duties
of it.

20 Blessed are those priests, who having finished their course before
these times have obtained a fruitful and perfect dissolution: for they
have no fear, lest any one should turn them out of the place which is
now appointed for them.

21 But we see how you have put out some, who lived reputably among you,
from the ministry, which by their innocence they had adorned.

#### CHAP. XX.

<span class="small">*He exhorts them to peace from examples out of the
Holy Scriptures,* 20 *particularly from St. Paul's exhortation to
them*.</span>

YE are contentious, brethren, and zealous for things that pertain not
unto salvation.

2 Look into the Holy Scriptures, which are the true words of the Holy
Ghost. Ye know that there is nothing unjust or counterfeit written in
them.

3 There you shall not find that righteous men were ever cast off by such
as were good themselves.

4  <span id="fr_433"></span>[3](#fn_433) They were persecuted, but it
was by the wicked and unjust.

5 They were cast into prison; but they were cast in by those that were
unholy.

6 They were stoned; but it was by transgressors.

7 They were killed; but by accursed men, and such as had taken up an
unjust envy against them.

8  <span id="fr_434"></span>[4](#fn_434) And all these things they
underwent gloriously.

9 For what shall we say, brethren? Was Daniel cast into the  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[5](#fn_435) den of lions, by men fearing God?
Ananias, Azarius, and Misael, were they  <span
id="fr_436"></span>[6](#fn_436) cast into the  <span
id="fr_437"></span>[7](#fn_437) fiery furnace by men,  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[8](#fn_438) professing the excellent and glorious
worship of the Most High? God forbid.

10 What kind of persons then were they that did these things? They were
men abominable, full of all wickedness; who were incensed to so great a
degree, as to bring those into sufferings, who with a holy and
unblameable purpose of mind worshipped God: not knowing that the Most
High is the protector and defender of all such as with a pure conscience
serve his  <span id="fr_439"></span>[9](#fn_439) holy name: to whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen.

11 But they who with a full persuasion have endured these things,  <span
id="fr_440"></span>[10](#fn_440) and are made partakers of glory and
honour: and  <span id="fr_441"></span>[11](#fn_441) are exalted and
lifted up by God in their memorial throughout all ages, Amen.

12 ¶ Wherefore it will behoove us also, brethren,  <span
id="fr_442"></span>[12](#fn_442) to follow such examples as these; for
it is written, Hold fast to such as are holy; for they that do so shall
be sanctified.

13 And again in another place he saith,  <span
id="fr_443"></span>[13](#fn_443) With the pure thou shalt be pure,
( <span id="fr_444"></span>[14](#fn_444) and with the elect thou shalt
be elect),

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

but with the perverse man thou shalt be  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_445) perverse.

14 Let us therefore join ourselves to the innocent and righteous; for
such are the elect of God.

15 Wherefore are there strifes, and anger, and divisions, and schisms,
and wars, among us?

16  <span id="fr_446"></span>[2](#fn_446) Have we not all one God, and
one Christ?  <span id="fr_447"></span>[3](#fn_447) Is not one spirit of
grace poured out upon us all? Have we not one calling in Christ?

17 Why then do we rend and tear in pieces the members of Christ; and
raise seditious against our own body? And are come to such a height of
madness, as to forget that  <span id="fr_448"></span>[4](#fn_448) we
were members one of another?

18 Remember the words of our Lord Jesus,  <span
id="fr_449"></span>[5](#fn_449) how he said, Wo to that man, (by whom
offences come)  <span id="fr_450"></span>[6](#fn_450) It were better for
him that he had never been born, than that he should have offended one
of my elect. It were better for him, that a millstone should be tied
about his neck, and he should be cast into the sea, than that he should
offend one of my little ones.

19 Your schism has perverted many, has discouraged many: it has caused
diffidence in many, and grief in us all. And yet your sedition continues
still.

20 ¶ Take the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle into your hands;
 <span id="fr_451"></span>[7](#fn_451) What was it that he wrote to you
at his first preaching the Gospel among you?

21 Verily he did  <span id="fr_452"></span>[8](#fn_452) by the spirit
admonish you concerning himself, and Cephas, and Apollos, because that
even then ye had begun to fall into  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[9](#fn_453) parties and factions among yourselves.

22 Nevertheless your partiality then led you into a much less sin:
forasmuch as ye  <span id="fr_454"></span>[10](#fn_454) placed your
affections upon Apostles, men of  <span id="fr_455"></span>[11](#fn_455)
eminent reputation in the church; and upon another, who was greatly
tried and approved of by them.

23 But consider, we pray you, who are they that have now led you astray;
and lessened the  <span id="fr_456"></span>[12](#fn_456) reputation of
that brotherly love that was  <span id="fr_457"></span>[13](#fn_457) so
eminent among you?

24 It is a shame, my beloved, yea, a very great shame, and unworthy of
your Christian  <span id="fr_458"></span>[14](#fn_458) profession, to
hear that the most firm and  <span id="fr_459"></span>[15](#fn_459)
ancient church of the Corinthians should, by one or two persons, be led
into a sedition against its priests.

25 And this report is come not only to us, but to those also that differ
from us.

26 Insomuch that the name of the Lord is blasphemed through your folly;
and even ye yourselves are brought into danger by it.

27 ¶ Let us therefore with all haste  <span
id="fr_460"></span>[16](#fn_460) put an end to this sedition; and let us
fall down before the Lord, and beseech Him with tears that He  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[17](#fn_461) would be favourably reconciled to us,
and restore us again to a  <span id="fr_462"></span>[18](#fn_462) seemly
and holy course of brotherly love.

28 For this is the gate of righteousness, opening unto life: as it is
written,  <span id="fr_463"></span>[19](#fn_463) Open unto me

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the gates of righteousness; I will go in unto them and will praise the
Lord. This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it.

29 Although therefore many gates are opened, yet this gate of
righteousness is that gate in Christ at which blessed are they that
enter in, and direct their way in holiness and righteousness, doing all
things without disorder.

30 Let a man be faithful, let him be powerful in the utterance of
knowledge: let him be wise in making an exact judgment of words; let him
be pure in all his actions.

31 But still by how much the more he seems to be  <span
id="fr_464"></span>[1](#fn_464) above others by reason of these things,
by so much the more will it behoove him to be humble-minded; and to seek
what is profitable to all men, and not his own advantage.

#### CHAP. XXI.

<span class="small">1 *The value which God puts upon love and unity: the
effects of a true charity,* 8 *which is the gift of God, and must be
obtained by prayer*.</span>

HE that has the love that is in Christ, let him keep the commandments of
Christ.

2 For who is able to express the  <span id="fr_465"></span>[2](#fn_465)
obligation of the love of God? What man is sufficient to declare, and is
fitting, the excellency of its beauty?

3 The height to which charity leads is inexpressible.

4 Charity  <span id="fr_466"></span>[3](#fn_466) unites us to God;
 <span id="fr_467"></span>[4](#fn_467) charity covers the multitude of
sins:  <span id="fr_468"></span>[5](#fn_468) charity endures all things,
is long-suffering in all things.

5 There is nothing base and sordid in charity; charity lifts not itself
up above others; admits of no divisions; is not seditious; but does all
things in peace and concord.

6 By charity were all the elect of God made perfect: Without it nothing
is pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God.

7 Through charity did the Lord  <span id="fr_469"></span>[6](#fn_469)
join us unto himself; whilst for the love that he bore towards us, our
Lord Jesus Christ gave his own blood for us, by the will of God; his
flesh for our flesh; his soul, for our souls.

8 ¶ Ye see, beloved, how great and wonderful a thing charity is: and how
that no expressions are sufficient to declare its perfection.

9 But who is fit to be found in it? Even such only as God shall
vouchsafe to make so.

10 Let us therefore pray to him, and beseech him, that we may be worthy
of it; that so we may live in charity; being
[unblameable](errata.htm#5), without human propensities, without respect
of persons.

11 All the ages of the world, from Adam, even unto this day, are passed
away; but they who have been made perfect in love, have by the grace of
God obtained a place among the righteous; and shall be made manifest in
the  <span id="fr_470"></span>[7](#fn_470) judgment of the kingdom of
Christ.

12 For it is written,  <span id="fr_471"></span>[8](#fn_471) Enter into
thy chambers for a little space, till my anger and indignation shall
pass away: And I will remember the good day, and will raise you up out
of your graves.

13 Happy  <span id="fr_472"></span>[9](#fn_472) then shall we be,
beloved, if we shall have fulfilled the commandments of God, in the
unity of love; that so, through love, our sins may be forgiven us.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

14 For so it is written,  <span id="fr_473"></span>[1](#fn_473) Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sin, and in whose mouth
there is no guile.

15 Now this blessing is fulfilled in those who are chosen by God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

#### CHAP. XXII.

<span class="small">1 *He exhorts such as have been concerned in these
divisions to repent, and return to their unity, confessing their sin to
God,* 7 *which he enforces from the example of Moses,* 10 *and of many
among the heathen,* 23 *and of Judith and Esther among the Jews*.</span>

LET us therefore, as many as have transgressed by any of the  <span
id="fr_474"></span>[2](#fn_474) suggestions of the adversary, beg God's
forgiveness.

2 And as for those who have been the  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[3](#fn_475) heads of the sedition and faction among
you,  <span id="fr_476"></span>[4](#fn_476) let them look to the common
end of our hope.

3 For as many as are  <span id="fr_477"></span>[5](#fn_477) endued with
fear and charity, would rather they themselves should fall into trials
than their neighbours: And choose to be themselves condemned, rather
than that the good and just charity delivered to us, should suffer.

4 For it is seemly for a man to confess wherein he has transgressed.

5  <span id="fr_478"></span>[6](#fn_478) And not to harden his heart, as
the hearts of those were hardened, who raised up sedition against Moses
the servant of God; whose punishment was manifest <span
id="fr_479"></span>[7](#fn_479) unto all men; for they went down alive
into the grave, death swallowed them up.

6  <span id="fr_480"></span>[8](#fn_480) Pharaoh and his host, and all
the rulers of Egypt, their chariots also and their horsemen, were for no
other cause drowned, in the bottom of the Red Sea, and perished; but
because they hardened their foolish hearts, after so many signs done in
the land of Egypt, by Moses the servant of God.

7 ¶ Beloved, God is rot indigent of any thing; nor does he demand any
thing of us, but that we should confess our sins unto him.

8 For so says the  <span id="fr_481"></span>[9](#fn_481) Holy David,
 <span id="fr_482"></span>[10](#fn_482) I will confess unto the Lord,
and it shall please him better than a young bullock that hath horns and
hoof. Let the poor see it and be glad.

9 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_483"></span>[11](#fn_483) Offer unto
God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows unto the Most Highest. And
call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shalt glorify me.  <span id="fr_484"></span>[12](#fn_484) The sacrifice
of God is a broken spirit.

10 ¶ Ye know, beloved, ye know full well the Holy Scriptures; and have
thoroughly searched into the oracles of God: call them therefore to your
remembrance.

11 For when Moses went up into the mount, and tarried there forty days
and forty nights in fasting and humiliation; God said unto him,  <span
id="fr_485"></span>[13](#fn_485) Arise, Moses, and get thee down quickly
from hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest out of the land of
Egypt, have committed wickedness:

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span id="img_13700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE RED SEA
SWALLOWING UP THE ARMY OF PHARAOH, AFTER THE ISRAELITES HAD PASSED
THROUGH. FROM A FRAGMENT OF THE BIBLE, IN GREEK MANUSCRIPT, OF THE
FOURTEENTH CENTURY.](tn/13700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13700.jpg)  
THE RED SEA SWALLOWING UP THE ARMY OF PHARAOH, AFTER THE ISRAELITES HAD
PASSED THROUGH. FROM A FRAGMENT OF THE BIBLE, IN GREEK MANUSCRIPT, OF
THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY.  
</span>

they have soon transgressed the way that I commanded them, and have made
to themselves graven images.

12 And the Lord said unto him, I have spoken unto thee  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_486) several times, saying I have seen this
people, and behold it is a stiffnecked people: let me therefore destroy
them, and put out their name from under heaven. And I will make unto
thee a great and a wonderful nation, that shall be much  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[2](#fn_487) larger than this.

13 But Moses said, Not so, Lord; Forgive now this people their sin; or
if thou wilt not, blot me also out of the book of! the living. O
admirable charity! O insuperable perfection! The servant speaks freely
to his Lord; He beseeches him either to forgive the people, or to  <span
id="fr_488"></span>[3](#fn_488) destroy him together with them.

14 ¶ Who is there among you that is generous? Who that is compassionate?
Who that has any charity? Let him say, if this sedition, this
contention, and these schisms, be upon my account, I am ready to depart;
to go away whithersoever you please; and do whatsoever  <span
id="fr_489"></span>[4](#fn_489) ye shall command me: Only let the flock
of Christ be in peace, with the elders that are set over it.

15 He that shall do this, shall get to himself a very great honour in
the Lord; and  <span id="fr_490"></span>[5](#fn_490) there is no place
but what will be ready to receive him:  <span
id="fr_491"></span>[6](#fn_491) For the earth is the Lord's and the
fulness thereof.

16 These things they who have their conversation towards God not to be
repented of, both have done and will always be ready! to do.

17 ¶  <span id="fr_492"></span>[7](#fn_492) Nay and even the Gentiles
themselves have given us! examples of this kind.

18 For we read, How many kings and princes, in times of pestilence,
being warned by their oracles, have given up themselves unto death: that
by their own blood, they might deliver their  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[8](#fn_493) country from destruction.

19  <span id="fr_494"></span>[9](#fn_494) Others have forsaken their
cities, so that they might put an end to the seditions of them.

20 We know how many among ourselves, have given up themselves unto
bonds, that thereby they might free others from them.

21 Others have sold themselves into bondage that they might feed  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[10](#fn_495) their brethren with the price of
themselves.

22 And even many women, being strengthened by the grace of God, have
done many glorious and manly things on such occasions.

23 The blessed  <span id="fr_496"></span>[11](#fn_496) Judith, when her
city was besieged, desired the elders, that they would suffer her to go
into the camp of <span id="fr_497"></span>[12](#fn_497) their enemies:
and she went out exposing herself to danger for the love she bore to her
country and her people that were besieged; and the Lord delivered
Holofernes into the hands of a woman.

24 Nor did <span id="fr_498"></span>[13](#fn_498) Esther, being perfect
in faith, expose herself to any less hazard, for the delivery of the
twelve tribes of Israel, in danger of being destroyed. For, by fasting
and humbling herself, she entreated the Great Maker

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

of all things, the God of <span id="fr_499"></span>[1](#fn_499) spirits;
so that beholding the humility of her soul, he delivered the people, for
whose sake she was in peril.

#### CHAP. XXIII.

<span class="small">*The benefit of mutual advice and correction. He
entreats them to follow that which is here given to them*.</span>

WHEREFORE let us also pray for such as are fallen into  <span
id="fr_500"></span>[2](#fn_500) sin. That being endued with humility and
moderation, they may submit not unto us, but to the will of God.

2 For by this means  <span id="fr_501"></span>[3](#fn_501) they shall
obtain a fruitful and perfect remembrance, with mercy, both in our
prayers to God, and in our mention of them before his  <span
id="fr_502"></span>[4](#fn_502) saints.

3 Let us receive correction, at which no man ought to repine.

4 Beloved, the reproof and the correction which we exercise towards one
another, is good, and exceeding profitable: for it unites us the more
closely to the will of God.

5 For so says the Holy Scripture,  <span id="fr_503"></span>[5](#fn_503)
The Lord corrected me, but he did not deliver me over unto death.  <span
id="fr_504"></span>[6](#fn_504) For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,
and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.

6  <span id="fr_505"></span>[7](#fn_505) The righteous, saith he, shall
instruct me in mercy and reprove me; but let not oil of sinners make fat
my head.

7 And again he saith,  <span id="fr_506"></span>[8](#fn_506) Happy is
the man whom God correcteth; therefore despise not thou the chastening
of the Almighty.

8 For he maketh sore and bindeth up; he woundeth and his hands make
whole.

9 He shall deliver thee in six troubles; yea in seven there shall no
evil touch thee. In famine he shall redeem thee from death; and in war
from the power of the sword.

10 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue; neither shalt thou
be afraid of destruction when it cometh.

11 Thou shalt laugh at the wicked and sinners; neither shalt thou be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. The wild beast shall be at peace with
thee.

12 Then shalt thou know that thy house shall be in peace; and the
habitation of thy tabernacle shall not err. Thou shalt know also that
thy seed shall be great and thy offspring as the grass of the earth.

13 Thou shalt come to thy grave as the ripe corn, that is taken in due
time; like as a shock of corn cometh in, in its season.

14 Ye see, beloved, how there shall be a defence to those that are
corrected of the Lord. For being a good instructor, he is willing to
admonish us by his holy discipline.

15 Do ye therefore who laid the first foundation of this sedition,
submit yourselves unto your  <span id="fr_507"></span>[9](#fn_507)
priests; and be instructed unto repentance, bending the knees of your
hearts.

16 Learn to be subject, laying aside all proud and arrogant boasting of
your tongues.

17 For it is better for you to be found little, and approved, in the
 <span id="fr_508"></span>[10](#fn_508) sheepfold of Christ, than to
seem to yourselves better than others, and be cast out of his  <span
id="fr_509"></span>[11](#fn_509) fold.

18 For thus speaks the excellent and all virtuous wisdom,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>  <span
id="fr_510"></span>[1](#fn_510) Behold I will pour out the word of my
spirit upon you, I will make known my speech unto you.

19 Because I called and ye would not hear, I stretched out my words and
ye regarded not.

20 But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof. I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
cometh.

21 When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction as a
whirlwind, when distress and anguish cometh upon you.

22 Then shall ye call upon me, but I will not hear you: the wicked shall
seek me, but they shall not find me. For that they hated knowledge, and
did not seek the fear of the Lord.

23 They would not hearken unto my counsel: they despised all my reproof.
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own ways; and be filled
with their own wickedness.

\*      \*      \*

#### CHAP. XXIV.

<span class="small">1 *Recommends there to God. Desires speedily to hear
that this Epistle has had a good effect upon them.* 4
*conclusion*.</span>

NOW God, the inspector of all things, the  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[2](#fn_511) Father of Spirits, and the Lord of all
flesh, who hath chosen our Lord Jesus Christ, and us by him, to be his
peculiar people;

2 Grant to every soul of man that calleth upon his glorious and holy
name, faith, fear, peace, long-suffering, patience, temperance, holiness
and sobriety, unto all well-pleasing  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[3](#fn_512) in his sight; through our High-Priest
and Protector Jesus Christ, by whom be glory, and majesty, and power,
and honour, unto him now and for ever more. Amen.

3 ¶ The messengers whom we have sent unto you, Claudius, Ephebus, and
Valerios Bito, with Fortunatus, send back to us again with all speed in
peace, and with joy, that they may the sooner acquaint us with your
peace and concord, so much prayed for and desired by us; and that we may
rejoice in your good order.

4 The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, and with all that are
anywhere called by God through him: To whom be honour and glory, and
might and majesty, and eternal dominion, by  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[4](#fn_513) Christ Jesus, from everlasting to
everlasting. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[112:1](lbob15.htm#fr_137) Sojourneth.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[112:2](lbob15.htm#fr_138) Called. See Hammond
on Matt. xx.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[112:3](lbob15.htm#fr_139) Gr. in. See Bp.
Pearson's note on this place.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[112:4](lbob15.htm#fr_140) Ed. Colomesii. p. 2.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[112:5](lbob15.htm#fr_141) Ibid.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[112:6](lbob15.htm#fr_142) And.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[112:7](lbob15.htm#fr_143) Gr. Strange to.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[112:8](lbob15.htm#fr_144) Gr. Lodged as a
stranger.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[112:9](lbob15.htm#fr_145) Adorned with all
manner of virtues.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[113:1](lbob15.htm#fr_146) In.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[113:2](lbob15.htm#fr_147) Presbyters.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[113:3](lbob15.htm#fr_148) Canon, rule.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[113:4](lbob15.htm#fr_149) Themselves do their
own business. Vid. Not. Junii in loc.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[113:5](lbob15.htm#fr_150) Temperance,
sobriety.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[113:6](lbob15.htm#fr_151) 1 Pet. v. 5.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[113:7](lbob15.htm#fr_152) Proud.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[113:8](lbob15.htm#fr_153) Acts, xx. 35.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[113:9](lbob15.htm#fr_154) 1 Tim. vi. 8.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[113:10](lbob15.htm#fr_155) Embraced it in your
very bowels.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[113:11](lbob15.htm#fr_156) παθηματα. See Dr.
Grabe's Addit. to Bp. Bull's Def. fid. Nic. p. 60, 61.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[113:12](lbob15.htm#fr_157) Gr. λιπαρα.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[113:13](lbob15.htm#fr_158) Holy counsel, or
purpose, or will.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[113:14](lbob15.htm#fr_159) Gr. good.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[113:15](lbob15.htm#fr_160) With mercy and
conscience.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[113:16](lbob15.htm#fr_161) Ye were without
repentance in all well-doing. Titus iii. 1.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[113:17](lbob15.htm#fr_162) Prov. vii. 3.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[113:18](lbob15.htm#fr_163) Deut. xxxii. 15.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[113:19](lbob15.htm#fr_164) Confusion, tumults,
&c.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[114:1](lbob15.htm#fr_165) Walketh after.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[114:2](lbob15.htm#fr_166) Gen. iv. 3 &c.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[114:3](lbob15.htm#fr_167) This is according to
the LXX.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[114:4](lbob15.htm#fr_168) Ἀποστροφη,
conversion.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[114:5](lbob15.htm#fr_169) Fratricide.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[114:6](lbob15.htm#fr_170) Envy.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[114:7](lbob15.htm#fr_171) Gen. xxviii.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[114:8](lbob15.htm#fr_172) Gen. xxxvii.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[114:9](lbob15.htm#fr_173) Exodus ii. 15.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[114:10](lbob15.htm#fr_174) Exod. ii. 14.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[114:11](lbob15.htm#fr_175) Made to lodge out.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[114:12](lbob15.htm#fr_176) Num. xii. 14, 15.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[114:13](lbob15.htm#fr_177) Brought.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[114:14](lbob15.htm#fr_178) Hades.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[114:15](lbob15.htm#fr_179) Had, or underwent
the hatred, not only, &c.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[114:16](lbob15.htm#fr_180) To cease from.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[114:17](lbob15.htm#fr_181) Combatants,
wrestlers.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[114:18](lbob15.htm#fr_182) The faithful and
most righteous.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[114:19](lbob15.htm#fr_183) Good.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[115:1](lbob15.htm#fr_184) Labours.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[115:2](lbob15.htm#fr_185) And so.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[115:3](lbob15.htm#fr_186) By envy.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[115:4](lbob15.htm#fr_187) Having borne seven
times bonds, &c.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[115:5](lbob15.htm#fr_188) He received the, &c.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[115:6](lbob15.htm#fr_189) Vid. Pearson de
Success, c. viii. 9.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[115:7](lbob15.htm#fr_190) Men who have lived
godly, is gathered together.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[115:8](lbob15.htm#fr_191) Become an excellent
example among us.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[115:9](lbob15.htm#fr_192) Envy.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[115:10](lbob15.htm#fr_193) The names of Danae
and Dirce I omit.—See Junius Annot. in loc.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[115:11](lbob15.htm#fr_194) Cursed afflictions
or torments.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[115:12](lbob15.htm#fr_195) Envy or emulation.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[115:13](lbob15.htm#fr_196) Gen. ii. 23.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[115:14](lbob15.htm#fr_197) Great.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[115:15](lbob15.htm#fr_198) End.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[115:16](lbob15.htm#fr_199) Instructing you,
but also remembering, &c.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[115:17](lbob15.htm#fr_200) Place of encounter.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[115:18](lbob15.htm#fr_201) Imposed upon us
all.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[115:19](lbob15.htm#fr_202) 1 Tim. v. 4.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[115:20](lbob15.htm#fr_203) Afforded or given
to.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[115:21](lbob15.htm#fr_204) Look diligently to.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[115:22](lbob15.htm#fr_205) From age to age.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[115:23](lbob15.htm#fr_206) Be turned.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[115:24](lbob15.htm#fr_207) 2 Peter ii. 5.
Genesis vii.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[115:25](lbob15.htm#fr_208) John iii.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[116:1](lbob15.htm#fr_209) Received salvation.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[116:2](lbob15.htm#fr_210) Spoken.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[116:3](lbob15.htm#fr_211) Ezekiel xxxiii. 11.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[116:4](lbob15.htm#fr_212) So much as his
repentance.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[116:5](lbob15.htm#fr_213) Repent from.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[116:6](lbob15.htm#fr_214) Ezekiel xviii. 30,
23; Isaiah i.; Jeremiah iii. 4, 19.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[116:7](lbob15.htm#fr_215) Isaiah v. 16.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[116:8](lbob15.htm#fr_216) Evil from your
souls.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[116:9](lbob15.htm#fr_217) I will make them as
wool.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[116:10](lbob15.htm#fr_218) Becoming suppliants
of, &c.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[116:11](lbob15.htm#fr_219) Turn ourselves to
his mercy.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[116:12](lbob15.htm#fr_220) Vain labour.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[116:13](lbob15.htm#fr_221) Gen. v. 24.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[116:14](lbob15.htm#fr_222) Found.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[116:15](lbob15.htm#fr_223) Being found.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[116:16](lbob15.htm#fr_224) Gen. vi., vii.,
viii.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[116:17](lbob15.htm#fr_225) In unity.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[116:18](lbob15.htm#fr_226) James ii. 23;
Isaiah xli. 8.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[116:19](lbob15.htm#fr_227) Words.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[116:20](lbob15.htm#fr_228) This man.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[117:1](lbob15.htm#fr_229) Gen. xii. 1.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[117:2](lbob15.htm#fr_230) Gen. xiii. 14.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[117:3](lbob15.htm#fr_231) Towards the sea.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[117:4](lbob15.htm#fr_232) Gen. xv. 5.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[117:5](lbob15.htm#fr_233) A son was given unto
him.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[117:6](lbob15.htm#fr_234) Gen. xix. 2; 2 Peter
ii. 6; Jude 7.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[117:7](lbob15.htm#fr_235) See Not. in loc. or
punished with.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[117:8](lbob15.htm#fr_236) But those that turn
another way, he puts, &c.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[117:9](lbob15.htm#fr_237) Not in concord.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[117:10](lbob15.htm#fr_238) Put for a sign.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[117:11](lbob15.htm#fr_239) Become.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[117:12](lbob15.htm#fr_240) Jos. ii. 1, &c.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[117:13](lbob15.htm#fr_241) He sent men that
should take them, that being taken, &c.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[117:14](lbob15.htm#fr_242) Therefore
hospitable Rahab.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[118:1](lbob15.htm#fr_243) Men being sent by
the king, and saying.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[118:2](lbob15.htm#fr_244) Verse 4.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[118:3](lbob15.htm#fr_245) Verses 4, 5.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[118:4](lbob15.htm#fr_246) Vid. Conjecture.
Coteler. in loc.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[118:5](lbob15.htm#fr_247) Men.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[118:6](lbob15.htm#fr_248) Verse 9.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[118:7](lbob15.htm#fr_249) Given you this city.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[118:8](lbob15.htm#fr_250) Verse 13.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[118:9](lbob15.htm#fr_251) Verses 18, 19.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[118:10](lbob15.htm#fr_252) Verse 18.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[118:11](lbob15.htm#fr_253) Many of the Fathers
have applied this to the same purpose.—See not. Coteler in loc.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[118:12](lbob15.htm#fr_254) Jer. ix. 23. Comp.
2 Cor. xi. 31.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[118:13](lbob15.htm#fr_255) Teaching us.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[118:14](lbob15.htm#fr_256) For thus he saith.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[118:15](lbob15.htm#fr_257) Luke vi. 35.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[118:16](lbob15.htm#fr_258) Holy Word.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[118:17](lbob15.htm#fr_259) Isaiah lxvi. 2.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[118:18](lbob15.htm#fr_260) Holy.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[119:1](lbob15.htm#fr_261) In.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[119:2](lbob15.htm#fr_262) Prick on to.—See
Junius Ann.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[119:3](lbob15.htm#fr_263) Psalm xxxvii. 9.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[119:4](lbob15.htm#fr_264) Prov. ii. 10.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[119:5](lbob15.htm#fr_265) Psalm lxviii. 36.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[119:6](lbob15.htm#fr_266) With religion or
godliness.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[119:7](lbob15.htm#fr_267) With hypocrisy will
it.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[119:8](lbob15.htm#fr_268) Isaiah xxix. 13.
Psalm lxii. 4.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[119:9](lbob15.htm#fr_269) Blessed.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[119:10](lbob15.htm#fr_270) Cursed.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[119:11](lbob15.htm#fr_271) Psalm lxxviii. 36,
37.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[119:12](lbob15.htm#fr_272) Psalm xii. 3.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[119:13](lbob15.htm#fr_273) We will magnify our
tongue.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[119:14](lbob15.htm#fr_274) Boasting.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[119:15](lbob15.htm#fr_275) Καιπερ ὁυναμενος,
though he were powerful.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[119:16](lbob15.htm#fr_276) Isaiah liii.
according to the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[120:1](lbob15.htm#fr_277) Psalm xxii. 6.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[120:2](lbob15.htm#fr_278) MS. ὁι αυτου.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[120:3](lbob15.htm#fr_279) We say.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[120:4](lbob15.htm#fr_280) To these, those also
that have been witnessed of.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[120:5](lbob15.htm#fr_281) Gen. xviii. 27.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[120:6](lbob15.htm#fr_282) Job i. 1.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[120:7](lbob15.htm#fr_283) Job xiv. 4.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[121:1](lbob15.htm#fr_284) MS. εκρινεν ο θεος
τον Ισραηλ δια των μαστιγων.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[121:2](lbob15.htm#fr_285) Exod. iii. 11.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[121:3](lbob15.htm#fr_286) Exod. iv. 10.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[121:4](lbob15.htm#fr_287) Psalm lxxxix. 20.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[121:5](lbob15.htm#fr_288) Psalm li. to v. 17,
according to the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[121:6](lbob15.htm#fr_289) Fearfulness.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[121:7](lbob15.htm#fr_290) So great and such
kind of men.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[121:8](lbob15.htm#fr_291) Witnessed of, or
celebrated.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[121:9](lbob15.htm#fr_292) In.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[122:1](lbob15.htm#fr_293) Deeds or works.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[122:2](lbob15.htm#fr_294) Let us return to the
mark of peace given to us from the beginning.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[122:3](lbob15.htm#fr_295) See him with our
understanding.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[122:4](lbob15.htm#fr_296) Soul.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[122:5](lbob15.htm#fr_297) Choruses.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[122:6](lbob15.htm#fr_298) Bounds.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[122:7](lbob15.htm#fr_299) Doubting.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[122:8](lbob15.htm#fr_300) Vid. Edit. Colomes.
p. 53.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[122:9](lbob15.htm#fr_301) Hollow, or depth.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[122:10](lbob15.htm#fr_302) Commanded, so it
does.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[122:11](lbob15.htm#fr_303) Job xxxiii.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[122:12](lbob15.htm#fr_304) Stations.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[122:13](lbob15.htm#fr_305) Survive.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[122:14](lbob15.htm#fr_306) Mix together.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[122:15](lbob15.htm#fr_307) All of us.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[122:16](lbob15.htm#fr_308) With concord.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[122:17](lbob15.htm#fr_309) Prov. xx. 27.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[123:1](lbob15.htm#fr_310) That nothing is hid
to him of our thoughts, or reasonings.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[123:2](lbob15.htm#fr_311) In the pride of
their own speech, or reason.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[123:3](lbob15.htm#fr_312) Correct, or amend.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[123:4](lbob15.htm#fr_313) Will, or counsel.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[123:5](lbob15.htm#fr_314) Moderation.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[123:6](lbob15.htm#fr_315) Let them manifest.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[123:7](lbob15.htm#fr_316) Partake of.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[123:8](lbob15.htm#fr_317) Saving.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[123:9](lbob15.htm#fr_318) The faith confirms.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[123:10](lbob15.htm#fr_319) Psalm xxiv. 11.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[124:1](lbob15.htm#fr_320) Be double-minded.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[124:2](lbob15.htm#fr_321) Let the writing be
far from us.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[124:3](lbob15.htm#fr_322) James i. 8.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[124:4](lbob15.htm#fr_323) Compare ourselves
unto a tree.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[124:5](lbob15.htm#fr_324) Ex. MS. omitted by
James, Hab. ii. 3; Malach. iii. 1.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[124:6](lbob15.htm#fr_325) Coteler. Αγγελος
Angel.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[124:7](lbob15.htm#fr_326) See.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[124:8](lbob15.htm#fr_327) Made every season.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[124:9](lbob15.htm#fr_328) Went forth, and so
in the rest.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[124:10](lbob15.htm#fr_329) Sign.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[125:1](lbob15.htm#fr_330) Do.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[125:2](lbob15.htm#fr_331) Psalm iii. 5.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[125:3](lbob15.htm#fr_332) Job xix. 23.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[125:4](lbob15.htm#fr_333) Let our minds be
fastened.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[125:5](lbob15.htm#fr_334) Majesty.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[125:6](lbob15.htm#fr_335) His word.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[125:7](lbob15.htm#fr_336) Wisd. xii. 12.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[125:8](lbob15.htm#fr_337) MS. ποιησει.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[125:9](lbob15.htm#fr_338) If the &c., Psalm
xix. 1.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[125:10](lbob15.htm#fr_339) Covered.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[125:11](lbob15.htm#fr_340) Judgments.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[125:12](lbob15.htm#fr_341) Psalm cxxxix. 7.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[125:13](lbob15.htm#fr_342) Mind.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[125:14](lbob15.htm#fr_343) A part.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[125:15](lbob15.htm#fr_344) Deut. xxxii. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[125:16](lbob15.htm#fr_345) So the LXX.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[126:1](lbob15.htm#fr_346) Deut. iv. 34.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[126:2](lbob15.htm#fr_347) Num. xxvii.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[126:3](lbob15.htm#fr_348) Ja. iv. 9, 1 Pet. v.
5.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[126:4](lbob15.htm#fr_349) The grace of God has
been given.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[126:5](lbob15.htm#fr_350) Works.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[126:6](lbob15.htm#fr_351) He that speaketh
many things shall also hear, &c.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[126:7](lbob15.htm#fr_352) Job xi. 2, 3, lxx.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[126:8](lbob15.htm#fr_353) Be not wordy.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[126:9](lbob15.htm#fr_354) Are praised of.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[126:10](lbob15.htm#fr_355) See what are the
ways of his blessing.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[126:11](lbob15.htm#fr_356) Unroll.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[126:12](lbob15.htm#fr_357) Foreknowing what
was to be, became a sacrifice.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[126:13](lbob15.htm#fr_358) These gifts he
shall know who will carefully consider them.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[127:1](lbob15.htm#fr_359) Sceptres.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[127:2](lbob15.htm#fr_360) Gen. xxvii. 17.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[127:3](lbob15.htm#fr_361) Glorified.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[127:4](lbob15.htm#fr_362) In holiness of
heart.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[127:5](lbob15.htm#fr_363) All-greatest.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[127:6](lbob15.htm#fr_364) Gen. i. 25, 27.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[127:7](lbob15.htm#fr_365) Gen. i. 28.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[127:8](lbob15.htm#fr_366) This.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[127:9](lbob15.htm#fr_367) Come to.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[127:10](lbob15.htm#fr_368) Work.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[127:11](lbob15.htm#fr_369) Isaiah xl. 10,
lxii. 11.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[128:1](lbob15.htm#fr_370) Every good work.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[128:2](lbob15.htm#fr_371) Him.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[128:3](lbob15.htm#fr_372) Dan. vii. 10.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[128:4](lbob15.htm#fr_373) Isaiah vi. 3.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[128:5](lbob15.htm#fr_374) Every creature.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[128:6](lbob15.htm#fr_375) Isaiah lxiv. 4, 1
Cor. ii. 9.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[128:7](lbob15.htm#fr_376) He.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[128:8](lbob15.htm#fr_377) Ages.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[128:9](lbob15.htm#fr_378) Quantity.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[128:10](lbob15.htm#fr_379) Gifts.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[128:11](lbob15.htm#fr_380) If we shall.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[128:12](lbob15.htm#fr_381) Perform those
things that are agreeable.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[128:13](lbob15.htm#fr_382) Rom. i. 32.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[128:14](lbob15.htm#fr_383) Psalm l. 15, &c.,
ac. to the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[129:1](lbob15.htm#fr_384) That which has the
power to save us.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[129:2](lbob15.htm#fr_385) Heights of heaven.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[129:3](lbob15.htm#fr_386) Heb. i. 3, 4.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[129:4](lbob15.htm#fr_387) Psalm cix. 4. Heb.
i. 7.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[129:5](lbob15.htm#fr_388) Heb. i. 5.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[129:6](lbob15.htm#fr_389) Comp. Psalm ii. 7,
8.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[129:7](lbob15.htm#fr_390) Heb. i. 13, Psalm
cv. 1.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[129:8](lbob15.htm#fr_391) War.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[129:9](lbob15.htm#fr_392) Prefects.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[129:10](lbob15.htm#fr_393) Commanders of a
thousand.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[129:11](lbob15.htm#fr_394) Centurions.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[129:12](lbob15.htm#fr_395) Commanders of 50,
and so on.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[129:13](lbob15.htm#fr_396) 1 Cor. xii. 13, 21.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[129:14](lbob15.htm#fr_397) Use one common
subjection.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[130:1](lbob15.htm#fr_398) MS. το σωα.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[130:2](lbob15.htm#fr_399) As also has he
placed.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[130:3](lbob15.htm#fr_400) His gift.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[130:4](lbob15.htm#fr_401) Another that gave
him.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[130:5](lbob15.htm#fr_402) Of what matter.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[130:6](lbob15.htm#fr_403) Prepared for us.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[130:7](lbob15.htm#fr_404) And impudent, and
without instruction.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[130:8](lbob15.htm#fr_405) For.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[130:9](lbob15.htm#fr_406) An air.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[130:10](lbob15.htm#fr_407) John iv. 16, &c.,
xv. 15, iv. 19.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[130:11](lbob15.htm#fr_408) Job v. 1, &c.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[130:12](lbob15.htm#fr_409) Were crushed upon.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[130:13](lbob15.htm#fr_410) Deliver.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[130:14](lbob15.htm#fr_411) Eat.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[131:1](lbob15.htm#fr_412) By chance.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[131:2](lbob15.htm#fr_413) To his will.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[131:3](lbob15.htm#fr_414) See Coteler. in loc.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[131:4](lbob15.htm#fr_415) Being in a good
conscience.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[131:5](lbob15.htm#fr_416) Ye see.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[131:6](lbob15.htm#fr_417) Done.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[131:7](lbob15.htm#fr_418) 1 Thess. i. 5.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[131:8](lbob15.htm#fr_419) With the full
assurance.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[131:9](lbob15.htm#fr_420) Vid. Coteler. in
loc.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[132:1](lbob15.htm#fr_421) Isaiah lx. 17.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[132:2](lbob15.htm#fr_422) Bishops, Deacons.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[132:3](lbob15.htm#fr_423) Signified.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[132:4](lbob15.htm#fr_424) An emulation
happening.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[132:5](lbob15.htm#fr_425) Numb. xvii.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[132:6](lbob15.htm#fr_426) And the Rods.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[132:7](lbob15.htm#fr_427) To exercise the
office of the priesthood, and to minister, &c.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[132:8](lbob15.htm#fr_428) That this should be
so.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[132:9](lbob15.htm#fr_429) About the name of
the bishoprick.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[132:10](lbob15.htm#fr_430) Left a list of
other chosen and approved persons, who should succeed them in their
ministry. See Dr. Arden's Disc. upon this passage. Dr. Hammond's Power
of the Keys, c. iii. p. 413.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[133:1](lbob15.htm#fr_431) Bishoprick.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[133:2](lbob15.htm#fr_432) Offer the gifts.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[133:3](lbob15.htm#fr_433) Just men.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[133:4](lbob15.htm#fr_434) Suffering these
things they underwent them gloriously.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[133:5](lbob15.htm#fr_435) Dan. vi. 16.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[133:6](lbob15.htm#fr_436) Shut into.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[133:7](lbob15.htm#fr_437) Dan. iii. 20.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[133:8](lbob15.htm#fr_438) Worshipping the
worship.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[133:9](lbob15.htm#fr_439) Full of virtue.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[133:10](lbob15.htm#fr_440) Have inherited.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[133:11](lbob15.htm#fr_441) Have been exalted.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[133:12](lbob15.htm#fr_442) To cleave to.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[133:13](lbob15.htm#fr_443) Psalm xvii. 2.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[133:14](lbob15.htm#fr_444) Omitted by Junius,
and now restored from the MS.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[134:1](lbob15.htm#fr_445) Turn aside.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[134:2](lbob15.htm#fr_446) Eph. iv. 4.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[134:3](lbob15.htm#fr_447) 1 Cor. xii.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[134:4](lbob15.htm#fr_448) Rom. xii.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[134:5](lbob15.htm#fr_449) For he said.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[134:6](lbob15.htm#fr_450) Luke, xvii. 2.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[134:7](lbob15.htm#fr_451) See Dodwell's add.
and Pearson, Dr. Grabe, &c.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[134:8](lbob15.htm#fr_452) Spiritually send to
you.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[134:9](lbob15.htm#fr_453) Inclinations.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[134:10](lbob15.htm#fr_454) Inclined.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[134:11](lbob15.htm#fr_455) Witnessed of.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[134:12](lbob15.htm#fr_456) Gravity.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[134:13](lbob15.htm#fr_457) So much spoken of.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[134:14](lbob15.htm#fr_458) Institution.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[134:15](lbob15.htm#fr_459) See Dodwell.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[134:16](lbob15.htm#fr_460) Take away.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[134:17](lbob15.htm#fr_461) Becoming
favourable.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[134:18](lbob15.htm#fr_462) Grave, venerable.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[134:19](lbob15.htm#fr_463) Psalm cxviii. 19,
20.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[135:1](lbob15.htm#fr_464) Greater.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[135:2](lbob15.htm#fr_465) Bond.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[135:3](lbob15.htm#fr_466) Glues.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[135:4](lbob15.htm#fr_467) 1 Peter iv. 9.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[135:5](lbob15.htm#fr_468) 1 Cor. xiii. 7, &c.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[135:6](lbob15.htm#fr_469) Take as up.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[135:7](lbob15.htm#fr_470) Animadversion, or
visitation.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[135:8](lbob15.htm#fr_471) Isaiah xxvi. 20.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[135:9](lbob15.htm#fr_472) Are we.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[136:1](lbob15.htm#fr_473) Psalm xxxii.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[136:2](lbob15.htm#fr_474) See Junius in loc.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[136:3](lbob15.htm#fr_475) Chief leaders.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[136:4](lbob15.htm#fr_476) They ought.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[136:5](lbob15.htm#fr_477) Walking according
to; live in.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[136:6](lbob15.htm#fr_478) Rather than.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[136:7](lbob15.htm#fr_479) Num. xvi.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[136:8](lbob15.htm#fr_480) Exod. iv.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[136:9](lbob15.htm#fr_481) Chosen.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[136:10](lbob15.htm#fr_482) Psalm lxix. 31.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[136:11](lbob15.htm#fr_483) Psalm l. 14.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[136:12](lbob15.htm#fr_484) Psalm li. 17.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[136:13](lbob15.htm#fr_485) Exod. xxxii. Deut.
ix.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[137:1](lbob15.htm#fr_486) Once and twice.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[137:2](lbob15.htm#fr_487) More, greater.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[137:3](lbob15.htm#fr_488) Blot out.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[137:4](lbob15.htm#fr_489) The multitude.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[137:5](lbob15.htm#fr_490) Every place.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[137:6](lbob15.htm#fr_491) Psalm xxiv.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[137:7](lbob15.htm#fr_492) But that we may
bring the examples of heathens.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[137:8](lbob15.htm#fr_493) Citizens.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[137:9](lbob15.htm#fr_494) Many

<span id="fn_495"></span>[137:10](lbob15.htm#fr_495) Others.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[137:11](lbob15.htm#fr_496) Judith, viii. ix.
x. xiii.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[137:12](lbob15.htm#fr_497) The strangers.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[137:13](lbob15.htm#fr_498) Esther, vii. viii.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[138:1](lbob15.htm#fr_499) Ages; who.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[138:2](lbob15.htm#fr_500) Viz. that of schism.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[138:3](lbob15.htm#fr_501) There shall he to
them.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[138:4](lbob15.htm#fr_502) *i.e.* our
Fellow-Christians.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[138:5](lbob15.htm#fr_503) Psalm xcviii.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[138:6](lbob15.htm#fr_504) Prov. iii. 11.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[138:7](lbob15.htm#fr_505) Psalm cxli. 5.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[138:8](lbob15.htm#fr_506) Job v. 17, &c.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[138:9](lbob15.htm#fr_507) Elders.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[138:10](lbob15.htm#fr_508) See Junius in loc.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[138:11](lbob15.htm#fr_509) See Coteler in loc.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[139:1](lbob15.htm#fr_510) Prov. i. 23, &c.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[139:2](lbob15.htm#fr_511) Master.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[139:3](lbob15.htm#fr_512) To his name.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[139:4](lbob15.htm#fr_513) Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians](lbob16)

</div>
