<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob15)  [Next](lbob17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The SECOND EPISTLE of CLEMENT to the CORINTHIANS.

\[Archbishop Wake is the translator of this Second Epistle, which he
says was not of so great reputation among the primitive Fathers as the
first. He defends it notwithstanding; and in answer to those who
objected to Clement's First Epistle, that it did not duly honour the
Trinity, the Archbishop refers to this as containing proof of the
writer's fulness of belief on that point.\]

#### CHAP. I.

<span class="small">That we ought to value our salvation; and to skew
that we do, by a sincere obedience.</span>

BRETHREN, we ought so to think of Jesus Christ as of God: as of the
judge of the living, and the dead; nor should we think any less of our
salvation.

2 For if we think  <span id="fr_514"></span>[5](#fn_514) meanly of him,
we shall hope only to receive

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

some small things from him.

3 And if we  <span id="fr_515"></span>[1](#fn_515) do so; we shall sin;
not  <span id="fr_516"></span>[2](#fn_516) considering from whence we
have been called, and by whom, and to what place; and how much Jesus
Christ vouchsafed to suffer for our sakes.

4 What recompense then shall we render unto him? Or what fruit that may
be worthy of what he has given to us?

5 For indeed  <span id="fr_517"></span>[3](#fn_517) how great are those
advantages which we owe to him in relation to our holiness? He has
illuminated us: as a father, he has called us his children; he has saved
us who were lost and undone.

6 What praise shall we give to him? Or what reward that may be
answerable to those things which we have received?

7 We were defective in our understandings; worshipping stones and wood;
gold, and silver, and brass, the works of men's hands; and our whole
life was nothing else but death.

8 Wherefore being encompassed with darkness, and having such a mist
before our eyes, we have looked up, and through his will have laid aside
the cloud wherewith we were surrounded.

9 For he had compassion upon us, and being moved in his bowels towards
us, he saved us; having beheld in us much error, and destruction; and
seen that we had no hope of salvation, but only through him.

10 For he called us who were not; and was pleased from nothing to give
us being.

#### CHAP. II.

<span class="small">1 *That God had before prophesied by Isaiah, that
the Gentiles should be saved.* 8 *That this ought to engage such
especially to live well; without which they will still miscarry*.</span>

REJOICE, thou barren, that bearest not, break forth and cry thou that
travailest not; for she that is desolate hath many more children than
she that hath an husband. <span id="fr_518"></span>[4](#fn_518)

2 In that he said, Rejoice thou barren that bearest not, he spake of us:
for our church was barren before that children were given unto it.

3 And again; when he said, Cry thou that travailest not; he implied thus
much: That after the manner of women in travail, we should not cease to
put up our prayers unto God  <span id="fr_519"></span>[5](#fn_519)
abundantly.

4 And for what follows, because she that is desolate hath more children
than she that hath an husband: it was therefore added, because our
people which seem to have been forsaken by God, now believing in him,
are become more than they who seemed to have God.

5 And another Scripture saith,  <span id="fr_520"></span>[6](#fn_520) I
came not to call the righteous but sinners (to repentance). The meaning
of which is this: that those who were lost must be saved.

6 For that is, indeed, truly great and wonderful, not to confirm those
things that are yet standing, but those which are falling.

7 Even so did it seem good to Christ to save what was lost; and when he
came into the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

world, he saved many, and called us who were already lost.

8 Seeing then he has shewed so great mercy towards us; and chiefly for
that, we who are alive, do now no longer sacrifice to dead Gods, nor pay
any worship to them, but have by him been brought to the knowledge of
the Father of truth.

9  <span id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_521) Whereby shall we shew that we
do indeed know him, but by not denying him by whom we have come to the
knowledge of him?

10 For even he himself saith,  <span id="fr_522"></span>[2](#fn_522)
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my
Father. This therefore is our reward if we shall confess him by whom we
have been saved.

11 But, wherein must we confess him?—Namely, in doing those things which
he saith, and not disobeying his commandments: by worshipping him not
with our lips only, but with all our heart, and with all our mind. For
he saith in Isaiah:  <span id="fr_523"></span>[3](#fn_523) This people
honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

12 Let us then not only call him Lord; for that will not save us. For he
saith:  <span id="fr_524"></span>[4](#fn_524) Not every one that saith
unto me Lord, Lord, shall be saved, but he that doeth righteousness.

13 Wherefore, brethren, let us confess him by our works; by loving one
another; in not committing adultery, not speaking evil against each
other, not envying one another; but by being temperate, merciful, good.

14 Let us also have a mutual sense of one another's sufferings; and not
be covetous of money: but let us, by our good works, confess God, and
not by those that are otherwise.

15 Also let us not fear men: but rather God.  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[5](#fn_525) Wherefore, if we should do such wicked
things, the Lord hath said: Though ye should be joined unto me, even in
my very bosom, and not keep my commandments, I would cast you off, and
say unto you:  <span id="fr_526"></span>[6](#fn_526) Depart from me; I
know not whence you are, ye workers of iniquity.

#### CHAP. III.

<span class="small">1 *That whilst we secure the other world, we need
not fear what can befall us in this.* 5*. That if we follow the
interests of this present world, we cannot escape the punishment of the
other.* 10 *Which ought to bring us to repentance and holiness,* 14 *and
that presently: because in this world is the only time for
repentance*.</span>

WHEREFORE, brethren, leaving willingly for conscience sake our
sojourning in this world, let us do the will of him who has called us,
and not fear to depart out of this world.

2 For the Lord saith,  <span id="fr_527"></span>[7](#fn_527) Ye shall be
as sheep in the midst of wolves. Peter answered and said, What if the
wolves shall tear in pieces the sheep? Jesus said unto Peter, Let not
the sheep fear the wolves after death:  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[8](#fn_528) And ye also fear not those that kill
you, and after that have no more that they can do unto you; but fear him
who after you are dead, has power to cast both soul and body into
hell-fire.

3 For consider, brethren, that the sojourning of this flesh in

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the present world, is but little, and of a short continuance, but the
promise of Christ is great and wonderful, even the rest of the kingdom
that is to come, and of eternal life.

4 What then must we do that we may attain unto it?—We must  <span
id="fr_529"></span>[1](#fn_529) order our conversation holily and
righteously, and look upon all the things of this world as none of ours,
and not desire them. For, if we desire to possess them we fall from the
way of righteousness.

5 For thus saith the Lord,  <span id="fr_530"></span>[2](#fn_530) No
servant can serve two masters. If therefore we shall desire to serve God
and Mammon it will be without profit to us.  <span
id="fr_531"></span>[3](#fn_531) For what will it profit, if one gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul?

6 Now this world and that to come are two enemies. This speaketh of
adultery and corruption, of covetousness and deceit; but renounces these
things.

7 We cannot, therefore, be the friends of both; but we must resolve by
forsaking the one, to enjoy the other. And we think it is better to hate
the present things, as little, short-lived, and corruptible, and to love
those which are to come, which are truly good and incorruptible.

8 For, if we do the will of Christ, we shall find rest: but if not,
nothing shall deliver us from eternal punishment if we shall disobey his
commands. For even thus saith the Scripture in the prophet Ezekiel,
 <span id="fr_532"></span>[4](#fn_532) If Noah, Job, and Daniel should
rise up, they shall not deliver their children in captivity.

9 Wherefore, if such righteous men are not able by their righteousness
to deliver their children; how can we hope to enter into the kingdom of
God, except we keep our baptism holy and undefiled? Or who shall be our
advocate, unless we shall be found to have done what is holy and just?

10 Let us, therefore, my brethren, contend with all earnestness, knowing
that our combat is at hand; and that many go long voyages to encounter
for a corruptible reward.

11 And yet all are not crowned, but they only that labour much, and
strive gloriously. Let us, therefore, so contend, that we may all be
crowned. Let us run in the straight road, the race that is
incorruptible: and let us in great numbers pass unto it, and strive that
we may receive the crown. But and if we cannot all be crowned, let us
come as near to it as we are able.

12 Moreover, we must consider, that he who contends in a corruptible
combat, if he be found doing anything that is not fair, is taken away
and scourged, and cast out of the lists. What think ye then that he
shall suffer, who does anything that is not fitting in the combat of
immortality?

13 Thus speaks the prophet concerning those who keep not their seal;
 <span id="fr_533"></span>[5](#fn_533) Their worm shall not die, and
their fire shall not be quenched; and they shall be for a spectacle unto
all flesh.

14 Let us therefore repent, whilst we are yet upon the earth: for we are
as clay in the hand of the artificer. For as the potter if he make a
vessel, and it be turned amiss in his hands, or broken, again forms it
anew;

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

but if he have gone so far as to throw it into the furnace of fire, he
can no more bring any remedy to it.

15 So we, whilst we are in this world,  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[1](#fn_534) should repent with our whole heart for
whatsoever evil we have done in the flesh; while we have yet the time of
repentance, that we may be saved by the Lord.

16 For after we shall have departed out of this world, we shall no
longer be able to confess our sins or repent  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[2](#fn_535) in the other.

17 Wherefore, brethren, let us doing the will of the Father, and keeping
our flesh pure, and observing the commandments of the Lord, lay hold on
eternal life: for the Lord saith in the gospel,  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[3](#fn_536) If ye have not kept that which was
little, who will give you that which is great?—For I say unto you, he
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much.

18 This, therefore, is what he saith; keep your bodies pure, and your
seal without spot, that ye may receive eternal life.

#### CHAP. IV.

<span class="small">1 *We shall rise, and be judged in our bodies;
therefore we must live well in them,* 6 *that we ought, for our own
interest, to live well; though few seem to mind what really is for their
advantage,* 10 *and not deceive ourselves: seeing God will certainly
judge us, and render to all of us according to our works*.</span>

AND let not any one among you say, that this very flesh is not judged,
neither raised up. Consider, in what were you saved; in what did you
look up, if not whilst you were in this flesh.

2 We must, therefore, keep our flesh as the temple of God. For in like
manner as ye were called in the flesh ye shall also come to judgment in
the flesh.  <span id="fr_537"></span>[4](#fn_537) Our one Lord Jesus
Christ, who has saved us, being first a spirit, was made flesh, and so
called us; even so we also shall in this flesh receive the reward.

3 Let us, therefore, love one another, that we may attain unto the
kingdom of God. Whilst we have time to be healed, let us deliver up
ourselves to God our physician, giving our reward unto him.

4\. And what reward shall we give?—Repentance out of a pure heart. For
he knows all things before hand, and searches out our very hearts.

5 Let us, therefore, give praise unto him: not only with our mouths, but
with all our souls; that he may receive us as children.  <span
id="fr_538"></span>[5](#fn_538) For so the Lord hath said;  <span
id="fr_539"></span>[6](#fn_539) They are my brethren, who do the will of
my father.

6 ¶ Wherefore, my brethren, let us do the will of the Father, who hath
called us, that we may live. Let us pursue virtue, and forsake
wickedness, which leadeth us into sins; and let us flee all ungodliness,
that evils overtake us not.

7 For, if we shall do our diligence to live well, peace shall follow us.
 <span id="fr_540"></span>[7](#fn_540) And yet how hard is it to find a
man that does this? For almost all are led by human fears, choosing
rather the present enjoyments, than the future promise.

8 For they know not how great a torment the present enjoyments bring
with them; nor what delights the future promise

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

9 And if they themselves only did this, it might the more easily be
endured; but now they go on to infect innocent souls with their evil
doctrines; not knowing that both themselves, and those that hear them,
shall receive a double condemnation.

10 ¶ Let us, therefore, serve God with a pure heart, and we shall be
righteous: but if we shall not serve him because we do not believe the
promise of God, we shall be miserable.

11 For thus saith the prophet;  <span id="fr_541"></span>[1](#fn_541)
Miserable are the double minded who doubt in their heart, and say, these
things we have heard, even in the time of our fathers, but we have seen
none of them, though we have expected them from day to day.

12 O ye fools! compare yourselves to a tree; take the vine for an
example. First it sheds its leaves, then it buds, then come the sour
grapes, then the ripe fruit; even so my people have borne its disorders
and afflictions, but shall hereafter receive good things.

13 Wherefore my brethren, let us not doubt in our minds, but let us
expect with hope, that we may receive our reward; for he is faithful,
who has promised  he will render to every one a reward according to his
works.

14 If, therefore, we shall do what is just in the sight of God we shall
enter into his kingdom, I and shall receive the promises;  <span
id="fr_542"></span>[2](#fn_542) Which neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor have entered into the heart of man.

15 ¶ Wherefore let us every hour expect the kingdom of God in love and
righteousness; because we know not the day of God's appearing.

#### CHAP. V.

#### <span class="smallcaps">A Fragment.</span>

*Of the Lord's kingdom*.

1    \*   \* For the Lord himself, being asked by a certain person, When
his kingdom should come? answered, When two shall be one, and that which
is without as that which is within; and the male with the female,
neither male nor female.

2 Now *two are one*, when we speak the truth to each other, and there is
(without hypocrisy) one soul in two bodies:

3 *And that which is without as that which is within;*—He means this: he
calls the soul that which is within, and the body that which is without.
As therefore thy body appears, so let thy soul be seen by its good
works.

4 *And the male with the female neither male nor female;*—He means this;
he calls our anger the male, our concupiscence the female.

5 When therefore a man is come to such a pass that he is subject neither
to the one nor the other of these (both of which, through the prevalence
of custom, and an evil education, cloud and darken the reason,)

6 But rather, having dispelled the mist arising from them, and being
full of shame, shall by repentance have united both his soul and spirit
in the obedience of reason; then, as Paul says, there is in us neither
male nor female

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_514"></span>[139:5](lbob16.htm#fr_514) Little things, or
meanly.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[140:1](lbob16.htm#fr_515) Hear as of little
things.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[140:2](lbob16.htm#fr_516) Knowing.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[140:3](lbob16.htm#fr_517) How greatly holy
things do we owe unto him.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[140:4](lbob16.htm#fr_518) Isaiah liv. 1.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[140:5](lbob16.htm#fr_519) Ἀπλως. See St. James
i. 5. Compare Rom. xii. 8. 2 Cor. viii. 2, ix. 11, 13.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[140:6](lbob16.htm#fr_520) Matt. ix. 13.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[141:1](lbob16.htm#fr_521) What is the
knowledge which is towards him.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[141:2](lbob16.htm#fr_522) Matt. x. 32.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[141:3](lbob16.htm#fr_523) Isaiah xxix. 13.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[141:4](lbob16.htm#fr_524) Matt. vii. 21.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[141:5](lbob16.htm#fr_525) Wherefore we doing
these things.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[141:6](lbob16.htm#fr_526) Matt. xii. 23; Luke
xiii. 27.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[141:7](lbob16.htm#fr_527) Matt. v. 16.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[141:8](lbob16.htm#fr_528) Luke xii. 4, 5.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[142:1](lbob16.htm#fr_529) MS. Alexander. οσιως
και διακαιως ανϛρεφεσθαι.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[142:2](lbob16.htm#fr_530) Luke xvi. 13.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[142:3](lbob16.htm#fr_531) Matt. xvi 26.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[142:4](lbob16.htm#fr_532) Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[142:5](lbob16.htm#fr_533) Isaiah lxvi. 24.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[143:1](lbob16.htm#fr_534) Let us repent.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[143:2](lbob16.htm#fr_535) There.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[143:3](lbob16.htm#fr_536) Luke xvi. 10, 12.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[143:4](lbob16.htm#fr_537) MS. Alex. plane sic
exhibit: εις Χριϛος.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[143:5](lbob16.htm#fr_538) Vox. Θεου non est in
MS.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[143:6](lbob16.htm#fr_539) Matt. xii. 50.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[143:7](lbob16.htm#fr_540) For, for this cause,
we cannot find a man. Aliter Wendel. in traduct. lat. q. v.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[144:1](lbob16.htm#fr_541) See I. Clement,
chap. x.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[144:2](lbob16.htm#fr_542) 1 Cor. ii. 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The General Epistle of Barnabas](lbob17)

</div>
