<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lbob27)  [Next](lbob29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002LE7A6A/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Lost Books of the Bible*, \[1926\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Third Book of HERMAS, which is called his SIMILITUDES.

#### SIMILITUDE I.

<span class="small">*That seeing we have no abiding city in this world,
we ought to look after that which is to come*.</span>

AND he said unto me;  <span id="fr_1327"></span>[5](#fn_1326.md) Ye know
that ye who are the servants of the Lord, live here as in a pilgrimage;
for your city is far off from this city.

2 If, therefore, ye know your city in which ye are to dwell, why do ye
here buy estates, and provide yourselves with delicacies, and stately
buildings, and superfluous houses? For he that provides himself these
things in this city, does not think of returning into his own city.

3 O foolish, and doubtful, and wretched man; who understandest not that
all these things belong to other men, and are under the power of
another. For the Lord of this city saith unto thee; Either obey my laws,
or depart out of my city.

4 What therefore shalt thou do who art subject to a law in thine own
city? Canst thou for thy estate, or for any of those things which thou
hast provided, deny thy law? But if thou shalt deny it, and wilt
afterwards return into thy own city, thou shalt not be received, but
shall be excluded thence.

5 See therefore, that like a man in another country, thou procure

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

no more to thyself than what is necessary, and sufficient for thee? and
be ready, that when the God or Lord of this city shall drive thee out of
it, thou mayst oppose his law, and go into thine own city; where thou
mayst with all cheerfulness live according to thine own law with no
wrong.

6 Take heed therefore ye that serve God, and have him in your hearts:
work ye the works of God, being mindful both of his commands and of his
promises, which he has promised; and be assured that he will make them
good unto you; if ye shall keep his commandments.

7 Instead therefore of the possessions that ye would otherwise purchase,
redeem  <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1](#fn_1327.md) those that are in want
from their necessities, as every one is able; justify the widows; judge
the cause of the fatherless; and spend your riches and your wealth in
such works as these.

8 For, for this end has God enriched you, that ye might fulfil these
kind of services. It is much better to do this, than to buy lands or
houses; because all such things shall perish with this present time.

9 But what ye shall do for the name of the Lord, ye shall find in your
city, and shall have joy without sadness or fear. Wherefore covet not
the riches of the heathen; for they are destructive to the servants of
God.

10  <span id="fr_1329"></span>[2](#fn_1328.md) But trade with your own
riches which you possess, by which ye may attain unto everlasting joy.

11 And do not commit adultery, nor touch any other man's wife, nor
desire her; but covet that which is thy own business, and thou shalt be
saved.

#### SIMILITUDE II.

<span class="small">*As the vine is supported by the elm, so is the rich
man helped by the prayers of the poor*.</span>

AS I was walking into the field, and considered the elm and the vine,
and thought with myself of their fruits, an angel appeared unto me, and
said unto me; What is it that thou thinkest upon thus long within
thyself?

2 And I said unto him, Sir, I think of this vine and this elm because
their fruits are fair. And he said unto me;  <span
id="fr_1330"></span>[3](#fn_1329.md) These two trees are set for a pattern
to the servants of God.

3 And I said unto him, Sir, I would know in what the pattern of these
trees which thou mentionest, does consist. Hearken, saith he; seest thou
this vine and this elm; Sir, said I, I see them,

4 This vine, saith he, is fruitful, but the elm is a tree without fruit.
Nevertheless this vine unless it were set by this elm, and supported by
it, would not bear much fruit; but lying along upon the ground, would
bear but ill fruit, because it did not hang upon the elm; whereas, being
supported upon the elm, it bears fruit both for itself and for that.

5 See, therefore, how the elm gives no less, but rather more fruit, than
the vine. How, Sir, said I, does it bear more fruit than the vine?
Because, said he, the vine being supported upon the elm gives both much
and good fruit; whereas, if it lay along upon the ground, it would bear
but little, and that very ill too.

6 This similitude, therefore, is set forth to the servants of God;

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

and it represents the rich and poor man. I answered, Sir, make this
manifest unto me. Hear, said he; the rich man has wealth; howbeit
towards the Lord he is poor; for he is  <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1](#fn_1330.md) taken up about his riches, and prays
but little to the Lord; and the prayers which he makes are lazy and
without force.

7 When, therefore, the rich man reaches out to the poor those things
which he wants, the poor man prays unto the Lord for the rich; and God
grants unto the rich man all good things, because the poor man is rich
in prayer; and his requests have great power with the Lord.

8 Then the rich man ministers all things to the poor, because he
perceives that he is heard by the Lord: and he the more willingly and
without doubting, affords him what he wants, and takes care that nothing
be lacking to him.

9 And the poor man gives thanks unto the Lord for the rich; because they
do both their work from the Lord.

10 With men therefore, the elm is not thought to give any fruit; and
they know not neither understand that its company being added to the
vine, the vine bears a double increase, both for itself and for the elm.

11 Even so the poor praying unto the Lord for the rich, are heard by
him; and their riches are increased, because they minister to the poor
of their wealth. They are therefore both made partakers of each other's
good works.

12 Whosoever, therefore, shall do these things, he shall not be forsaken
by the Lord, but shall be written in the book of life.

13 Happy are they who are rich, and perceive themselves to be increased:
for he that is sensible of this, will be able to minister somewhat to
others.

#### SIMILITUDE III.

<span class="small">*As the green trees in the winter cannot be
distinguished from the dry; so neither can the righteous from the wicked
in this present world*.</span>

AGAIN he showed me many trees whose leaves were shed, and which seemed
to me to be withered, for they were all alike. And he said unto me,
Seest thou these trees? I said, Sir, I see that they look like dry
trees.

2 He answering, said unto me; These trees are like unto the men who live
in the present world. I replied: Sir, why are they like unto dried
trees? Because, said he, neither the righteous, nor unrighteous, are
known from one another; but all are alike in this present world.

3 For this world is as the winter to the righteous men, <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[2](#fn_1331.md) because they are not known, but dwell
among sinners.

4 As in the winter all the trees having lost their leaves, are like dry
trees; nor can it be discerned which are dry and which are green: so in
this present world neither the righteous nor wicked are discerned from
each other; but they are all alike.

#### SIMILITUDE IV.

<span class="small">*As in the summer the living trees are distinguished
from the dry by their fruit and green leaves; so in the world to come
the righteous shall be distinguished from the unrighteous by their
happiness*.</span>

AGAIN he showed me many other trees, of which some had leaves, and
others appeared dry and withered. And he said unto me, Seest thou these
trees? Ianswered, Sir, I see them; .and some are dry, and others full of
leaves.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

2 These trees, saith he, which are green, are the righteous which shall
possess the world to come. For the world to come, is the summer to the
righteous; but to sinners it is the winter.

3 When, therefore, the mercy of the Lord shall shine forth, then they
who serve God shall be made manifest, and plain unto all. For as in the
summer the fruit of every tree is shown and made manifest, so also the
works of the righteous shall be declared and made manifest, and they
shall be restored in that world merry and joyful.

4 For the other  <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1](#fn_1332.md) kind of men,
namely the wicked, like the trees which thou sawest dry, shall as such
be found dry and without fruit in that other world; and like dry wood
shall be burnt; and it shall be made manifest that they have done evil
all the time of their life;

5 And they shall be burnt because they have sinned and have not repented
of their sins. And also all the other nations shall be burnt, because
they have not acknowledged God their Creator.

6 Do thou therefore bring forth good fruit, that in the summer thy fruit
may be known; and keep thyself from much business, and thou shalt not
offend. For they who are involved in much business, sin much; because
they are taken up with their affairs, and serve not God.

7 And how can a man that does not serve God, ask anything of God, and
receive it? But they who serve him, ask and receive what they desire.

8 But, if a man has only one thing to follow, he may serve

God, because his mind is not taken off from God but he serves him with a
pure mind.

9 If, therefore, thou shalt do this, thou mayest have fruit in the world
to come; and all, as many as shall do in like manner, shall bring forth
fruit.

#### SIMILITUDE V.

<span class="small">*Of a true fast, and the rewards of it, also of the
cleanliness of the body*.</span>

AS I was fasting, and sitting down in a certain mountain, and giving
thanks unto God for

all the things that he had done  <span id="fr_1334"></span>[2](#fn_1333.md)
unto me; behold I saw the shepherd, who was wont to converse with me,
sitting by me, and saying unto me: What has brought thee hither thus
early in the morning? I answered, Sir, today I keep a  <span
id="fr_1335"></span>[3](#fn_1334.md) station.

2 He answered, What is a station? I replied, it is a fast. He said, What
is that fast? I answered, I fast, as I have been wont to do. Ye know
not, said he, what it is to fast unto God; nor is this a fast which ye
fast, profiting nothing with God.

3 Sir, said I, what makes you speak thus? He replied, I speak it,
because this is not the true fast which you think that you fast; but I
will show you what that is which is a  <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[4](#fn_1335.md) complete fast, and acceptable unto
God.

4 Hearken, said he, The Lord does not desire such a needless fast: for
by fasting in this manner, thou advancest nothing in righteousness.

5  <span id="fr_1337"></span>[5](#fn_1336.md) But the true fast is this: Do
nothing wickedly in thy life, but serve God with a pure mind; and keep
his commandments and walk according to his precepts, nor suffer any
wicked desire to enter into the mind.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

6 But trust in the Lord, that if thou dost these things, and fearest
him, and abstaineth from every evil work, thou shalt live unto God.

7 If thou shalt do this, thou shalt perfect a great fast, and an
acceptable one unto the Lord.

8 ¶ Hearken unto the similitude which I am about to propose unto thee,
as to this matter.

9 A certain man having a farm, and many servants, planted a vineyard in
a certain part of his estate for his posterity:

10 And taking a journey into a far country, chose one of his servants
which he thought the most faithful and approved, and delivered the
vineyard into his care; commanding him that he should take up the vines.
Which if he did, and fulfilled his command, he promised to give him his
liberty. Nor did he command him to do anything more; and so went into a
far country.

11 And after that servant had taken that charge upon him, he did
whatsoever his lord commanded him. And when he had staked the vineyard,
and found it to be full of weeds, he began to think with himself,
saying;

12 I have done what my lord commanded me, I will now dig this vineyard,
and when it is digged, it will be more beautiful; and the weeds being
pulled up, it will bring forth more fruit and not be choked by the
weeds.

13 So setting about this work he digged it, and plucked up all the weeds
that were in it; and so the vineyard became very beautiful and
prosperous, not being choked with weeds.

14 After some time the lord of the vineyard comes and goes into the
vineyard, and when he saw that it was handsomely staked and digged, and
the weeds plucked up that were in it, and the vines flourishing, he
rejoiced greatly at the care of his servant.

15 And calling his son whom he loved, and who was to be his heir, and
his friends with whom he was wont to consult; he tells them what he had
commanded his servant to do, and what his servant had done more; and
they immediately congratulated that servant, that he had received so
 <span id="fr_1338"></span>[1](#fn_1337.md) full a testimony from his lord.

16 Then he said to them, I indeed promised this servant his liberty, if
he observed the command which I gave him; and he observed it, and
besides has done a good work to my vineyard, which has exceedingly
pleased me.

17 Wherefore, for this work which he hath done, I will make him my heir
together with my son, because that when he saw what was good, he
neglected it not, but did it.

18 This design of the lord both his son and his friends approved,
namely, that his servant should be heir together with his son.

19 Not long after this, the master of the family calling together his
friends, sent from his supper several kinds of food to that servant.

20 Which when he had received, he took so much of them as was sufficient
for himself, and divided the rest among his fellow servants.

21 Which when they had received, they rejoiced; and wished that he might
find yet greater favour with his lord, for what he had done to them.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span id="img_23300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHRIST AS A
GARDENER APPEARING TO MARY MAGDALENE. FROM A PAINTING IN DISTEMPER ON
WOOD: TWELFTH CENTURY. The letters underneath are from the back of the
Picture: ''Donatus Bizamanus, pixit in Hotranto.''](tn/23300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23300.jpg.md)  
CHRIST AS A GARDENER APPEARING TO MARY MAGDALENE. FROM A PAINTING IN
DISTEMPER ON WOOD: TWELFTH CENTURY. The letters underneath are from the
back of the Picture: ''Donatus Bizamanus, pixit in Hotranto.''  
</span>

22 When his lord heard all these things, he was again filled with great
joy; and calling again his friends and his son together, he related to
them what his servant had done with the meats which he had sent unto
them.

23 They therefore so much the more assented to the master of the
household; and he ought to make that servant his heir together with his
son.

24 ¶ I said unto him, Sir, I know not these similitudes, neither can I
understand them, unless you expound them unto me. I will, says he,
expound all things unto thee whatsoever I have talked with thee, or
shewn unto thee.

25 Keep the commandments of the Lord and thou shalt be approved, and
shalt be written in the number of those that keep his commandments. But
if besides those things which the Lord hath commanded, thou shalt add
some good thing; thou shalt purchase to thyself a greater dignity, and
be in more favour with the Lord than thou shouldst otherwise have been.

26 If therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord, and shalt
add to them these stations, thou shalt rejoice; but especially if thou
shalt keep them according to my commands.

27 I said unto him, Sir, whatsoever thou shalt command me, I will
observe; for I know that thou wilt be with me. I will, said he, be with
thee who hast taken up such a resolution; and I will be with all those
who purpose in like manner.

28 This fast, saith he, whilst thou dost also observe the commandments
of the Lord, is exceeding good. Thus shalt there. fore thou keep it.

29 First of all, take heed to thyself, and keep thyself from every
 <span id="fr_1339"></span>[1](#fn_1338.md) wicked act, and from every
filthy word, and from every hurtful desire; and purify thy mind from all
the vanity of this present world. If thou shalt observe these things,
this fast shall be right.

30 Thus therefore do. Having performed what is before written, that day
on which thou fastest thou shalt taste nothing at all but  <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[2](#fn_1339.md) bread and water;  <span
id="fr_1341"></span>[2](#fn_1339.md) and computing the quantity of food
which thou art wont to eat upon other days, thou shalt  <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[2](#fn_1339.md) lay aside the expense which thou
shouldest have made that day, and give it unto the widow, the
fatherless, and the poor.

31  <span id="fr_1343"></span>[3](#fn_1340.md) And thus thou shalt perfect
the humiliation of thy soul; that he who receives of it may satisfy his
soul, and his prayer come up to the Lord God for thee.

32 If therefore thou shalt thus accomplish thy fast, as I command thee,
thy sacrifice shall be acceptable unto the Lord, and thy fast shall be
written in his book.

33 This station, thus performed, is good and pleasing, and acceptable
unto the Lord. These things if thou shalt observe with thy children and
with all thy house, thou shalt be happy.

34 And whosoever when they hear these things, shall do them, they also
shall be happy; and whatsoever they shall ask of the Lord they shall
receive it.

35 And I prayed him that he would expound unto me the similitude of the
farm, and the Lord, and of the vineyard, and of the servant that had
staked the vineyard;

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

and of the weeds that were plucked out of the vineyard; and of his son
and his friends which he took into council with him. For I understand
that that was a similitude.

36 He said unto me, Thou art very bold in asking: for thou oughtest not
to ask any thing; because if it be fitting to shew it unto thee, it
shall be shewed unto thee.

37 I answered him; Sir, whatsoever thou shalt shew me, without
explaining it unto me, I shall in vain see it, if I do not understand
what it is. And if thou shalt propose any similitudes, and not expound
them, I shall in vain hear them.

38\. He answered me again, saying: Whosoever is the servant of God, and
has the Lord in his heart, he desires understanding of him, and receives
it; and he explains every similitude, and understands the words of the
Lord which need an inquiry.

39 But they that are lazy and slow to pray, doubt to seek from the Lord;
although the Lord be of such an extraordinary goodness, that without
ceasing he giveth all things to them that ask of him.

40 Thou therefore who art strengthened by that venerable messenger, and
hast received such a powerful gift of prayer; seeing thou art not
slothful, why dost thou not now ask understanding of the Lord, and
receive it?

41 I said unto him; seeing I have thee present, it is necessary that I
should seek it of thee, and ask thee; for thou showest all things unto
me, and speakest to me when thou art present.

42 But if I should see or hear these things when thou wert not present,
I would then ask the Lord that he would shew them unto me.

43 ¶ And he replied, I said a little before that thou wert subtle and
bold, in that thou asketh the meaning of these similitudes.

44 But because thou still persistest, I will unfold to thee this parable
which thou desirest, that thou mayest make it known unto all men.

45 Hear therefore, said he, and understand. The farm before mentioned
denotes the whole earth. The Lord of the farm is he who created and
finished all things, and gave virtue unto them.

46 His son is the Holy Spirit: the servant is the Son of God: the
vineyard is the people whom he saves. The stakes are the  <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1](#fn_1341.md) messengers which are set over them by
the Lord, to support his people. The weeds that are plucked up out of
the vineyard, are the sins which the servants of God had committed.

47 The food which he sent him from his supper, are the commands which he
gave to his people by his Son. The friends whom he called to counsel
with him, are the holy angels whom he first created. The absence of the
master of the household, is the time that remains unto his coming.

48 I said unto him, Sir, all these things are very excellent, and
wonderful, and good. But, continued I, could I or any other man besides
though never so wise, have understood these things?

49 Wherefore now, sir, tell me, what I ask. He replied, ask me what thou
wilt. Why, said I, is the Son of God in this parable, put in the place
of a servant?

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

50 Hearken, he said; the Son of God is not put in the condition of a
servant, but in great power and authority. I said unto him 'how, sir? I
understand it not.'

51 Because, said he, the Son set his  <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1](#fn_1342) [messengers](errata.htm#14.md) over those
whom the Father delivered unto him, to keep every one of them; but he
himself labored very much, and suffered much, that he might blot out
their offences.

52 For no vineyard can be digged without much labour and pains.
Wherefore having blotted out the sins of his people, he shewed to them
the paths of life, giving them the law which he had received of the
Father.

53 You see, said he, that he is the Lord of his people, having received
all power from his Father.  <span id="fr_1346"></span>[2](#fn_1343.md) But
why the Lord did take his Son into counsel, about dividing the
inheritance, and the good angels, hear now.

54 That  <span id="fr_1347"></span>[3](#fn_1344.md) Holy Spirit, which was
created first of all, he placed in the body in which God should dwell;
namely, in a chosen body, as it seemed good to him. This body therefore
into which the  <span id="fr_1348"></span>[3](#fn_1344.md) Holy Spirit was
brought, served that Spirit, walked rightly and purely in modesty; nor
ever defiled that Spirit.

55 Seeing therefore the body at all times obeyed the Holy Spirit, and
laboured rightly and chastely with him, nor faltered at any time; that
body being wearied conversed indeed servilely, but being mightily
approved to God with the Holy Spirit, was accepted by him.

56 For such a stout course pleased God, because he was not defiled in
the earth, keeping the Holy Spirit. He called therefore to counsel his
Son, and the good angels, that there might be some place of standing
given to this body which had served the Holy Spirit without blame; lest
it should seem to have lost the reward of its service.

57 For every pure body shall receive its reward; that is found without
spot, in which the Holy Spirit has been appointed to dwell. And thus you
have now the exposition of this parable also.

58 Sir, said I, I now understand your meaning, since I have heard this
exposition. Hearken further, said he: keep this thy body clean and pure,
that the Spirit which shall dwell in it may bear witness unto it, and be
judged to have been with thee.

59 Also take heed that it be not instilled into thy mind that this body
perishes, and thou abuse it to any lust. For if thou shalt defile thy
body, thou shalt also at the same time defile the Holy Spirit; and if
thou shalt defile  <span id="fr_1349"></span>[4](#fn_1345.md) the Holy
Spirit, thou shalt not live.

60 And I said, What if through ignorance this should have been already
committed, before a man heard these words; How can he attain unto
salvation, who has thus defiled his body?

61 He replied, As for men's

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

former actions which through ignorance they have committed, God only can
afford a remedy unto them; for all the power belongeth unto him.

62 But now guard thyself; and seeing God is almighty and merciful, he
will grant a remedy to what thou hast formerly done amiss, if for the
time to come thou shalt not defile thy body and spirit;

63 For they are companions together, and the one cannot be defiled but
the other will be so too. Keep therefore both of them pure, and thou
shalt live unto God.

#### SIMILITUDE VI.

<span class="small">*Of two sorts of voluptuous men, and of their death,
defection, and of the continuance of their pains*.</span>

AS I was sitting at home, and praising God for all the things which I
had seen; and was thinking concerning the commands, that they were
exceeding good, and great, and honest, and pleasant; and such as were
able to bring a man to salvation; I said thus within myself; I shall be
happy if I shall walk according to these commands, and whosoever shall
walk in them shall live unto God.

2 Whilst I was speaking on this wise within myself, I saw him whom I had
before been wont to see, sitting by me; and he spake thus unto me:

3 What doubtest thou concerning my commands which I have delivered unto
thee? They are good, doubt not, but trust in the Lord, and thou shalt
walk in them. For I will give thee strength  <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1](#fn_1346.md) to fulfil them.

4 These commands are profitable to those who shall repent of those sins
which they have formerly committed; if for the time to come they shall
not continue in them.

5 Whosoever therefore ye be that repent, cast away from you the
naughtiness of the present world; and put on all virtue, and
righteousness, and so shall ye be able to keep these commands; and not
sin from henceforth any more.

6 For if ye shall keep yourselves from sin from the time to come, ye
shall cut off a great deal of your former sins. Walk in my commands, and
ye shall live unto God: These things have I spoken unto you.

7 And when he had said this, he added; let us go into the field, and I
will show thee shepherds of sheep. I replied, sir, let us go.

8 And we came into a certain field, and there he showed me a young
shepherd,  <span id="fr_1351"></span>[2](#fn_1347.md) finely arrayed, with
his garments of a purple colour. And he fed large flocks; and his sheep
were full of pleasure, and in much delight and cheerfulness; and they
skipping, ran here and there.

9 And the shepherd took very great satisfaction in his flock; and the
countenance of that shepherd was cheerful, running up and down among his
flock.

10 ¶ Then the angel said unto me, Seest thou this shepherd? I answered,
sir, I see him. He said unto me, this is the  <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[3](#fn_1348.md) messenger of delight and pleasure. He
therefore corrupts the minds of the servants of God, and turns them from
the truth, delighting them with many pleasures, and they perish.

11 For they forget the commands of the living God, and live

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

in luxury and in vain pleasures, and are corrupted by the evil angel,
some of them even unto death; and others to  <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1](#fn_1349.md) a falling away.

12 I replied; I understand not what you mean, by saying unto death, and
to a falling away. Hear, says he; all these sheep which thou sawest
exceeding  <span id="fr_1354"></span>[2](#fn_1350.md) joyful, are such as
have for ever departed from God, and given themselves up to the  <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[3](#fn_1351.md) lusts of this present time.

13 To these therefore there is no return, by repentance unto life;
because that to their other sins they have added this, that they have
blasphemed the name of the Lord. These kind of men are ordained unto
death.

14 But those sheep which thou sawest not leaping, but feeding in one
place, are such as have in deed given themselves up to pleasures and
delights; but have not spoken anything wickedly against the Lord.

15 These therefore are only fallen off from the truth, and so have yet
hope laid up for them in repentance. For such a falling off hath some
hope still left of a renewal; but they that are dead, are utterly gone
forever.

16 Again we went a little farther forward; and he showed me a great
 <span id="fr_1356"></span>[4](#fn_1352.md) shepherd, who had as it were a
rustic figure, clad with a white goat's skin, having his bag upon his
shoulder, and in his hand a stick full of knots, and very hard, and a
whip in his other hand; and his countenance was stern and sour; enough
to affright a man; such was his look.

17 He took from that young shepherd such sheep as lived in pleasures,
but did not skip up and down; and drove them into a certain steep craggy
place full of thorns and briars, insomuch that they could not get
themselves free from them.

18 But being entangled in them, fed upon thorns and briars, and were
grievously tormented with his whipping. For he still drove them on, and
afforded them not any place or time to stand still.

19 ¶ When therefore I saw them so cruelly whipped and afflicted, I was
grieved for them; because they were greatly tormented, nor had they any
rest afforded them.

20 And I said unto the shepherd that was with me; Sir, who is this cruel
and implacable shepherd, who is moved with no compassion towards these
sheep? He answered,  <span id="fr_1357"></span>[5](#fn_1353.md) This
shepherd is indeed one of the  <span id="fr_1358"></span>[6](#fn_1354.md)
holy angels, but is appointed for the punishment of sinners.

21 To him therefore are delivered those who have erred from God, and
served the lusts and pleasures of this world. For this cause he punishes
them every one according to their deserts, with cruel and various kinds
of pains.

22 Sir, said I, I would know, what kind of pains they are which every
one undergoes? Hearken, said he; The several pains and torments are
those which men every day undergo in their present lives. For some
suffer losses; others poverty; others divers sicknesses. Some are
unsettled; others suffer injuries from those that are unworthy; others
fall under many other trials and inconveniences.

23 For many with an unsettled design aim at many things, and it

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

profiteth them not; and they say that they have not success in their
undertakings.

24  <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1](#fn_1355.md) They do not call to their
mind what they have done amiss, and they complain of the Lord. When
therefore they shall have undergone all kind of vexation and
inconvenience; then they are delivered over to me for good instruction,
and are confirmed in the faith of the Lord, and serve the Lord all the
rest of their days with a pure mind.

25 And when they begin to repent of their sins, then they call to mind
their works which they have done amiss, and give honour to God, saying,
That he is a just Judge, and they have deservedly suffered all things
according to their deeds.

26 Then for what remains of their lives, they serve God with a pure
mind; and have success in all their undertakings, and receive from the
Lord whatever they desire.

27 And then they give thanks unto the Lord that they were delivered unto
me; nor do they suffer any more cruelty.

28 ¶ I said unto him; Sir, I entreat you still to show me now one thing.
What, said he, dost thou  <span id="fr_1360"></span>[2](#fn_1356.md) ask? I
said unto him; Are they who depart from the fear of God, tormented for
the same time that they enjoyed their false delight and pleasures? He
answered me: They are tormented for the same time.

29 And I said unto him; They are then tormented but little; whereas they
who enjoy their pleasures so as to forget God, ought to endure seven
times as much punishment.

30 He answered me; Thou art foolish, neither understandest thou the
efficacy of this punishment. I said unto him; Sir, if I understood it, I
would not desire you to tell me.

31 Hearken, said he, and learn what the force of both is, both of the
pleasure and of the punishment. An hour of pleasure is terminated within
its own space; but one hour of punishment has the efficacy of thirty
days.  <span id="fr_1361"></span>[3](#fn_1357.md) Whosoever therefore
enjoys his false pleasure for one day, and is one day tormented; that
one day of punishment is equivalent to a whole year's space.

32 Thus look how many days any one pursues his pleasures, so many years
is he punished for it. You see therefore how that the time of worldly
enjoyments is but short; but that of pain and torments a great deal
more.

33 I replied; Sir, forasmuch as I do not understand  <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[4](#fn_1358.md) at all these times of pleasure and
pain;

I entreat you that you would explain yourself more clearly concerning
them. He answered me, saying; Thy foolishness still sticks unto thee.

34 Shouldst thou not rather purify thy mind, and serve God? Take heed,
lest when thy time is fulfilled, thou be found still unwise. Hear then,
as thou desirest, that thou mayest the more easily understand.

35 He that gives himself up one day to his pleasures and delights, and
does whatsoever his soul desires, is full of great folly, nor
understands what he does, but the day following forgets what he did the
day before.

36 For delight and worldly pleasure are not kept in memory, by reason of
the folly that is

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

rooted in them. But when pain and torment befal a man a day, he is in
effect troubled the whole year after; because his punishment continues
firm in his memory.

37 Wherefore he remembers it with sorrow the whole year; and then calls
to mind his vain pleasure and delight, and perceives that for the sake
of that he was punished.

38 Whosoever therefore have delivered themselves over to such pleasures,
are thus punished; because that when they had life, they rendered
themselves liable to death.

39 I said unto him; Sir, what pleasures are hurtful? He answered; That
is pleasure to every man which he doth willingly.

40 For the angry man, gratifying his passion, perceives pleasure in it;
and so the adulterer and drunkard; the slanderer and liar; the covetous
man and the defrauder; and whosoever commits anything like unto these,
because he  <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1](#fn_1359.md) followeth his evil
disposition, he receives a satisfaction in the doing of it.

41 All these pleasures and delights are hurtful to the servants of God.
For these therefore they are tormented and suffer punishment.

42 There are also pleasures that bring salvation unto men. For many,
when they do what is good, find pleasure in it, and are attracted by the
delights of it.

43 Now this pleasure is profitable to the servants of God, and brings
life to such men; but those hurtful pleasures, which were before
mentioned, bring torments and punishment.

44 And whosoever shall continue in them, and shall not repent of what
they have done, shall bring death upon themselves.

#### SIMILITUDE VII.

<span class="small">*That they who repent, must bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance*.</span>

AFTER a few days I saw the same person that before talked with me, in
the same field, in which I had seen those shepherds. And he said unto
me; What seekest thou?

2 Sir, said I, I came to entreat you that you would command the
shepherd, who is the minister of punishment, to depart out of my house,
because he greatly afflicts me.

3 And he answered, It is necessary for thee to endure inconveniences and
vexations; for so that good angel hath commanded concerning thee,
because he would try thee.

4 Sir, said I; What so great offence have I committed, that I should be
delivered to this  <span id="fr_1364"></span>[2](#fn_1360.md) messenger?
Hearken, said he: Thou art indeed guilty of many sins, yet not so many
that thou shouldest be delivered to this  <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[2](#fn_1360.md) messenger.

5 But thy house hath committed many sins and offences, and therefore
that good  <span id="fr_1366"></span>[2](#fn_1360.md) messenger being
grieved at their doings commanded that for some time thou shouldst
suffer affliction; that they may both repent of what they have done, and
may wash themselves from all the lusts of this present world.

6 When therefore they shall have repented, and be purified, then that
messenger which is

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

appointed over thy punishment, shall depart from thee.

7 I said unto him; Sir, if they have behaved themselves so as to anger
that good angel, yet what have I done? He answered: They cannot
otherwise be afflicted, unless thou, who art the head of the family,
suffer.

8 For whatsoever thou shalt suffer, they must needs feel it; but as long
as thou shalt stand well established, they cannot experience any
vexation.

9 I replied; But, sir, behold they also now repent with all their
hearts. I know, says he, that they repent with all their hearts; but
dost thou therefore think that their offences who repent are immediately
blotted out?

10 No, they are not presently; but he that repents must afflict his soul
and shew himself humble in all his affairs, and undergo many and divers
vexations.

11 And when he shall have suffered all things that were appointed for
him; then perhaps he that made him, and formed all things besides, will
be moved with compassion towards him, and afford him some remedy; and
especially if he shall perceive his heart, who repents, to be pure from
every evil work.

12 But at present it is expedient for thee, and for thy house, to be
grieved; and it is needful that thou shouldest endure much vexation, as
the angel of the Lord who committed thee unto me, has commanded.

13 Rather give thanks unto the Lord, that knowing what was to come, he
thought thee worthy to whom he should foretell that trouble was coming
upon thee, who art able to bear it.

14 I said unto him; Sir, be but thou also with me, and I shall easily
undergo any trouble. I will, said he, be with thee; and I will entreat
the messenger who is set over thy punishment, that he would moderate his
afflictions towards thee.

15 And moreover thou shalt suffer adversity but for a little time; and
then thou shalt again be restored to thy former state; only continue on
in the humility of thy mind.

16 Obey the Lord with a pure heart; thou, and thy house, and thy
children; and walk in the commands which I have delivered unto thee; and
then thy repentance may be firm and pure.

17 And if thou shalt keep these things with thy house, thy
inconveniences shall depart from thee.

18 And all vexation shall in like manner depart from all those,
whosoever shall walk according to these commands.

#### SIMILITUDE VIII.

<span class="small">*That there are many kinds of elect, and of
repenting sinners: and how all of them shall receive a reward
proportionable to the measure of their repentance and good
works*.</span>

AGAIN he shewed me a low which covered the fields and the mountains,
under whose shadow came all such as were called by the name of the Lord.

2 And by that willow stood an angel of the Lord very excellent and
lofty; and did cut down boughs from that willow with a great hook; and
reached out to the people that were under the shadow of that willow
little rods, as it were about a foot long.

3 And when all of them had taken them, he laid aside his hook, and the
tree continued entire, as I had before seen it. At which I wondered, and
mused within myself

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span id="img_24100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![JESUS CHRIST
ASCENDING TO HEAVEN WITH TWO ANGELS. FROM ONE OF THE MINIATURE PAINTINGS
IN THE ''BIBLE OF ST. PAUL.''](tn/24100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24100.jpg.md)  
JESUS CHRIST ASCENDING TO HEAVEN WITH TWO ANGELS. FROM ONE OF THE
MINIATURE PAINTINGS IN THE ''BIBLE OF ST. PAUL.''  
</span>

4 Then that shepherd said unto me; Forbear to wonder that that tree
continues whole, notwithstanding so many boughs have been cut off from
it, but stay a little, for now it shall be shewn thee, what that angel
means, who gave those rods to the people.

5 So he again demanded the rods of them, and in the same order that
every one had received them, was he called to him, and restored his rod;
which when he had received, he examined them.

6 From some he received them dry and rotten, and as it were touched with
the moth; those he commanded to be separated from the rest and placed by
themselves. Others gave in their rods dry indeed, but not touched with
the moth: these also he ordered to be set by themselves.

7 Others gave in their rods half dry; these also were set apart. Others
gave in their rods half dry and cleft; these too were set by themselves.
Others brought in their rods half dry and half green, and these were in
like manner placed by themselves.

8 Others delivered up their rods two parts green, and the third dry; and
they too were set apart. Others brought their rods two parts dry, and
the third green; and were also placed by themselves.

9 Others delivered up their rods less dry, (for there was but a very
little, to wit, their tops dry) but they had clefts, and these were set
in like manner by themselves. In the rods of others there was but a
little green, and the rest dry; and these were set aside by themselves.

10 Others came, and brought their rods green as they had received them,
and the greatest part of the people brought their rods thus; and the
messenger greatly rejoiced at these, and they also were put apart by
themselves.

11 Others brought in their rods not only green, but full of branches;
and these were set aside, being also received by the angel with great
joy. Others brought their rods green with branches, and those also some
fruit upon them.

12 They who had such rods, were very cheerful; and the angel himself
took great joy at them; nor was the shepherd that stood with me, less
pleased with them.

13 ¶ Then the angel of the Lord commanded crowns to be brought: and the
crowns were brought made of palms; and the angel crowned those men in
whose rods he found the young branches with fruit; and commanded them to
go into the tower.

14 He also sent those into the tower, in whose rods he found branches
without fruit, giving a seal unto them. For they had the same garment,
that is, one white as snow; with which he bade them go into the tower.
And so he did to those who returned their rods green as he had received
them; giving them a white garment, and so sent them away to go into the
tower.

15 Having done this, he said to the shepherd that was with me, I go my
way; but do thou send these within the walls, every one into the place
in which be has deserved to dwell; examining first their rods, but
examine them diligently that no one deceive thee. But and if any one
shall escape thee, I will try them

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

upon the altar. Having said this to the shepherd, he departed.

16 After he was gone, the shepherd said unto me: Let us take the rods
from them, and plant them; if perchance they may grow green again. I
said unto him; Sir, how can those dry rods ever grow green again?

17 He answered me; That tree is a willow, and always loves to live. If
therefore these rods shall be planted, and receive a little moisture,
many of them will recover themselves.

18 Wherefore I will try, and will pour water upon them, and if any of
them can live, I will rejoice with him; but if not, at least by this
means I shall be found not to have neglected my part.

19 Then he commanded me to call them; and they all came unto him, every
one in the rank in which he stood, and gave him their rods; which having
received, he planted every one of them in their several orders.

20 And after he had planted them all, he poured much water upon them,
insomuch that they were covered with water, and did not appear above it.
Then when he had watered them, he said unto me; Let us depart, and after
a little time we will return and visit them.

21 For he who created this tree, would have all those live that received
rods from it. And I hope now that these rods are thus watered, many of
them receiving in the moisture, will recover.

22 ¶ I said unto him, Sir, tell me what this tree denotes? For I am
greatly  <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1](#fn_1361.md) astonished, that after
so many branches have been cut off, it seems still to be whole; nor does
there any thing the less of it appear to remain, which greatly amazes
me.

23 He answered, Hearken. This great tree which covers the plains and the
mountains, and all the earth, is the law of God, published throughout
the whole world.

24 Now  <span id="fr_1368"></span>[2](#fn_1362.md) this law is the Son of
God, who is preached to all the ends of the earth. The people that stand
under its shadow, are those which have heard his preaching, and
believed.

25 The great and venerable angel which you saw, was Michael, who has the
power over his people, and governs them. For he has planted the law in
the hearts of those who have believed; and therefore he visits them to
whom he has given the law, to see if they have kept it.

26 And he examines every one's rod; and of those, many that are
weakened: for those rods are the law of the Lord. Then he discerns all
those who have not kept the law, knowing the place of every one of them.

27 I said unto him, Sir, why did he send away some to the tower, and
left others here to you? He replied, those who have transgressed the
law, which they received from him, are left in my power, that they may
repent of their sins: but they who  <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[3](#fn_1363.md) fulfilled the law and kept it, are
under his power.

28 But who then, said I, are those, who went into the tower crowned? He
replied all such as having striven with the devil, have overcome him,
are crowned:

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and they are those, who have suffered hard things, that they might keep
the law.

29 But they who gave up their rods green, and with young branches, but
without fruit, have indeed endured trouble for the same law, but have
not suffered death; neither have they denied their holy law.

30 They who delivered up their rods green as they received them, are
those who were modest and just, and have lived with a very pure mind,
and kept the commandments of God.

31 The rest thou shalt know, when I shall have considered those rods
which I have planted and watered.

32 ¶ After a few days we returned, and in the same place stood that
glorious angel, and I stood by him, Then he said unto me; Gird thyself
with a  <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1](#fn_1364.md) towel, and serve me.

33 And I girded myself with a clean towel, which was made of coarse
cloth. And when he saw me girded, and ready to minister unto him, he
said, Call those men whose rods have been planted, every one in his
order as he gave them.

34 And he brought me into the field, and I called them all, and they all
stood ready in their several ranks. Then he said unto them; let every
one pluck up his rod, and bring it unto me. And first they delivered
theirs, whose rods had been dry and rotten.

35 And those whose rods still continued so, he commanded to stand apart.
Then they came whose rods had been dry but not rotten. Some of these
delivered in their rods green; others dry and rotten, as if they had
been touched by the moth.

36 Those who gave them up green, he commanded to stand apart; but those
whose rods were dry and rotten, he caused to stand with the first sort.
Then came they whose rods had been half dry, and cleft: many of these
gave up their rods green, and uncleft.

37 Others delivered them up green with branches, and fruit upon the
branches, like unto those who went crowned into the tower. Others
delivered them up dry, but not rotten; and some gave them up as they
were before, half dry, and cleft.

38 Every one of these he ordered to stand apart; some by themselves,
others in their respective ranks.

39 Then came they whose rods had been green, but cleft. These delivered
their rods altogether green, and stood in their own order. And the
shepherd rejoiced at these, because they were all changed, and free from
their clefts.

40 Then they gave in their rods, who had them half green and half dry.
Of these some were found wholly green, others half dry; others green,
with young shoots. And all these were sent away, every one to his proper
rank.

41 Then they gave up their rods, who had them before two parts green,
and the third dry. Many of those gave in their rods green; many half
dry; the rest dry but not rotten. So these were sent away, each to his
proper place.

42 Then came they who had before their rods two parts dry

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

and the third green; many of these delivered up their rods half dry,
others dry and rotten; others half dry and cleft; but few green. And all
these were set every one in his own rank.

43 Then they reached in their rods,  <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1](#fn_1365.md) in which there was before but a little
green, and the rest dry. Their rods were for the most part found green,
having little boughs, with fruit upon them, and the rest altogether
green.

44 And the shepherd upon sight of these rejoiced exceedingly, because he
had found them thus; and they also went to their proper orders.

45 ¶ Now after he had examined all their rods, he said unto me I told
thee that this tree loved life: thou seest how many have repented, and
attained unto salvation. Sir, said I, I see it.

46 That thou mightest know, saith he, that the goodness and mercy of the
Lord is great, and to be had in honour; who gave his spirit to them that
were found worthy of repentance.

47 I answered, Sir, why then did not all of them repent? He replied,
Those whose minds the Lord foresaw would be pure, and that they would
serve him with all their hearts, to them he gave repentance.

48 But for those whose deceit and wickedness he beheld, and perceived
that they would not truly return unto him; to them he denied any return
unto repentance, lest they should again blaspheme his law with wicked
words.

49 I said unto him; Now, Sir, make known unto me, what is the place of
every one of those, who have given up their rods, and what their  <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[2](#fn_1366.md) portion; that when they may have not
kept their seal entire, but have wasted the seal which they received,
shall hear and believe these things, they may acknowledge their evil
deeds and repent;

50 And receiving again their seal from you, may give glory to God, that
he was moved with compassion towards them, and sent you to renew their
spirits.

51 Hearken, said he: they whose rods have been found dry and rotten, and
as it were touched with the moth; are the deserters and the betrayers of
the church.

52 Who with the rest of their crimes, have also blasphemed the Lord, and
denied his name which had been called upon them. Therefore all these are
dead unto God: and thou seest that none of them have repented, although
they have heard my commands which thou hast delivered unto them. From
these men therefore life is far distant.

53 They also who have delivered up their rods dry, but not rotten, have
not been far from them. For they have been counterfeits, and brought in
evil doctrines; and have perverted the servants of God: but especially
those who had sinned; not suffering them to return unto repentance, but
keeping them back by their false doctrines.

54 These therefore have hope; and thou seest that many of them have
repented, since the time that thou hast laid my commands before them;
and many more will yet repent. But they that shall not repent shall lose
both repentance and life.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

55 But they that have repented, their place is begun to be within the
first walls, and some of them are even gone into the tower. Thou seest
therefore, said he, that in the repentance of sinners there is life; but
for those who repent not, death is prepared.

56 ¶ Hear now concerning those who gave in their rods half dry and full
of clefts. Those whose rods were only half dry, are the doubtful; for
they are neither living nor dead.

57 But they who delivered in their rods, not only half dry but also full
of clefts, are both doubtful and evil speakers; who detract from those
who are absent, and have never peace among themselves, and that envy one
another.

58 Howbeit to those also repentance is offered; for thou seest that some
of these have repented.

59 Now all those of this kind who have quickly repented, shall have a
place in the tower; but they who have been more slow in their
repentance, shall dwell within the walls; but they that shall not
repent, but shall continue on in their wicked doings, shall die the
death.

60 As for those who had their rods green, but yet cleft; they are such
as were always faithful and good, but they had some envy and strife
among themselves concerning dignity and pre-eminence.

61 Now all such are vain and without understanding, as contend with one
another about these things.

62 Nevertheless, seeing they are otherwise good, if when they shall hear
these commands they shall amend themselves, and shall at my persuasion
suddenly repent; they shall at last dwell in the tower, as they who have
truly and worthily repented.

63 But if any one shall again return to his dissension; he shall be shut
out from the tower, and shall lose his life. For the life of those who
keep the commandments of the Lord consists in doing what they are
commanded; not in principality, or in any other dignity.

64 For by forbearance and humility of mind, men shall attain unto life;
but by seditions and contempt of the law, they shall purchase death unto
themselves.

65 ¶ They who in their rods had half dry and half green, are those who
are engaged in many affairs of the world, and are not joined to the
saints. For which cause half of them liveth, and half is dead.

66 Wherefore many of these since the time that they have heard my
commands, have repented, and begun to dwell in the tower. But some of
them have wholly fallen away; to these there is no more place for
repentance.

67 For by reason of their present interests, they have blasphemed and
denied God: and for this wickedness they have lost life. And of these
many are still in doubt; these may yet return; and if they shall quickly
repent, they shall have a place in the tower; but if they shall be more
slow, they shall dwell within the walls; but if they shall not repent,
they shall die. <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1](#fn_1367.md)

68 As for those who had two

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

parts of their rods green, and the third dry; they have by manifold ways
denied the Lord. Of those many have repented, and found a place in the
tower: and many have altogether departed from God. These have utterly
lost life.

69 And some being in a doubtful state, have raised up dissensions: these
may yet return, if they shall suddenly repent and not continue in their
lusts; but if they shall continue in their evil doing they shall die.

70 ¶ They who gave in their rods two parts dry, and the other green; are
those who have indeed been faithful, but withal rich and full of good
things; and thereupon have desired to be famous among the heathen which
are without, and have thereby fallen into great pride, and begun to aim
at high matters, and to forsake the truth.

71 Nor were they joined to the  <span id="fr_1374"></span>[1](#fn_1368.md)
saints, but lived with the heathen; and this life seemed the more
pleasant to them. Howbeit they have not departed from God, but continued
in the faith; only they have not wrought the works of faith.

72 Many therefore of these have repented, and begun to dwell in the
tower. Yet others still living among the heathen people, and being
lifted up with their vanities, have utterly fallen away from God, and
followed the works and wickednesses of the heathen. These kind of men
therefore are reckoned among strangers to the Gospel.

73 Others of these began to be doubtful in their minds; despairing by
reason of their wicked doings ever to attain unto salvation: Others
being thus made doubtful, did moreover stir up dissensions.

74 To these therefore, and to those who by reason of their doings are
become doubtful, there is still hope of return; but they must repent
quickly, that their place may be in the tower. But they that repent not,
but continue still in their pleasures, are nigh unto death.

75 ¶ As for those who gave in their rods green, excepting their tops,
which only were dry, and had clefts; these were always good, and
faithful, and  <span id="fr_1375"></span>[2](#fn_1369.md) upright before
God: nevertheless they sinned a little, by reason of their empty
pleasures and trifling thoughts which they had within themselves.

76 Wherefore many of them when they heard my words, repented forthwith,
and began to dwell in the tower. Nevertheless some grew doubtful, and
others to their doubtful minds added dissensions. To these therefore
there is still hope of return, because they were always good; but they
shall not hardly be moved.

77 As for those, lastly, who gave in their rods dry, their tops only
excepted, which alone were green: they are such as have believed indeed
in God, but have lived in wickedness; yet without departing from God:
having always willingly borne the name of the Lord; and readily received
into their houses the servants of God.

78 Wherefore hearing these things they returned, and without delay
repented, and lived in all righteousness. And some of them suffered
death: others

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

readily underwent many trials, being mindful of their evil doings.

79 ¶ And when he had ended his explications of all the rods, he said
unto me, Go, and say unto all men that they repent, aid they shall live
unto God: because the Lord being moved with great clemency hath sent me
to preach repentance unto all.

80 Even unto those who by reason of their evil doings, deserve not to
attain unto salvation. But the Lord will be patient, and keep the
invitation that was made by his Son.

81 I said unto him, Sir, I hope that all when they shall hear these
things, will repent. For I trust that everyone acknowledging his crimes,
and taking up the fear of the Lord, will return unto repentance.

82 He said unto me, Whosoever shall repent with all their hearts, and
cleanse themselves from all the evils that I have before mentioned, and
not add anything more to their sins, shall receive from the Lord the
cure of their former iniquities, if they shall not make any doubt of
these commands, and shall live unto God.

83 But they that shall continue to add to their transgressions, and
shall still converse with the lusts of the present world, shall condemn
themselves unto death. But do thou walk in these commands, and whosoever
shall walk in these, and exercise them rightly, shall live unto God.

84 And having shewed me all these things, he said; I will shew thee the
rest in a few days.

#### SIMILITUDE IX.

<span class="small">*The greatest mysteries of the militant and
triumphant church which is to be built*.</span>

AFTER I had written the Commands and Similitudes of the Shepherd, the
Angel of Repentance; he came unto me, and said to me, I will shew thee
all those things which the  <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1](#fn_1370.md)
Spirit spake with thee under the figure of the Church. For that Spirit
is the Son of God.

2 And because thou wert weak in body, it was not declared unto thee by
the angel, until thou wert strengthened by the Spirit, and increased in
force, that thou mightest also see the angel.

3 For then indeed the building of the tower was very well and gloriously
shewn unto thee by the church; nevertheless thou sawest all things shewn
unto thee as it were by a virgin.

4 But now thou art enlightened by the angel, but yet by the same Spirit.
But thou must consider all things diligently; for therefore am I sent
into thy house by that venerable  <span
id="fr_1377"></span>[2](#fn_1371.md) messenger, that when thou shalt have
seen all things powerfully, thou mayest not be afraid as before.

5 And he led me to the  <span id="fr_1378"></span>[3](#fn_1372.md) height
of a mountain in Arcadia, and we sat upon its top. And he showed me a
great plain, and about it twelve mountains in different figures.

6 The first was black as soot. The second was smooth, without herbs. The
third was full of thorns and thistles. The fourth had herbs half dried;
of which the upper part was green, but that next the root was dry; and

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

some of the herbs, when the sun grew hot, were dry.

7 The fifth mountain was very rugged; but yet had green herbs. The sixth
mountain was full of clefts, some lesser, and some greater; and in these
clefts grew grass, not flourishing, but which seemed to be withering

8 The seventh mountain had delightful pasture, and was wholly fruitful:
and all kinds of cattle, and of the birds of heaven, fed upon it; and
the more they fed of it, the more and better did the grass grow.

9 The eighth mountain was full of fountains, and from those fountains
were watered all kinds of the creatures of God. The ninth mountain had
no water at all, but was wholly destitute of it; and nourished deadly
serpents, and destructive to men.

10 The tenth mountain was full of tall trees, and altogether shady: and
under the shade of them lay cattle resting and chewing the cud.

11 The eleventh mountain was full of the thickest trees; and those trees
seemed to be loaded with several sorts of fruits; that whosoever saw
them could not choose but desire to eat of their fruit.

12 The twelfth mountain was altogether white, and of a most pleasant
aspect, and itself gave a most excellent beauty to itself.

13 ¶ In the middle of the  <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1](#fn_1373.md) plain
he showed me a huge white rock, which rose out of the plain, and the
rock was higher than those mountains, and was square; so that it seemed
capable of supporting the whole world.

14 It looked to me to be old, yet it had in it a new gate, which seemed
to have been newly hewn out in it. Now that gate was bright beyond the
sun itself; insomuch, that I greatly admired at its light.

15 About the gate stood twelve virgins; of which four that stood at the
corners of the gate, seemed to me to be the chiefest, although the rest
were also of worth: and they stood at the four parts of the gate.

16 It added also to the grace of those virgins, that they stood in
pairs, clothed with linen garments, and decently girded, their right
arms being at liberty, as if they were about to lift up some  <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[2](#fn_1374.md) burthen; for so they were adorned, and
were exceeding cheerful and ready.

17 When I saw this, I wondered with myself to see such great and noble
things. And again I admired upon the account of those virgins, that they
were so handsome and delicate; and stood with such firmness and
constancy, as if they would carry the whole heaven.

18 And as I was thinking thus within myself, the shepherd said unto me:
What thmkest thou within thyself, and art disquieted, and fillest
thyself with care?

19 Do not seem to consider, as if thou wert wise, what thou doest not
understand, but pray unto the Lord, that thou mayest have ability to
understand it: what is to come thou canst not understand, but thou seest
that which is before thee.

20 Be not therefore disquieted at those things which thou canst not see;
but get the understanding of those which thou seest.

21 Forbear to be curious; and

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will shew thee
all things that I ought to declare unto thee; but first consider what
yet remains.

22 ¶ And when he had said this unto me I looked up, and behold I saw six
tall and venerable men coming; their countenances were all alike; and
they called a certain multitude of men; and they who came at their call
were also tall and stout.

23 And those six commanded them to build a certain tower over that gate.
And immediately there began to be a great noise of those men running
here and there about the gate, who were come together to build the
tower.

24 But those virgins which stood about the gate perceived that the
building of the tower was to be hastened by them. And they stretched out
their hands, as if they were to receive somewhat from them to do.

25 Then those six men commanded, that they should lift up stones out of
a certain deep place, and prepare them for the building of the tower.
And there were lifted up ten white stones, square, and  <span
id="fr_1381"></span>[1](#fn_1375.md) not cut round.

26 Then those six men called the ten virgins to them, and commanded them
to carry all the stones that were to be put into the building and having
carried them through the gate to deliver them to those that were about
to build the tower.

27 Immediately the virgins began all of them together to lift up those
stones, that were before taken out of the deep.

28 ¶ And they who also stood about the gate did carry stones in such a
manner, that those stones which seemed to be the strongest were laid at
the corners, the rest were put into the sides.

29 And thus they carried all the stones, and bringing them through the
gate delivered them to the builders, as they had been commanded: who
receiving them at their hands, built with them.

30 But this building was made upon that great rock, and over the gate;
and by these the whole tower was supported. But the building of the ten
stones filled the whole gate, which began to be made for the foundation
of that tower.

31 After those ten stones did five and twenty others  <span
id="fr_1382"></span>[2](#fn_1376.md) rise up out of the deep; and these
were placed in the building of the same tower; being lifted up by those
virgins, as the others had been before.

32 After these did five and thirty others  <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[2](#fn_1376.md) rise up; and these were also in like
manner fitted into the same work. Then forty other stones were brought
up, and all these were added unto the building of that tower.

33 So there began to be four ranks in the foundation of that tower; and
the stones ceased to  <span id="fr_1384"></span>[2](#fn_1376.md) rise out
of the deep; and they also which built rested a little.

34 Again those six men commanded the multitude, that they should bring
stones out of those twelve mountains to the building of the same tower.

35 So they cut out of all the mountains stones of divers colours, and
brought them and gave them to the virgins; which when they had received
they carried them, and delivered them into the building of the tower,

36 In which when they were built they became white, and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

different from what they were before; for they were all alike, and did
change their former colours. And some were reached up by the men
themselves, which when they came into the building, continued such as
they were put in.

37 These neither became white, nor different from what they were before;
because they were not carried by the virgins through the gate. Wherefore
these stones were disagreeable in the building: which, when those six
men perceived, they commanded them to be removed, and put again in the
place from which they were brought.

38 And they said to those who brought those stones; Do not ye reach up
to us any stones for this building, but lay them down by the tower, and
these virgins may carry them and reach them to us.

39 For unless they shall be carried by these virgins through this gate,
they cannot change their colours; therefore do not labour in vain.

40 ¶ So the building that day was done, howbeit the tower was not
finished; for it was afterwards to be built, therefore now also there
was some delay made of it.

41 And these six men commanded those that built to depart, and as it
were to rest for some time; but they ordered those virgins that they
should not depart from the tower; now they seemed to me to be left for
the guarding of it.

42 When all were departed, I said unto that shepherd; Sir, why is not
the building of the tower finished? Because it cannot, said he, be
finished until its Lord comes, and approves of the building; that if he
shall find any stones in it that are not good they may be changed; for
this tower is built according to his will.

43 Sir, said I, I would know what the building of this tower signifies;
as also I would be informed concerning this rock, and this gate.

44 And concerning the mountains, and the virgins, and the stones that
did rise out of the deep, and were not cut, but put into the building
just as they came forth; and why the ten stones were first laid in the
foundation; then the twenty-five; then thirty-five; then forty?

45 Also concerning these stones that were put into the building, and
again taken out, and carried back into their place? Fulfil, I pray, the
desire of my soul as to all these things and manifest all unto me.

46 And he said unto me; If thou shalt not be dull, thou shalt know all,
and shalt see all the other things that are about to happen in this
tower; and shalt understand diligently all these similitudes.

47 And after a few days we came into the same place where we had sat
before; and he said unto me, Let us go unto the tower; for the Lord of
it will come and examine it.

48 So we came thither, and found none but those virgins there. And he
asked them whether the Lord of that tower was come thither? And they
replied, that he would be there presently to examine the building.

49 ¶ After a very little while I saw a great multitude of men coming,
and in the middle of

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

them a man so tall, that he surpassed the tower in  <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1](#fn_1377.md) height.

50 About him were those six, who before commanded in the building, and
all the rest of those who had built that tower, and many others of great
dignity: and the virgins that kept the tower ran to meet him, and kissed
him, and began to walk near unto him.

51 But he examined the building with so much care that he handled every
stone; and struck every one with a rod which he held in his hand:

52 Of which some being so struck turned black as soot; others were
rough; some looked as if they had cracks in them; others seemed maimed:
some neither black nor white; some looked sharp, and agreed not with the
other stones, and others were full of spots.

53 These were the several kinds of those stones which were not found
proper in the building; all which the Lord commanded to be taken out of
the tower, and laid near it, and other stones to be brought and put in
their places.

54 And they that built, asked him from which of the mountains he would
have stones brought to put in the place of those that were laid aside.
But he forbad them to bring any from the mountains, and commanded that
they should take out of a certain field that was near.

55 So they digged in the field, and found many bright square stones, and
some also that were round. Howbeit, all that were found in that field
were taken away, and carried through the gate by those virgins; and
those of them that were square were fitted and put into the places of
those that were pulled out.

56 But the round ones were not put into the building, because they were
hard, and it would have required too much time to cut them; but they
were placed about the tower, as if they should hereafter be cut square,
and put into the building; for they were very white.

57 ¶ When he who was chief in dignity, and lord of the whole tower saw
this, he called to him the shepherd that was with me and gave him the
stones that were rejected and laid about the tower and said unto him;
cleanse these stones with all care, and fit them into the building of
the tower, that they may agree with the rest; but those that will not
suit with the rest, cast away afar off from the tower.

58 When he had thus commanded him, he departed, with all those that came
with him to the tower: but those virgins still stood about the tower to
keep it.

59 And I said unto that shepherd, How can these stones, seeing they have
been rejected, return into the building of this tower? He replied; I
will cut off the greatest part front these stones, and will add them to
the building, and they will agree with the rest.

60 And I said, Sir, how will they be able to fill the same place, when
they shall be so much cut away? He answered; They that shall be found
too little shall be put into the middle of the building, and the greater
shall be placed without, and keep them in.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

61 When he had said thus unto me, he added; Let us go, and after three
days we will return, and I will put these stones, being cleansed, into
the tower.

62 For all these that are about the tower must be cleansed, lest the
master of the house chance to come upon the sudden, and find those which
are about the tower unclean;  <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1](#fn_1378.md)
and be so exasperated, that these stones should never be put into the
building of this tower, and I shall be looked upon to have been  <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[2](#fn_1379.md) unmindful of my master's commands.

63 When therefore we came after three days to the tower, he said unto
me; Let us examine all these stones, and let us see which of them may go
into the building. I answered, Sir, let us see.

64 ¶ And first of all we begun to consider those which had been black;
for they were found just such as they were when they were pulled out of
the tower: wherefore he commanded them to be removed from the tower and
put by themselves.

65 Then he examined those which had been rough; and commanded many of
those to be cut round, and to be fitted by the virgins into the building
of the tower; so they took them, and fitted them into the middle of the
building; and he commanded the rest to be laid by with the black ones,
for they also were become black.

66 Next he considered those which were full of cracks, and many of those
also he ordered to be pared away, and so to be added to the rest of the
building by the same virgins.

67 These were placed without because they were found entire; but the
residue through the multitude of their cracks could not be reformed, and
therefore were cast away from the building of the tower.

68 Then he considered those that had been maimed; many of these had
cracks, and were become black; others were large clefts; these he
commanded to be placed with those that were rejected.

69 But the rest being cleansed and reformed, he commanded to be put in
the building. These therefore those virgins took up, and fitted into the
middle of the building, because they were but weak.

70 After these he examined those which were found half white and half
black; and many of those were now black; these also he ordered to be
laid among those that were cast away.

71 The rest were found altogether white; those were taken up by the
virgins, and fitted into the same tower:  <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[3](#fn_1380.md) and these were put in the outside,
because they were found entire; that so they might keep in those that
were placed in the middle, for nothing was cut off from them.

72 Next he looked upon those  <span id="fr_1389"></span>[4](#fn_1381.md)
which had been hard and sharp; but few of these were made use of,
because they could not be cut, for they were found very hard: but the
rest were formed, and fitted by the virgins into the middle of the
building, because they were more weak.

73 Then he considered those which had spots; of these a few were found
black, and these were carried to their fellows. The rest

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

were white and entire; and they were fitted by the virgins into the
building, and placed in the outside, by reason of their strength.

74 ¶ After this he came to consider those stones which were white and
round: and he said unto me, What shall we do with these stones? I
answered, Sir, I cannot tell.

75 He replied, Canst thou think of nothing then for these? I answered,
Sir, I understand not this art; neither am I a stone-cutter, nor can I
tell any thing.

76 And he said, seest thou not that they are very round? Now to make
them square, I must cut off a great deal from them; howbeit, it is
necessary that some of these should go into the building of the tower.

77 I answered; If it be necessary, why do you perplex yourself, and not
rather choose, if you have any choice among them, and fit them into the
building.

78 Upon this he chose out the largest and brightest, and squared them;
which when he had done the virgins took them up, and placed them in the
outside of the building.

79 And die rest that remained were carried back into the same field from
which they were taken; howbeit, they were not cast away; because, said
he, there is not yet a little wanting to this tower, which is to be
built; and perhaps the Lord will have these stones fitted into this
building, because they are exceeding white.

80 Then were there called twelve very stately women, clothed with a
black garment, girded, and their shoulders free, and their hair loose.
These seemed to me to be country women.

81 And the shepherd commanded them to take up those stones which were
cast out of the building, and carry them back to the mountains out of
which they were taken.

82 And they took them all up joyfully, and carried them back to their
places from whence they had been taken.

83 When not one stone remained about the tower, he said unto me, Let us
go about this tower, and see whether any thing be wanting to it.

84 We began therefore to go round about it; and when he saw that it was
handsomely built, he began to be very glad; for it was so beautifully
framed, that any one that had seen it must have been in love with the
building:

85 For it seemed to be all but one stone, nor did a joint anywhere
appear; but it looked as if it had all been cut out of one rock.

86 ¶ And when I diligently considered what a tower it was, I was
extremely pleased: and he said unto me, Bring hither some lime and
little shells, that I may fill up the  <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1](#fn_1382.md) spaces of those stones that were taken
out of the building, and put in again; for all things about the tower
must be made even.

87 And I did as he commanded me, and he said unto me, Be ready to help
me, and this work will quickly be finished.

88 He therefore filled up the spaces of those stones, and commanded the
place about the tower to be cleansed.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

89 Then those virgins took besoms, and cleansed all the place around and
took away all the rubbish, and threw water on; which being done, the
place became delightful, and the tower beauteous.

90 Then he said unto me, All is now clean: if the Lord should come to
finish the tower, he will find nothing whereby to complain of us.

91 When he had said this he would have departed. But I laid hold on his
bag, and began to entreat him for the Lord's sake, that he would explain
to me all things that he had shown me.

92 He said unto me, I have at present a little business; but I will
suddenly explain all things unto thee. Tarry here for me till I come.

93 I said unto him, Sir, what shall I do here alone? He answered, Thou
art not alone, seeing all these virgins are with thee.

94 I said, Sir, deliver me then unto them. Then he called them and said
unto them, I commend this man unto you until I shall come.

95 So I remained with those virgins: now they were cheerful and
courteous unto me; especially the four, which seemed to be the chiefest
among them.

96 ¶ Then those virgins said unto me, that shepherd will not return
hither to day. I said unto them, What then shall I do? They answered,
Tarry for him till the evening, if perhaps he may come and speak with
thee; but if not, yet thou shalt continue with us till he does coma.

97 I said unto them, I will tarry for him till evening; but if be comes
not by that time, I will go home, and return hither again the next
morning.

98 They answered me, Thou art delivered unto us, thou mayest not depart
from us. I said, Where shall I tarry?

99 They replied, Thou shalt sleep with us as a brother, not as a
husband: for thou art our brother, and we are ready from henceforth to
dwell with thee; for thou art very dear to us.

100 Howbeit I was ashamed to continue with them. But she that seemed to
be the chiefest amongst them, embraced me, and began to kiss me. And the
rest when they saw that I was kissed by her, began also to kiss me as a
brother; and led me about the tower, and played with me.

101 Some of them also sung psalms, others made up the chorus with them.
But I walked about the tower with them, rejoicing silently, and seeming
to myself to be grown young again.

102 When the evening came on, I would forthwith have gone home, but they
withheld me, and suffered me not to depart. Wherefore I continued with
them that night near the same tower.

103 So they spread their linen garments upon the ground; and placed me
in the middle, nor did they anything else, only they prayed.

104 I also prayed with them without ceasing, nor less than they. Who
when they saw me pray in that manner, rejoiced greatly; and I continued
there with them till the next day.

105 And when we had worshipped God, then the shepherd came and said unto
them: You have done no injury to this man. They answered, Ask him. I
said unto him, Sir, I have received a

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

great deal of satisfaction in that have remained with them.

106 And he said unto me, How thou sup? I answered, Sir, I feasted the
whole night upon the words of the Lord. They received thee well then,
said he; I said, Sir, very well.

107 He answered, Wilt thou now learn what thou didst desire? I replied,
Sir, I will: and first I pray thee that thou shouldest shew me all
things in the order that I asked them.

108 He answered, I will do all as thou wouldst have me, nor will I hide
anything from thee.

109 ¶ First of all, Sir, said I, tell me, what this rock, and this gate
denote? Hearken, said he; this rock, and this gate, are the Son of God.
I replied, Sir, how can that be; seeing the rock is old, but the gate
new.

110 Hear, said he, O foolish man! and understand. The Son of God is
indeed more ancient than any creature;  <span
id="fr_1391"></span>[1](#fn_1383.md) insomuch that he was in council with
his Father at the creation of  <span id="fr_1392"></span>[2](#fn_1384.md)
all things.

111 But the gate is therefore new, because he appeared in the last days
in the fulness of time; that they who shall attain unto salvation, may
by it enter into the kingdom of God.

112 You have seen, said he, those stones which were carried through the
gate, how they were placed in the building of the tower; but that those
which were not carried through the gate, were sent away into their own
places?

113 I answered, Sir, I saw it. Thus, said he, no man shall enter into
the kingdom of God, but he who shall take upon him the name of the Son
of God.

114 For if you would enter into any city, and that city should w be
encompassed with a wall, and had only one gate, could you n enter into
that city except by that gate?

115 I answered, Sir, how could I do otherwise? As therefore, said he,
there would be no other way of entering into that city but by its gate,
so neither can any one enter into the kingdom of God, but only by the
name of his Son, who is most dear unto him.

116 And he said unto me, Didst thou see the multitude of those that
built that tower? Sir, said I, I saw it. He answered, All those are the
angels, venerable in their dignity.

117 With those is the Lord encompassed as with a wall: but the gate is
the Son of God, who is the only way of coming unto God. For no man shall
go to God, but by his Son.

118 Thou sawest also, said he, the six men, and in the middle of them
that venerable great man, who walked about the tower, and rejected the
stones out of the tower?

119 Sir, said I, I saw them. He answered, that tall man was the Son of
God: and those six were his angels of most eminent dignity, which stand
about him on the right hand and on the left.

120 Of these excellent angels none comes in unto God without him. He
added, Whosoever therefore shall not take upon him his name, he shall
not enter into the kingdom of God.

121 ¶ Then I said, What is this tower? This, said he, is the church. And
what, Sir, are these virgins? He said unto me, These are the holy
spirits, for no

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

man can enter into the kingdom of God, except these clothe him with
their garment.

122 For it will avail thee nothing to take up the name of the Son of
God, unless thou shalt also receive their garment from them. For these
virgins are the powers of the Son of God. So shall a man in vain bear
his name, unless he shall be also endued with his powers.

123 And he said unto me, sawest thou those stones that were cast away?
They bore indeed the name, but put not on their garment. I said, Sir,
what is their garment?  <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1](#fn_1385.md) Their
very names, said he, are their garment.

124 Therefore whosoever beareth the name of the Son of God, ought to
bear their names also; for the Son of God also himself beareth their
names.

125 As for those stones, continued he, which being delivered by their
hands, thou sawest remain in the building, they were clothed with their
power; for which cause thou seest the whole tower of the same  <span
id="fr_1394"></span>[2](#fn_1386.md) colour with the rock, and made as it
were of one stone.

126 So also those who have believed in God by his Son, have put on his
spirit. Behold there shall be one spirit, and one body, and one colour
of their garments; and all they shall attain this, who shall bear the
names of these virgins.

127 And I said, Sir, why then were those stones cast away which were
rejected, seeing they also were carried through the gate, and delivered
by the hands of these virgins into the building of this tower?

128 Seeing, said he, thou takest care to inquire diligently into all
things, hear also concerning those stones which were rejected. All these
received the name of the Son of God, and with that the power of these
virgins.

129 Having therefore received these spirits, they were perfected, and
brought into the number of the servants of God; and they began to be one
body, and to have one garment, for they were  <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[3](#fn_1387.md) endued with the same righteousness,
which they alike exercised.

130 But after that they be held those women which thou sawest clothed
with a black garment, with their shoulders at liberty and their hair
loose; they fixed their desires upon them, being tempted with their
beauty; and were clothed with their power, and cast off the clothing of
the virgins:

131 Therefore were they cast off from the house of God, and delivered to
those women. But they that were not corrupted with their beauty,
remained in the house of God. This, said he, is the signification of
those stones which were rejected.

132 ¶ And I said, Sir, what if any of these men shall repent, and cast
away their desire of those women, and be converted, and return to these
virgins, and put on again their virtue; shall they not enter into the
house of God?

133 They shall enter, said he, if they shall lay aside all the works of
those women, and shall resume the power of these virgins, and shall walk
in their works.

134 And for this cause there

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span id="img_25700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![JONAH CAST INTO
THE SEA, AND HIS COMING OUT OF THE WHALE. FROM THE FRONT OF A
SARCOPHAGUS OF THE FIRST AGES OF CHRISTIANITY, FOUND IN THE CEMETERY OF
THE VATICAN, ROME.](tn/25700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25700.jpg.md)  
JONAH CAST INTO THE SEA, AND HIS COMING OUT OF THE WHALE. FROM THE FRONT
OF A SARCOPHAGUS OF THE FIRST AGES OF CHRISTIANITY, FOUND IN THE
CEMETERY OF THE VATICAN, ROME.  
</span>

is a stop in the building, that if they shall repent, they may be added
to the building of this tower; but if they shall not repent, that others
may be built in their places, and so they may be utterly cast away.

135 For all these things I gave thanks unto the Lord, that being moved
with mercy towards all those upon whom his name is called, he sent to us
the angel of repentance to preside over us who have sinned against him;
and that he has refreshed our spirits which were almost gone, and who
had no hope of salvation, but are now refreshed to the renewal of life.

136 Then I said, Shew me now, Sir, why this tower is not built upon the
ground, but upon a rock, and upon the gate? He replied, thou art
foolish, and without understanding, therefore thou asketh this.

137 And I said, Sir, I must needs ask all things of you, because I
understand nothing at all. For all your answers are great and excellent;
and which a man can hardly understand.

138 Hear, said he: The name of the Son of God is great and without
bounds, and the whole world is supported by it. If therefore, said I,
every creature of God be sustained by his Son, why should he not support
those also who have been invited by him, and who carry his name, and
walk in his commandments?

139 Seest thou not, said he, that he doth support them, who with all
their heart bear his' name? He therefore is their foundation, and gladly
supports those who do not deny his name, but willingly bear it.

140 ¶ And I said: Sir, tell me the names of these virgins; and of those
women that were clothed with the black garment.

141 Hear, said he, the names of those virgins which are the more
powerful, and stand at the corners of the gate. These are their names:

142 The first is called  <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1](#fn_1388.md) Faith;
the second Continence; the third, Power; the fourth, Patience; the rest
which stand beneath these are, Simplicity, Innocence, Chastity,
Cheerfulness, Truth, Understanding, Concord, Charity.

143 Whosoever therefore bear these names, and the names of the Son of
God, shall enter into the kingdom of God.

144 Hear now, said he, the names of those women, which were clothed with
the black garment. Of these, four are the principal: the first is
Perfidiousness; the second, Incontinence; the third, Infidelity; the
fourth, Pleasure.

145 And the rest which follow are called thus, Sadness, Malice, Lust,
Anger, Lying, Foolishness, Pride, and Hatred. The servant of God, which
carries these spirits, shall see indeed the kingdom of God, but he shall
not enter into it.

146 But, Sir, what are those stones which were taken out of the deep and
fitted into the building? The ten, said he, which were placed at the
foundation, are the first age; the following five-and-twenty, the
second, of righteous men.

147 The next thirty-five, are the prophets and ministers of the Lord.
And the forty, are the Apostles and doctors of the preaching of the Son
of God.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

148 And I said, Sir, why did the virgins put even those stones into the
building after they were carried through the gate? And he said, Because
these first carried those spirits, and they departed not one from the
one, neither the men from the spirits, nor the spirits from the men:

149 But the spirits were joined to those men even to the day of their
death; who if they had not had these spirits with them, they could not
have been useful to the building of this tower.

150 And I said, Sir, shew me this farther. He answered, What dost thou
ask? Why did these stones come out of the deep, and were placed into the
building of this tower, seeing that they long ago carried those  <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1](#fn_1389.md) holy spirits.

151  <span id="fr_1398"></span>[2](#fn_1390.md) It was necessary, said he,
for them to ascend by water, that they might be at rest. For they could
not otherwise enter into the kingdom of God, but by laying aside the
mortality of their former life.

152 They therefore being dead, were nevertheless sealed with the seal of
the Son of God, and so entered into the kingdom of God.

153 For before a man receives the name of the Son of God, he is ordained
unto death; but when he receives that seal, he is freed from death, and
 <span id="fr_1399"></span>[3](#fn_1391.md) assigned unto life.

154 Now that seal is the water of baptism, into which men go down under
the obligation unto death, but come up appointed unto life.

155 Wherefore to those also was this seal  <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[4](#fn_1392.md) preached, and they made use of it,
that they might enter the kingdom of God.

156 And I said, Why then, sir, did these forty stones also ascend with
them out of the deep, having already received that seal?

157 He answered,  <span id="fr_1401"></span>[5](#fn_1393.md) Because these
Apostles and teachers, who preached the name of the Son of God, dying
after they had received his faith and power, preached to them who were
dead before; and they gave this seal to them.

158 They went down therefore into the water with them, and again came
up. But these went down whilst they were alive, and came up again alive:
whereas those who were before dead, went down dead, but came up alive;

159 Through these therefore they received life, and knew the Son of God:
for which cause they came up with them, and were fit to come into the
building of the tower; and were not cut, but put in entire; because they
died in righteousness, and in great purity; only this seal was wanting
to them.

160 Thus you have the explication of these things.

161 ¶ I answered: Sir, tell me now what concerns those mountains, why
are they so different; some of one form, and some of another.

162 Hear, said he; These twelve mountains which thou seest, are twelve
nations, which make up the whole world. Wherefore the Son of God is
preached to them, by those whom he sent unto them.

163 But why, said I, are they different, and every one of a

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

figure? He replied, Hearken. Those twelve nations which possess the
whole world, are twelve people.

164 And as thou hast beheld these mountains different, so are they. I
will therefore open to thee the meaning and actions of every mountain.

165 But first, sir, said I, shew me this; Seeing these mountains are so
different, how have they agreed into the building of this tower; and
been brought to one colour; and are no less bright than those that came
out of the deep?

166 Because, replied he, all the nations which are under heaven, have
heard and believed in the same one name of the Son of God by whom they
are called.

167 Wherefore having received his seal, they have all been made
partakers of the same  <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1](#fn_1394.md)
understanding and  <span id="fr_1403"></span>[2](#fn_1395.md) knowledge;
and their faith and charity have been the same; and they have carried
the spirits of these virgins together with his name.

168 And therefore the building of this tower appeared to be of the same
colour, and did shine like the brightness of the sun.

169 But after that they had thus agreed in one mind there began to be
one body of them all; howbeit some of them polluted themselves, and were
cast off from the kind of the righteous, and again returned to their
former state, and became even worse than they were before.

170 ¶ How, said I, sir, were they worse who knew the Lord? He answered:
If he who knows not the Lord liveth wickedly, the punishment of his
wickedness attends him.

171 But he who has known the Lord, ought to abstain altogether from all
wickedness, and more and more to be the servant of righteousness.

172 And does not he then seem to thee to sin more who ought to follow
goodness, if he shall prefer the part of sin; than he who offends
without knowing the power of God?

173 Wherefore these are indeed ordained unto death; but they who have
known the Lord, and have seen his wonderful works, if they shall live
wickedly, they shall be doubly punished, and shall die for ever.

174 As therefore thou hast seen that after the stones were cast out of
the tower, which had been rejected; they were delivered to wicked and
cruel spirits; and thou beheldest the tower so cleansed, as if it had
all been made of one stone:

175  <span id="fr_1404"></span>[3](#fn_1396.md) So the church of God, when
it shall be purified: (the  <span id="fr_1405"></span>[4](#fn_1397.md)
wicked and counterfeits, the  <span id="fr_1406"></span>[5](#fn_1398.md)
mischievous and doubtful, and all that have behaved themselves wickedly
in it, and committed divers kinds of sin, being cast out) shall become
one body, and there shall be one understanding, one opinion, one faith,
and the same charity.

176 And then shall the Son of God rejoice among them, and shall receive
his people with a pure will.

177 And I said; Sir, all these things are great and honourable; but now
shew unto me the effect and force of every mountain: that every soul
which trusteth in the Lord, when it shall hear these things may honour
his great, and wonderful, and holy name.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

178 Hear, said he, the variety of these mountains, that is, of the
twelve nations.

179 ¶ They who have believed of the first mountain, which is black, are
those who have revolted from the faith; and spoken wicked things against
the Lord; and betrayed the servants of God.

180 These are condemned to death, there is no repentance for them: and
therefore they are black, because their kind is wicked.

181 Of the second mountain which was smooth, are the  <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1](#fn_1399.md) hypocrites, who have believed, and the
teachers of naughtiness: and these are next to the foregoing, which have
not in them the fruit of righteousness.

182 For as their mountain is barren and without fruit; so also such kind
of men have indeed the name of Christians, but are empty of faith; nor
is there any fruit of the truth in them.

183 Nevertheless there is room left to them for repentance, if they
shall suddenly pursue it: but if they shall delay, they also shall be
partakers of death with the foregoing kind.

184 I said, Sir, why is there room left to those for repentance, and not
to the foregoing kind, seeing their sins are well nigh the same?

185 There is therefore, said he to these a return unto life by
repentance, because they have not blasphemed against their Lord, nor
betrayed the servants of God: but by their desire of gain have deceived
men, leading them according to the lusts of sinners; wherefore they
shall suffer for this thing.

186 Howbeit there is still left them room for repentance, because they
have not spoken any thing wickedly against the Lord.

187 ¶ They who are of the third mountain which had thorns and brambles,
are those who believed, but were some of them rich, others taken up with
many affairs: the brambles are their riches: the thorns, those affairs
in which they were engaged.

188 Now they who are entangled in much business, and in diversity of
affairs, join not themselves to the servants of God, but wander, being
called away by those affairs with which they are choked.

189 And so they which are rich, with difficulty yield themselves to the
 <span id="fr_1408"></span>[2](#fn_1400.md) conversation of the servants of
God; fearing lest anything should be asked of them. These therefore
shall hardly enter into the kingdom of God.

190 For as men walk with difficulty bare-foot over thorns, even so these
kind of men shall scarcely enter into the kingdom of God.

191 Nevertheless there is at. forded to all these a return unto
repentance; if that they shall quickly return to it; that because in
their former days they have neglected to work, in the time that is to
come they may do some good.

192 If therefore having repented they shall do the works of
righteousness, they shall live; but if they shall continue in their evil
courses, they shall be delivered to those women that will take away
their life.

193 ¶ As for the fourth mountain, which had many herbs, the upper part
of which is green,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

but the roots dry, and some of which being touched with the heat of the
sun are withered;

194 It denotes the doubtful, who have believed, and some others who
carry the Lord in their tongues, but have him not in their heart:
therefore their grass is dry, and without root; because they live only
in words, but their works are dead.

195 These therefore are neither dead nor living, and withal are
doubtful. For the doubtful are neither green nor dry; that is, neither
dead nor alive.

196 For as the herbs dry away at the sight of the sun; so the doubtful
as soon as they hear of persecution, and fear inconveniences, return to
their idols, and again serve them, and are ashamed to bear the name of
their Lord.

197 This kind of men then is neither dead nor alive; nevertheless these
also may live, if they shall presently repent; but if not, they shall be
delivered to those women, who shall take away their life.

198 ¶ As concerning the fifth mountain that is craggy, and yet has green
grass: they are of this kind who have believed, and are faithful indeed,
but believe with difficulty; and are bold, and self-conceited; that
would be thought to know all things, but really know nothing.

199 Wherefore, by reason of this confidence, knowledge is departed from
them; and a rash presumption is entered into them.

200 But they carry themselves high, and as prudent men; and though they
are fools, yet would seem to be teachers.

201 Now by reason of this folly many of them, whilst they magnify
themselves, are become vain and empty. For boldness and vain confidence
is a  <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1](#fn_1401.md) very evil spirit.

202 Wherefore many of these are cast away; but others acknowledging
their error, have repented, and submitted themselves to those who are
knowing.

203 And to all the rest of this kind there is repentance allowed;
forasmuch as they were not so much wicked as foolish, as void of
understanding.

204 If these therefore shall repent, they shall live unto God; but if
not, they shall dwell with those women, who shall exercise their
wickedness upon them.

205 ¶ For what concerns the sixth mountain having greater and lesser
clefts, they are such as have believed; but those in which were lesser
clefts are they who have had controversies among themselves; and by
reason of their quarrels languish in the faith;

206 Nevertheless many of these have repented, and so will the rest when
they shall hear my commands; for their controversies are but small, and
they will easily return unto repentance.

207 But those who have the greater clefts, will be as stiff stones,
mindful of grudges and offences, and full of anger among themselves.
These therefore are cast from the tower, and refused to be put into its
building; for this kind of men shall hardly live.

208 Our God and Lord, who ruleth over all things, and has power over all
his creatures, will not remember our offences, but is easily appeased by
those who confess their sins: but man being

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

languid, mortal, infirm, and full of sins, perseveres in his anger
against man; as if it were in his power to save or destroy him.

209 But I, as the angel who am set over your repentance, admonish you,
that whosoever among you has any such purpose he should lay it aside,
and return unto repentance; and the Lord will heal your former sins, if
you shall purge yourselves from this evil spirit; but if you shall not
do it, ye shall be delivered to him unto death.

210 ¶ As for the seventh mountain in which the grass was green and
flourishing, and the whole mountain faithful; and all kind of cattle fed
upon the grass of it, and the more the grass was eaten so much the more
it flourished:

211 They are such as believed, and were always good and upright; and
without any differences among themselves, but still rejoiced in the
servants of God, having put on the spirit of these virgins; and been
always forward to shew mercy to all men, readily giving to all men of
their labours without upbraiding, and without deliberation.

212 Wherefore the Lord seeing their simplicity and  <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1](#fn_1402.md) innocence, has increased them in the
works of their hands, and given them grace in all their works.

213 But I, who am the angel appointed over your repentance, exhort you,
that as many as are of this kind would continue in the same purpose,
that your seed may not be rooted out forever.

214 For the Lord hath tried you, and written you into our number; and
all your seed shall dwell with the Son of God; for ye are all of his
spirit.

215 ¶ As concerning the eighth mountain in which were a great many
springs, by which every kind of all the creatures of God was watered;
they are such as have believed the Apostles which the Lord sent into all
the world to preach;

216 And  <span id="fr_1411"></span>[2](#fn_1403.md) some of them being
teachers have preached and taught purely and sincerely, and have not in
the least yielded to any evil desires, but have constantly walked in
righteousness and truth.

217 These therefore have their conversations among the angels.

218 ¶ Again; as for what concerns the ninth mountain which is desert,
and full of serpents; they are such as have believed, but had many
stains:

219 These are such ministers as discharge their ministry amiss;
ravishing away the goods of the widows and fatherless; and serve
themselves, not others, out of those things which they have received.

220 These, if they continue in this covetousness, have delivered
themselves unto death, nor shall there be any hope of life for them. But
if they shall be converted, and shall discharge their ministry
sincerely, they may live.

221 As for those which were found rough, they are such as have denied
the name of the Lord, and not returned again to the Lord, but have
become savage and wild; not applying themselves to the servants of God;
but being separated from them, have for a little carelessness lost their
lives.

222 For as a vine that is forsaken in a hedge, and never

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

dressed, perishes and is choked by the weeds, and in time becomes wild,
and ceases to be useful to its lord; so this kind of men despairing of
themselves, and being soured, have begun to be unprofitable to their
Lord.

223 Howbeit to these there is, after all, repentance allowed, if they
shall not be found from their hearts to have denied Christ; but if any
of these shall be found to have denied him from his heart, I cannot tell
whether such a one can attain unto life.

224 I say therefore that if any one hath denied, he should in these days
return unto repentance; for it cannot be that any one who now denies the
Lord, can afterwards attain unto salvation: nevertheless repentance is
proposed unto them who have formerly denied.

225 But he who will repent must hasten on his repentance, before the
building of this tower is finished: otherwise he shall be delivered by
those women unto death.

226 But they that are maimed are the deceitful; and those who mix with
one another, these are the serpents that you saw mingled in that
mountain.

227 For as the poison of serpents is deadly unto men; so the words of
such persons infect and destroy men. They are therefore maimed in their
faith, by reason of that kind of life which they lead.

228 Howbeit some of them, having repented, have been saved, and so shall
others of the same kind be also saved, if they shall repent; but if not,
they shall die by those women whose power and force they possess.

229 ¶ For what concerns the tenth mountain, in which were the trees
covering the cattle, they are such as have believed, and some of them
have been bishops, that is, governors of the churches.

230 Others, are such stones as have not feignedly, but with a cheerful
mind entertained the servants of God.

231 Then such as have been set over inferior ministries; and have
protected the poor and the widows; and have always kept a chaste
conversation: therefore they also are protected by the Lord.

232 Whosoever shall do on this wise, are honored with the Lord; and
their place is among the angels, if they shall continue to obey the Lord
even unto the end.

233 ¶ As to the eleventh mountain in which were trees loaded with
several sorts of fruits, they are such as have believed, and suffered
death, for the name of the Lord; and have endured with a ready mind, and
have given up their lives with all their hearts.

234 And I said, Why then, sir, have all these fruit indeed, but yet some
fairer than others?

235 Hearken, said he: Whosoever have suffered for the name of the Lord
are esteemed honourable by the Lord; and all their offences are blotted
out, because they have suffered death for the name of the Son of God.

236 Hear now, why their fruits are different, and some of them excel
others, they who being brought before magistrates, and being asked,
denied not the Lord, but suffered with a ready mind; these are more
honourable with the Lord. The fruits therefore that are the most fair
are these.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

237 But they who were fearful and doubtful, and have deliberated with
themselves whether they should confess or deny Christ, and yet have
suffered; their fruits are smaller, because that this thought came into
their hearts.

238 For it is a wicked and evil thought for a servant to deliberate
whether he should deny his master. Take heed therefore ye who have such
thoughts, that this mind continue not in you, and ye die unto God.

239 But ye who suffer death for his name sake, ought to honour the Lord,
that he has esteemed you worthy to bear his name; and that you should be
delivered from all your sins.

240 And why therefore do you not rather esteem yourselves happy? Yea
think verily that if any one among you suffer, he performs a great work?
For the Lord giveth you life, and ye understand it not. For your
offences did oppress you; and if ye had not suffered for his name sake,
ye had now been dead unto the Lord,

241 Wherefore I speak this unto you who deliberate whether ye should
confess or deny him; confess that ye have the Lord for your God; lest at
any time denying him, ye be delivered not into bonds.

242 For all nations punish their servants which deny their masters; what
think you that the Lord will do unto you, who has the power of all
things?

243 Remove therefore out of hearts these doubts, that ye may live
forever unto God.

244 As for the twelfth mountain, which was white, they are such as have
believed like sincere children, into whose thoughts there never came any
malice, nor have they ever known what sin was, but have always continued
in their integrity.

245 Wherefore this kind of men shall without all doubt inherit the
kingdom of God; because they have never in any thing defiled the
commandments of God, but have continued with sincerity in the same
condition all the days of their life.

246 Whosoever therefore, said he, shall continue as children without
malice; shall be more honourable than all those of whom I have yet
spoken: for all such children are honoured by the Lord, and esteemed the
first of all.

247 Happy therefore are ye who shall remove all malice from you, and put
on innocence; because ye shall first see the Lord.

248 And after he had thus ended his explication of all the mountains, I
said unto him, Sir, show me now also what concerns the stones that were
brought out of the plain, and put into the tower in the room of those
that were rejected:

249 As also concerning those round stones which were added into the
building of the tower: and also of those who still continued round.

250 ¶ Hear now, says he, concerning those stones which were brought out
of the plain into the building of the tower, and placed in the room of
those that were rejected; they are the roots of that white mountain.

251 Wherefore because those who have believed of that mountain were very
innocent; the lord of this tower commanded that they which were of the
roots of this mountain should be placed into the building.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

252 For he knew that if they were put into this building they would
continue bright; nor would any of them any more be made black.

253 But if he had added on this manner from the rest of the mountains,
he would  <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1](#fn_1404.md) almost have needed
again to visit the tower and to cleanse it.

254 Now all these white stones are the young men who have believed, or
shall believe; for they are all of the same kind. Happy is this kind,
because it is innocent.

255 Hear now also concerning those round and bright stones: all these
are of this white mountain. But they are therefore found round, because
their riches have a little darkened them from the truth and dazzled
their eyes:

256 Howbeit they have never departed from the Lord, nor has any wicked
word proceeded out of their mouths; but all righteousness, and virtue,
and truth.

257 When therefore the Lord saw their mind, and that they might adorn
the truth; he commanded that they should continue good, and that their
riches should be pared away:

258 For he would not have them taken wholly away, to the end they might
do some good with that which was left, and live unto God; because they
also are of a good kind.

259 Therefore was there a little cut off from them, and so they were put
into the building of this tower.

260 ¶ As for the rest which continued still round, and were not found
fit for the building  <span id="fr_1413"></span>[2](#fn_1405.md) of this
tower, because they have not yet received the seal; they were carried
back to their place, because they were found very round.

261 But this present world must be cut away from them, and the vanities
of their riches; and then they will be fit for the kingdom of God. For
they must enter into the kingdom of God, because God has blessed this
innocent kind.

262 Of this kind therefore none shall fall away; for though any of them
being tempted by the devil should offend, he shall soon return to his
Lord God.

263 I the angel of repentance esteem you happy, whosoever are innocent
as little children, because your portion is good and honourable with the
Lord.

264 And I say unto all you who have received this seal; keep simplicity,
and remember not the offences which are committed against you, nor
continue in malice, or in bitterness, through the memory of offences.

265  <span id="fr_1414"></span>[3](#fn_1406.md) But become one spirit, and
provide remedies for these evil rents, and remove them from you; that
the lord of the sheep may rejoice  <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[4](#fn_1407.md) at it;  <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[5](#fn_1408.md) for he will rejoice, if he shall find
all whole.

266 But if any of these sheep shall be found scattered away, Wo shall be
to the shepherds; but and if the shepherds themselves shall be
scattered; what will they answer to  <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[6](#fn_1409.md) the lord of the sheepfold? Will they
say that they were troubled by the

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

sheep? But they shall not be believed.

267 For it is an incredible thing that the shepherd should suffer by his
flock; and he shall be the more punished for his lie.

268 Now I am the shepherd; and especially must give an account of you.

269 ¶ Wherefore take care of yourselves whilst the tower is yet
building. The Lord dwells in those that love peace; for peace is
beloved; but he is far off from the contentious, and those who are
 <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1](#fn_1410.md) full of malice.

270 Wherefore restore unto him the spirit entire, as ye received it.
 <span id="fr_1419"></span>[2](#fn_1411.md) For if thou shalt give unto a
fuller a garment new and whole, thou wilt expect to receive it whole
again; if therefore the fuller shall restore it unto thee torn, wouldest
thou receive it?

271 Wouldst thou not presently be angry; and reproach him, saying; I
gave my garment to thee whole; why hast thou rent it, and made it
useless to me? Now it is of no use to me, by reason of the rent which
thou hast made in it. Wouldst thou not say all this to a fuller, for the
rent which he made in thy garment?

272 If therefore thou wouldst be concerned for thy garment, and complain
that thou hadst not received it whole; what thinkest thou that the Lord
will do, who gave his Spirit to thee entire, and thou hast rendered him
altogether unprofitable, so that he can be of no use unto his Lord? For
being corrupted by thee, he is no longer profitable to him.

273 Will not therefore the Lord do the same concerning his Spirit, by
reason of thy deed? Undoubtedly, said I, he will do the same to all
those whom he shall find to continue in the remembrance of injuries.

274 Tread not then under foot he said, his mercy; but rather honour him,
because he is so patient with respect to your offences, and not like one
of you; but repent, for that will be profitable for you.

275 ¶ All these things which are above written, I the shepherd, the
angel of repentance, have shown and spoken to the servants of God.

276 If therefore ye shall believe and hearken to these words, and shall
walk in them, and shall correct your ways, ye shall live. But if ye
shall continue in malice, and in the remembrance of injuries, no such
sinners shall live unto God.

277 All these things which were to be spoken by me I have thus delivered
unto you. Then the shepherd said unto me, Hast thou asked all things of
me? I answered, Sir, I have.

278 Why, then, said he, hast thou not asked concerning the spaces of
these stones that were put in the building, that I may explain that also
unto thee? I answered, Sir, I forgot it. Hear, then, said he, concerning
these also.

279 They are those who have now heard these commands, and have repented
with all their hearts;

280 And when the Lord saw that their repentance was good and pure, and
that they could continue in it, he commanded their former sins to be
blotted

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

out. For these spaces were their sins, and they are therefore made even
that they might not appear.

#### SIMILITUDE X.

<span class="small">*Of Repentance and alms-deeds*.</span>

AFTER that I had written this book, the angel which had delivered me to
that shepherd, came into the house where I was and sat upon the bed, and
that shepherd stood at his right hand.

2 Then he called me and said unto me; I delivered thee and thy house to
this shepherd, that thou mightest be protected by him. I said, Yes,
Lord.

3 If therefore, said he, thou wilt be protected from all vexations and
from all cruelty, and have success in every good word and work; and have
all virtue and righteousness; walk in those commands which he has given
thee, and thou shalt have dominion over all sin.

4 For if thou keepest those commands, all the lust and pleasure of this
present world shall be subject to thee; and success shall follow thee in
every good undertaking.

5 Take therefore his  <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1](#fn_1412.md) gravity
and modesty towards thee, and say unto all, that he is in great honour
and renown with God, and is a  <span id="fr_1421"></span>[2](#fn_1413.md)
prince of great authority and powerful in his office.

6 To him only is the power of repentance committed throughout the whole
world. Does he not seem to thee to be of great authority?

7 But ye despise his goodness, and the modesty which he chews towards
you.

8 ¶ I said unto him; Sir, ask him since the time that he came into my
house whether I have done any thing disorderly, or have offended him in
any thing?

9 I know, said he, that thou hast done nothing disorderly, neither wilt
thou hereafter do any such thing; and therefore I speak these things
with thee that thou mayest persevere; for he has given me a good account
concerning thee,

10 But thou shalt speak these things to others, that they who either
have repented, or shall repent,  <span id="fr_1422"></span>[3](#fn_1414.md)
may be like-minded with thee; and he may give me as good an account of
them also, and I may do the same unto the Lord.

11 I answered; Sir, I declare to all men the wonderful works of God; and
I hope that all who love them and have before sinned, when they shall
hear these things, will repent, and recover life.

12 Continue therefore, said he, in this ministry, and fulfil it. And
whosoever shall do according to the commands of this shepherd, he shall
live; and shall have great honour both here and with the Lord.

13 But they that shall not keep his commands, flee from their life, and
are adversaries to it. And they that follow not his commands, shall
deliver themselves unto death, and shall be every one guilty of his own
blood.

14 But I say unto thee, keep these commandments, and thou shalt find a
cure for all thy sins.

15 ¶ Moreover, I have sent these  <span
id="fr_1423"></span>[4](#fn_1415.md) virgins to dwell with thee; for I have
seen that they are

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

very kind to thee. Thou shalt therefore have them for thy helpers, that
thou mayest the better keep the commands which he hath given thee; for
these commands cannot be kept without these virgins.

16 And  <span id="fr_1424"></span>[1](#fn_1416.md) I see how they are
willing to be with thee; and I will also command them that they shall
not all depart from thy house.

17 Only do thou purify thy house, for they will readily dwell in a clean
house. For they are clean and chaste, and industrious; and all of them
have grace with the Lord.

18 If therefore, thou shalt have thy house pure, they will abide with
thee. But if it shall be never so little polluted, they will immediately
depart from thy house: for these virgins cannot endure any manner of
pollution.

19 I said unto him; Sir, I hope that I shall so please them, that they
shall always delight to dwell in my house. And as he to whom you have
committed me, makes no complaint of me; so neither shall they complain.

20 Then he said to that shepherd: I see that the servant of God will
live and keep these commandments, and place these virgins in a pure
habitation.

21 When he had said this, he delivered me again to that shepherd, and
called the virgins, and said unto them; forasmuch as I see that ye will
readily dwell in this man's house, I commend him and his house to you,
that ye may not at all depart from his house. And they willingly heard
these words.

22 ¶ Then he said unto me, Go on manfully in thy ministry; declare to
all men the great things of God, and thou shalt find grace in this
ministry.

23 And whosoever shall walk in these commands, shall live, and be happy
in his life. But he that shall neglect them, shall not live, and shall
be unhappy in his life.

24 Say unto all that whosoever can do well, cease not to exercise
themselves in good works, for it is profitable unto them. For I  <span
id="fr_1425"></span>[2](#fn_1417.md) would that all men should be delivered
from the inconveniences they lie under.

25 For he that wants, and suffers inconveniences in his daily life, is
in great torment and necessity. Whosoever therefore delivers such a soul
from necessity, gets great joy unto himself.

26 For he that is grieved with such inconveniences is equally tormented,
as if he were in chains. And many upon the account of such calamities,
being not able to bear them, have chosen even to destroy themselves.

27 He therefore that knows the calamity of such a man, and does not free
him from it, commits a great sin, and is guilty of his blood.

28 Wherefore exercise yourselves in good works, as many as have received
ability from the Lord; lest whilst ye delay to do them, the building of
the tower be finished; because for your sakes the building is stopped.

29 Except therefore ye shall make haste to do well, the tower shall be
finished, and ye shall be shut out of it.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

30 And after he had thus spoken with me, he rose up from the bed and
departed, taking the shepherd and virgins with him.

31 Howbeit he said unto me that he would send back the shepherd and
virgins unto my house. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[228:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1327.md) Antioch. Hom. xv.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[229:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1328.md) Souls.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[229:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1329.md) MS. Lambeth.
Proprias, autem quas habetis agite.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[229:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1330.md) Vid. Origen. in
Jos. Hom. x.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[230:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1331.md) Distracted.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[230:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1332.md) Who are.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[231:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1333.md) Nations

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[231:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1334.md) With me.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[231:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1335.md) Vid. not. Coteler.
in loc. pp. 72, 73.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[231:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1336.md) Coteler.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[231:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1337.md) Jejuna certe verum
jejunium tale. Lat.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[232:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1338.md) Just a
commendation.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[233:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1339.md) Shameful; or,
upbraiding.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[233:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1342.md) Vid. Not. Coteler.
ii., p. 74. A. B. C.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[233:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1343.md) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
vii.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[234:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1344.md) Angels.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[235:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1345.md) Angels.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[235:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1346.md) This place, which
in all the editions of Hermas is wretchedly corrupted, by the collation
of editions and MSS. is thus corrected by Dr. Grabe: "Quære autem
Dominus in concilio adhibuerit, filium de hæreditate, honestosque
nuncios, audi; Spiritum Sanctum, qui creatus est omnium primus, in
corpore, in quo habitaret Deus, collocavit; in delecto scilicet corpore
quod ei videbatur."

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[235:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1348.md) Viz. the created
Spirit of Christ, as man; not the Holy Ghost, the Third Person of the
Sacred Trinity.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[235:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1349.md) Thy body,
according to some copies.

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[236:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1350.md) In them.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[236:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1351.md) Vid. Annot.
Coteler. in loc.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[236:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1352.md) Angel.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[237:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1353.md) Ad. defectionem.
Lat.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[237:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1354.md) Exultantia. Lat.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[237:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1355.md) In Gr. επιθυμιαις
του Αιωνος τουτου.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[237:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1356.md) Agrestem Lat.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[237:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1357.md) Vid. Origen. in
Ps. xxxvi. Hom. 1.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[237:6](lbob28.htm#fr_1358.md) Righteous. In Gr.
Athanas. εκ των Αγγελων των δικαιων εστι, &c. et sic MS. Lamb.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[238:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1359.md) MS. Lamb.
Succurritiis: Gr. Athanas, ον γινωσκουσι.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[238:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1360.md) MS. Lamb.
Inquiris.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[238:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1361.md) Origen. in Num.
Hom. viii.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[238:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1362.md) MS. Lamb. Omnino.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[239:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1363.md) Obeyeth his
disease.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[239:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1366.md) Angel.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[242:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1367.md) Moved.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[242:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1368.md) MS. Lamb. Hæc
autem lex Filius Dei est, prædicatus, &c.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[242:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1369.md) Satisfied.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[243:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1370.md) Sabano. Vid. Edit.
Oxon. p. 129. not. d.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[244:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1371.md) MS. Lamb. Minimum
habuerant viride.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[244:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1372.md) Sea.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[245:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1373.md) Lamb. MS.
Quamplurimis generibus inficiati.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[246:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1374.md) Righteous.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[246:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1375.md) Probi.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[247:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1376.md) See above, Book I.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[247:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1377.md) Angel

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[247:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1378.md) Ascent.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[248:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1379.md) Origen, Hom. iii.
in. Ezech.

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[248:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1380.md) Fascem aliquem.
Lat.

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[249:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1381.md) So Cotelerius in
loc.

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[249:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1384.md) MS. Lamb.
Ascenderunt.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[251:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1385.md) Greatness.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[252:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1386.md) MS. Lamb. Ita
exasperetur, ut hi lapides.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[252:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1387.md) MS. Lamb.
Negligens, patrisfamilias.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[252:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1388.md) Vid. MS. Lamb.
Edit. Oxon. p. 157.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[252:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1389.md) MS. Lamb. Fuerant.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[253:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1390.md) Formas. Lat.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[255:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1391.md) Ita ut. Lat.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[255:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1392.md) The creatures.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[256:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1393.md) Vid. Annot. Edit.
Oxon. p. 116, d.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[256:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1394.md) Vid. Origen.
Philocal. c. viii.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[256:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1395.md) Sentiebant
æquitatem, Lat. from the Greek εφρονουν: but the true reading of Hermes
seemeth to have been οφορουν.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[257:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1396.md) Origin. Hom. 13,
in Ezek.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[258:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1397.md) Justos, Righteous.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[258:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1398.md) Vid. Edit. Oxon.
p.171, b.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[258:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1399.md) Traditur,
Delivered.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[258:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1400.md) Vid. Coteler.
Annot. in loc. p. 77, 78. Comp. 1 Pet. iii. 19.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[258:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1401.md) Vid. Clem. Alex.
Strom. ii. et vi.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[259:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1402.md) Prudence.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[259:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1403.md) Sense.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[259:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1404.md) Lat. Virtutem.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[259:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1405.md) Vid. Orig.
Philocal. c. viii.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[259:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1406.md) Evil.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[260:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1407.md) Profligate.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[260:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1408.md) Vid. Edit. Oxon.,
p. 178, Not. b.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[261:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1409.md) Magnum Dæmonium.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[262:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1410.md) Infancy.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[262:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1411.md) MS. Lamb. Et
quidam Doctores caste: Omitting Qui.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[265:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1412.md) MS. Lamb. Tantum
non necesse habuisset.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[265:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1413.md) MS. Lamb.
Structuram turris hujus.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[265:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1414.md) MS. Lamb. Et unum
quemque spiritum fleri: which appears from the Gr. of Antiochus to be
the true reading, και γενεσθαι εν πνευμα.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[265:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1415.md) MS. Lamb. Gaudeat
de his; and Gr. Antioch χαρη επ αυτω.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[265:5](lbob28.htm#fr_1416.md) Vid. Antioch. Hom.
cxxii.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[265:6](lbob28.htm#fr_1417.md) Gr. Τῳ δεσποτῃ του
ποιμνιου.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[266:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1418.md) Perdites malitia.
Lat.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[266:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1419.md) Antioch. Hom.
xciv.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[267:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1420.md) Lat. Maturitatem.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[267:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1421.md) President.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[267:3](lbob28.htm#fr_1422.md) Eadem quæ tu
sentiant.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[267:4](lbob28.htm#fr_1423.md) What is meant by
these virgins?—See before, Simil. ix. v. 149 et seq.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[268:1](lbob28.htm#fr_1424.md) MS. Lamb. Video:
which appears from the close of this section to be the true reading.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[268:2](lbob28.htm#fr_1425.md) Say.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letters of Herod and Pilate](lbob29.md)

</div>
