[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050034)  [Next](1050036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Whom Sinners Imitate.</span>

<span id="x.iii.xvii-p2"></span>“For if by one man’s offence death
reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of
righteousness shall reign in life by one, even Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) Why did death reign on account of the
sin of one, unless it was that men were bound by the chain of death in
that one man in whom all men sinned, even though they added no sins of
their own? Otherwise it was not on account of the sin of one that death
reigned through one; rather it was on account of the manifold offences
of many, \[operating\] through each individual sinner. For if the reason
why men have died for the transgression of another be, that they have
imitated him by following him as their predecessor in transgression, it
must even result, and *that* “much more,” that that one died on account
of the transgression of another, whom the devil so preceded in
transgression as himself to persuade him to commit the transgression.
Adam, however, used no influence to persuade his followers; and the many
who are said to have imitated him have, in fact, either not heard of his
existence at all or of his having committed any such sin as is ascribed
to him, or altogether disbelieve it. How much more correctly, therefore,
as I have already remarked, <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)
would the apostle have set forth the devil as the author, from which
“one” he would say that sin and death had passed upon all, if he had in
this passage meant to speak, not of propagation, but of imitation? For
there is much stronger reason for saying that Adam is an imitator of the
devil, since he had in *him* an actual instigator to sin; if one may be
an imitator even of him who has never used any such persuasion, or of
whom he is absolutely ignorant. But what is implied in the clause, “They
which receive abundance of grace and righteousness,” but that the grace
of remission is given not only to that sin in which all have sinned, but
to those offences likewise which men have actually committed besides;
and that on these \[men\] so great a righteousness is freely bestowed,
that, although Adam gave way to him who persuaded him to sin, they do
not yield even to the coercion of the same tempter? Again, what mean the
words, “Much more shall they reign in life,” when the fact is, that the
reign of death drags many more down to eternal punishment, unless we
understand those to be really mentioned in both clauses, who pass from
Adam to Christ, in other words, from death to life; because in the life
eternal they shall reign without end, and thus exceed the reign of death
which has prevailed within them only temporarily and with a termination?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[21:260](1050035.htm#fr_259) <span
id="x.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xvii-p3"></span> [Rom. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span id="x.iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[21:261](1050035.htm#fr_260) <span
id="x.iii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xvii-p4"></span> See above, ch. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1050036)
