[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050456)  [Next](1050458) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii-Page_218"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2 \[II.\]—Suspicious Character of
Pelagius’ Confession as to the Necessity of Grace for Every Single Act
of Ours.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p2"></span>You informed me in your letter, that you
had entreated Pelagius to express in writing his condemnation of all
that had been alleged against him; and that he had said, in the audience
of you all: “I anathematize the man who either thinks or says that the
grace of God, whereby ‘Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners,’ <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) is not necessary
not only for every hour and for every moment, but also for every act of
our lives: and those who endeavour to disannul it deserve everlasting
punishment.” Now, whoever hears these words, and is ignorant of the
opinion which he has clearly enough expressed in his books,—not those,
indeed, which he declares to have been stolen from him in an incorrect
form, nor those which he repudiates, but those even which he mentions in
his own letter which he forwarded to Rome,—would certainly suppose that
the views he holds are in strict accordance with the truth. But whoever
notices what he openly declares in them, cannot fail to regard these
statements with suspicion. Because, although he makes that grace of God
whereby Christ came into the world to save sinners to consist simply in
the remission of sins, he can still accommodate his words to this
meaning, by alleging that the necessity of such grace for every hour and
for every moment and for every action of our life, comes to this, that
while we recollect and keep in mind the forgiveness of our past sins, we
sin no more, aided not by any supply of power from without, but by the
powers of our own will as it recalls to our mind, in every action we do,
what advantage has been conferred upon us by the remission of sins.
Then, again, whereas they are accustomed to say that Christ has given us
assistance for avoiding sin, in that He has left us an example by living
righteously and teaching what is right Himself, they have it in their
power here also to accommodate their words, by affirming that this is
the necessity of grace to us for every moment and for every action,
namely, that we should in all our conversation regard the example of the
Lord’s conversation. Your own fidelity, however, enables you clearly to
perceive how such a profession of opinion as this differs from that true
confession of grace which is now the question before us. And yet how
easily can it be obscured and disguised by their ambiguous statements!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[218:1786](1050457.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="xv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii-p3"></span> [1 Tim i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)<span id="xv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1050458)
