[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050518)  [Next](1050520.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8 \[VII.\]—Cœlestius Condemned by
Zosimus.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.viii-p2"></span>The venerable Pope Zosimus, keeping in
view this deprecatory preamble, dealt with the man, puffed up as he was
with the blasts of false doctrine, so as that he should condemn all the
objectionable points which had been alleged against him by the deacon
Paulinus, and that he should yield his assent to the rescript of the
Apostolic See which had been issued by his predecessor of sacred memory.
The accused man, however, refused to condemn the objections raised by
the deacon, yet he did not dare to hold out against the letter of the
blessed Pope Innocent; indeed, he went so far as to “promise that he
would condemn all the points which the Apostolic See condemned.” Thus
the man was treated with gentle remedies, as a delirious patient who
required rest; but, at the same time, he was not regarded as being yet
ready to be released from the restraints of excommunication. The
interval of two months being granted him, until communications could be
received from Africa, a place for recovery was conceded to him, under
the mild restorative of the sentence which had been pronounced. For in
truth, if he would have laid aside his vain obstinacy, and be now
willing to carry out what he had undertaken, and would carefully read
the very letter to which he had replied by promising submission, he
would yet come to a better mind. But after the rescripts were duly
issued from the council of the African bishops, there were very good
reasons why the sentence should be carried out against him, in strictest
accordance with equity. What these reasons were you may read for
yourselves, for we have sent you all the particulars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050520.md)
