[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050669)  [Next](1050671) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ii"></span> <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="xvii.ii-Page_310"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>Extract from Augustin’s “Retractations,”</span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c40"><span
id="xvii.ii-p2.1"></span>Book II. Chap. 56,</span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xvii.ii-p3.1"></span>On the Following Treatise,</span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="xvii.ii-p4.1"></span>“De anima et ejus origine.”</span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>————————————

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>“<span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.ii-p6.1"></span>At</span> that time one Vincentius discovered
in the possesion of a certain presbyter called Peter, in Mauritania
Cæsariensis, a little work of mine, in a particular passage of which,
touching the origin of souls in individual men, I had confessed that I
knew not whether they are propagated from the primeval soul of the first
man, and from that by parental descent, or whether they are severally
assigned to each person without propogation, as the first was to Adam;
but that I was, at the same time, quite sure that the soul was not body,
but spirit. In opposition to these opinions of mine, he addressed to
this Peter two books, which were sent to me from Cæsarea by the monk
Renatus. Having read these books, I replied in four others,—one
addressed to the monk Renatus, another to the presbyter Peter, and two
more to Victor himself. That to Peter, however, though it has all the
lengthiness of a book, is yet only a letter, which I did not like to be
kept separate from the other three works. In all of them, while
discussing many points which were unavoidable, I defended my hesitancy
on the point of the origin of the souls which are given to individual
men; and I pointed out this man’s many errors and presumptuous pravity.
At the same time, I treated the young man as gently as I could,—not as
one who ought to be denounced all out of hand, but as one who ought to
be still instructed; and I accepted the account of his conduct which he
wrote back to me. In this work of mine, the book addressed to Renatus
begins with these words: “Your sincerity towards us;” while that which
was written to Peter begins thus: “To his Lordship, my dearly beloved
brother and co-presbyter Peter.” Of the last two books, which are
addressed to Vincentius Victor, the former one thus opens: “As to that
which I have thought it my duty to write to you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisement to the Reader on the...](1050671)
