[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050842)  [Next](1050844.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Introduction; The Pelagians
Impeach Catholics as Manicheans.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xviii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Let</span> me now consider a second letter,
not of Julian’s alone, but common to him with several bishops, which
they sent to Thessalonica; and let me answer it, with God’s help, as I
best can. And lest this work of mine become longer than the necessity of
the subject itself requires, what need is there to refute those things
which do not contain the insidious poison of their doctrine, but seem
only to plead for the acquiescence of the Eastern bishops for their
assistance, or, on behalf of the catholic faith, against the profanity,
as they say, of the Manicheans; with no other view except, a horrible
heresy being presented to them, whose adversaries they profess
themselves to be, to lie hid as the enemies of grace in praise of
nature? For who at any time has stirred any question of these matters
against them? or what catholic is displeased because they condemn those
whom the apostle foretold as departing from the faith, having their
conscience seared, forbidding to marry, abstaining from meats that they
think unclean, not thinking that all things were created by God? <span
id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621.md) Who at any time constrained them to
deny that every creature of God is good, and there is no substance which
the supreme God has not made, except God Himself, who was not made by
any? It is not such things as these, which it is plain are catholic
truths, that are rebuked and condemned in them; because not alone the
catholic faith holds in detestation the Manichean impiety as exceedingly
foolish and mischievous, but also all heretics who are not Manicheans.
Whence even these Pelagians do well to utter an anathema against the
Manicheans, and to speak against their errors. But they do two evil
things, for which they themselves must also be anathematized—one, that
they impeach catholics under the name of Manicheans, the other, that
they themselves also are introducing the heresy of a new error. For they
are not therefore sound in the faith because they are not labouring
under the disease of the Manicheans. The kind of pestilence is not
always one and the same—as in the bodies, so also in the minds. As,
therefore, the physician of the body would not have pronounced a man
free from peril of death whom he might have declared free from dropsy,
if he had seen him to be sick of some other mortal disease; so truth is
not acknowledged in their case because they are not Manicheans, if they
are raving in some other kind of perversity. Wherefore what we
anathematize with them is one thing, what we anathematize in them is
another. For we hold in abhorrence with them what is rightly offensive
to them also; just as, nevertheless, we hold in <span id="page_392">p.
392</span> <span id="xviii.iv.i-Page_392"></span>abhorrence in them that
for which they themselves are rightly offensive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[391:2622](1050843.htm#fr_2621.md) <span
id="xviii.iv.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.i-p3"></span> [1 Tim.
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#000.md)<span id="xviii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>
ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1050844.md)
