[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050513)  [Next](1050515.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3 \[III.\]—Part of the Proceedings of
the Council of Carthage Against Cœlestius.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iii-p2"></span>“The bishop Aurelius said: ‘Let what
follows be recited.’ It was accordingly recited, ‘That the sin of Adam
was injurious to him alone, and not to the human race.’ Then, after the
recital, Cœlestius said: ‘I said that I was in doubt about the
transmission of sin, <span id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931.md) but so
as to yield assent <span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iii-Page_237"></span>to any man whom God has gifted with the
grace of knowledge; for I have heard different opinions from those who
have been even appointed presbyters in the Catholic Church.’ The deacon
Paulinus <span id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932.md) said: ‘Tell us their
names.’ Cœlestius answered: ‘The holy presbyter Rufinus, <span
id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933.md) who lived at Rome with the holy
Pammachius. I have heard him declare that there is no transmission of
sin.’ The deacon Paulinus then asked: ‘Is there any one else?’ Cœlestius
replied: ‘I have heard more say the same.’ The deacon Paulinus rejoined:
‘Tell us their names.’ Cœlestius said: ‘Is not one priest enough for
you?’” Then afterwards in another place we read: “The bishop Aurelius
said: ‘Let the rest of the accusation be read.’ It then was recited
‘That infants at their birth are in the same state that Adam was before
the transgression;’ and they read to the very end of the brief
accusation which had been previously put in. \[IV.\] The bishop Aurelius
inquired: ‘Have you, Cœlestius, taught at any time, as the deacon
Paulinus has stated, that infants are at their birth in the same state
that Adam was before his transgression?’ Cœlestius answered: ‘Let him
explain what he meant when he said, “*before the transgression*.’” The
deacon Paulinus then said: ‘Do you on your side deny that you ever
taught this doctrine? It must be one of two things: he must either say
that he never so taught, or else he must now condemn the opinion.’
Cœlestius rejoined: ‘I have already said, Let him explain the words he
mentioned, “*before the transgression*.”’ The deacon Paulinus then said:
‘You must deny ever having taught this.’ The bishop Aurelius said: ‘I
ask, What conclusion I have on my part to draw from this man’s
obstinacy; my affirmation is, that although Adam, as created in
Paradise, is said to have been made immortal at first, he afterwards
became corruptible through transgressing the commandment. Do you say
this, brother Paulinus?’ ‘I do, my lord,’ answered the deacon Paulinus.
Then the bishop Aurelius said: ‘As regards the condition of infants
before baptism at the present day, the deacon Paulinus wishes to be
informed whether it is such as Adam’s was before the transgression; and
whether it derives the guilt of transgression from the same origin of
sin from which it is born?’ The deacon Paulinus asked: ‘Let him deny
whether he taught this, or not.’ Cœlestius answered: ‘As touching the
transmission of sin, I have already asserted, that I have heard many
persons of acknowledged position in the catholic Church deny it
altogether; and on the other hand, others affirm it: it may be fairly
deemed a matter for inquiry, but not a heresy. I have always maintained
that infants require baptism, and ought to be baptized. What else does
he want?’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[236:1932](1050514.htm#fr_1931.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iii-p3"></span> *De traduce peccati*, the technical
phrase to express the conveyance by birth of original sin.

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[237:1933](1050514.htm#fr_1932.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iii-p4"></span> This Paulinus, according to Mercator
(*Commonit. super nomine Cœlestii*), was the deacon of Ambrose, Bishop
of Milan, and the author of his biography, which he wrote at the
instance of Augustin. According to his own showing, he lived in Africa,
and wrote the *Life of Ambrose* when John was pretorian prefect, *i.e*.
either in the year 412, or 413, or 422. The trial mentioned in the text
took place about the commencement of the year 412, according to
Augustin’s letter to Pope Innocent (See Augustin’s letter, 175, 1. 6).
See above, in the treatise *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 23.

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[237:1934](1050514.htm#fr_1933.md) <span
id="xv.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iii-p5"></span> Mercator (*Commonit. adv. Hæres.
Pelagii*) informs us that a certain Syrian called Rufinus introduced the
discussion against original sin and its transmission into Rome in the
pontificate of Anastasius. According to some, this was the Rufinus of
Aquileia, whom Jerome (in *Epist. ad Ctesiphont*.) notices as the
precursor of Pelagius in his error about the sinless nature of man;
according, however, to others, it is the other Rufinus, mentioned by
Jerome in his 66th Epistle, who is possibly the same as he who rejects
the transmission of original sin in a treatise *On Faith*, which J.
Sismondi published as the work of Rufinus, a presbyter of the province
of Palestine. It is, at any rate, hardly possible to suppose that the
Aquileian Rufinus either went to Rome, or lodged there with Pammachius,
in the time of Pope Anastasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1050515.md)
