[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050056)  [Next](1050058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 39 \[XXVI.\]—The Conclusion Drawn,
that All are Involved in Original Sin.</span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxix-p2"></span>It would be tedious, were we fully to
discuss, at similar length, every testimony bearing on the question. I
suppose it will be the more convenient course simply to collect the
passages together which may turn up, or such as shall seem sufficient
for manifesting the truth, that the Lord Jesus Christ came in the flesh,
and, in the form of a servant, became obedient even to the death of the
cross, <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) for no other reason than,
by this dispensation of His most merciful grace, to give life to all
those to whom, as engrafted members of His body, He becomes Head for
laying hold upon the kingdom of heaven: to save, free, redeem, and
enlighten them,—who had aforetime been involved in the death,
infirmities, servitude, captivity, and darkness of sin, under the
dominion of the devil, the author of sin: and thus to become the
Mediator between God and man, by whom (after the enmity of our ungodly
condition had been terminated by His gracious help) we might be
reconciled to God unto eternal life, having been rescued from the
eternal death which threatened such as us. When this shall have been
made clear by more than sufficient evidence, it will follow that those
persons cannot be concerned with that dispensation of Christ which is
executed by His humiliation, who have no need of life, and salvation,
and deliverance, and redemption, and illumination. And inasmuch as to
this belongs baptism, in which we are buried with Christ, in order to be
incorporated into Him as His members (that is, as those who believe in
Him): it of course follows that baptism is unnecessary for them, who
have no need of the benefit of that forgiveness and reconciliation which
is acquired through a Mediator. Now, seeing that they admit the
necessity of baptizing infants,—finding themselves unable to contravene
that authority of the universal Church, which has been unquestionably
handed down by the Lord and His apostles,—they cannot avoid the further
concession, that infants require the same benefits of the Mediator, in
order that, being washed by the sacrament and charity of the faithful,
and thereby incorporated into the body of Christ, which is the Church,
they may be reconciled to God, and so live in Him, and be saved, and
delivered, and redeemed, and enlightened. But from what, if not from
death, and the vices, and guilt, and thraldom, and darkness of sin? And,
inasmuch as they do not commit any sin in the tender age of infancy by
their actual transgression, original sin only is left.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[30:331](1050057.htm#fr_330) <span
id="x.iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxxix-p3"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="x.iii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](1050058)
