[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050763)  [Next](1050765.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—We Have No Memory of Our
Creation.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.viii-p2"></span>And whosoever shall have attempted to
fathom such knowledge may not improperly have addressed to him the words
we have before quoted, “Seek not out the things that are too high for
thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength.” Now it is
not a question of mere altitude, such as is beyond our stature, but it
is an elevation which our intelligence cannot reach, and a strength
which our mental power cannot cope with. And yet it is neither the
heaven of heavens, nor the measure of the stars, nor the scope of sea
and land, nor the nethermost hell; it is our own selves that we are
incapable of comprehending; it is our own selves, who, in our too great
height and strength, transcend the humble limits of our own knowledge;
it is our own selves, whom we are incapable of embracing, although we
are certainly not beside ourselves. But we are not to be compared with
cattle simply because we do not perfectly discover what we ourselves
are: and yet you think that we deserve the humiliating comparison, if we
have forgotten what we were, even though we knew it once. My soul is not
now being derived from my parents, is not now receiving insufflation
from God. Whichever of these two processes He used, He used when He
created <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="xvii.vii.viii-Page_358"></span>me; He is not at this moment using it
of me, or within me. It is past and gone,—not a present thing, nor a
recent one to me. I do not even know whether I was aware of it and then
forgot it; or whether I was unable, even at the time when it was done,
to feel and to know it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050765.md)
