[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050285)  [Next](1050287.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xliii"></span>

<span id="xii.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 39.—Pelagius Glorifies God as Creator
at the Expense of God as Saviour.</span>

<span id="xii.xliii-p2"></span>Beyond this, however, although he
flatters himself that he vindicates the cause of God by defending
nature, he forgets that by predicating soundness of the said nature, he
rejects the Physician’s mercy. He, however, who created him is also his
Saviour. We ought not, therefore, so to magnify the Creator as to be
compelled to say, nay, rather as to be convicted of saying, that the
Saviour is superfluous. Man’s nature indeed we may honour with worthy
praise, and attribute the praise to the Creator’s glory; but at the same
time, while we show our gratitude to Him for having created us, let us
not be ungrateful to Him for healing us. Our sins which He heals we must
undoubtedly attribute not to God’s operation, but to the wilfulness of
man, and submit them to *His* righteous punishment; as, however, we
acknowledge that it was in our power that they should not be committed,
so let us confess that it lies in His mercy rather than in our own power
that they should be healed. But this mercy and remedial help of the
Saviour, according to this writer, consists only in this, that He
forgives the transgressions that are past, not that He helps us to avoid
such as are to come. Here he is most fatally mistaken; here, however
unwittingly—here he hinders us from being watchful, and from praying
that “we enter not into temptation,” since he <span id="page_135">p.
135</span> <span id="xii.xliii-Page_135"></span>maintains that it lies
entirely in our own control that this should not happen to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](1050287.md)
