[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050654)  [Next](1050656) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xlix"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xlix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 48.—Original Sin Arose from Adam’s
Depraved Will. Whence the Corrupt Will Sprang.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xlix-p2"></span>“If,” says he, “sin comes from the
will, it is an evil will that causes sin; if it comes from nature, then
nature is evil.” I at once answer, Sin does come from the will. Perhaps
he wants to know, whether original sin also? I answer, most certainly
original sin also. Because it, too, was engendered from the will of the
first man; so that it both existed in him, and passed on to all. As for
what he next proposes, “If it comes from nature, then nature is evil,” I
request him to answer, if he can, to this effect: As it is manifest that
all evil works spring from a corrupt will, like the fruits of a corrupt
tree; so let him say whence arose the corrupt will itself—the corrupt
tree which yields the corrupt fruits. If from an angel, what was the
angel, but the good work of God? If from man, what was even he, but the
good work of God? Nay, inasmuch as the corrupt will arose in the angel
from an angel, and in man from man, what were both these, previous to
the evil arising within them, but the good work of God, with a good and
laudable nature? Behold, then, evil arises out of good; nor was there
any other source, indeed, whence it could arise, but out of good. I call
that will bad which no evil has preceded; no evil works, of course,
since they only proceed from an evil will, as from a corrupt tree.
Nevertheless, that the evil will arose out of good, could not be,
because that good was made by the good God, but because it was created
out of nothing—not out of God. What, therefore, becomes of his argument,
“If nature is the work of God, it will never do for the work of the
devil to permeate the work of God”? Did not the work of the devil, I
ask, arise in a work of God, when it first arose in that angel who
became the devil? Well, then, if evil, which was absolutely nowhere
previously, could arise in a work of God, why could not evil, which had
by this time found an existence somewhere, pervade the work of God;
especially when the apostle uses the very expression in the passage,
“And so death passed <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.xlix-Page_303"></span>upon all men”? <span
id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) Can it be that men are not the work
of God? Sin, therefore, has passed upon all men—in other words, the
devil’s work has penetrated the work of God; or putting the same meaning
in another shape, The work done by a work of God has pervaded God’s
work. And this is the reason why God alone has an unchangeable and
almighty goodness: even before any evil came into existence He made all
things good; and out of all the evils which have arisen in the good
things which He has made, He works through all for good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[303:2300](1050655.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="xvi.vi.xlix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xlix-p3"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="xvi.vi.xlix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 49](1050656)
