[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050402)  [Next](1050404.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xxii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p2"></span>But perhaps the point requires some
consideration, whether he was right in saying that “such as held the
opinions in question deserved anathema, not as heretics, but as fools,
since it was no dogma.” The question, when fairly confronted, is no
doubt far from being an unimportant one,—how far a man deserves to be
described as a heretic; on this occasion, however, the judges acted
rightly in abstaining from it altogether. If any one, for example, were
to allege that eaglets are suspended in the talons of the parent bird,
and so exposed to the rays of the sun, and such as wink are flung to the
ground as spurious, the light being in some mysterious way the gauge of
their genuine nature, he is not to be accounted a heretic, if the story
happens to be untrue. <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649.md) And,
since it occurs in the writings of the learned and is very commonly
received as fact, ought it to be considered a foolish thing to mention
it, even though it be not true? much less ought our credit, which gains
for us the name of being trustworthy, to be affected, on the one hand
injuriously if the story be believed by us, or beneficially if
disbelieved. <span id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650.md) If, to go a step
further in illustration, any one were from this opinion to contend that
there existed in birds reasonable souls, from the notion that human
souls at intervals passed into them, then indeed we should have to
reject from <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="xiv.xxii-Page_191"></span>our mind and ears alike an idea like this
as the rankest heresy; and even if the story about the eagles were true
(as there are many curious facts about bees before our eyes, that are
true), we should still have to consider, and demonstrate, the great
difference that exists between the condition of creatures like these,
which are quite irrational, however surprising in their powers of
sensation, and the nature which is common (not to men and beasts, but)
to men and angels. There are, to be sure, a great many foolish things
said by foolish and ignorant persons, which yet fail to prove them
heretics. One might instance the silly talk so commonly heard about the
pursuits of other people, from persons who have never learned these
pursuits,—equally hasty and untenable whether in the shape of excessive
and indiscriminate praise of those they love, or of blame in the case of
those they happen to dislike. The same remark might be made concerning
the usual curent of human conversation: whenever it does touch on a
subject which requires dogmatic acuracy of statement, but is thrown out
at random or suggested by the passing moment, it is too often pervaded
by foolish levity, whether uttered by the mouth or expressed in writing.
Many persons, indeed, when gently reminded of their reckless gossip,
have afterwards much regretted their conduct; they scarcely recollected
what they had never uttered with a fixed purpose, but had poured forth
in a sheer volley of casual and unconsidered words. It is, unhappily,
almost impossible to be quite clear of such faults. Who is he “that
slippeth not in his tongue,” <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651.md)
and “offendeth not in word?” <span id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652.md)
It, however, makes all the difference in the world, to what extent, and
from what motive, and whether in fact at all, a man when warned of his
fault corrects it, or obstinately clings to it so as to make a dogma and
settled opinion of that which he had not at first uttered on purpose,
but only in levity. Although, then, it turns out eventually that every
heretic is a fool, it does not follow that every fool must immediately
be named a heretic. The judges were quite right in saying that Pelagius
had anathematized the vague folly under consideration by its fitting
designation for even if it were heresy, there could be no doubt of its
being foolish prattle. Whatever, therefore, it was, they designated the
offence under a general name. But whether the quoted words had been used
with any definitely dogmatic purpose, or only in a vague and
indeterminate sense, and with an unmeaningness which should be capable
of an easy correction, they did not deem it necessary to discuss on the
present occasion, since the man who was on his trial before them denied
that the words were his at all, in whatever sense they had been
employed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[190:1650](1050403.htm#fr_1649.md) <span
id="xiv.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p3"></span> It is told by Pliny, *Hist. Nat*. x. 3
(3), and Lucan, *Pharsalia*, ix. 902, etc.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[190:1651](1050403.htm#fr_1650.md) <span
id="xiv.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p4"></span> *Creditum*, however, is read in both
clauses; we should expect *non creditum* in one, as one reading has it.
\[?—W.\]

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[191:1652](1050403.htm#fr_1651.md) <span
id="xiv.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p5"></span> See [Ecclesiasticus
19.16](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#016.md)<span id="xiv.xxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[191:1653](1050403.htm#fr_1652.md) <span
id="xiv.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xxii-p6"></span> See [Jas. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span id="xiv.xxii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1050404.md)
