[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050434)  [Next](1050436) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.liv"></span>

<span id="xiv.liv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.liv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 50.—Pelagius Has No Good Reason to Be
Annoyed If His Name Be at Last Used in the Controversy, and He Be
Expressly Refuted.</span>

<span id="xiv.liv-p2"></span>But now if Pelagius thinks of God, if he is
not ungrateful for His mercy in having brought him before this tribunal
of the bishops, that thus he might be saved from the hardihood of
afterwards defending these anathematized opinions, and be at once led to
acknowledge them as deserving of abhorrence and rejection, he will be
more thankful to us for our book, in which, by mentioning his name, we
shall open the wound in order to cure it, than for one in which we were
afraid to cause him pain, and, in fact, only produced irritation,—a
result which causes us regret. Should he, however, feel angry with us,
let him reflect how unfair such anger is; and, in order to subdue it,
let him ask God to give him that grace which, in this trial, he has
confessed to be necessary for each one of our actions, that so by His
assistance he may gain a real victory. For of what use to him are all
those great laudations contained in the letters of the bishops, which he
thought fit to be men<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="xiv.liv-Page_205"></span>tioned, and even to be read and quoted in
his favour,—as if all those persons who heard his strong and, to some
extent, earnest exhortations to goodness of life could not have easily
discovered how perverse were the opinions which he was entertaining?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 51](1050436)
