[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050732)  [Next](1050734.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1 \[I.\]—Augustin’s Purpose in
Writing.</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.vi.i-p2.1"></span>As</span> to that which I have thought it my
duty to write to you, my much-loved son Victor, I would have you to
entertain this above all other thoughts in your mind, if I seemed to
despise you, that it was certainly not my intention to do so. At the
same time I must beg of you not to abuse our condescension in such a way
as to suppose that you possess my approval merely because you have not
my contempt. For it is not to follow, but to correct you, that I give
you my love; and since I by no means despair of the possibility of your
amendment, I do not want you to be surprised at my inability to despise
the man who has my love. Now, since it was my bounden duty to love you
before you had united with us, in order that you might become a
catholic; how much more ought I now to love you since your union with
us, to prevent your becoming a new heretic, and that you may become so
firm a catholic that no heretic may be able to withstand you! So far as
appears from the mental endowments which God has largely bestowed upon
you, you would be undoubtedly a wise man if you only did not believe
that you were one already, and begged of Him who maketh men wise, with a
pious, humble, and earnest prayer, that you might become one, and
preferred not to be led astray with error rather than to be honoured
with the flattery of those who go astray.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1050734.md)
