[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050012)  [Next](1050014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="viii-Page_3"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii-p1.1"></span>Preface to Volume I. Of the Edinburgh
Edition.</span>

<span id="viii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="viii-p3"></span>Contents.—§ 1. The Latin Titles of the
Treatises contained in this Volume; on the Preface of the Benedictine
Edition. § 2. Notice of Pelagius and his Opinions. § 3. Of Cœlestius and
his Doctrine, in Seven Propositions. § 4. On Augustin as compared with
other Doctors of the Church; his Estimate of Pelagius and Cœlestius. §
5. The Different Fortunes of these Two Men at First. § 6. St. Jerome
differs from St. Augustin as to the Origin of Pelagianism; East and
West, their Doctrinal Characteristics—how Agreeing, how Varying. § 7. On
the Conduct of Augustin and Pelagius; Partisanship of their Followers
and Critics. § 8. Paramount Influence of St. Augustin in Ancient and
Modern Times, and in Various Parts of Christendom. § 9. Reason of this
Influence; Augustin true to Scripture and Human Experience; in
Favourable Contrast to Pelagius as to the Scientific Depth and Accuracy
of his Doctrine. § 10. Rationalism and Revelation; Pelagius’ Views
Isolated and Incoherent; Augustin an Excellent Guide in Scripture
Knowledge. § 11. Popularity and Permanence of Pelagianism; Consentient
with Man’s Natural Feelings; Elevating Influence of Divine Grace, its
Ultimate Triumph in Everlasting Glory. § 12. Original Text from which
this Translation is made; Works useful in the Pelagian Controversy.

<span id="viii-p4"></span>§ 1. <span class="c16"><span
id="viii-p4.1"></span>The</span> reader has in this volume, translated
for the first time in English, five of the fifteen treatises of St.
Augustin on the Pelagian heresy. They are here arranged in the same
order (the chronological one) in which they are placed in the tenth
volume of the Benedictine edition, and are therefore St. Augustin’s
earliest contributions to the great controversy. These are their Latin
titles:

<span id="viii-p5"></span>*De peccatorum meritis et remissione, et de
baptismo parvulorum ad Marcellinum*; libri tres, scripti anno Christi
412.

<span id="viii-p6"></span>*De Spiritu et littera ad eumdem*; liber unus,
scriptus sub finem anni 412.

<span id="viii-p7"></span>*De natura et gratia contra Pelagium, ad
Timasium et Jacobum*; liber unus, scriptus anno Christi 415.

<span id="viii-p8"></span>*De perfectione justitiæ hominis*; \[Epistola
seu\] liber ad Eutropium et Paulum, scriptus circiter finem anni 415.

<span id="viii-p9"></span>*De gestis Pelagii ad Aurelium episcopum*;
liber unus, scriptus sub initium anni 417.

<span id="viii-p10"></span>The Benedictine editors have enriched their
edition with prefaces (“Admonitiones”) and critical and explanatory
notes, and, above all, with the appropriate extracts from St. Augustin’s
*Retractations*, <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) in which we
have the author’s own final revision and correction of his works. All
these have been reproduced in a translated form in this volume; and they
will, it is believed, afford the reader sufficient guidance for an
intelligent apprehension of at least the special arguments of the
several treatises. The Benedictine editors, however, prefixed to this
detailed information an elaborate and lengthy preface, in which they
reviewed the general history of the Pelagian discussions and their
authors, with especial reference to the part which St. Augustin played
throughout it. This historical introduction it was at first intended to
present to the reader in English at the head of this volume. In
consideration, however, of the length of the document, we have so far
changed our purpose as to substitute a shorter statement of certain
facts and features of the Pelagian controversy, which it is hoped may
contribute to a better understanding of the general subject.

<span id="viii-p12"></span>§ 2. The Pelagian heresy is so designated
after Pelagius, a British monk. (Augustin calls him *Brito*, so do
Prosper and Gennadius; by Orosius he is called *Britannicus noster*, and
by Mercator described as *gente Britannus*. This wide epithet is
somewhat restricted by Jerome, who says of him, *Habet progeniem Scotiæ
gentis de Britannorum vicinia*; leaving it uncertain, however, whether
he deemed Scotland his native country, or Ireland. His monastic
character is often referred to both by Augustin and other writers, and
Pope Zosimus describes him as *Laicum virum ad bonam frugem longa erga
Deum servitute nitentem*. It is, after all, quite uncertain what part of
“Britain” gave him birth; among other conjectures, he has been made a
native of Wales, attached to a monastery at Bangor, and gifted with the
Welsh name of *Morgan*, of which his usual designation of *Pelagius* is
supposed to be simply the Greek version, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii-p12.1"></span>Πελαγιος</span>.) It was at the beginning of the
fifth century that he became conspicuous. He then resided at Rome, known
by many as an honourable and earnest man, seeking in a <span
id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="viii-Page_4"></span>corrupt age to
reform the morals of society. (In the present volume the reader will not
fail to observe the eulogistic language which Augustin often uses of
Pelagius; see *On the Merits of Sin,* iii. 1, 5, 6.) Sundry theological
treatises are even attributed to him; among them one *On the Trinity*,
of unquestionable orthodoxy, and showing great ability. Unfavourable
reports, however, afterwards began to be circulated, charging him with
opening, in fact, entirely new ground in the fields of heresy. During
the previous centuries of Christian opinion the speculations of active
thinkers had been occupied on *Theology* properly so called, or the
doctrine of God as to His nature and personal attributes, including
*Christology,* which treated of Christ’s divine and human natures. This
was objective divinity. With Pelagius, however, a fresh class of
subjects was forced on men’s attention: in his peculiar system of
doctrine he deals with what is subjective in man, and reviews the whole
of his relation to God. His heresy turns mainly upon two points—the
assumed incorruptness of human nature, and the denial of all
supernatural influence upon the human will.

<span id="viii-p13"></span>§ 3. He had an early associate in Cœlestius,
a native of Campania, according to some, or as others say, of Ireland or
of Scotland. This man, who is said to have been highly connected, began
life as an advocate, but, influenced by the advice and example of
Pelagius, soon became a monk. He excelled his master in boldness and
energy; and thus early precipitated the new doctrine into a formal
dogmatism, from which the caution and subtler management of Pelagius
might have saved it. In the year <span class="c16"><span
id="viii-p13.1"></span>A.D.</span> 412 (Pelagius having just left him at
Carthage to go to Palestine), Cœlestius was accused before the bishop
Aurelius of holding and teaching the following opinions:

<span id="viii-p14"></span>1. Adam was created mortal, and must have
died, even if he had not sinned; 2. Adam’s sin injured himself only, and
not mankind; 3. Infants are born in the state of Adam before he fell; 4.
Mankind neither died in Adam, nor rose again in Christ; 5. The Law, no
less than the Gospel, brings men to the kingdom of heaven; 6. There were
sinless men before the coming of Christ. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) What Cœlestius thus boldly propounded,
he had the courage to maintain. On his refusal to retract, he was
excommunicated. He threatened, or perhaps actually though ineffectually
made, an appeal to Rome, and afterwards quitted Carthage for Ephesus.

<span id="viii-p16"></span>§ 4. Augustin, who had for some time been
occupied in the Donatist controversy, had as yet taken no personal part
in the proceedings against Cœlestius. Soon, however, was his attention
directed to the new opinions, and he wrote the first two treatises
contained in this volume, in the year when Cœlestius was excommunicated.
At first he treated Pelagius, as has been said, with deference and
forbearance, hoping by courtesy to recall him from danger. But as the
heresy developed, Augustin’s opposition was more directly and vigorously
exhibited. The gospel was being fatally tampered with, in its essential
facts of human sin and divine grace; so, in the fulness of his own
absolute loyalty to the entire volume of evangelical truth, he
concentrated his best efforts in opposition to the now formidable
heresy. It is perhaps not too much to say, that St. Augustin, the
greatest doctor of the Catholic Church, effected his greatness mainly by
his labours against Pelagianism. Other Christian writers besides
Augustin have achieved results of decisive influence on the Church and
its deposit of the Christian faith. St. Athanasius, “alone against the
world,” has often been referred to as a splendid instance of what
constancy, aided by God’s grace and a profound knowledge of theology,
could accomplish; St. Cyril of Alexandria, and St. Leo of Rome, might be
also quoted as signal proofs of the efficacy of catholic truth in
opposition to popular heresy: these men, under God, saved the Creed from
the ravages of Arianism, and the subtler injuries of Nestorius and
Eutyches. Then, again, in the curious learning of the primitive Irenæus;
in the critical skill, and wide knowledge, and indomitable labours of
Origen; in the catechetical teaching of the elder Cyril; in the chaste
descriptive power of Basil; in the simplicity and self-denial of
Ambrose; in the fervid eloquence of the “golden-mouthed” Chrysostom; in
the great learning of Jerome; in the scholastic accuracy of Damascene;
and in the varied sacred gifts of other Christian worthies, from the
impetuous Tertullian and the gentle Cyprian, with all the Gregories of
manifold endowments, down to the latest period of patristic wisdom,
graced by our own Anselm and the unrivalled preacher Bernard,—in all
these converging lines of diverse yet compatible accomplishments, the
Church of Christ has found, from age to age, ample reinforcements
against the attacks of heretical hostility. And in our great Bishop of
Hippo one may trace, operating on various occasions in his various
works, the manifold characteristics which we have just enumerated of his
brother saints,—with this difference, that in no one of them are found
combined the many traits which constitute *his* greatness. We have here
to do only with his anti-Pelagian writings. Upon the whole, perhaps,
these exhibit most of his wonderful resources of Christian character. In
many respects, one is reminded by him of the great apostle, whom he
reverenced, and whose profound doctrines he republished and vindicated.
He has himself, in several of his works, especially in his
*Confessions*, admitted us to a view of the sharp convulsions and bitter
conflicts through which he passed, before his regeneration, into the
Christian life, animated by the free and sovereign grace of God, and
adorned with his unflagging energies in works of faith and love. From
the depths of his own consciousness he instinctively felt the dangers of
Pelagianism, and he put forth his strength, as God enabled him, to meet
the evil; and the reader has in this volume samples in great variety of
the earnestness of his conflict with <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="viii-Page_5"></span>the new heresy and its leaders. These leaders he
has himself characterized: “*Ille* \[nempe Cœlestius\] *apertior, iste*
\[scilicet Pelagius\] *occultior fuit; ille pertinacior, iste mendacior;
vel certe ille liberior, hic astutior*;” <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) and illustrations of the general
correctness of this estimate will be forthcoming, especially in the
fourth treatise of this volume, where Cœlestius is dealt with, and in
the fifth, which relates to the subterfuges and pretexts practised by
Pelagius in his proceedings in Palestine.

<span id="viii-p18"></span>§ 5. The difference in the characters of the
two leaders in this heresy contributed to different results in their
earlier proceedings. We have seen the disastrous issue to Cœlestius at
Carthage, from his outspoken and unyielding conduct. The more reserved
Pelagius, resorting to a dexterous management of sundry favourable
circumstances, obtained a friendly hearing on two public occasions—at
Jerusalem, in the summer of <span class="c16"><span
id="viii-p18.1"></span>A.D.</span> 415, and again at the end of that
year, in a council of fourteen bishops, at Diospolis, the ancient Lydda.
In the last treatise of this volume, <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) the reader has a characteristic
narrative of these events from St. Augustin’s own pen. The holy man’s
disappointment at the untoward results of these two inquiries is
apparent; but he struggles to maintain his respect for the bishops
concerned in the affair, and comforts himself and all Catholics with the
assurance, which he thinks is warranted by the proceedings, that the
acquittal obtained by Pelagius, through the concealment of his real
opinions, amounted in fact to a condemnation of them. This volume
terminates with these transactions in Palestine; so that any remarks on
the decline and fall of Pelagianism proper must be postponed to a
subsequent volume.

<span id="viii-p20"></span>§ 6. St. Jerome as well as St. Augustin
engaged in this controversy, and experienced in the East some loss and
much danger from the rougher followers of Pelagius. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) It is not without interest that one
observes the difference of view entertained by these eminent men on the
general question of the Pelagian heresy. Augustin had but an imperfect
acquaintance with either the language or the writings of the Greek
Fathers, and had treated the Pelagian opinions as unheard-of novelties.
Jerome, however, who had acquired a competent knowledge of the Christian
literature of Greece during his long residence in the East, traced these
heretical opinions to the school of Origen, for whose memory he
entertained but scant respect. There is, no doubt, extravagance in
Jerome’s censure, but withal a foundation of truth. For from the
beginning there was a tendency at least to divergent views between the
Eastern and the Western sections of Christendom, on the relation of the
human will to the grace of God in the matter of man’s conversion and
salvation. On the general question, indeed, there was always substantial
agreement in the Catholic Church;—man, as he is born into the world, is
not in his originally perfect state; in order to be able to live
according to his original nature and to do good, he requires an inward
change by the almighty power of God. But this general agreement did not
hinder specific differences of opinion, which having been developed with
considerable regularity, in East and West respectively, admit of some
classification. The chief writers of the West, especially Tertullian and
Cyprian in the third century, and Hilary of Poitiers and (notably)
Ambrose in the fourth century, prominently state the doctrine of man’s
corruption, and the consequent necessity of a change of his nature by
divine grace; whilst the Alexandrian Fathers (especially Clement), and
other Orientals (for instance, Chrysostom), laid great stress upon human
freedom, and on the indispensable co-operation of this freedom with the
grace of God. By the fifth century these tendencies were ready to
culminate; they were at length precipitated to a decisive controversy.
In the Pelagian system, the liberty which had been claimed for man was
pushed to the heretical extreme of independence of God’s help; while
Augustin, in resisting this heresy, found it hard to keep clear of the
other extreme, of the absorption of human responsibility into the divine
sovereignty. Our author, no doubt, moves about on the confines of a deep
insoluble mystery here; but, upon the whole, it must be apparent to the
careful reader how earnestly he tries to maintain and vindicate man’s
responsibility even amidst the endowments of God’s grace.

<span id="viii-p22"></span>§ 7. Much has been written on the conduct of
the two leading opponents in this controversy. Sides (as usual) have
been taken, and extreme opinions of praise and of blame have been freely
bestowed on both Augustin and Pelagius. It is impossible, even were it
desirable, in this limited space to enter upon a question which, after
all, hardly rises above the dignity of mere *personalities*. The
orthodox bishop and the heretical monk have had their share of censure
as to their mode of conducting the controversy. Augustin has been taxed
with intolerance, Pelagius with duplicity. We are perhaps not in a
position to form an impartial judgment on the case. To begin with, the
evidence comes all from one side; and then the critics pass their
sentence according to the suggestions of modern prejudice, rather than
by the test of ancient contemporary facts, motives, and principles of
action. A good deal of obloquy has been cast on Augustin, as if he were
responsible for the Rescript of Honorius and its penalties; but this is
(to say the least) a conclusion which outruns the premises. We need say
nothing of the peril which seriously threatened true religion when the
half-informed bishops of Palestine, and the vacillating Pope, all gave
their hasty and ill-grounded approval to Pelagius, as a justification of
Augustin. He deeply felt the seriousness of the crisis, and he
unsheathed “the sword of the Spirit,” and dealt with it trenchant blows,
every one of which struck home with admirable precision; but it is not
proved that he ever wielded the civil sword of pains and penalties. Of
all theological writers in ancient, medieval, or earlier modern times,
<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="viii-Page_6"></span>it may be
fairly maintained that St. Augustin has shown himself the most
considerate, courteous, and charitable towards opponents. The reader
will trace with some interest the progress of his criticism on Pelagius.
From the forbearance and love which he gave him at first,  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) he passes slowly and painfully on to
censure and condemnation, but only as he detects stronger and stronger
proofs of insincerity and bad faith.

<span id="viii-p24"></span>§ 8. But whatever estimate we may form on the
score of their personal conduct, there can be no doubt of the bishop’s
superiority over the monk, when we come to gauge the value of their
principles and doctrines, whether tested by Scripture or by the great
facts of human nature. Concerning the test of Scripture, our assertion
will be denied by no one. No ancient Christian writer approaches near
St. Augustin in his general influence on the opinions and belief of the
Catholic Church, in its custody and interpretation of Holy Scripture;
and there can be no mistake either as to the Church’s uniform
guardianship of the Augustinian doctrine, taken as a whole, or as to its
invariable resistance to the Pelagian system, whenever and however it
has been reproduced in the revolutions of human thought. There cannot be
found in all ecclesiastical history a more remarkable fact than the
deference shown to the great Bishop of Hippo throughout Christendom, on
all points of salient interest connected with his name. Whatever basis
of doctrine exists in common between the great sections of Catholicism
and Protestantism, was laid at first by the genius and piety of St.
Augustin. In the conflicts of the early centuries he was usually the
champion of Scripture truth against dangerous errors. In the Middle Ages
his influence was paramount with the eminent men who built up the
scholastic system. In the modern Latin Church he enjoys greater
consideration than either Ambrose, or Hilary, or Jerome, or even Gregory
the Great; and lastly, and perhaps most strangely, he stands nearest to
evangelical Protestantism, and led the van of the great movement in the
sixteenth century, which culminated in the Reformation. How unique the
influence which directed the minds of Anselm, and Bernard, and Aquinas,
and Bonaventure, with no less power than it swayed the thoughts of
Luther, and Melanchthon, and Zuingle, and Calvin!

<span id="viii-p25"></span>§ 9. The key to this wonderful influence is
Augustin’s knowledge of Holy Scripture, and its profound suitableness to
the facts and experience of our entire nature. Perhaps to no one, not
excepting St. Paul himself, has it been ever given so wholly and so
deeply to suffer the manifold experiences of the human heart, whether of
sorrow and anguish from the tyranny of sin, or of spiritual joy from the
precious consolations of the grace of God. Augustin speaks with
authority here; he has traversed all the ground of inspired writ, and
shown us how true is its portraiture of man’s life. And, to pass on to
our last point, he has threaded the mazes of human consciousness; and in
building up his doctrinal system, has been, in the main, as true to the
philosophy of fact as he is to the statements of revelation. He appears
in as favourable a contrast to his opponent in his philosophy as in his
Scripture exegesis. We cannot, however, in the limits of this Preface,
illustrate this criticism with all the adducible proofs; but we may
quote one or two weak points which radically compromise Pelagius as to
the scientific bearings of his doctrine. By science we mean accurate
knowledge, which stands the test of the widest induction of facts. Now,
it has been frequently remarked that Pelagius is scientifically
defective in the very centre of his doctrine,—on the freedom of the
will. His theory, especially in the hands of his vigorous followers,
Cœlestius and Julianus, <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) ignored
the influence of habit on human volition, and the development of habits
from action, isolating human acts, making man’s power of choice (his
*liberum arbitrium*) a mere natural faculty, of physical, not moral
operation. How defective this view is,—how it impoverishes the moral
nature of man, strips it of the very elements of its composition, and
drops out of consideration the many facts of human life, which interlace
themselves in our experience as the very web and woof of moral
virtue,—is manifest to the students of Aristotle and Butler. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) Acts are not mere insulated atoms,
merely done, and then done with; but they have a relation to the will,
and an influence upon subsequent acts: and so acts generate habits, and
habits produce character, the formal cause of man’s moral condition. The
same defect runs through the Pelagian system. Passing from the subject
of human freedom, and the effect of action upon conduct and habit, we
come to Pelagius’ view of sin. According to him, Adam’s transgression
consisted in an isolated act of disobedience to God’s command; and our
sin now consists in the mere repetition and imitation of his offence.
There was no “original sin,” and consequently no hereditary guilt. Adam
stood alone in his transgression, and transmitted no evil taint to his
posterity, much less any tendency or predisposition to wrong-doing:
there was no doubt a bad example, but against this Pelagius complacently
set the happier examples of good and prudent men. *Isolation,* then, is
the principle of Pelagius and his school; *organization* is the
principle of true philosophy, as tested by the experience and
observation of mankind.

<span id="viii-p28"></span><span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="viii-Page_7"></span>§ 10. We have said enough, and we hope not
unfairly said it, to show that Pelagius was radically at fault in his
deductions, whether tested by divine revelation or human experience. How
superior to him in all essential points his great opponent was, will be
manifest to the reader of this volume. Not a statement of Scripture, nor
a fact of nature, does Augustin find it necessary to soften, or
repudiate, or ignore. Hence his writings are valuable in illustrating
the harmony between revelation and true philosophy; we have seen how
much of his far-seeing and eminent knowledge was owing to his own deep
convictions and discoveries of sin and grace; perhaps we shall not be
wrong in saying, that even to his opponents is due something of his
excellence. There can be no doubt that in Pelagius and Cœlestius, and
his still more able follower Julianus, of whom we shall hear in a future
volume, he had very able opponents—men of earnest character, acute in
observation and reasoning, impressed with the truth of their
convictions, and deeming it a fit occupation to rationalize the meaning
of Scripture in its bearings on human experience. There is a remarkable
peculiarity in this respect in the opinions of Pelagius. He accepted the
mysteries of *theology,* properly so called, with the most exemplary
orthodoxy. Nothing could be better than his exposition of the doctrine
of the Holy Trinity. But again we find him hemmed in with a perverse
isolation. The doctrine of the Trinity, according to him, stands alone;
it sheds no influence on man and his eternal interests; but in the
blessed Scripture, as read by Augustin, there is revealed to man a most
intimate relation between himself and God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, as his Creator, his Redeemer, and his Sanctifier. In
Pelagianism, then, we see a disjointed and unconnected theory,—a creed
which stands apart from practical life, and is not allowed to shape
man’s conduct,—a system, in short, which falls to pieces for want of the
coherence of the true “analogy of the faith” which worketh by love. By
exposing, therefore, this incompatibility in the doctrine of his
opponents, Augustin shows how irreconcilable are the deductions of their
Rationalism with the statements of Revelation. But Rationalism is not
confined to any one period. We live to see a bolder Rationalism, which,
unlike Pelagius’, is absolutely uncompromising in its aims, and (as must
be admitted) more consistent in its method. To institute the supremacy
of Reason, it destroys more or less the mysteries of Religion. All the
miraculous element of the gospel is discarded; God’s personal relation
to man in the procedures of grace, and man’s to God in the discipline of
repentance, faith, and love, are abolished: nay, the Divine Personality
itself merges into an impalpable, uninfluential Pantheism; while man’s
individual responsibility is absorbed into a mythical personification of
the race. The only sure escape from such a desolation as this, is to
recur to the good old paths of gospel faith—“*stare super antiquas
vias*.” Our directory for life’s journey through these is furnished to
us in Holy Scripture; and if an interpreter is wanted who shall be able
by competent knowledge and ample experience to explain to us any
difficulties of direction, we know none more suited for the purpose than
our St. Augustin.

<span id="viii-p29"></span>§ 11. But Rationalism is not always so
exaggerated as this: in its ordinary development, indeed, it stops short
of open warfare with Revelation, and (at whatever cost of logical
consistency) it will accommodate its discussions to the form of
Scripture. This adaptation gives it double force: there is its own
intrinsic principle of uncontrolled liberty in will and action, and
there is “the form of godliness,” which has weight with unreflective
Christians. Hence Pelagianism was undoubtedly popular: it offered
dignity to human nature, and flattered its capacity; and this it did
without virulence and with sincerity, under the form of religion. This
acquiescence of matter and manner gave it strength in men’s sympathies,
and has secured for it durability, seeing that there is plenty of it
still amongst us; as indeed there always has been, and ever will be, so
long as the fatal ambition of Eden ([Gen.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span id="viii-p29.1"></span>) shall
seduce men into a temper of rivalry with God. Writers like Paley (in his
*Evidences*) have treated of the triumph of Christianity over
difficulties of every kind. Of all the stumbling-blocks to the holy
religion of our blessed Saviour, not one has proved so influential as
its doctrine of <span class="c16"><span
id="viii-p29.2"></span>Grace</span>; the prejudice against it, by what
St. Paul calls “the natural man” ([1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="viii-p29.3"></span>), is
ineradicable—and, it may be added, inevitable: for in his independence
and self-sufficiency he cannot admit that in himself he is nothing, but
requires external help to rescue him from sin, and through imparted
holiness to elevate him to the perfection of the blessed. How great,
then, is the benefit which Augustin has accomplished for the gospel, in
probing the grounds of this natural prejudice against it, and showing
its ultimate untenableness—the moment it is tested on the deeper
principles of the divine appreciation! No, the ultimate effect of the
doctrine and operation of grace is not to depreciate the true dignity of
man. If there be the humbling process first, it is only that out of the
humility should emerge the exaltation at last ([1 Pet. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="viii-p29.4"></span>). I
know nothing in the whole range of practical or theoretical divinity
more beautiful than Augustin’s analysis of the procedures of grace, in
raising man from the depths of his sinful prostration to the heights of
his last and eternal elevation in the presence and fellowship of God.
The most ambitious, who thinks “man was not made for meanness,” might be
well content with the noble prospect. But his ambition must submit to
the conditions; and his capacity both for the attainment and the
fruition of such a destiny is given to him and trained by God Himself.
“It is so contrived,” says Augustin, “in the discipline of the present
life, that the holy Church shall arrive at last at that condition of
unspotted purity which all holy men desire; and that it may in the world
to come, and in a state unmixed with all soil of evil men, and
undisturbed by any law of sin resisting the law of the mind, lead the
purest life in a divine eternity.…But in whatever place and at what time
soever the love which animates the good shall reach that state of
absolute perfection which shall admit of no increase, it is certainly
not ‘shed abroad in our hearts’ <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="viii-Page_8"></span>by any energies either of the nature or the
volition that are within us, but ‘by the Holy Ghost which is given unto
us’ ([Rom. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="viii-p29.5"></span>), and which both helps our infirmity and
co-operates with our strength” (*On Nature and Grace*, chs. 74 and 84).

<span id="viii-p30"></span>§ 12. This translation has been made from the
(Antwerp) Benedictine edition of the works of St. Augustin, tenth
volume, compared with the beautiful reprint by Gaume. (Although left to
his own resources in making his version, the Translator has gladly
availed himself of the learned aid within his reach. He may mention the
*<span id="viii-p30.1"></span>Kirchengeschichte* both of Gieseler and
Neander \[Clark’s transl. vol. iv.\]; Wiggers’ *<span
id="viii-p30.2"></span>Versuch einer pragmatischen Darstellung des
Augustinismus und Pelagianismus* \[1st part\]; Shedd’s *Christian
Doctrine*; Cunningham’s *Historical Theology*; Short’s *Bampton
Lectures* for 1846 \[Lect. vii.\]; Professor Bright’s *History of the
Church* from <span class="c16"><span id="viii-p30.3"></span>A.D.</span>
313 to <span class="c16"><span id="viii-p30.4"></span>A.D.</span> 451;
Bishop Forbes’ *Explanation of the Thirty-nine Articles* \[vol. i.\];
Canon Robertson’s *History of the Christian Church*, vol. i. pp.
376–392; and especially Professor Mozley’s *Treatise on the Augustinian
Doctrine of Predestination*, ch. iii. iv. vi.; and Dr. Philip Schaff’s
excellent *History of the Christian Church* \[Clark, Edinburgh
1869 <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) \], vol. iii. pp.783–1028;
of which work Dr. Dorner’s is by no means exaggerated commendation: “It
is,” says he, “on account of the beauty of its descriptions, the lucid
arrangement of its materials, and the moderation of its decisions, a
very praiseworthy work” (Dorner’s *History of Protestant Theology*
\[Clark’s translation\], vol. ii. p. 449, note 2). This portion of Dr.
Schaff’s work is an expansion of his able and interesting article on the
*Pelagian Controversy* in the American *Bibliotheca Sacra* of May 1848.

<span id="viii-p32"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii-p32.1"></span>Peter Holmes.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[3:198](1050013.htm#fr_197) <span
id="viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p11"></span> It is satisfactory to observe how brief and
scanty are his “retractations” on the topics treated in the present
volume.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[4:199](1050013.htm#fr_198) <span
id="viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p15"></span> Marius Mercator mentions a seventh opinion
broached by Cœlestius, to the effect that “infants, though they be
unbaptized, have everlasting life.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[5:200](1050013.htm#fr_199) <span
id="viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p17"></span> *De Peccato originali*, \[xii.\] 13. See
below.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[5:201](1050013.htm#fr_200) <span
id="viii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii-p19"></span> \[i.e. *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*.\]

<span id="fn_201"></span>[5:202](1050013.htm#fr_201) <span
id="viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p21"></span> See the *Proceedings of Pelagius*, c. 66.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[6:203](1050013.htm#fr_202) <span
id="viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p23"></span> For some time Augustin abstained from
mentioning the name of Pelagius, to save him as much as he could from
exposure, and to avoid the irritation which might urge him to heresy
from obstinacy. Augustin recognised early enough the motive which
influenced Pelagius at first. The latter dreaded the Antinomianism of
the day, and concentrated his teaching in a doctrine which was meant as
a protest against it. “We would rather not do injustice to our friends,”
says Augustin, as he praises their “strong and active minds;” and he
goes on to commend Pelagius anonymously for “the zeal which he
entertains against those *who find a defence for their sins in the
infirmity of human nature*.” See the third treatise of this volume, *On
Nature and Grace*, ch. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[6:204](1050013.htm#fr_203) <span
id="viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p26"></span> We make this qualification, because Pelagius
himself seems to have recognised to some extent the power of habit and
its effect upon the will, in his Letter to Demetrias, 8. See Dr. Philip
Schaff’s *History of the Christian Church*, vol. iii. p. 804.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[6:205](1050013.htm#fr_204) <span
id="viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p27"></span> Aristotle, *Ethic. Nicom*. ii. 2, 3, 6;
Butler, *Analogy*, i. 5.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[8:206](1050013.htm#fr_205) <span
id="viii-p30.5"></span>

<span id="viii-p31"></span> \[Revised edition. Charles Scribner’s Sons,
New York, and T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1884.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to Volume II. Of the Edinburgh...](1050014)
