[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050013)  [Next](1050015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span> <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="ix-Page_9"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix-p1.1"></span>Preface to Volume II. Of the Edinburgh
Edition.</span>

<span id="ix-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="ix-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ix-p3.1"></span>This</span> volume contains a translation of the
three following treatises by St. Augustin on the Pelagian controversy:—

<span id="ix-p4"></span>*De Gratia Christi, et De Peccato originali
contra Pelagium et Cœlestium, ad Albinam, Pinianum, et Melaniam*; libri
duo, scripti anno Christi 418.

<span id="ix-p5"></span>*De Nuptiis et Concupiscentiâ ad Valerium
Comitem*; libri duo, scriptus alter circiter initium anni 419; alter
anno Christi 420.

<span id="ix-p6"></span>*De Animâ et ejus origine, contra Vincentium
Victorem*; libri quatuor, scriptus sub finem anni Christi 419.

<span id="ix-p7"></span>These, with the contents of our former volume,
comprise eight of the fifteen works contributed by the great author to
the defence of the Catholic faith against Pelagius and his most
conspicuous followers. The prefaces and chapter headings, which have
been, as heretofore, transferred to their proper places in this volume
from the Benedictine edition of the original, will afford the reader
preliminary help enough, and thus render more than a few general
prefatory remarks unnecessary here.

<span id="ix-p8"></span>The second book in the first of these treatises
adds some facts to the historical information contained in our preceding
volume; Pelagius is shown to be at one, in the main, with Cœlestius, the
bolder but less specious heretic. They were condemned everywhere—even at
Rome by Pope Zosimus, who had at first shown some favour to them. These
authoritative proceedings against them gave a sensible check to their
progress in public; there is, however, reason to believe that the
opinions, which the Pelagian teachers had with great industry, and with
their varied ability, propounded, had created much interest and even
anxiety in private society. The early part of the first of the following
treatises throws some light on this point, and on the artful methods by
which the heretics sought to maintain and extend their opinions; it
affords some evidence also of the widespread influence of St. Augustin.
The controversy had engaged the attention of a pious family in
Palestine; Pelagius was in the neighbourhood; and when frankly
questioned by the friends, he strongly protested his adherence to the
doctrine of <span class="c16"><span id="ix-p8.1"></span>Grace</span>. “I
anathematize,” he exclaimed with suspicious promptitude, “the man who
holds that the grace of God is not necessary for us at every moment and
in every act of our lives: and all who endeavour to disannul it, deserve
everlasting punishment.” It was an act of astonishing duplicity, which
Augustin, to whom the case was referred, soon detected and exposed. It
is satisfactory to find that the worthy Christians to whom the Saint
addressed his loving labour were confirmed in their simple faith; and in
one of the last of his extant letters, towards the close of his days on
earth, the venerable St. Jerome, in the course of the following year,
united the gratitude of Albina, Pinianus, and Melania, with his own to
his renowned brother in the west, whom he saluted as “the restorer of
the ancient faith.” “*Macte virtute,*” said the venerable man, “*in orbe
celebraris; et, quod signum majoris est gloriæ, omnes heretici
detestantur*.” \[Go on and prosper; the whole world endows thee with its
praise, and all heretics with their hatred.\]

<span id="ix-p9"></span>In the latter part of the first treatise in this
volume, one of the most formidable of the Pelagian objections to the
Catholic doctrine of original sin is thrown out against marriage:
“Surely that could not be a holy state, instituted of God, which
produced human beings in sin!” Augustin in a few weighty chapters
removes the doubts of his perplexed correspondents, and reserves his
strength for the full treatment of the subject in the second treatise,
here translated, *On Marriage and Concupiscence*. It is a noble monument
of his firm grasp of Scripture truth, his loyal adherence to its plain
meaning, and his delicate and, at the same time, intrepid handling of a
subject, which could only be touched by a man whose mind possessed a
deep knowledge of human nature—both in its moral and its physiological
aspects, and in its relations to God as affected by its creation, its
fall, and its redemption.

<span id="ix-p10"></span>This treatise introduces us to a change of
circumstances. The preceding one was, as we have seen, addressed to a
small group of simple believers in sacred truth, who were not personally
known to the author, and, though zealous in the maintenance of the
faith, occupied only a private place in society; but the present work
was written at the urgent request of a nobleman in high office as a
minister of state, and well known to the writer. It is pleasant to trace
a similar earnestness, in such dissimilar ranks, in the defence of the
assailed faith: and it illus<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="ix-Page_10"></span>trates the wide stretch of mind and comprehensive
love of Augustin, that he could so promptly sympathize with the
anxieties of all classes and conditions in the Christian life; and, what
is more, so administer comfort and conviction out of the treasures of
his wisdom, as to settle their doubts and reassure them in faith. Nor
does the change end here. Instead of Pelagius and Cœlestius, Augustin
has in this work to confute the powerful argument of Julianus, bishop of
Celanum, the ablest of his Pelagian opponents. This man was really the
mainstay of the heresy; he had greater resources of mind and a firmer
character than either of his associates;—more candid and sincere than
Pelagius, and less ambitious and impatient than Cœlestius, he seemed to
contend for truth for its own sake, and this disposition found a
complete response in the Church’s earnest and accomplished champion.
Notwithstanding the difficulty and delicacy of the subject, which
removes, no doubt, the treatise *De Nuptiis et Concupisentiâ* out of the
category of what is called “general reading,” the great author never did
a higher service to the faith than when he provided for it this defence
of a fundamental point. The venerable Jerome rejoiced at the good
service, and longed to embrace his brother Saint from his distant
retreat of Bethlehem. “*Testem invoco Deum*,” he wrote to Augustin, and
his dear friend and helper Alypius, “*quod si posset fieri, assumptis
alis columbæ, vestris amplexibus implicarer.*”

<span id="ix-p11"></span>In the last and longest work, translated for
this volume, we come upon a change, both of subject and circumstances,
as complete as that we have just noticed. Vincentius Victor, whose
unsafe opinions are reviewed, was a young African of great ability and
rhetorical accomplishment. His fluent tongue had fairly bewitched not
only crowds of thoughtless hearers, but staid persons, whose faith
should have been proof against a seductive influence which was soon
shown to be transient and flimsy. The young disputant seems to have been
more of a schismatic in the Donatist party, than a heretic with
Pelagius; showy, however, and unstable, and hardly weighing the
consequence of his own opinions, he began to air his metaphysics, and
soon fell into strange errors about the nature and origin of the human
soul. In his youthful arrogance he happened to censure Augustin for his
cautious teaching on so profound a subject; kindly does the aged bishop
receive the criticism, show its unreasonableness, and point out to his
rash assailant some serious errors which he was propounding at random.
He also reproves one of Victor’s friends, who happened to be a
presbyter, for allowing himself to be misled by the young man’s eloquent
sophistry; and in the latter half of his treatise, with fatherly love
and earnestness, he advises Victor to renounce his dangerous errors,
some of which were rankly Pelagian, and something worse. The result of
Augustin’s admonitions—adorned as they were with great depth and width
of reflection and knowledge (extending this time even to physical
science, on some facts of which he playfully comments with the ease of a
modern experimenter), with loving consideration for his opponent’s
inexperience, kindly deference to his undoubted abilities, and a pious
desire to win him over to the cause of truth and godliness—was entirely
satisfactory. We find from the *Retractations* (ii. 56), that Victor in
time abjured all his errors, and doubtless, like another Apollos, ably
employed his best powers in the service of true religion. This was a
real trophy, great among the greatest of Augustin’s achievements for
faith and charity. For so great a soul to stoop to the level of so
captious a spirit, and with industrious love and patience to trace out
and refute all its ambitious error, was “a labour of love” indeed. He
remembered the wise counsel of the apostle: “Count him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother;” and he reaped the victory the Saviour
promised: “Thou hast gained thy brother.”

<span id="ix-p12"></span>The translation, as in the former volume of the
Anti-Pelagian writings of our author, has been made from the tenth
volume of the Antwerp reprint of the Benedictine edition of St.
Augustin’s works.

<span id="ix-p13"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ix-p13.1"></span>Peter Holmes.</span>

<span id="ix-p14"></span>\[Volume III. of the Edinburgh edition appeared
without dedication or preface, in 1876. It contained translations of
Augustin’s treatises on *Grace and Free-Will, Rebuke and Grace, The
Predestination of the Saints, The Gift of Perseverance*, and of his work
*Against Two Letters of the Pelagians*. Of these, only the first was
from the pen of Dr. Holmes, the rest being the work of Dr. Robert Ernest
Wallis, whose name has been accordingly placed on the general titlepage
of this revision.—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise on the Merits and Forgiveness...](1050015)
