[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050793)  [Next](1050795) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 38 \[XXIV.\]—Victor’s Chief
Errors Again Pointed Out.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p2"></span>Wherefore if you take these books,
which I have with a sincere and affectionate interest written in answer
to your opinions, and read them with a reciprocal love for me; if you
attend to what you have yourself declared in the beginning of your first
book, and “are anxious not to insist on any opinion of your own, if it
be found an improbable one,” <span id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523)
then I beseech you to beware especially of those eleven errors which I
warned you of in the preceding book of this treatise. <span
id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) Do not say, that “the soul is of
God in such a sense that He created it not out of no, nor out of
another, but out of His own nature;” or that, “as God who gives is
Himself ever ex<span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-Page_371"></span>istent, so is He ever giving souls
through infinite time;” or that “the soul lost some merit through the
flesh, which it had previous to the flesh;” or that “the soul by means
of the flesh repairs its ancient condition, and is born again through
the very same flesh, by which it had deserved to be polluted;” or that
“the soul deserved to be sinful even prior to sin;” or that “infants who
die without the regeneration of baptism, may yet attain to forgiveness
of their original sins;” or that “they whom the Lord has predestinated
to be baptized can be taken away from His predestination, or die before
that has been accomplished in them which the Almighty had
predetermined;” or that “it is of those who expire before they are
baptized that the Scripture says, ‘Speedily was he taken away, lest
wickedness should alter his understanding,’”—with the remainder of the
passage to the same effect; or that “there are some mansions outside the
kingdom of God, belonging to the ‘many,’ which the Lord said were in His
Father’s house;” or that “the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ
ought to be offered in behalf of those who have departed out of the body
without being baptized;” or that “any of those persons who die without
Christ’s baptism, are received for a while into paradise, and afterwards
attain even to the blessedness of the kingdom of heaven.” Above all
things, beware of these opinions, my son, and, as you wish to be the
vanquisher of error, do not rejoice in the surname of “Vincentius.” And
when you are ignorant on any subject, do not think that you know it; but
in order to get real knowledge, learn how to be ignorant. For we commit
a sin by affecting to be ignorant of nothing among “the secret things of
God;” by constructing random theories about unknown things, and taking
them for known; and by producing and defending errors as if they were
truth. As for my own ignorance on the question whether the souls of men
are created afresh at every birth, or are transmitted by the parents (an
ignorance which is, however, modified by my belief, which it would be
impious to falter in, that they are certainly made by the Divine
Creator, though not of His own substance), I think that your loving self
will by this time be persuaded that it either ought not to be censured
at all, or, if it ought, that it should be done by a man who is capable
by his learning of removing it altogether; and so also with respect to
my other opinions, that while souls have in them the incorporeal
semblances of bodies, they are not themselves bodies; and that, without
impairing the natural distinction between soul and spirit, the soul is
in a general sense actually designated spirit. If, indeed, I have
unfortunately failed to persuade you, I must leave it rather to my
readers to determine whether what I have advanced ought not to have
convinced you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[370:2524](1050794.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p3"></span> See above in Book ii. 22
\[xvi.\].

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[370:2525](1050794.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxxviii-p4"></span> See Book iii., next to last
chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](1050795)
