[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050705)  [Next](1050707.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiv"></span> <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="xvii.iv.xxxiv-Page_330"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 34.—The Mistakes Which Must Be
Avoided by Those Who Say that Men’s Souls are Not Derived from Their
Parents, But are Afresh Inbreathed by God in Every Instance.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>All, therefore, who wish to maintain
that new souls are rightly said to be breathed into persons at their
birth, and not derived from their parents, must by all means be cautious
on each of the four points which I have already mentioned. That is to
say, do not let them affirm that souls become sinful by another’s
original sin; do not let them affirm that infants who died unbaptized
can possibly reach eternal life and the kingdom of heaven by the
remission of original sin in any other way whatever; do not let them
affirm that souls had sinned in some other place previous to their
incarnation, and that on this account they were forcibly introduced into
sinful flesh; nor let them affirm that the sins which were not actually
found in them were, because they were foreknown, deservedly punished,
although they were never permitted to reach that life where they could
be committed. Provided that they affirm none of these points, because
each of them is simply false and impious, they may, if they can, produce
any conclusive testimonies of the Holy Scriptures on this question; and
they may maintain their own opinion, not only without any prohibition
from me, but even with my approbation and best thanks. If, however, they
fail to discover any very decided authority on the point in the divine
oracles, and are obliged to propound any one of the four opinions by
reason of their failure, let them restrain their imagination, lest they
should be driven in their difficulty to enunciate the now damnable and
very recently condemned heresy of Pelagius, to the effect that the souls
of infants have not original sin. It is, indeed, better for a man to
confess his ignorance of what he knows nothing about, than either to run
into heresy which has been already condemned, or to found some new
heresy, while recklessly daring to defend over and over again opinions
which only display his ignorance. This man has made some other absurd
mistakes, indeed many, in which he has wandered out of the beaten track
of truth, without going, however, to dangerous lengths; and I would
like, if the Lord be willing, to write even to himself something on the
subject of his books; and probably I shall point them all out to him, or
a good many of them if I should be unable to notice all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](1050707.md)
