[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050459)  [Next](1050461) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5 \[IV.\]—Pelagius’ Own Account of the
Faculties, Quoted.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v-p2"></span>Lest, however, it should chance to be said
that we either do not correctly understand what he advances, or
malevolently pervert to another meaning what he never meant to bear such
a sense, I beg of you to consider his own actual words: “We
distinguish,” says he, “three things, arranging them in a certain
graduated order. We put in the first place ‘ability;’ in the second,
‘volition;’ and in the third, ‘actuality.’ <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) The ‘ability’ we place in our
nature, the ‘volition’ in our will, and the ‘actuality’ in the effect.
The first, that is, the ‘ability,’ properly belongs to God, who has
bestowed it on His creature; the other two, that is, the ‘volition’ and
the ‘actuality,’ must be referred to man, because they flow forth from
the fountain of the will. For his willing, therefore, and doing a good
work, the praise belongs to man; or rather both to man, and to God who
has bestowed on him the ‘capacity’ for his will and work, and who
evermore by the help of His grace assists even this capacity. That a man
is able to will and effect any good work, comes from God alone. So that
this one faculty can exist, even when the other two have no being; but
these latter cannot exist without that former one. I am therefore free
not to have either a good volition or action; but I am by no means able
not to have the capacity of good. This capacity is inherent in me,
whether I will or no; nor does nature at any time receive in this point
freedom for itself. Now the meaning of all this will be rendered clearer
by an example or two. That we are able to see with our eyes is not of
us; but it is our own that we make a good or a bad use of our eyes. So
again (that I may, by applying a general case in illustration, embrace
all), that we are able to do, say, think, any good thing, comes from Him
who has endowed us with this ‘ability,’ and who also assists this
‘ability;’ but that we really do a good thing, or speak a good word, or
think a good thought, proceeds from our own selves, because we are also
able to turn all these into evil. Accordingly,—and this is a point which
needs frequent repetition, because of your calumniation of us,—whenever
we say that a man can live without sin, we also give praise to God by
our acknowledgment of the capacity which we have received from Him, who
has bestowed such ‘ability’ upon us; and there is here no occasion for
praising the human agent, since it is God’s matter alone that is for the
moment treated of; for the question is not about ‘willing,’ or
‘effecting,’ but simply and solely about that which may possibly be.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[218:1790](1050460.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="xv.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v-p3"></span> \[The three terms here are, *posse,
velle, esse*.—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1050461)
