[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050499)  [Next](1050501) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.xlv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45 \[XLI.\]—To What Purpose Pelagius
Thought Prayers Ought to Be Offered.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.xlv-p2"></span>“Let them also read,” says he, “my
recent little treatise which we were obliged to publish a short while
ago in defence of free will, and let them acknowledge how unfair is
their determination to disparage us for a denial of grace, when we
throughout almost the whole work acknowledge fully and sincerely both
free will and grace.” There are four books in this treatise, all of
which I read, marking such passages as required consideration, and which
I proposed to discuss: these I examined as well as I was able, before we
came to that epistle of his which was sent to Rome. But even in these
four books, that which he seems to regard as the grace which helps us to
turn aside from evil and to do good, he describes in such a manner as to
keep to his old ambiguity of language, and thus have it in his power so
to explain to his followers, that they may suppose the assistance which
is rendered by grace, for the purpose of helping our natural capacity,
consists of nothing else than the law and the teaching. Thus our <span
id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="xv.iii.xlv-Page_232"></span>very
prayers (as, indeed, he most plainly affirms in his writings) are of no
other use, in his opinion, than to procure for us the explanation of the
teaching by a divine revelation, not to procure help for the mind of man
to perfect by love and action what it has learned should be done. The
fact is, he does not in the least relinquish that very manifest dogma of
his system in which he sets forth those three things, capacity,
volition, action; maintaining that only the first of these, the
capacity, is favoured with the constant assistance of divine help, but
supposing that the volition and the action stand in no need of God’s
assistance. Moreover, the very help which he says assists our natural
capacity, he places in the law and teaching. This teaching, he allows,
is revealed or explained to us by the Holy Ghost, on which account it is
that he concedes the necessity of prayer. But still this assistance of
law and teaching he supposes to have existed even in the days of the
prophets; whereas the help of grace, which is properly so called, he
will have to lie simply in the example of Christ. But this example, you
can plainly see, pertains after all to “teaching,”—even that which is
preached to us as the gospel. The general result, then, is the pointing
out, as it were, of a road to us by which we are bound to walk, by the
powers of our free will, and needing no assistance from any one else,
may suffice to ourselves not to faint or fail on the way. And even as to
the discovery of the road itself, he contends that nature alone is
competent for it; only the discovery will be *more* easily effected if
grace renders assistance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1050501)
