[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050873)  [Next](1050875) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—All Righteous Men Before and
After Abraham are Children of the Promise and of Grace.</span>

<span id="xviii.v.viii-p2"></span>Whether, then, Abraham, or righteous
men before him or after him, even to Moses himself, by whom was given
the testament gendering to bondage from Mount Sinai, or the rest of the
prophets after him, and the holy men of God till John the Baptist, they
are all children of the promise and of grace according to Isaac the son
of the freewoman,—not of the law, but of the promise, heirs of God and
joint-heirs with Christ. Far be it from us to deny that righteous Noah
and the righteous men of the earlier times, and whoever from that time
till the time of Abraham could be righteous, either manifestly or
hiddenly, belong to the Jerusalem which is above, who is our mother,
although they are found to be earlier in time than Sarah, who bore the
prophecy and figure of the free mother herself. How much more evidently,
then, after Abraham, to whom that promise was declared, that he should
be called the father of many nations, must all, whoever have pleased
God, be esteemed the children of the promise! For from Abraham, and the
righteous men who followed him, the generation is not found more true,
but the prophecy more plain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050875)
