[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050080)  [Next](1050082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.lxiii"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 63 \[XXXIV.\]—The Form, or Rite, of
Baptism. Exorcism.</span>

<span id="x.iii.lxiii-p2"></span>What shall I say of the actual form of
this sacrament? I only wish some one of those who espouse the contrary
side would bring me an infant to be baptized. What does my exorcism work
in that babe, if he be not held in the devil’s family? The man who
brought the infant would certainly have had to act as sponsor for him,
for he could not answer for himself. How would it be possible then for
him to declare that he renounced the devil, if there was no devil in
him? that he was converted to God, if he had never been averted from
Him? that he believed, besides other articles, in the forgiveness of
sins, if no sins were attributable to him? For my own part, indeed, if I
thought that his opinions were opposed to this faith, I could not permit
him to bring the infant to the sacraments. Nor can I imagine with what
countenance before men, or what mind before God, he can conduct himself
in this. But I do not wish to say anything too severe. That a false or
fallacious form of baptism should be administered to infants, in which
there might be the sound and semblance of something being done, but yet
no remission of sins actually ensue, has been seen by some amongst them
to be as abominable and hateful a thing as it was possible to mention or
conceive. Then, again, in respect of the necessity of baptism to
infants, they admit that even infants stand in need of redemption,—a
concession which is made in a short treatise written by one of their
party,—but yet there is not found in this work any open admission of the
forgiveness of a single sin. According, however, to an intimation
dropped in your letter to me, they now acknowledge, as you say, that a
remission of sins takes place even in infants through baptism. No
wonder; for it is impossible that *redemption* should be understood in
any other way. Their own words are these: “It is, however, not
originally, but in their own actual life, after they have been born,
that they have begun to have sin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 64](1050082.md)
