[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050762)  [Next](1050764) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7 \[VI.\]—We Often Need More
Teaching as to What is Most Intimately Ours Than as to What is Further
from Us.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.vii-p2"></span>But I have to put to you a far wider
question arising out of our subject. Why should only a very few know why
all men do what they do? Perhaps you will tell me, Because they have
learnt the art of anatomy or experiment, which are both comprised in the
physician’s education, which few obtain, while others have refused to
acquire the information, although they might, of course, if they had
liked. Here, then, I say nothing of the point why many try to acquire
this information, but cannot, because they are hindered by a slow
intellect (which, however, is a very strange fact) from learning of
others what is done by their own selves and in their own selves. But
this is a very important question which I now ask, Why I should have no
need of art to know that there is a sun in the heavens, and a moon, and
other stars; but must have the aid of art to know, on moving my finger,
whence the act begins,—from the heart, or the brain, or from both, or
from neither: why I do not require a teacher to know what is so much
higher than me; but must yet wait for some one else to learn whence that
is done by me which is done within me? For although we are said to think
in our heart, and although we know what our thoughts are, without the
knowledge of any other person, yet we know not in what part of the body
we have the heart itself, where we do our thinking, unless we are taught
it by some other person, who yet is ignorant of what we think. I am not
unaware that when we hear that we should love God with our whole heart,
this is not said of that portion of our flesh which lies under our ribs,
but of that power that originates our thoughts. And this is properly
designated by this name, because, as motion does not cease in the heart
whence the pulsation of the veins radiates in every direction, so in the
process of thought we do not rest in the act itself and abstain from
further pondering. But although every sensation is imparted even to the
body by the soul, how is it that we can count our external limbs, even
in the dark and with closed eyes, by the bodily sense which is called
“touch,” but we know nothing of our internal functions in the very
central region of the soul itself, where that power is present which
imparts life and animation to all else,—a mystery this which, I
apprehend, no medical men of any kind, whether empirics, or anatomists,
or dogmatists, or methodists, <span id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463)
or any man living, have any knowledge of?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[357:2464](1050763.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="xvii.vii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.vii-p3"></span> \[The names of these various medical
schools may be found explained in the article “Medicine” in the ninth
edition of the *Encyclopædia Britannica*, vol. xv. See especially p.
802.—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1050764)
