[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050890)  [Next](1050892.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25 \[IX.\]—He Shows that the
Opinion of the Catholics is the Mean Between that of the Manicheans and
Pelagians, and Refutes Both.</span>

<span id="xviii.v.xxv-p2"></span>But since, in these five particulars
which I have set forth, in which they seek lurking-places, and from
which they weave misrepresentations, they are forsaken and convicted by
the divine writings, they have thought to deter those whom they could by
the hateful name of Manicheans, lest in opposition to their most
perverse teachings their ears should be conformed to the truth; because
doubtless the Manicheans blasphemously condemn the three former of those
five dogmas, saying that neither the human creature, nor <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="xviii.v.xxv-Page_415"></span>marriage, nor the law was ordained by
the supreme and true God. But they do not receive what the truth says,
that sin took its origin from free will, and that all evil, whether of
angel or man, comes from it; because they prefer to believe, in their
turning aside from God, that the nature of evil was always evil, and
co-eternal with God. They, moreover, attack the holy patriarchs and
prophets with as many execrations as they can. This is the way in which
the modern heretics think, that by objecting the name of Manicheans,
they evade the force of truth. But they do not evade it; because it
follows them up, and overturns at once Manicheans and Pelagians. For in
that when a man is born there is something good, so far as he is a man,
he condemns the Manichean, and praises the Creator; but in so far as he
derives original sin, he condemns the Pelagian, and holds a Saviour
necessary. For even because that nature is said to be *healable*, it
repels both teachings; because it would not, on the one hand, have need
of medicine if it were sound, which is opposed to the Pelagian, nor
could it be healed at all if the evil in it were eternal and immutable,
which is opposed to the Manichean. Moreover, in that to marriage, which
we praise as ordained of God, we do not say that the concupiscence of
the flesh is to be attributed, this is both contrary to the Pelagians,
who make this concupiscence itself a matter of praise, and contrary to
the Manicheans, who attribute it to a foreign and evil nature, when it
really is an evil accidental to our nature, not to be separated by the
disjunction from God, but to be healed by the mercy of God. Moreover, in
that we say that the law, holy and just and good, was given not for the
justification of the wicked, but for the conviction of the proud, for
the sake of transgressions,—this is, on the one hand, opposed to the
Manicheans, in that according to the apostle the law is praised; and on
the other opposed to the Pelagians, in that, in accordance with the
apostle, no one is justified by the law; and therefore, for the sake of
making alive those whom the letter has killed, that is, whom the law,
enjoining good, makes guilty by transgressions, the Spirit of grace
freely brings aid. Also in that we say that the will is free in evil,
but for doing good it must be made free by God’s grace, this is opposed
to the Pelagians; but in that we say it originated from that which
previously was not evil, this is opposed to the Manicheans. Again, that
we honour the holy patriarchs and prophets with praises due to them in
God, is in opposition to the Manicheans; but that we say that even to
them, however righteous and pleasing to God they might have been, the
propitiation of the Lord was necessary, this is in opposition to the
Pelagians. The catholic faith, therefore, finds them both, as it does
also other heretics, in opposition to it, and convicts both by the
authority of the divine testimonies and by the light of truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1050892.md)
