[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050612)  [Next](1050614) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.vii-p2"></span>He has next adduced that passage of
ours, wherein we said: “For there would have been none of this
shame-producing concupiscence, which is impudently praised by impudent
men, if man had not previously sinned; while as to marriage, it would
still have existed, even if no man had sinned: for the procreation of
children would have been effected without this disease.” Up to this
point he cited my words; but he shrank from adding what comes next—“in
the body of that chaste life, although without it this cannot be done in
‘the body of this death.’” He would not complete my sentence, but
mutilated it somewhat, because he dreaded the apostle’s exclamation, of
which my words gave him a reminder: “O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.” <span id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) For the
body of this death existed not in paradise before sin; therefore did we
say, “In the body of that chaste life,” which was the life of paradise,
“the procreation of children could have been effected without the
disease, without <span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.vii-Page_285"></span>which now in the body of this death it
cannot be done.” The apostle, however, before arriving at that mention
of man’s misery and God’s grace which we have just quoted, had first
said: “I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
members.” Then it is that he exclaimed, “O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.” In the body of this death, therefore, such as it
was in paradise before sin, there certainly was not “another law in our
members warring against the law of our mind”—which now, even when we are
unwilling, and withhold consent, and use not our members to fulfil that
which it desires, still dwells in these members, and harasses our
resisting and repugnant mind. And this conflict in itself, although not
involving condemnation, because it does not consummate sin, is
nevertheless “wretched,” inasmuch as it has no peace. I think, then,
that I have shown you clearly enough that this man had a special object
as well as method in quoting my words: he adduced them for refutation in
such manner as in some instances to interrupt the context of my
sentences by removing what stood between them, and in other instances to
curtail them by withdrawing their concluding words; and his reason for
doing all this I think I have sufficiently explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[284:2201](1050613.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="xvi.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.vii-p3"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="xvi.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1050614)
