[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050526)  [Next](1050528.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16 \[XV.\]—Pelagius’ Fraudulent and
Crafty Excuses.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xvi-p2"></span>For what is the significance to the
matter with which we now have to do of his answers to his followers,
when he tells them that “the reason why he condemned the points which
were objected against him, is because he himself maintains that primal
sin was injurious not only to the first man, but to the whole human
race, not by transmission, but by example;” in other words, not because
those who have been propagated from him have derived any fault from him,
but because all who afterwards have sinned, have imitated him who
committed the first sin? Or when he says that “the reason why infants
are not in the same state in which Adam was before the transgression, is
because they are not yet able to receive the commandment, whereas he was
able; and because they do not yet make use of that choice of a rational
will which he certainly made use of, since otherwise no commandment
would have been given to him”? How does such an exposition as this of
the points alleged against him justify him in thinking that he rightly
condemned the propositions, “Adam’s sin injured only himself, and not
the whole race of man;” and “infants at their birth are in the self-same
state in which Adam was before he sinned;” and that by the said
condemnation he is not guilty of deceit in holding such opinions as are
found in his subsequent writings, how that “infants are born without any
evil or fault, and that there is nothing in them but what God has
formed,”—no wound, in short, inflicted by an enemy?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1050528.md)
