[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050585)  [Next](1050587) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="xvi.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21 \[XIX.\]—Thus Sinners are Born of
Righteous Parents, Even as Wild Olives Spring from the Olive.</span>

<span id="xvi.v.xxi-p2"></span>That, therefore, which is born of the
lust of the flesh is really born of the world, and not of God; but it is
born of God, when it is born again of water and of the Spirit. The guilt
of this concupiscence, regeneration alone remits, even as natural
generation contracts it. What, then, is generated must be regenerated,
in order that likewise since it cannot be otherwise, what has been
contracted may be remitted. It is, no doubt, very wonderful that what
has been remitted in the parent should still be contracted in the
offspring; but nevertheless such is the case. That this mysterious
verity, which unbelievers neither see nor believe, might get some
palpable evidence in its support, God in His providence has secured in
the example of certain trees. For why should we not suppose that for
this very purpose the wild olive springs from the olive? Is it not
indeed credible that, in a thing which has been created for the use of
mankind, the Creator provided and appointed what should afford an
instructive example, applicable to the human race? It is a wonderful
thing, then, how those who have been themselves delivered by grace from
the bondage of sin, should still beget those who are tied and bound by
the self-same chain, and who require the same process of loosening? Yes;
and we admit the wonderful fact. But that the embryo of wild olive trees
should latently exist in the germs of true olives, who would deem
credible, if it were not proved true by experiment and observation? In
the same manner, therefore, as a wild olive grows out of the seed of the
wild olive, and from the seed of the true olive springs also nothing but
a wild olive, notwithstanding the very great difference there is between
the wild olive and the olive; so what is born in the flesh, either of a
sinner or of a just man, is in both instances a sinner, notwithstanding
the vast distinction which exists between the sinner and the righteous
man. He that is begotten is no sinner as yet in act, and is still new
from his birth; but in guilt he is old. Human from the Creator, he is a
captive of the destroyer, and needs a redeemer. The difficulty, however,
is how a state of captivity can possibly befall the offspring, when the
parents have been themselves previously redeemed from it. Now it is no
easy matter to unravel this intricate point, or to explain it in a set
discourse; therefore unbelievers refuse to accept it as true; just as if
in that other point about the wild olive and the olive, which we gave in
illustration, any reason could be easily found, or explanation clearly
given, why the self-same shoot should sprout out of so dissimilar a
stock. The truth, <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span
id="xvi.v.xxi-Page_273"></span>however, of this can be discovered by any
one who is willing to make the experiment. Let it then serve for a good
example for suggesting belief of what admits not of ocular
demonstration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1050587)
