[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050441)  [Next](1050443.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.lxi"></span>

<span id="xiv.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.lxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 57 \[XXXII.\]—Fraudulent Practices
Pursued by Pelagius in His Report of the Proceedings in Palestine, in
the Paper Wherein He Defended Himself to Augustin.</span>

<span id="xiv.lxi-p2"></span>There is yet another point which I must not
pass over in silence. In the paper containing his defence which he sent
to me by a friend of ours, one Charus, a citizen of Hippo, but a deacon
in the Eastern Church, he has made a statement which is different from
what is contained in the Proceedings of the Bishops. Now, these
Proceedings, as regards their contents, are of a higher and firmer tone,
and more straightforward in defending the catholic verity in opposition
to this heretical pestilence. For, when I read this paper of his,
previous to receiving a copy of the Proceedings, I was not aware that he
had made use of those words which he had used at the trial, when he was
present for himself; they are few, and there is not much discrepancy,
and they do not occasion me much anxiety. \[XXXIII.\] But I could not
help feeling annoyance that he can appear to have defended sundry
sentences of Cœlestius, which, from the Proceedings, it is clear enough
that he anathematized. Now, some of these he disavowed for himself,
simply remarking, that “he was not in any way responsible for <span
id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span id="xiv.lxi-Page_208"></span>them.” In
his paper, however, he refused to anathematize these same opinions,
which are to this effect: “That Adam was created mortal, and that he
would have died whether he had sinned or not sinned. That Adam’s sin
injured only himself, and not the human race. That the law, no less than
the gospel, leads us to the kingdom. That new-born infants are in the
same condition that Adam was before he fell. That, on the one hand, the
entire human race does not die owing to Adam’s death and transgression;
nor, on the other hand, does the whole human race rise again through the
resurrection of Christ. That infants, even if they die unbaptized, have
eternal life. That rich men, even if they are baptized, unless they
renounce and give up all, have, whatever good they may seem to have
done, nothing of it reckoned to them; neither shall they possess the
kingdom of heaven.” Now, in his paper, the answer which he gives to all
this is: “All these statements have not been made by me, even on their
own testimony, nor do I hold myself responsible for them.” In the
Proceedings, however, he expressed himself as follows on these points:
“They have not been made by me, as even their testimony shows, and for
them I do not feel that I am at all responsible. But yet, for the
satisfaction of the holy synod, I anathematize those who either now
hold, or have ever held, them.” Now, why did he not express himself thus
in his paper also? It would not, I suppose, have cost much ink, or
writing, or delay; nor have occupied much of the paper itself, if he had
done this. Who, however, can help believing that there is a purpose in
all this, to pass off this paper in all directions as an abridgment of
the Episcopal Proceedings. In consequence of which, men might think that
his right still to maintain any of these opinions which he pleased had
not been taken away,—on the ground that they had been simply laid to his
charge but had not received his approbation, nor yet had been
anathematized and condemned by him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 58](1050443.md)
