[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050684)  [Next](1050686.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13 \[XI.\]—The Sacrifice of the
Body and Blood of Christ Will Not Avail for Unbaptized Persons, and Can
Not Be Offered for the Majority of Those Who Die Unbaptized.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xiii-p2"></span>But even if it be conceded to this man
(what cannot by any means be allowed with safety to the catholic faith
and the rule of the Church), that the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ may be offered for unbaptized persons of every age, as if they
were to be helped by this kind of piety on the part of their friends to
reaching the kingdom of heaven: what will he have to say to our
objections respecting the thousands of infants who are born of impious
parents and never fall, by any mercy of God or man, into the hands of
pious friends, and who depart from that wretched life of theirs at their
most tender age without the washing of regeneration? Let him tell us, if
he only can, how it is that those souls deserved to be made sinful to
such a degree as certainly never afterwards to be delivered from sin.
For if I ask him why they deserve to be condemned if they are not
baptized, he will rightly answer me: On account of original sin. If I
then inquire whence they derived original sin, he will answer, From
sinful flesh, of course. If I go on to ask why they deserved to be
condemned to a sinful flesh, seeing they had done no evil before they
came in the flesh, and to be so condemned to undergo the contagion of
the sin of another, that neither baptism shall regenerate them, born as
they are in sin, nor sacrifices expiate them in their pollution: let him
find something to reply to this! For in such circumstances and of such
parents have these infants been born, or are still being born, that it
is not possible for them to be reached with such help. Here, at any
rate, all argument is lacking. Our question is not, why souls have
deserved to be condemned subsequently to their consorting with sinful
flesh? But we ask, how it is that souls have deserved to be condemned to
undergo at all this association with sinful flesh, seeing that they have
no sin previous to this association. There is no room for him to say:
“It was no detriment to them that they shared for a season the contagion
of another’s sin, since in the prescience of God redemption had been
provided for them.” For we are now speaking of those to whom no
redemption brings help, since they depart from the body before they are
baptized. Nor is there any propriety in his saying: “The souls which
baptism does not cleanse, the many sacrifices which are offered up for
them will cleanse. God foreknew this, and willed that they should for a
little while be implicated in the sins of another without incurring
eternal damnation, and with the hope of eternal happiness.” For we are
now speaking of those whose birth among impious persons and of impious
parents could by no possibility find such defences and helps. And even
if these could be applied, they would, it is certain, be unable to
benefit any who are unbaptized; just as the sacrifices which he has
mentioned out of the book of the Maccabees could be of no use for the
sinful dead for whom they were offered, inasmuch as they had not been
circumcised. <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[320:2350](1050685.htm#fr_2349.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xiii-p3"></span> [2 Maccabees
12.43](../../../bib/apo/ma2012.htm#043.md)<span
id="xvii.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1050686.md)
