[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050743)  [Next](1050745) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12 \[IX.\]—His Sixth Error. (See
Above in Book I. 10-12 \[IX., X.\], and in Book II. 13, 14 \[IX.,
X.\].)</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p2"></span>If you wish to be a catholic, refrain
from believing, or saying, or teaching that “infants which are
forestalled by death before they are baptized may yet attain to
forgiveness of their original sins.” For the examples by which you are
misled—that of the thief who confessed the Lord upon the cross, or that
of Dinocrates the brother of St. Perpetua—contribute no help to you in
defence of this erroneous opinion. As for the thief, although in God’s
judgment he might be reckoned among those who are purified by the
confession of martyrdom, yet you cannot tell whether he was not
baptized. For, to say nothing of the opinion that he might have been
sprinkled with the water which gushed at the same time with the blood
out of the Lord’s side, <span id="fr_2444"></span>[2445](#fn_2444) as he
hung on the cross next to Him, and thus have been washed with a baptism
of the most sacred kind, what if he had been baptized in prison, as in
after times some under persecution were enabled privately to obtain? or
what if he had been baptized previous to his imprisonment? If, indeed,
he had been, the remission of his sins which he would have received in
that case from God would not have protected him from the sentence of
public law, so far as appertained to the death of the body. What if,
being already baptized, he had committed the crime and incurred the
punishment of robbery and lawlessness, but yet received, by virtue of
repentance added to his baptism, forgiveness of the sins which, though
baptized, he had committed? For beyond doubt his faith and piety
appeared to the Lord clearly in his heart, as they do to us in his
words. If, indeed, we were to conclude that all those who have quitted
life without a record of their baptism died unbaptized, we should
calumniate the very apostles themselves; for we are ignorant when they
were, any of them, baptized, except the Apostle Paul. <span
id="fr_2445"></span>[2446](#fn_2445) If, however, we could regard as an
evidence that they were really baptized the circumstance of the Lord’s
saying to St. Peter, “He that is washed needeth not save to wash his
feet,” <span id="fr_2446"></span>[2447](#fn_2446) what are we to think
of the others, of whom we do not read even so much as this,—Barnabas,
Timothy, Titus, Silas, Philemon, the very evangelists Mark and Luke, and
innumerable others, about whose baptism God forbid that we should
entertain any doubt, although we read no record of it? As for
Dinocrates, he was a child of seven years of age; and as children who
are baptized so old as that can now recite the creed and answer for
themselves in the usual examination, I know not why he may not be
supposed after his baptism to have been recalled by his unbelieving
father to the sacrilege and profanity of heathen worship, and for this
reason to have been condemned to the pains from which he was liberated
at his sister’s intercession. For in the account of him you have never
read, either that he was never a Christian, or died a catechumen. But
for the matter of that, the account itself that we have of him does not
occur in that canon of Holy Scripture whence in all questions of this
kind our proofs ought always to be drawn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2444"></span>[348:2445](1050744.htm#fr_2444) <span
id="xvii.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p3"></span> [John xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2445"></span>[348:2446](1050744.htm#fr_2445) <span
id="xvii.vi.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p4"></span> [Acts ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#018)<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2446"></span>[348:2447](1050744.htm#fr_2446) <span
id="xvii.vi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p5"></span> [John xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)<span id="xvii.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1050745)
