[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050744)  [Next](1050746) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13 \[X\]—His Seventh Error. (See
Above in Book II. 13 \[IX.\].)</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xiii-p2"></span>If you wish to be a catholic, do not
venture to believe, to say, or to teach that “they whom the Lord has
predestinated for baptism can be snatched away from his predestination,
or die before that has been accomplished in them which the Almighty has
predestined.” There is in such a dogma more power than I can tell
assigned to chances in opposition to the power of God, by the occurrence
of which casualties that which He has predestinated is not permitted to
come to pass. It is hardly necessary to spend time or earnest words in
cautioning the man who takes up with this error against the absolute
vortex of confusion into which it will absorb him, when I shall
sufficiently meet the case if I briefly warn the prudent man who is
ready to receive correction against the threatening mischief. Now these
are your words: “We say that some such method as this must be had
recourse to in the case of infants who, being predestinated for baptism,
are yet, by the failing of this life, hurried away before they are born
again in Christ.” Is it then really true that any who have been
predestinated to baptism are forestalled before they come to it by the
failing of this life? And could God predestinate anything which He
either in His foreknowledge saw would not come to pass, or in ignorance
knew not that it could not come to pass, either to the frustration of
His purpose or the discredit of His foreknowledge? You see how many
weighty remarks might be made on this subject; but I am restrained by
the fact of having treated on it a little while ago, so that I content
myself with this brief and passing admonition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1050746)
