[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050673)  [Next](1050675.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2 \[II.\]—He Receives with a Kindly
and Patient Feeling the Books of a Young and Inexperienced Man Who Wrote
Against Him in a Tone of Arrogance. Vincentius Victor Converted from the
Sect of the Rogatians.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.ii-p2"></span>I am somewhat pained, however, at being
thus far less understood by your Holiness than I should like to be;
forasmuch as you supposed that I should so receive your communication,
as if you did me an injury, by making known to me what another had done.
You may see, indeed, how far this feeling is from my mind, in that I
have no complaint to make of having suffered <span id="page_316">p.
316</span> <span id="xvii.iv.ii-Page_316"></span>any wrong even from
him. For, when he entertained views different from my own, was he bound
to preserve silence? It ought, no doubt, to be even pleasant to me, that
he broke silence in such a way as to put it in our power to read what he
had to say. He ought, I certainly think, to have written simply to me,
rather than to another concerning me; but as he was unknown to me, he
did not venture to intrude personally on me in refuting my words. He
thought there was no necessity for applying to me in a matter on which
he seemed to himself least of all liable to be doubted,  <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343.md) but to be holding a perfectly
well-known and certain opinion. He moreover, acted in obedience to a
friend of his by whom he tells us he was compelled to write. And if he
expressed any sentiment during the controversy which was contumelious to
me, I would prefer supposing that he did this, not with any wish to
treat me with incivility, but from the necessity of thinking differently
from me. For in all cases where a person’s *animus* towards one is
indeterminate and unknown, I think it better to suppose the existence of
the kindlier motive, than to find fault with an undiscovered one.
Perhaps, too, he acted from love to me, as knowing that what he had
written might possibly reach me; being at the same time unwilling that I
should be in error on such points as he especially thinks himself to be
free from error regarding. I ought, therefore, to be grateful for his
kindness, although I feel obliged to disapprove of his opinion.
Accordingly, as regards the points on which he does not entertain right
views, he appears to me to deserve gentle correction rather than severe
disapproval; more especially because, if I am rightly informed, he has
lately become a catholic—a matter in which he is to be congratulated.
For he has freed himself from the schism and errors of the Donatists (or
rather the Rogatists) in which he was previously implicated; and if he
understands the catholic verity as he ought, we may really rejoice at
his conversion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[316:2344](1050674.htm#fr_2343.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.ii-p3"></span> \[The Edinburgh translator conjectures
*minime dubitandam* here: “on which he seemed to himself to be holding
no doubtful, but a perfectly well-known and certain opinion.”—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1050675.md)
