[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050852)  [Next](1050854) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11 \[VI.\]—The Accusation of Fate
is Thrown Back Upon the Adversaries.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xi-p2"></span>But is it true, O children of pride,
enemies of God’s grace, new Pelagian heretics, that whoever says that
all man’s good deservings are preceded by God’s grace, and that God’s
grace is not given to merits, lest it should not be grace if it is not
given freely but be repaid as due to those who deserve it, seems to you
to assert fate? <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="xviii.iv.xi-Page_396"></span>Do not you yourselves also say,
whatever be your purpose, that baptism is necessary for all ages? Have
you not written in this very letter of yours that opinion concerning
baptism, and that concerning grace, side by side? Why did not baptism,
which is given to infants, by that very juxtaposition admonish you what
you ought to think concerning grace? For these are your words: “We
confess that baptism is necessary for all ages, and that grace,
moreover, assists the good purpose of everybody; but yet that it does
not infuse the love of virtue into a reluctant one, because there is no
acceptance of persons with God.” In all these words of yours, I for the
meanwhile say nothing of what you have said concerning grace. But give a
reason concerning baptism, why you should say that it is necessary for
all ages; say why it is necessary for infants. Assuredly because it
confers some good upon them; and that same something is neither small
nor moderate, but of great account. For although you deny that they
contract the original sin which is remitted in baptism, yet you do not
deny that in that laver of regeneration they are adopted from the sons
of men unto the sons of God; nay, you even preach this. Tell us, then,
how the infants, whoever they are, that are baptized in Christ and have
departed from the body, received so lofty a gift as this, and with what
preceding merits. If you should say that they have deserved this by the
piety of their parents, it will be replied to you, Why is this benefit
sometimes denied to the children of pious people and given to the
children of the wicked? For sometimes the offspring born from religious
people, in tender age, and thus fresh from the womb, is forestalled by
death before it can be washed in the laver of regeneration, and the
infant born of Christ’s foes is baptized in Christ by the mercy of
Christians,—the baptized mother bewails her own little one not baptized,
and the chaste virgin gathers in to be baptized a foreign offspring,
exposed by an unchaste mother. Here, certainly, the merits of parents
are wanting, and even by your own confession the merits of the infants
themselves are wanting also. For we know that you do not believe this of
the human soul, that it has lived somewhere before it inhabited this
earthly body, and has done something either of good or of evil for which
it might deserve such difference in the flesh. What cause, then, has
procured baptism for this infant, and has denied it to that? Do they
have fate because they do not have merit? or is there in these things
acceptance of persons with God? For you have said both,—first fate,
afterwards acceptance of persons,—that, since both must be refuted,
there may remain the merit which you wish to introduce against grace.
Answer, then, concerning the merits of infants, why some should depart
from their bodies baptized, others not baptized, and by the merits of
their parents neither possess nor fail of so excellent a gift that they
should become sons of God from sons of men, by no deserving of their
parents, by no deservings of their own. You are silent, forsooth, and
you find yourselves rather in the same position which you object to us.
For if when there is no merit you say that consequently there is fate,
and on this account wish the merit of man to be understood in the grace
of God, lest you should be compelled to confess fate; see, you rather
assert a fate in the baptism of infants, since you avow that in them
there is no merit. But if, in the case of infants to be baptized, you
deny that any merit at all precedes, and yet do not concede that there
is a fate, why do you cry out,—when we say that the grace of God is
therefore given freely, lest it should not be grace, and is not repaid
as if it were due to preceding merits,—that we are assertors of
fate?—not perceiving that in the justification of the wicked, as there
are no merits because it is God’s grace, so that it is not fate because
it is God’s grace, and so that it is not acceptance of persons because
it is God’s grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050854)
