[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050855)  [Next](1050857.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—He Illustrates His Argument by
an Example.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>But that what I am saying may be made
clear by the exhibition of an example, let us suppose certain twins,
born of a certain harlot, and exposed that they might be taken up by
others. One of them has expired without baptism; the other is baptized.
What can we say was in this case the “fate” or the “fortune,” which are
here absolutely nothing? What “acceptance of persons,” when with God
there is none, even if there could be any such thing in these cases,
seeing that they certainly had nothing for which the one could be
preferred to the other, and no merits of their own,—whether good, for
which the one might deserve to be baptized; or evil, for which the other
might deserve to die without baptism? Were there any merits in their
parents, when the father was a fornicator, the mother a harlot? But of
whatever kind those merits were, there were certainly not any that were
different in those who died in such different conditions, but all were
common to both. If, then, neither fate, since no stars made them to
differ; nor fortune, since no fortuitous accidents produce these things;
nor the diversity of persons nor of merits have done this; what remains,
so far as it refers to the baptized child, save the grace of God, which
is given freely to vessels made unto honour; but, as it refers to the
unbaptized child, the wrath of God, which is repaid to the vessels made
for dishonour in respect of the deservings of the lump itself? But in
that one which is baptized we constrain you to confess the grace of God,
and convince you that no merit of its own preceded; but as to that one
which died without baptism, why that sacrament should have been wanting
to it, which even you confess to be needful for all ages, and what in
that manner may have been punished in him, it is for you to see who will
not have it that there is any original sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1050857.md)
