[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050712)  [Next](1050714) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5 \[III.\]—In What Sense Created
Beings are Out of God.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.v-p2"></span>Now, just because I do not suppose that
you, a member of the catholic Church, ever believed the human soul to be
a portion of God, or that the soul’s nature is in any degree identical
with God’s, I have some apprehension lest you may have been induced to
fall in with this man’s opinion, that “God did not make the soul from
nothing, but that the soul is so far out of Him as to have emanated from
Him.” For he has put out such a statement as this, with his other
opinions, which have led him out of the usual track on this subject to a
huge precipice. Now, if he has taught you this, I do not want you to
teach it to me; nay, I should wish you to unlearn what you have been
taught. For it is not enough to avoid believing and saying that the soul
is a part of God. We do not even say that the Son or the Holy Ghost is a
part of God, although we affirm that the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit are all of one and the same nature. It is not, then, enough for
us to avoid saying that the soul is a part of God, but it is of
indispensable importance that we should say that the soul and God are
not of one and the self-same nature. This person is therefore right in
declaring that “souls are God’s offspring, not by nature, but by gift;”
and then, of course, not the souls of all men, but of the faithful. But
afterwards he returned to the statement from which he had shrunk, and
affirmed that God and the soul are of the same nature—not, indeed, in so
many words, but plainly and manifestly to such a purport. For when he
says that the soul is out of God, in such a manner that God created it
not out of any other nature, nor out of nothing, but out of His own
self, what would he have us believe but the very thing which he denies,
in other words, even that the soul is of the self-same nature as God
Himself is? For every nature is either God, who has no author; or out of
God, as having Him for its Author. But the nature which has for its
author God, out of whom it comes, is either not made, or made. Now, that
nature which is not made and yet is out of Him, is either begotten by
Him or proceeds from Him. That which is begotten is His only Son, <span
id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span id="xvii.v.v-Page_333"></span>that
which proceedeth is the Holy Ghost, and this Trinity is of one and the
self-same nature. For these three are one, and each one is God, and all
three together are one God, unchangeable, eternal, without any beginning
or ending of time. That nature, on the other hand, which is made is
called “creature;” God is its Creator, even the blessed Trinity. The
creature, therefore, is said to be out *of God* in such wise as not to
be made out of His nature. It is predicated as out *of Him*, inasmuch as
it has in Him the author of its being, not so as to have been born of
Him, or to have proceeded from Him, but as having been created, moulded,
and formed by Him, in some cases, out of no other substance,—that is,
absolutely out of nothing, as, for instance, the heaven and the earth,
or rather the whole material of the universe coeval in its creation with
the world—but, in some cases, out of another nature already created and
in existence, as, for instance, man out of the dust, woman out of the
man, and man out of his parents. Still, every creature is out of
God,—but out of God as its creator either out of nothing, or out of
something previously existing, not, however, as its begetter or its
producer from His own very self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1050714)
