[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050245)  [Next](1050247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.iii"></span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="xii.iii-Page_117"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c25"><span
id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>Note on the Following Work.</span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>In</span> a letter (169th <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121) ) to Evodius, written in the course
of the year <span class="c16"><span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>
A.D.</span> 415, Augustin assigned to this work, *On Nature and Grace*,
the last place of several treatises written in that year. “I have also
written,” says he, “an extensive book in opposition to the heresy of
Pelagius, at the request of some brethren, whom he had persuaded to
accept a very pernicious opinion against the grace of Christ.” The work
had been begun, but was not completed, when Orosius sailed from Africa
to Palestine, in the spring of this year of 415; for, shortly after his
arrival there, at a council in Jerusalem, where Pelagius was present, he
expressly affirmed, “that the blessed Augustin had prepared a very
complete answer to Pelagius’ book, two of whose followers had presented
the work to him, and requested him to reply to it.” Jerome, also, at
this time mentioned a certain production of Augustin’s, which he had not
yet seen, wherein it was said that he had expressly opposed Pelagius.
His words, which occur in his third dialogue against the heresy of
Pelagius, are these: “It is said that he is preparing other treatises
likewise, especially against your name.” Augustin, however, did not
actually employ in this work of his the *name* of Pelagius, whose book
he was refuting, in order that (as he says in his letter \[186th\] to
Paulinus) he might not by personal irritation drive him into a more
incurable degree of opposition; for he hoped to be of some service to
his opponent, if by still maintaining friendly terms with him he might
be able to spare his feelings, although he could not in duty show
leniency to his writings. Thus, at least, he expresses his mind, in his
book *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, ch. xxiii. No. 47. In this latter
passage he subjoins a letter which he had received from Timasius and
Jacobus, containing the expression of great gratitude to Augustin on
receiving his volume *On Nature and Grace*, in which they expressed
“their agreeable surprise” at the answers he had furnished to them “on
every point” of the Pelagian controversy.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>In the following year Augustin despatched
this work, along with Pelagius’ own book, to John, bishop of Jerusalem,
in order that that prelate might at length become acquainted with the
views of the new heresiarch, accompanying the books with a letter to the
bishop \[179th\]. In the course of this year 416, he had the same two
treatises (his own and Pelagius’) forwarded to Pope Innocent, with a
letter \[177th\] sent in the name of five bishops, to which Innocent
returned an answer \[183d\]. It may be here stated, that in this
last-mentioned letter \[183, n. 5\], and in the foregoing epistle \[177,
n. 6\], there is honourable mention made of Timasius and Jacobus, as
“conscientious and honourable young men, servants of God, who had
relinquished the hope which they had in the world, and continued
diligently to serve God.” The same persons are described in another
epistle \[179, n. 2\] as “young men of very honourable birth, and highly
educated;” and in the work *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, ch. xxiii.
No. 47, they are called “servants of God, good, and honourable men.”

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>Julianus \[who espoused the side of
Pelagius\], in his work addressed to Florus (book iv. n. 112, of the
Imperfect Work), <span id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) quotes this
treatise of Augustin’s as addressed to Timasius, and calumniously
pronounces it to be written “against free will.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[117:1122](1050246.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="xii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> See vol. i. p. 543.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[117:1123](1050246.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span> \[i.e., the work of Augustin against
Julianus, which was left incomplete at his death, and hence is called
the Imperfect Work.—W.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument.](1050247)
