[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050697)  [Next](1050699) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[XVI.\]—The Fifth Passage of
Scripture Quoted by Victor.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>“Learn,” says he, “for, behold the
apostle teaches you.” Yes, indeed, I will learn, if the apostle teaches;
since it is God alone who teaches by the apostle. But, pray, what is it
which the apostle teaches? “Behold,” he adds, “how, when speaking to the
men of Athens, he strongly set forth this truth, saying: ‘Seeing He
giveth to all life and spirit.’” Well, who thinks of denying this? “But
understand,” he says, “what it is the apostle states: *He giveth*; not,
*He hath given.* He refers us to continuous and indefinite time, and
does not proclaim past and completed time. Now that which he gives
without cessation, He is always giving; just as He who gives is Himself
ever existent.” I have quoted his words precisely as I found them in the
second of the books which you sent me. First, I beg you to notice to
what lengths he has gone, while endeavouring to affirm what he knows
nothing about. For he has dared to say, that God, without any cessation,
and not merely in the present time, but for ever and ever, gives souls
to persons when they are born. “He is <span id="page_326">p. 326</span>
<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-Page_326"></span>always giving,” says he, “just
as He who gives is Himself ever existent.” Far be it from me to say that
I do not understand what the apostle said, for it is plain enough. But
what this man says, he even ought himself to know, is contrary to the
Christian faith; and he should be on his guard against going any further
in such assertions. For, of course, when the dead shall rise again,
there will be no more persons to be born; therefore God will bestow no
longer any souls at any birth; but those which He is now giving to men
along with their bodies He will judge. So that He is not always giving,
although He is ever existent, who at present is giving. Nor, indeed, is
that at all derivable from the apostle’s expression, *who giveth* (not
*hath given*), which this writer wishes to deduce, namely, that God does
not give men souls by propagation. For souls are still given by Him,
even if it be by propagation; even as bodily endowments, such as limbs,
and sensations, and shape, and, in fact, the whole substance, are given
by God Himself to human beings, although it be by propagation that He
gives them. Nor again, because the Lord says, <span
id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) “If God so clothes the grass of the
field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven” (not using
the preterite time, *hath clothed*, as when He first formed the
material; but employing the present form, *clothes*, which, indeed, He
still is doing), shall we on that account say, that the lilies are not
produced from the original source of their own kind. What, therefore, if
the soul and spirit of a human being in like manner is given by God
Himself, whenever it is given; and given, too, by propagation from its
own kind? Now this is a position which I neither maintain nor refute.
Nevertheless, if it must be defended or confuted, I certainly recommend
its being done by clear, and not doubtful proofs. Nor do I deserve to be
compared with senseless cattle because I avow myself to be as yet
incapable of determining the question, but rather with cautious persons,
because I do not recklessly teach what I know nothing about. But I am
not disposed on my own part to return railing for railing and compare
this man with brutes; but I warn him as a son to acknowledge that he is
really ignorant of that which he knows nothing about; nor to attempt to
teach that which he has not yet learnt, lest he should deserve to be
compared with those persons whom the apostle mentions as “desiring to be
teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say nor whereof
they affirm.” <span id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[326:2376](1050698.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p3"></span> [Matt. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)<span
id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[326:2377](1050698.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p4"></span> [2 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007)<span id="xvii.iv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050699)
