[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050875)  [Next](1050877.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v.x"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—The Old Law Also Given by
God.</span>

<span id="xviii.v.x-p2"></span>And it is for this reason that God made
the old testament, because it pleased God to veil the heavenly promises
in earthly promises, as if established in reward, until the fulness of
time; and to give to a people which longed for earthly blessings, and
therefore had a hard heart, a law, which, although spiritual, was yet
written on tables of stone. Because, with the exception of the
sacraments of the old books, which were only enjoined for the sake of
their significance (although in them also, since they are to be
spiritually understood, the law is rightly called spiritual), the other
matters certainly which pertain to piety and to good living must not be
referred by any interpretation to some significancy, <span
id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717.md) but are to be done absolutely as
they are spoken. Assuredly no one will doubt that that law of God was
necessary not alone for that people at that time, but also is now
necessary for us for the right ordering of our life. For if Christ took
away from us that very heavy yoke of many observances, so that we are
not circumcised according to the flesh, we do not immolate victims of
the cattle, we do not rest even from necessary works on the Sabbath,
retaining the seventh in the revolution of the days, and other things of
this kind; but keep them as spiritually understood, and, the symbolizing
shadows being removed, are watchful in the light of those things which
are signified by them; shall we therefore say, that when it is written
that whoever finds another man’s property of any kind that has been
lost, should return it to him who has lost it, <span
id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718.md) it does not pertain to us? and many
other like things whereby people learn to live piously and uprightly?
and especially the Decalogue itself, which is contained in those two
tables of stone, apart from the carnal observance of the Sabbath, which
signifies spiritual sanctification and rest? For who can say that
Christians ought not to be observant to serve the one God with religious
obedience, not to worship an idol, not to take the name of the Lord in
vain, to honour one’s parents, not to commit adulteries, murders,
thefts, false witness, not to covet another man’s wife, or anything at
all that belongs to another man? Who is so impious as to say that he
does not keep those precepts of the law because he is a Christian, and
is established not under the law, but under grace?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[406:2718](1050876.htm#fr_2717.md) <span
id="xviii.v.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.x-p3"></span> \[i.e., they must not be treated
*allegorically*, as if their *literal* sense was not important, and they
were given only to teach something symbolically or typically.—W.\]

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[406:2719](1050876.htm#fr_2718.md) <span
id="xviii.v.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.x-p4"></span> [Lev. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003.md)<span id="xviii.v.x-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1050877.md)
