[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050874)  [Next](1050876.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Who are the Children of the Old
Covenant.</span>

<span id="xviii.v.ix-p2"></span>But those belong to the old testament,
“which gendereth from Mount Sinai to bondage,” which is Agar, who, when
they have received a law which is holy and just and good, think that the
letter can suffice them for life; and do not seek the divine mercy, so
as they may become doers of the law, but, being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and wishing to establish their own righteousness,
are not subject to the righteousness of God. Of this kind was that
multitude which murmured against God in the wilderness, and made an
idol; and that multitude which even in the very land of promise
committed fornication after strange gods. But this multitude, even in
the old testament itself, was strongly rebuked. They, moreover, whoever
they were at that time who followed after those earthly promises alone
which God promises there, and who were ignorant of that which those
promises signify under the new testament, and <span id="page_406">p.
406</span> <span id="xviii.v.ix-Page_406"></span>who kept God’s
commandments with the desire of gaining and with the fear of losing
those promises,—certainly did not observe them, but only seemed to
themselves to observe. For there was no faith in them that worked by
love, but earthly cupidity and carnal fear. But he who thus fulfils the
commandments beyond a doubt fulfils them unwillingly, and then does not
do them in his heart; for he would rather not do them at all, if in
respect of those things which he desires and fears he might be allowed
to neglect them with impunity. And thus, in the will itself within him,
he is guilty; and it is here that God, who gives the command, looks.
Such were the children of the earthly Jerusalem, concerning which the
apostle says, “For she is in bondage with her children,” <span
id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716.md) and belongs to the old testament
“which gendereth to bondage from Mount Sinai, which is Agar.” Of that
same kind were they who crucified the Lord, and continued in the same
unbelief. Thence there are still their children in the great multitude
of the Jews, although now the new testament as it was prophesied is made
plain and confirmed by the blood of Christ; and the gospel is made known
from the river where He was baptized and began His teachings, even to
the ends of the earth. And these Jews, according to the prophecies which
they read, are dispersed everywhere over all the earth, that even from
their writings may not be wanting a testimony to Christian truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[406:2717](1050875.htm#fr_2716.md) <span
id="xviii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.ix-p3"></span> [Gal. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025.md)<span id="xviii.v.ix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1050876.md)
