[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050664)  [Next](1050666) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.lix"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.lix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 58.—Adam’s Sin is Derived from Him
to Every One Who is Born Even of Regenerate Parents; The Example of the
Olive Tree and the Wild Olive.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lix-p2"></span>But this sin, which changed man for the
worse in paradise, because it is far greater than we can form any
judgment of, is contracted by every one at his birth, and is remitted
only in the regenerate; and this derangement is such as to be derived
even from parents who have been regenerated, and in whom the sin is
remitted and covered, to the condemnation of the children born of them,
unless these, who were bound by their first and carnal birth, are
absolved by their second and spiritual birth. Of this wonderful fact the
Creator has produced a wonderful example in the cases of the olive and
the wild olive trees, in which, from the seed not only of the wild
olive, but even of the good olive, nothing but a wild olive springs.
Wherefore, although even in persons whose natural birth is followed by
regeneration through grace, there exists this carnal concupiscence which
contends against the law of the mind, yet, seeing that it is remitted in
the remission of sins, it is no longer accounted to them as sin, nor is
it in any degree hurtful, unless consent is yielded to its motions for
unlawful deeds. Their offspring, however, being begotten not of
spiritual concupiscence, but of carnal, like a wild olive of our race
from the good olive, derives guilt from them by natural birth to such a
degree that it cannot be liberated from that pest except by being born
again. How is it, then, that this man affirms that we ascribe holiness
to those who are born, and guilt to their parents? when the truth rather
shows that even if there has been holiness in the parents, original sin
is inherent in their children, which is abolished in them only if they
are born again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](1050666)
