[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050039)  [Next](1050041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="x.iii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22 \[XVII.\]—To Infants Personal Sin
is Not to Be Attributed.</span>

<span id="x.iii.xxii-p2"></span>They, therefore, who say that the reason
why infants are baptized, is, that they may have the remission of the
sin which they have themselves committed in their life, not what they
have derived from Adam, may be refuted without much difficulty. For
whenever these persons shall have reflected within themselves a little,
uninfluenced by any polemical spirit, on the absurdity of their
statement, how unworthy it is, in fact, of serious discussion, they will
at once change their opinion. But if they will not do this, we shall not
so completely despair of men’s common sense, as to have any fears that
they will induce others to adopt their views. They are themselves driven
to adopt their opinion, if I am not mistaken, by their prejudice for
some other theory; and it is because they feel themselves obliged to
allow that sins are remitted to the baptized, and are unwilling to allow
that the sin was derived from Adam which they admit to be remitted to
infants, that they have been obliged to charge infancy itself with
actual sin; as if by bringing this charge against infancy a man could
become the more secure himself, when accused and unable to answer his
assailant! However, let us, as I suggested, pass by such opponents as
these; indeed, we require neither words nor quotations of Scripture to
prove the sinlessness of infants, so far as their conduct in life is
concerned; this life they spend, such is the recency of their birth,
within their very selves, since it escapes the cognizance of human
perception, which has no data or support whereon to sustain any
controversy on the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1050041.md)
