[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050636)  [Next](1050638) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30 \[XV.\]—The Case of Abimelech
and His House Examined.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxi-p2"></span>Then, again, as to the passage which he
has adduced from the inspired history concerning Abimelech, and God’s
choosing to close up every womb in his household that the women should
not bear children, and afterwards opening them that they might become
fruitful, what is all this to the point? What has it to do with that
shameful concupiscence which is now the question in dispute? Did God,
then, deprive those women of this feeling, and give it to them again
just when He liked? The punishment however, was that they were unable to
bear children, and the blessing that they were able to bear them, after
the manner of this corruptible flesh. For God would not confer such a
blessing upon this body of death, as only that body of life in paradise
could have had before sin entered; that is, the process of conceiving
without the prurience of lust, and of bearing children without
excruciating pain. But why should we not suppose, since, indeed,
Scripture says that every womb was closed, that this took place with
something of pain, so that the women were unable to bear cohabitation,
and that God inflicted this pain in His wrath, and removed it in His
mercy? For if lust was to be taken away as an impediment to begetting
offspring, it ought to have been taken away from the men, not from the
women. For a woman might perform her share in cohabitation by her will,
even if the lust ceased by which she is stimulated, provided it were not
absent from the man for exciting him; unless, perhaps (as Scripture
informs us that even Abimelech himself was healed), he would tell us
that virile concupiscence was restored to him. If, however, it were true
that he had lost this, what necessity was there that he should be warned
by God to hold no connection with Abraham’s wife? The truth is,
Abimelech is said to have been healed, because his household was cured
of the affliction which smote it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1050638)
