[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050462)  [Next](1050464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Grace, According to the
Pelagians, Consists in the Internal and Manifold Illumination of the
Mind.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.viii-p2"></span>As to this natural capacity which, he
allows, is assisted by the grace of God, it is by no means clear from
the passage either what grace he means, or to what extent he supposes
our nature to be assisted by it. But, as is the case in other passages
in which he expresses himself with more clearness and decision, we may
here also perceive that no other grace is intended by him as helping
natural capacity than the law and the teaching. \[VII.\] For in one
passage he says: “We are supposed by very ignorant persons to do wrong
in this matter to divine grace, because we say that it by no means
perfects sanctity in us without our will,—as if God could have imposed
any command on His grace, without also supplying the help of His grace
to those on whom he imposed His commands, so that men might more easily
accomplish through grace what they are required to do by their free
will.” Then, as if he meant to explain what grace he meant, he
immediately went on to add these words: “And this grace we for our part
do not, as you suppose, allow to consist merely in the law, but also in
the help of God.” Now who can help wishing that he would show us what
grace it is that he would have us understand? Indeed, we have the
strongest reason for desiring him to tell us what he means by saying
that he does not allow grace merely to consist in the law. Whilst,
however, we are in the suspense of our expectation, observe, I pray you,
what he has further to tell us: “God helps us,” says he, “by His
teaching and revelation, whilst He opens the eyes of our heart; whilst
He points out to us the future, that we may not be absorbed in the
present; whilst He discovers to us the snares of the devil; whilst He
enlightens us with the manifold and ineffable gift of heavenly grace.”
He then concludes his statement with a kind of absolution: “Does the
man,” he asks, “who says all this appear to you to be a denier of grace?
Does he not acknowledge both man’s free will and God’s grace?” But,
after all, he has not got beyond his commendation of the law and of
teaching; assiduously inculcating this as the grace that helps us, and
so following up the idea with which he had started, when he said, “We,
however, allow it to consist in the help of God.” God’s help, indeed, he
supposed must be recommended to us by manifold lures; by setting forth
teaching and revelation, the opening of the eyes of the heart, the
demonstration of the future, the discovery of the devil’s wiles, and the
illumination of our minds by the varied and indescribable gift of
heavenly grace,—all this, of course, with a view to our learning the
commandments and promises of God. And what else is this than placing
God’s grace in “the law and the teaching”?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050464)
