[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050857)  [Next](1050859.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—The Pelagians are Refuted by
the Case of the Twin Infants Dying, the One After, and the Other
Without, the Grace of Baptism.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>But that every lurking-place of your
darkness <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="xviii.iv.xvi-Page_399"></span>may be taken away from you, I have
proposed to you the case of such twins as were not assisted by the
merits of their parents, and both died in the very beginning of infancy,
the one baptized, the other without baptism; lest you should say that
God foreknew their future works, as you say of Jacob and Esau, in
opposition to the apostle. For how did He foreknow that those things
should be, which, in those infants who were to die in infancy, He rather
foreknew as not to be, since His foreknowledge cannot be deceived? Or
what does it profit those who are taken away from this life that
wickedness may not change their understanding, nor deceit beguile their
soul, if even the sin which has not been done, said, or thought, is thus
punished as if it had been committed? Because, if it is most absurd,
silly, and senseless, that certain men should have to be condemned for
those sins, the guilt of which they could neither derive from their
parents, as you say, nor could incur themselves, either by committing
them, or even by conceiving of them, there comes back to you that
unbaptized twin brother of the baptized one, and silently asks you for
what reason he was made to differ from his brother in respect of
happiness,—why he was punished with that infelicity, so that, while his
brother was adopted into a child of God, he himself should not receive
that sacrament which, as you confess, is necessary for every age, if,
even as there is not a fortune or a fate, or an acceptance of persons
with God, so there is no gift of grace without merits, and no original
sin. To this dumb child you absolutely submit your tongue and voice; to
this witness who says nothing,—you have nothing at all to say!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1050859.md)
