[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050670)  [Next](1050672.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iii"></span> <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="xvii.iii-Page_311"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>advertisement to the reader on the following
treatise.</span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.iii-p3.1"></span>The</span> occasion of these four books was
furnished by a young man named Vincentius Victor, a native of Mauritania
Cæsariensis, a convert to the catholic Church from the Rogatian faction
(which split off from the Donatist schism, and inhabited that part of
Mauritania which lay around Cartenna). This Victor, they say, had
previously so high an opinion of the Vincentius who succeeded Rogatus as
the head of the before-mentioned faction, that he adopted his name as
his own. <span id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337.md) Happening to meet
with a certain work of Augustin’s, in which the writer acknowledged
himself to be incapable of saying whether all souls were propagated from
Adam’s soul simply, or whether every man severally had his soul given to
him by God, even as Adam himself had, without propagation, although he
declared, for all that, his conviction that the soul was in its nature
spirit, not body, Victor was equally offended with both statements: he
wondered that so great a man as Augustin did not unhesitatingly teach
what one ought to hold concerning the origin of the soul, especially as
he thought its propagation probable; and also that he did state with so
great assurance the nature of the soul to be incorporeal. He accordingly
published two books written to one Peter, a presbyter of Spain, against
Augustin on this subject, containing some conceits of the Pelagian
heretics, and other things even worse than these. <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338.md)

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span>A monk called Renatus happened then to be
at Cæsarea. It appears that this man had shown to Augustin, who was
staying at the same place in the autumn of the year 418, a letter of the
Bishop Optatus consulting him about the origin of the soul. <span
id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339.md) This monk, of the order of laymen,
but perfectly orthodox in the faith, induced by the circumstance,
carefully copied the books of Victor, and forwarded them from Cæsarea to
Hippo the next summer; Augustin, however, only received them at the end
of autumn of the year 419, as is supposed. As soon as the holy doctor
read them, he without delay wrote the first of the four following books
to the good monk, and then the second, in the shape of a letter, to the
presbyter Peter, and the two last books to Victor himself, but after a
considerable interval, as it appears from the following words of the
fourth chapter of the second book: “If, indeed, the Lord will that I
should write to the young man, as I desire to do.” In the
*Retractations* this little work of Augustin is placed immediately after
the treatises of the year 419, *i.e.* in the fifth place after *the
Proceedings with Emeritus*, which were completed in the month of
September in the year 418. It belongs, therefore, to the termination of
the year 419 or to the commencement of the year 420, having been written
after “the condemnation of the Pelagians by the authority of catholic
Councils and of the Apostolic See,” <span
id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340.md) but “very soon after,” <span
id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341.md) as that happy event had happened in
the year of Christ 418.

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>In <span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.iii-p10.1"></span>Book I</span>., written to Renatus, he points
out his own opinion about the nature of the soul, and his hesitation as
to its origin, which had been unjustly blamed by Victor. He reproves the
man’s juvenile forwardness, shows him he had fallen into grave and
unheard-of errors while venturing to take upon himself the solution of a
question which exceeded his abilities, and points out that he adduced
only doubtful passages of Scripture, and such as were not applicable to
the subject, in his endeavour to prove that souls are not propagated,
but that entirely new ones are breathed by God into every man at his
separate birth.

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span>In <span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.iii-p11.1"></span>Book II.</span>, he advises Peter not to
incur the imputation of having approved of the books which had been
addressed to him by Victor *On the Origin of the Soul* by any use he
might make of them, nor to take as catholic doctrines that person’s rash
utterances contrary to the Christian faith. Victor’s various and very
serious errors he points out and briefly confutes, and he concludes with
advising Peter himself to try to persuade Victor to correct his errors.

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span>In <span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.iii-p12.1"></span>Book III.</span>, which was written to Victor
himself, he points out the corrections which Victor ought to make in his
books if he wished to be deemed a catholic; those opinions also and
paradoxes of his, which had been already refuted in the preceding books
to Renatus and Peter, the author briefly censures in this third book,
and classifies under eleven heads of error.

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span>In <span class="c16"><span
id="xvii.iii-p13.1"></span>Book IV.</span>, addressed to the same
Victor, he first shows that his hesitation on the subject of the origin
of souls was undeservedly blamed, and that he was wrongly compared with
cattle, because he had refrained from any bold conclusions on the
subject. Then again, with regard to his own unhesitating statement, that
the soul was spirit, not body, he points out how rashly Victor
disapproved of this assertion, especially when he was vainly expending
his efforts to prove that the soul was corporeal in its own nature, and
that the spirit in man was distinct from the soul itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[311:2338](1050671.htm#fr_2337.md) <span
id="xvii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span> See below, Book iii. c. 2.

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[311:2339](1050671.htm#fr_2338.md) <span
id="xvii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span> See below, ii. 13, 15.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[311:2340](1050671.htm#fr_2339.md) <span
id="xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span> See Augustin’s letter 190, ch. 1.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[311:2341](1050671.htm#fr_2340.md) <span
id="xvii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span> See Book ii. 17.

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[311:2342](1050671.htm#fr_2341.md) <span
id="xvii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span> See Book i. 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](1050672.md)
