[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050552)  [Next](1050554.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 42 \[XXXVII.\]—The Evil of Lust
Ought Not to Be Ascribed to Marriage. The Three Good Results of the
Nuptial Ordinance: Offspring, Chastity, and the Sacramental
Union.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xlii-p2"></span>It is then manifest that that must not
be laid to the account of marriage, even in the absence of which,
marriage would still have existed. The good of marriage is not taken
away by the evil, although the evil is by marriage turned to a good use.
Such, however, is the present condition of mortal men, that the
connubial intercourse and lust are at the same time in action; and on
this account it happens, that as the lust is blamed, so also the nuptial
commerce, however lawful and honourable, is thought to be reprehensible
by those persons who either are unwilling or unable to draw the
distinction between them. They are, moreover, inattentive to that good
of the nuptial state which is the glory of matrimony; I mean offspring,
chastity, and the pledge. <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028.md) The
evil, however, at which even marriage blushes for shame is not the fault
of marriage, but of the lust of the flesh. Yet because without this evil
it is impossible to effect the good purpose of marriage, even the
procreation of children, whenever this process is approached, secrecy is
sought, witnesses removed, and even the presence of the very children
which happen to be born of the process is avoided as soon as they reach
the age of observation. Thus it comes to pass that marriage is permitted
to effect all that is lawful in its state, only it must not forget to
conceal all that is improper. Hence it follows that infants, although
incapable of sinning, are yet not born without the contagion of
sin,—not, indeed, because of what is lawful, but on account of that
which is unseemly: for from what is lawful nature is born; from what is
unseemly, sin. Of the nature so born, God is the Author, who created
man, and who united male and female under the nuptial law; but of the
sin the author is the subtlety of the devil who deceives, and the will
of the man who consents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[251:2029](1050553.htm#fr_2028.md) <span
id="xv.iv.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xlii-p3"></span> Sacramentum; see above, ch. 39.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](1050554.md)
