[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050660)  [Next](1050662.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.lv"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.lv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 54 \[XXXII.\]—How Marriage is Now
Different Since the Existence of Sin.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lv-p2"></span>God forbid that we should say, what this
man pretends we say, “Such marriages as are now enacted are the
invention of the devil.” Why, they are absolutely the same marriages as
God made at the very first. For this blessing of His, which He appointed
for the procreation of mankind, He has not taken away even from men
under condemnation, any more than He has deprived them of their senses
and bodily limbs, which are no doubt His gifts, although they are
condemned to die by an already incurred retribution. This, I say, is the
marriage whereof it was said (only excepting the great sacrament of
Christ and the Church, which the institution prefigured): “For this
cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto
his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh.” <span
id="fr_2323"></span>[2324](#fn_2323.md) For this, no doubt, was said before
sin; and if no one had sinned, it might have been done without shameful
lust. And now, although it is not done without that, in the body of this
death, there is that nevertheless which does not cease to be done so
that a man may cleave to his wife, and they twain be one flesh. When,
therefore, it is alleged that marriage is now one thing, but might have
been another had no one sinned, this is not predicated of its nature,
but of a certain quality which has undergone a change for the worse.
Just as a man is said to be different, though he is actually the same
individual, when he has changed his manner of life either for the better
or the worse; for as a righteous man he is one thing, and as a sinful
man another, though the man himself be really the same individual. In
like manner, marriage without shameful lust is one thing, and marriage
with shameful lust is another. When, however, a woman is lawfully united
to her husband in accordance with the true constitution of wedlock, and
fidelity to what is due to the flesh is kept free from the sin of
adultery, and so children are lawfully begotten, it is actually the very
same marriage which God instituted at first, although by his primeval
inducement to sin, the devil inflicted a heavy wound, not, indeed, on
marriage itself, but on man and woman by whom marriage is made, by his
prevailing on them to disobey God,—a sin which is requited in the course
of the divine judgment by the reciprocal disobedience of man’s own
members. United in this matrimonial state, although they were ashamed of
their nakedness, still they were not <span id="page_306">p. 306</span>
<span id="xvi.vi.lv-Page_306"></span>by any means able altogether to
lose the blessedness of marriage which God appointed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2323"></span>[305:2324](1050661.htm#fr_2323.md) <span
id="xvi.vi.lv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lv-p3"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md)<span id="xvi.vi.lv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 55](1050662.md)
