[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050527)  [Next](1050529.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—How Pelagius Deceived His
Judges.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xvii-p2"></span>Now, is it by making such statements as
these, meeting objections which are urged in one sense with explanations
which are meant in another, that he designs to prove to us that he did
not deceive those who sat in judgment on him? Then he utterly fails in
his purpose. In proportion to the craftiness of his explanations, was
the stealthiness with which he deceived them. For, just because they
were catholic bishops, when they heard the man pouring out anathemas
upon those who maintained that “Adam’s sin was <span id="page_242">p.
242</span> <span id="xv.iv.xvii-Page_242"></span>injurious to none but
himself, and not to the human race,” they understood him to assert
nothing but what the catholic Church has been accustomed to declare, on
the ground of which it truly baptizes infants for the remission of
sins—not, indeed, sins which they have committed by imitation owing to
the example of the first sinner, but sins which they have contracted by
their very birth, owing to the corruption of their origin. When, again,
they heard him anathematizing those who assert that “infants at their
birth are in the same state in which Adam was before the transgression,”
they supposed him to refer to none others than those persons who “think
that infants have derived no sin from Adam, and that they are
accordingly in that state that he was in before his sin.” For, of
course, no other objection would be brought against him than that on
which the question turned. When, therefore, he so explains the objection
as to say that infants are not in the same state that Adam was in before
he sinned, simply because they have not yet arrived at the same firmness
of mind or body, not because of any propagated fault that has passed on
to them, he must be answered thus: “When the objections were laid
against you for condemnation, the catholic bishops did not understand
them in this sense; therefore, when you condemned them, they believed
that you were a catholic. That, accordingly, which they supposed you to
maintain, deserved to be released from censure; but that which you
really maintained was worthy of condemnation. It was not you, then, that
were acquitted, who held tenets which ought to be condemned; but that
opinion was freed from censure which you ought to have held and
maintained. You could only be supposed to be acquitted by having been
believed to entertain opinions worthy to be praised; for your judges
could not suppose that you were concealing opinions which merited
condemnation. Rightly have you been adjudged an accomplice of Cœlestius,
in whose opinions you prove yourself to be a sharer. And though you kept
your books shut during your trial, you published them to the world after
it was over.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1050529.md)
