[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050437)  [Next](1050439) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.lvii"></span>

<span id="xiv.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.lvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53 \[XXIX.\]—Pelagius’ Use of
Recommendations.</span>

<span id="xiv.lvii-p2"></span>As to that which I placed in the
postscript,—that he might “find favour with the Lord,”—I intimated that
this lay rather in His grace than in man’s sole will; for I did not make
it the subject either of exhortation, or of precept, or of instruction,
but simply of my wish. But just in the same way as I should, if I had
exhorted or enjoined, or even instructed him, simply have shown that all
this appertained to free will, without, however, derogating from the
grace of God; so in like manner, when I expressed the matter in the way
of a wish, I asserted no doubt the grace of God, but at the same time I
did not quench the liberty of the will. Wherefore, then, did he produce
this letter at the trial? If he had only from the beginning entertained
views in accordance with it, very likely he would not have been at all
summoned before the bishops by the brethren, who, with all their
kindness of disposition, could yet not help being offended with his
perverse contentiousness. Now, however, as I have given on my part an
account of this letter of mine, so would they, whose epistles he quoted,
explain theirs also, if it were necessary;—they would tell us either
what they thought, or what they were ignorant of, or with what purpose
they wrote to him. Pelagius, therefore, may boast to his heart’s content
of the friendship of holy men, <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="xiv.lvii-Page_206"></span>he may read their letters recounting his
praises, he may produce whatever synodal acts he pleases to attest his
own acquittal,—there still stands against him the fact, proved by the
testimony of competent witnesses, that he has inserted in his books
statements which are opposed to that grace of God whereby we are called
and justified; and unless he shall, after true confession, anathematize
these statements, and then go on to contradict them both in his writings
and discussions, he will certainly seem to all those who have a fuller
knowledge of him to have laboured in vain in his attempt to set himself
right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1050439)
