[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050111)  [Next](1050113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iv.xxiii"></span> <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="x.iv.xxiii-Page_54"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23 \[XXI.\]—Why God Prescribes What
He Knows Cannot Be Observed.</span>

<span id="x.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>We must not deny that God commands that
we ought to be so perfect in doing righteousness, as to have no sin at
all. Now that cannot be sin, whatever it may be, unless God has enjoined
that it shall not be. Why then, they ask, does He command what He knows
no man living will perform? In this manner it may also be asked, Why He
commanded the first human beings, who were only two, what He knew they
would not obey? For it must not be pretended that He issued that
command, that some of us might obey it, if they did not; for, that they
should not partake of the fruit of the particular tree, God commanded
them, and none besides. Because, as He knew what amount of righteousness
they would fail to perform, so did He also know what righteous measures
He meant Himself to adopt concerning them. In the same way, then, He
orders all men to commit no sin, although He knows beforehand that no
man will fulfil the command; in order that He may, in the case of all
who impiously and condemnably despise His precepts, Himself do what is
just in their condemnation; and, in the case of all who while obediently
and piously pressing on in his precepts, though failing to observe to
the utmost all things which He has enjoined, do yet forgive others as
they wish to to be forgiven themselves, Himself do what is good in their
cleansing. For how can forgiveness be bestowed by God’s mercy on the
forgiving, when there is no sin? or how prohibition fail to be given by
the justice of God, when there is sin?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1050113)
