[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050298)  [Next](1050300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.lvi"></span>

<span id="xii.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 52.—The Whole Discussion is About
Grace.</span>

<span id="xii.lvi-p2"></span>Let us, however, observe what our author
answers, after laying before himself the question wherein he seems
indeed so intolerable to Christian hearts. He says: “But you will tell
me this is what disturbs a great many,—that you do not maintain that it
is by the grace of God that a man is able to be without sin.” Certainly
this is what causes us disturbance; this is what we object to him. He
touches the very point of the case. This is what causes us such utter
pain to endure it; this is why we cannot bear to have such points
debated by Christians, owing to the love which we feel towards others
and towards themselves. Well, let us hear how he clears himself from the
objectionable character of the question he has raised. “What blindness
of ignorance,” he exclaims, “what sluggishness of an uninstructed mind,
which supposes that that is maintained and held to be without God’s
grace which it only hears ought to be attributed to God!” Now, if we
knew nothing of what follows this outburst of his, and formed our
opinion on simply hearing these words, we might suppose that we had been
led to a wrong view of our opponents by the spread of report and by the
asseveration of some suitable witnesses among the brethren. For how
could it have been more pointedly and truly stated that the possibility
of not sinning, to whatever extent it exists or shall exist in man,
ought only to be attributed to God? This too is our own affirmation. We
may shake hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](1050300)
