[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050913)  [Next](1050915.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Pelagius, in Imitation of
Cyprian, Wrote a Book of Testimonies.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi-p2"></span>Even that heresiarch of these men,
Pelagius himself, mentions with the honour that is certainly due to him,
the most blessed Cyprian, most glorious with even the crown of
martyrdom, not only in the African and the Western, but also in the
Eastern Churches, well known by the report of fame, and by the diffusion
far and wide of his writings,—when, writing a book of testimonies, <span
id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840.md) he asserts that he is imitating
him, saying that “he was doing to Romanus what Cypria had done to
Quirinus.” Let us, then, see what Cyprian thought concerning original
sin, which entered by one man into the world. In the epistle on “Works
and Alms” <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841.md) he thus speaks:
“When the Lord at His advent had cured these wounds which Adam had
introduced, and had healed the old poisons of the serpent, He gave a law
to the sound man, and bade him sin no more, lest a worse thing should
happen to him if he sinned. We had been limited and shut up into a
narrow space by the commandment of innocence; nor would the infirmity
and weakness of human frailty have any resource unless the divine mercy
coming once more in aid should open some way of securing salvation by
pointing out works of justice and mercy, so that by alms-giving we may
wash away whatever foulness we subsequently contract.” By this testimony
this witness refutes two falsehoods of theirs,—the one, wherein they say
that the human race draws no sin from Adam which needs cure and healing
through Christ; the other, in which they say that the saints have no sin
after baptism. Again, in the same epistle <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842.md) he says, “Let each one place before
his eyes the devil with his servants,—that is, with the people of
perdition and death,—as springing forth into the midst and provoking the
people of Christ,—Himself being present and judging,—with the trial of
comparison in these words: ‘I, on behalf of those whom thou seest with
me, neither received buffets, nor bore scourgings, nor endured the
cross, nor shed my blood, nor redeemed my family at the price of my
suffering and blood; but neither do I promise them a celestial kingdom,
nor do I recall them to Paradise, having again restored to them
immortality.’” Let the Pelagians answer and say when we could have been
in the immortality of Paradise, and how we could have been expelled
thence so as to be recalled thither by the grace of Christ. And,
although they may <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="xviii.vi.xxi-Page_426"></span>be unable to find what they can answer
in this case on behalf of their own perversity, let them observe in what
manner Cyprian understood what the apostle says, “In whom all have
sinned.” And let not the Pelagian heretics, freed from the old Manichean
heretics, dare to suggest any calumny against a catholic, lest they
should be convicted of doing so wicked a wrong even to the ancient
martyr Cyprian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[425:2841](1050914.htm#fr_2840.md) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi-p3"></span> That is, his *Capitula*. See *On the
Proceedings of Pelagius*, 6.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[425:2842](1050914.htm#fr_2841.md) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi-p4"></span> Work cited, ch. 1; see *The
Ante-Nicene Fathers*, vol. v. p. 476.

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[425:2843](1050914.htm#fr_2842.md) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxi-p5"></span> Work cited, ch. 22; in *The
Ante-Nicene Fathers*, vol. v. p. 482.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1050915.md)
