[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050135)  [Next](1050137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iv.xlvii"></span>

<span id="x.iv.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 47 \[XXIX.\]—All the Predestinated
are Saved Through the One Mediator Christ, and by One and the Same
Faith.</span>

<span id="x.iv.xlvii-p2"></span>This being the case, ever since the time
when by one man sin thus entered into this world and death by sin, and
so it passed through to all men, up to the end of this carnal generation
and perishing world, the children of which beget and are begotten, there
never has existed, nor ever will exist, a human being of whom, placed in
this life of ours, it could be said that he had no sin at all, with the
exception of the one Mediator, who reconciles us to our Maker through
the forgiveness of sins. Now this same Lord of ours has never yet
refused, at any period of the human race, nor to the last judgment will
He ever refuse, this His healing to those whom, in His most sure
foreknowledge and future loving-kindness, He has predestinated to reign
with Himself to life eternal. For, previous to His birth in the flesh,
and weakness in suffering, and power in His own resurrection, He
instructed all who then lived, in the faith of those then *future*
blessings, that they might inherit everlasting life; whilst those who
were alive when all these things were being accomplished in Christ, and
who were witnessing the fulfilment of prophecy, He instructed in the
faith of these then *present* blessings; whilst again, those who have
since lived, and ourselves who are now alive, and all those who are yet
to live, He does not cease to instruct, in the faith of these now *past*
blessings. It is therefore “one faith” which saves all, who after their
carnal birth are born again of the Spirit, and it terminates in Him, who
came to be judged for us and to die,—the Judge of quick and dead. But
the sacraments of this “one faith” are varied from time to time in order
to its suitable signification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](1050137)
