[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050291)  [Next](1050293) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xlix"></span>

<span id="xii.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.xlix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45 \[XXXVIII.\]—Why Cain Has Been by
Some Thought to Have Had Children by His Mother Eve. The Sins of
Righteous Men. Who Can Be Both Righteous, and Yet Not Without
Sin.</span>

<span id="xii.xlix-p2"></span>When he says this, he forgets what he had
himself said not long before: “After the human race had multiplied, it
was possible that in the crowd the Scripture may have neglected to
notice the sins of all men.” If indeed he had borne this well in mind,
he would have seen that even in one man there was such a crowd and so
vast a number of slight sins, that it would have been impossible (or,
even if possible, not desirable) to describe them. For only such are
recorded as the due bounds allowed, and as would, by few examples, serve
for instructing the reader in the many cases where he needed warning.
Scripture has indeed omitted to mention concerning the few persons who
were then in existence, either how many or who they were,—in other
words, how many sons and daughters Adam and Eve begat, and what names
they gave them; and from this circumstance some, not considering how
many things are quietly passed over in Scripture, have gone so far as to
suppose that Cain cohabited with his mother, and by her had the children
which are mentioned, thinking that Adam’s sons had no sisters, because
Scripture failed to mention them in the particular place, although it
afterwards, in the way of recapitulation, implied what it had previously
omitted,—that “Adam begat sons and daughters,” <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) without, however, dropping a
syllable to intimate either their number or the time when they were
born. In like manner it was unnecessary to state whether Abel,
notwithstanding that he is rightly styled “righteous,” ever indulged in
immoderate laughter, or was ever jocose in moments of relaxation, or
ever looked at an object with a covetous eye, or ever plucked fruit to
extravagance, or ever suffered indigestion from too much eating, or ever
in the midst of his prayers permitted his thoughts to wander and call
him away from the purpose of his devotion; as well as how frequently
these and many other similar failings stealthily crept over his mind.
And are not these failings *sins*, about which the apostle’s precept
gives us a general admonition that we should avoid and restrain them,
when he says: “Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof?” <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) To escape from such an obedience,
we have to struggle in a constant and daily conflict against unlawful
and unseemly inclinations. Only let the eye be directed, or rather
abandoned, to an object which it ought to avoid, and let the mischief
strengthen and get the mastery, and <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>
<span id="xii.xlix-Page_137"></span>adultery is consummated in the body,
which is committed in the heart only so much more quickly as thought is
more rapid than action and there is no impediment to retard and delay
it. They who in a great degree have curbed this sin, that is, this
appetite of a corrupt affection, so as not to obey its desires, nor to
“yield their members to it as instruments of unrighteousness,” <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) have fairly deserved to be called
righteous persons, and this by the help of the grace of God. Since,
however, sin often stole over them in very small matters, and when they
were off their guard, they were both righteous, and at the same time not
sinless. To conclude, if there was in righteous Abel that love of God
whereby alone he is truly righteous who is righteous, to enable him, and
to lay him under a moral obligation, to advance in holiness, still in
whatever degree he fell short therein was of sin. And who indeed can
help thus falling short, until he come to that mighty power thereof, in
which man’s entire infirmity shall be swallowed up?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[136:1238](1050292.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="xii.xlix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xlix-p3"></span> [Gen. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#004)<span id="xii.xlix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[136:1239](1050292.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="xii.xlix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xlix-p4"></span> [Rom. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="xii.xlix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[137:1240](1050292.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="xii.xlix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xlix-p5"></span> [Rom. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="xii.xlix-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1050293)
