[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050400)  [Next](1050402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xx"></span>

<span id="xiv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16 \[VI.\]—The Sixth Item of the
Accusation, and Pelagius’ Reply.</span>

<span id="xiv.xx-p2"></span>The next objection was to the effect that
Pelagius in that same book of his wrote thus: “A man is able, if he
likes, to be without sin;” and that writing to a certain widow he said,
flatteringly: “In thee piety may find a dwelling-place, such as she
finds nowhere else; in thee righteousness, though a stranger, can find a
home; truth, which no one any longer recognises, can discover an abode
and a friend in thee; and the law of God, which almost everybody
despises, may be honoured by thee alone.” And in another sentence he
writes to her: “O how happy and blessed art thou, when that
righteousness which we must believe to flourish only in heaven has found
a shelter on earth only in thy heart!” In another work addressed to her,
after reciting the prayer of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and
teaching her in what manner saints ought to pray, he says: “He worthily
raises his hands to God, and with a good conscience does he pour out his
prayer, who is able to say, ‘Thou, O Lord, knowest how holy, and
harmless, and pure from all injury and iniquity and violence, are the
hands which I stretch out to Thee; how righteous, and pure, and free
from all deceit, are the lips with which I offer to Thee my
supplication, that Thou wouldst have mercy upon me.’” To all this
Pelagius said in answer: “We asserted that a man could be without sin,
and could keep God’s commandments if he wished; for this capacity has
been given to him by God. But we never said that any man could be found
who at no time whatever, from infancy to old age, had committed sin: but
that if any person were converted from his sins, he could by his own
labour and God’s grace be without sin; and yet not even thus would he be
incapable of change ever afterwards. As for the other statements which
they have made against us, they are not to be found in our books, nor
have we at any time said such things.” Upon hearing this vindication,
the synod put this question to him: “You have denied having ever written
such words; are you therefore ready to anathematize those who do hold
these opinions?” Pelagius answered: “I anathematize them as fools, not
as heretics, for there is no dogma.” The bishops then pronounced their
judgment in these words: “Since now Pelagius has with his own mouth
anathematized this vague statement as foolish verbiage, justly declaring
in his reply, ‘That a man is able with God’s assistance and grace to be
without sin,’ let him now proceed to answer the other heads of
accusation against him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1050402)
