[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050429)  [Next](1050431) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xlix"></span>

<span id="xiv.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xlix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45 \[XXI.\]—Pelagius’ Acquittal
Becomes Suspected.</span>

<span id="xiv.xlix-p2"></span>If these are the proceedings by which
Pelagius’ friends rejoice that he was exculpated, we, on our part,—since
he certainly took much pains to prove that we were well affected towards
him, by going so far as to produce even our private letters to him, and
reading them at the trial,—undoubtedly wish and desire his salvation in
Christ; but as regards his exculpation, which is rather believed than
clearly shown, we ought not to be in a hurry to exult. When I say this,
indeed, I do not charge the judges either with negligence or connivance,
or with consciously holding unsound doctrine—which they most certainly
would be the very last to entertain. But although by their sentence
Pelagius is held by those who are on terms of fullest and closest
intimacy with him to have been deservedly acquitted, with the approval
and commendation of his judges, he certainly does not appear to me to
have been cleared of the charges brought against him. They conducted his
trial as of one whom they knew nothing of, especially in the absence of
those who had prepared the indictment against him, and were quite unable
to ex<span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="xiv.xlix-Page_203"></span>amine him with diligence and care; but, in
spite of this inability, they completely destroyed the heresy itself, as
even the defenders of his perverseness must allow, if they only follow
the judgment through its particulars. As for those persons, however, who
well know what Pelagius has been in the habit of teaching, or who have
had to oppose his contentious efforts, or those who, to their joy, have
escaped from his erroneous doctrine, how can they possibly help
suspecting him, when they read the affected confession, wherein he
acknowledges past errors, but so expresses himself as if he had never
entertained any other opinion than those which he stated in his replies
to the satisfaction of the judges?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1050431)
