[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050686)  [Next](1050688.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xv"></span> <span id="page_321">p. 321</span> <span
id="xvii.iv.xv-Page_321"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15 \[XII.\]—God Does Not Judge Any
One for What He Might Have Done If His Life Had Been Prolonged, But
Simply for the Deeds He Actually Commits.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xv-p2"></span>For my own part, indeed, I affirm that
neither of the alternative cases ought to be admitted, nor that third
opinion which would have it that souls sinned in some other state
previous to the flesh, and so deserved to be condemned to the flesh; for
the apostle has most distinctly stated that “the children being not yet
born, had done neither good nor evil.” <span
id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351.md) So it is evident that infants can
have contracted none but original sin to require remission of sins. Nor,
again, that fourth position, that the souls of infants who will die
without baptism are by the righteous God banished and condemned to
sinful flesh, since He foreknew that they would lead evil lives if they
grew old enough for the use of free will. But this not even he has been
daring enough to affirm, though embarrassed in such perplexities. On the
contrary, he has declared, briefly indeed, yet manifestly, against this
vain opinion in these words: “God would have been unrighteous if He had
willed to judge any man yet unborn, who had done nothing whatever of his
own free will.” This was his answer when treating a question in
opposition to those persons who ask why God made man, when in His
foreknowledge He knew that he would not be good? He would be judging a
man before he was born if He had been unwilling to create him because He
knew beforehand that he would not turn out good. And there can be no
doubt about it, even as this person himself thought, that the proper
course would be for the Almighty to judge a man for his works when
accomplished, not for such as might be foreseen, nor such as might be
permitted to be done some time or other. For if the sins which a man
would have committed if he were alive are condemned in him when dead,
even when they have not been committed, no benefit is conferred on him
when he is taken away that no wickedness might change his mind; inasmuch
as judgment will be given upon him according to the wickedness which
might have developed in him, not according to the uprightness which was
actually found in him. Nor will any man possibly be safe who dies after
baptism, because even after baptism men may, I will not say sin in some
way or other, but actually go so far as to commit apostasy. What then?
Suppose a man who has been taken away after baptism should, if he had
lived, have become an apostate, are we to think that no benefit was
conferred even upon him in that he was removed and was saved from the
misery of his mind being changed by wickedness? And are we to imagine
that he will have to be judged, by reason of God’s foreknowledge, as an
apostate, and not as a faithful member of Christ? How much better, to be
sure, would it have been—if sins are punished not as they have been
committed or contemplated by the human agent, but foreknown and to
happen in the cognizance of the Almighty—if the first pair had been cast
forth from paradise previous to their fall, and so sin have been
prevented in so holy and blessed a place! What, too, is to be said about
the entire nullification of foreknowledge itself, when what is foreknown
is not to happen? How, indeed, can that be rightly called the prescience
of something to be, which in fact will not come to pass? And how are
sins punished which are none, that is to say, which are not committed
before the assumption of flesh, since life itself is not yet begun; nor
after the assumption, since death has prevented?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[321:2352](1050687.htm#fr_2351.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xv-p3"></span> [Rom. ix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011.md)<span id="xvii.iv.xv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1050688.md)
