[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050674)  [Next](1050676) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3 \[III\]—The Eloquence of
Vincentius, Its Dangers and Its Tolerableness.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.iii-p2"></span>For he has an eloquence by which he is
able to explain what he thinks. He must, therefore, be dealt with
accordingly; and we must hope that he may entertain right sentiments,
and that he may not turn useless things into objects of desire; that he
may not seem to have propounded as true whatever he may have expressed
with eloquence. But in his very outspokenness he may have much to
correct, and to prune of redundant verbiage. And this characteristic of
his has actually given offence to you, who are a person of gravity, as
your own writings indicate. This fault, however, is either easily
corrected, or, if it be resorted to with fondness by light minds, and
borne with by serious ones, it is not attended with any injury to their
faith. For we have already amongst us men who are frothy in speech, but
sound in the faith. We need not then despair that this quality even in
him (it might be endurable, however, even if it proved permanent) may be
tempered and cleansed—in fact, may be either extended or recalled to an
entire and solid criterion; especially as he is said to be young, so
that diligence may supply to him whatever defect his inexperience may
possess, and ripeness of age may digest what crude loquacity finds
indigestible. The troublesome, dangerous, and pernicious thing is, when
folly is set off by the commendation which is accorded to eloquence, and
when a poisonous draught is drunk out of a precious goblet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1050676)
