[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050523)  [Next](1050525.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13 \[XII.\]—Cœlestius the Bolder
Heretic; Pelagius the More Subtle.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xiii-p2"></span>You see, indeed, not to mention other
points, how that Pelagius pronounced his anathema against those who hold
that “Adam’s sin injured only himself, and not the human race; and that
infants are at their birth in the same condition in which Adam was
before the transgression.” Now what else could the bishops who sat in
judgment on him have possibly understood him to mean by this, but that
the sin of Adam is transmitted to infants? It was to avoid making such
an admission that Cœlestius refused to condemn this statement, which
this man on the contrary anathematized. If, therefore, I shall show that
he did not really entertain any other opinion concerning infants than
that they are born without any contagion of a single sin, what
difference will there remain on this question between him and Cœlestius,
except this, that the one is more open, the other more reserved; the one
more pertinacious, the other more mendacious; or, at any rate, that the
one is more candid, the other more astute? For, the one before the
church of Carthage refused to condemn what he afterwards in the church
at Rome publicly confessed to be a tenet of his own; at the same time
professing himself “ready to submit to correction if an error had stolen
over him, considering that he was but human;” whereas the other both
condemned this dogma as being contrary to the truth lest he should
himself be condemned by his catholic judges, and yet kept it in reserve
for subsequent defence, so that either his condemnation was a lie, or
his interpretation a trick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1050525.md)
