[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050800)  [Next](1050802) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Why Heretical Writings Must Be
Answered.</span>

<span id="xviii.iii.ii-p2"></span>For the new heretics, enemies of the
grace of God which is given by Jesus Christ our Lord to small and great,
although they are already shown more openly to need to be avoided by a
manifest disapprobation, still do not cease by their writings to try the
hearts of the less cautious and less learned. And these must certainly
be answered, lest they should confirm themselves or their friends in
that wicked error; even if we were not afraid that they might deceive
some one of the catholics by their plausible discourse. But since they
do not cease to growl at the entrances <span id="page_378">p. 378</span>
<span id="xviii.iii.ii-Page_378"></span>to the Lord’s fold, and from
every side to tear open approaches with a view to tear in pieces the
sheep redeemed at such a price; and since the pastoral watch-tower is
common to all of us who discharge the office of the episcopate (although
you are prominent therein on a loftier height), I do what I can in
respect of my small portion of the charge, as the Lord condescends by
the aid of your prayers to grant me power, to oppose to their pestilent
and crafty writings, healing and defensive writings, so that the madness
with which they are raging may either itself be cured, or may be
prevented from hurting others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1050802)
