[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050086)  [Next](1050088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.lxix"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.lxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 69 \[XXXVIII.\]—The Ignorance and
the Infirmity of an Infant.</span>

<span id="x.iii.lxix-p2"></span>But not to dwell on this, that was at
least possible to them which has actually happened to many animals, the
young of which are born small, and do not advance in mind (since they
have no rational soul) as their bodies grow larger, and yet, even when
most diminutive, run about, and recognize their mothers, and require no
external help or care when they want to suck, but with remarkable ease
discover their mothers’ breasts themselves, although these are concealed
from ordinary sight. A human being, on the contrary, at his birth is
furnished neither with feet fit for walking, nor with hands able even to
scratch; and unless their lips were actually applied to the breast by
the mother, they would not know where to find it; and even when close to
the nipple, they would, notwithstanding their desire for food, be more
able to cry than to suck. This utter helplessness of body thus fits in
with their infirmity of mind; nor would Christ’s flesh have been “in the
likeness of sinful flesh,” unless that sinful flesh had been such that
the rational soul is oppressed by it in the way we have
described,—whether this too has been derived from parents, or created in
each case for the individual separately, or inspired from
above,—concerning which I forbear from inquiring now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 70](1050088.md)
