[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050775)  [Next](1050777) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.xx"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20 \[XIV.\]—The Body Does Not
Receive God’s Image.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p2"></span>But I pass by all this, lest the
discussion between us should degenerate into one of names rather than
things. Let us, then, see whether the inner man be the soul, or the
spirit, or both. I observe, however, that you have expressed <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="xvii.vii.xx-Page_363"></span>your
opinion on the point in writing, calling the inner man the soul; for of
this you spoke when you said: “And as the substance congealed, which was
incapable of comprehension, it would produce another body within the
body rounded and amassed by the force and twirl of its own nature, and
thus an inner man would begin to appear, who, being moulded in a
corporeal sheath would in its lineaments be shaped after the likeness of
its outer man.” And from this you draw the following inference: “God’s
breath, therefore, made the soul; yea, that breath from God was made the
soul, an image, substantial, corporeal according to its own nature, like
its own body, and conformed to its image.” After this you proceed to
speak of the spirit, and say: “This soul which had its origin from the
breath of God could not exist without an innermost sense and intellect
of its own; and such is the spirit.” As I, then, understand your
statement, you mean the inner man to be the soul, and the inmost one to
be the spirit; as if the latter were inferior to the soul, as this is to
the body. Whence it comes to pass, that just as the body receives
another body pervading its own inner cavity, which (as you suppose) is
the soul; so in its turn must the soul be regarded as having its
interior emptiness also, where it could receive the third body, even the
spirit; and thus the whole man consists of three, the outer, the inner,
and the inmost. Now, do you not yet perceive what great absurdities
follow in your wake, when you attempt the asseveration that the soul is
corporeal? Tell me, I pray you, which of the two is it that is to be
renewed in the knowledge of God, after the image of Him that created
him?  <span id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480) The inner, or the
inmost? For my own part, indeed, I do not see that the apostle, besides
the inner and the outer man, knows anything of another man inside the
inner one, that is, of an inmost man. But you must decide which it is
you would have to be renewed after the image of God. How is he to
receive this, who has already got the image of the outer man? For if the
inner man has run throughout the limbs of the outward one, and
*congealed* (for this is the term you have used; as if a molten shape
were formed out of soft clay, which was thickened out of the dust), how,
if this same figure which has been impressed upon it, or rather
*expressed* out of a body, is to retain its place, could it be
refashioned after the image of God? Is it to have two images—God’s from
above, that of the body from below—as is said in the case of money,
“Heads and Tails”? <span id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481) Will you
perhaps say, that the soul received the bodily image, and that the
spirit takes God’s image, as if the former were contiguous to the body,
and the latter to God; and that, therefore, it is really the inmost man
which is refashioned after the image of God, and not the inner man?
Well, but this pretence is useless. For if the inmost man is as entirely
diffused through all the members of the soul, as the inner man of the
soul is through the limbs of the body; even it has now, through the
soul, received the image of the body, as the soul moulded the same; and
thus it results that it has no means whereby to receive God’s image,
while the afore-mentioned image of the body remains impressed upon it;
except as in the case of the money which I have just quoted, where there
is one form on the upper surface, and another on the lower one. These
are the absurd lengths to which you are driven, whether you will or no,
when you apply to the consideration of the soul the material ideas of
bodily substances. But, as even you yourself with perfect propriety
confess, God is not a body. How, then, could a body receive His image?
“I beseech you, brother, that you be not conformed to this world, but be
transformed by the renewing of your mind;” <span
id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482) and cherish not “the carnal mind,
which is death.” <span id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[363:2481](1050776.htm#fr_2480) <span
id="xvii.vii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p3"></span> [Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[363:2482](1050776.htm#fr_2481) <span
id="xvii.vii.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p4"></span> *Caput et Navia*, literally “head and
ship,” the piece of money having a head of Janus on one side, and a ship
on the other. See the matter illustrated in Macrobius, *Saturnalia*, i.
7, Aur. Vict. *Orig*. 3.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[363:2483](1050776.htm#fr_2482) <span
id="xvii.vii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p5"></span> [Rom.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[363:2484](1050776.htm#fr_2483) <span
id="xvii.vii.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p6"></span> [Rom. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006)<span id="xvii.vii.xx-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1050777)
