[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050333)  [Next](1050335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii"></span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="xiii.ii-Page_155"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>preface to the treatise on man’s perfection in
righteousness.</span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>Augustin</span> has made no mention of this
treatise in his book of *Retractations*; for the reason, no doubt, that
it belonged to the collection of the <span class="c16"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.2"></span>Epistles</span>, for which he designed a
separate statement of Retractations. In all the <span class="c16"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.3"></span> mss</span>. this work begins with his usual
epistolary salutation: “Augustin, to his holy brethren and
fellow-bishops Eutropius and Paulus.” And yet, by general consent, this
epistle has been received as a treatise, not only in those volumes of
his works which contain this work, but also in the writings of those
ancient authors who quote it. Amongst these, the most renowned and
acquainted with Augustin’s writings, <span class="c16"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.4"></span> Possidius</span> (*In indiculo*, 4) and <span
class="c16"><span id="xiii.ii-p3.5"></span> Fulgentius</span> (*Ad
Monimum*, i. 3) expressly call this work “*A Treatise on the Perfection
of Man’s Righteousness.*” So far nearly all the <span class="c16"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.6"></span> mss</span>. agree, but a few (including the
*Codd. Audöenensis* and *Pratellensis*) add these words to the general
title: “*In opposition to those who assert that it is possible for a man
to become righteous by his own sole strength.*” In a <span
class="c16"><span id="xiii.ii-p3.7"></span>ms</span>. belonging to the
Church of Rheims there occurs this inscription: “*A Treatise on what are
called the definitions of Cœlestius*.” Prosper, in his work against the
Collator, ch. 43, advises his reader to read, besides some other of
Augustin’s “*books*,” that which he wrote “to the priests Paulus and
Eutropius in opposition to the questions of Pelagius and Cœlestius.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>From this passage of Prosper, however, in
which he mentions, but with no regard to accurate order, some of the
short treatises of Augustin against the Pelagians, nobody could rightly
show that this work *On the Perfection of Man’s Righteousness* was later
in time than his work *On Marriage and Concupiscence*, or than the six
books against Julianus, which are mentioned previously in the same
passage by Prosper. For, indeed, at the conclusion of the present
treatise, Augustin hesitates as yet to censure those persons who
affirmed that men are living or have lived in this life righteously
without any sin at all: their opinion Augustin, in the passage referred
to (just as in his treatises *On Nature and Grace*, n. 3, and *On the
Spirit and the Letter*, nn. 49, 70), does not yet think it necessary
stoutly to resist. Nothing had as yet, therefore, been determined on
this point; nor were there yet enacted, in opposition to this opinion,
the three well-known canons (6–8) of the Council of Carthage, which was
held in the year 418. Afterwards, however, on the authority of these
canons, he cautions people against the opinion as a pernicious error, as
one may see from many passages in his books *Against the two Epistles of
the Pelagians*, especially Book iv. ch. x. (27), where he says: “Let us
now consider that third point of theirs, which each individual member of
Christ as well as His entire body regards with horror, where they
contend that there are in this life, or have been, righteous persons
without any sin whatever.” Certainly, in the year 414, in an epistle
(157) to Hilary, when answering the questions which were then being
agitated in Sicily, he expresses himself in the same tone, and almost in
the same language, on sinlessness, as that which he employs at the end
of this present treatise. “But those persons,” says he (in ch. ii. n. 4
of that epistle), “however much one may tolerate them when they affirm
that there either are, or have been, men besides the one Saint of saints
who have been wholly free from sin; yet when they allege that man’s own
free will is sufficient for fulfilling the Lord’s commandments, even
when unassisted by God’s grace and the gift of the Holy Spirit for the
performance of good works, the idea is altogether worthy of anathema and
of perfect detestation.” On comparing these words with the conclusion of
this treatise before us, nothing will appear more probable than that the
work which supplies the refutation of Cœlestius’ questions, which were
also brought over from Sicily, was written not long after the
above-mentioned epistle. This work Possidius, in his index, places
immediately after the treatise *On Nature and Grace*, and before the
book *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*. Augustin, however, does not
mention this work in his epistle (169) which he addressed to Evodius
about the end of the year 415; but he intimates in it that he had
published an answer to the *Commonitorium* of Orosius, wherein that
author stated that “the bishops Eutropius and Paulus had already given
information to Augustin about certain formidable heresies.” Some suppose
that this statement refers to the letter which they despatched to
Augustin along with Cœlestius’ propositions. However that be, it is not
unreasonable to believe that they, not long after Orosius’ arrival in
Africa (that is, before the midsummer of the year 415), had sent these
propositions to him, and that Augustin <span id="page_156">p. 156</span>
<span id="xiii.ii-Page_156"></span>soon afterwards wrote back to
Eutropius and Paulus a refutation of them, his answer to Orosius having
been previously given.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>Furthermore, Cœlestius, whose name is
inscribed in the propositions, “wrote to his parents from his
monastery,” as Gennadius informs us in his work on Church writers (*De
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis*), “before he fell in with the teaching of
Pelagius, three letters in the shape of short treatises, necessary for
all seekers after God.” Afterwards he openly professed the Pelagian
heresy, and published a short treatise, in which, besides other topics,
he acknowledged in the Church of Carthage that even infants had
redemption by being baptized into Christ,—an episcopal decision on the
question having been obtained in that city about the commencement of the
year 412, as we learn from an epistle to Pope Innocent (amongst the
Epistles of Augustin \[175, n. 1 and 6\]), as well as from the epistle
\[157, n. 22\] which we have referred to above; and from Augustin’s work
*On the Merits of Sins*, i. 62, and ii. 59; also from his treatise *On
Original Sin*, 21; and his work *Against Julianus*, iii. 9. Another work
by an anonymous writer, but which was commonly attributed to Cœlestius,
divided into chapters, is mentioned in the treatise which follows the
present one, *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*; see chapters 29, 30, and
62. There were extant, moreover, in the year 417, several small books or
tracts of Cœlestius, which Augustin, in his work *On the Grace of
Christ*, 31, 32, and 36, says were produced by Cœlestius himself in some
ecclesiastical proceedings at Rome under Zosimus. Augustin, at the
commencement of the present work *On the Perfection of Man’s
Righteousness*, mentions an undoubted work of Cœlestius as having been
seen by him, from which he discovered that the definitions or
propositions therein examined by Augustin were not unsuited to the tone
and temper of Cœlestius. This was very probably the book which Jerome
quotes in his Epistle to Ctesiphon, written in the year 413 or 414.
These are Jerome’s words: “One of his followers \[that is, Pelagius’\],
who was already in fact become the master and the leader of all that
army, and ‘a vessel of wrath,’ <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) in opposition to the apostle, runs
on through thickets, not of *syllogisms*, as his admirers are apt to
boast, but of *solecisms*, and philosophizes and disputes to the
following effect: ‘If I do nothing without God’s help, and if everything
which I shall achieve is owing to His operations solely, then it follows
that it is not I who work, but only God’s work is to be crowned in me.
In vain, therefore, has He conferred on me the power of will, if I am
unable to exercise it fully without His incessant help. That volition,
indeed, is destroyed which requires the assistance of another. But it is
free will which God has given to me; and *free* it can only remain, if I
do whatever I wish. The state of the case then is this: I either use
once for all the power which has been bestowed on me, so that free will
is preserved; or else, if I require the assistance of another, liberty
of decision in me is destroyed.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[156:1361](1050334.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span> [Rom. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)<span id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument.](1050335)
