[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050008)  [Next](1050010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>III. Augustin’s Part in the
Controversy.</span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>Both by nature and by grace, Augustin was
formed to be the champion of truth in this controversy. Of a naturally
philosophical temperament, he saw into the springs of life with a
vividness of mental perception to which most men are strangers; and his
own experiences in his long life of resistance to, and then of yielding
to, the drawings of God’s grace, gave him a clear apprehension of the
great evangelic principle that God seeks men, not men God, such as no
sophistry could cloud. However much his philosophy or theology might
undergo change in other particu<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxii"></span>lars, there was one conviction too deeply
imprinted upon his heart ever to fade or alter,—the conviction of the
ineffableness of God’s grace. Grace,—man’s absolute dependence on God as
the source of all good,—this was the common, nay, the *formative*
element, in all stages of his doctrinal development, which was marked
only by the ever growing consistency with which he built his theology
around this central principle. Already in 397,—the year after he became
bishop,—we find him enunciating with admirable clearness all the
essential elements of his teaching, as he afterwards opposed them to
Pelagius. <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) It was inevitable,
therefore, that although he was rejoiced when he heard, some years
later, of the zealous labours of this pious monk in Rome towards
stemming the tide of luxury and sin, and esteemed him for his devout
life, and loved him for his Christian activity, he yet was deeply
troubled when subsequent rumours reached him that he was “disputing
against the grace of God.” He tells us over and over again, that this
was a thing no pious heart could endure; and we perceive that, from this
moment, Augustin was only biding his time, and awaiting a fitting
opportunity to join issue with the denier of the Holy of holies of his
whole, I will not say theology merely, but life. “Although I was grieved
by this,” he says, “and it was told me by men whom I believed, I yet
desired to have something of such sort from his own lips or in some book
of his, so that, if I began to refute it, he would not be able to deny
it.” <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) Thus he actually excuses
himself for not entering into the controversy earlier. When Pelagius
came to Africa, then, it was almost as if he had deliberately sought his
fate. But circumstances secured a lull before the storm. He visited
Hippo; but Augustin was absent, although he did not fail to inform
himself on his return that Pelagius while there had not been heard to
say “anything at all of this kind.” The controversy against the
Donatists was now occupying all the energies of the African Church, and
Augustin himself was a ruling spirit in the great conference now holding
at Carthage with them. While there, he was so immersed in this business,
that, although he once or twice saw the face of Pelagius, he had no
conversation with him; and although his ears were wounded by a casual
remark which he heard, to the effect “that infants were not baptized for
remission of sins, but for consecration to Christ,” he allowed himself
to pass over the matter, “because there was no opportunity to contradict
it, and those who said it were not such men as could cause him
solicitude for their influence.” <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p6"></span>It appears from these facts, given us by
himself, that Augustin was not only ready for, but was looking for, the
coming controversy. It can scarcely have been a surprise to him when
Paulinus accused Cœlestius (412); and, although he was not a member of
the council which condemned him, it was inevitable that he should at
once take the leading part in the consequent controversy. Cœlestius and
his friends did not silently submit to the judgment that had been passed
upon their teaching: they could not openly propagate their heresy, but
they were diligent in spreading their plaints privately and by
subterraneous whispers among the people. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) This was met by the Catholics in public
sermons and familiar colloquies held everywhere. But this wise rule was
observed,—to contend against the erroneous teachings, but to keep
silence as to the teachers, that so (as Augustin explains <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) ) “the men might rather be brought to see
and acknowledge their error through fear of ecclesiastical judgment than
be punished by the actual judgment.” Augustin was abundant in these oral
labours; and many of his sermons directed against Pelagian error have
come down to us, although it is often impossible to be sure as to their
date. For one of them (170) he took his text from [Phil. iii.
6-16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>,
“as touching the righteousness which is by the law blameless; howbeit
what things were gain to me, those have I counted loss for Christ.” He
begins by asking how the apostle could count his blameless conversation
according to the righteousness which is from the law as dung and loss,
and then proceeds to explain the purpose for which the law was given,
our state by nature and under law, and the kind of blamelessness that
the law <span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxiii"></span>could produce, ending by showing that
man can have no righteousness except from God, and no perfect
righteousness except in heaven. Three others (174, 175, 176) had as
their text [1 Tim. 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.iii-p8.2"></span>,
and developed its teaching, that the universal sin of the world and its
helplessness in sin constituted the necessity of the incarnation; and
especially that the necessity of Christ’s grace for salvation was just
as great for infants as for adults. Much is very forcibly said in these
sermons which was afterwards incorporated in his treatises. “There was
no reason,” he insists, “for the coming of Christ the Lord except to
save sinners. Take away diseases, take away wounds, and there is no
reason for medicine. If the great Physician came from heaven, a great
sick man was lying ill through the whole world. That sick man is the
human race” (175, 1). “He who says, ‘I am not a sinner,’ or ‘I was not,’
is ungrateful to the Saviour. No one of men in that mass of mortals
which flows down from Adam, no one at all of men is not sick: no one is
healed without the grace of Christ. Why do you ask whether infants are
sick from Adam? For they, too, are brought to the church; and, if they
cannot run thither on their own feet, they run on the feet of others
that they may be healed. Mother Church accommodates others’ feet to them
so that they may come, others’ heart so that they may believe, others’
tongue so that they may confess; and, since they are sick by another’s
sin, so when they are healed they are saved by another’s confession in
their behalf. Let, then, no one buzz strange doctrines to you. *This*
the Church has always had, has always held; this she has received from
the faith of the elders; this she will perseveringly guard until the
end. Since the whole have no need of a physician, but only the sick,
what need, then, has the infant of Christ, if he is not sick? If he is
well, why does he seek the physician through those who love him? If,
when infants are brought, they are said to have no sin of inheritance
(*peccatum propaginis*) at all, and yet come to Christ, why is it not
said in the church to those that bring them, ‘take these innocents
hence; the physician is not needed by the well, but by the sick; Christ
came not to call the just, but sinners’? It never has been said, and it
never will be said. Let each one therefore, brethren, speak for him who
cannot speak for himself. It is much the custom to intrust the
inheritance of orphans to the bishops; how much more the grace of
infants! The bishop protects the orphan lest he should be oppressed by
strangers, his parents being dead. Let him cry out more for the infant
who, he fears, will be slain by his parents. Who comes to Christ has
something in him to be healed; and he who has not, has no reason for
seeking the physician. Let parents choose one of two things: let them
either confess that there is sin to be healed in their infants, or let
them cease bringing them to the physician. This is nothing else than to
wish to bring a well person to the physician. Why do you bring him? To
be baptized. Whom? The infant. To whom do you bring him? To Christ. To
Him, of course, who came into the world? Certainly, he says. Why did He
come into the world? To save sinners. Then he whom you bring has in him
that which needs saving?” <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) So again:
“He who says that the age of infancy does not need Jesus’ salvation,
says nothing else than that the Lord Christ is not *Jesus* to faithful
infants; i.e., to infants baptized in Christ. For what is *Jesus*?
*Jesus* means saviour. He is not Jesus to those whom He does not save,
who do not need to be saved. Now, if your hearts can bear that Christ is
not *Jesus* to any of the baptized, I do not know how you can be
acknowledged to have sound faith. They are infants, but they are made
members of Him. They are infants, but they receive His sacraments. They
are infants, but they become partakers of His table, so that they may
have life.” <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) The preveniency of
grace is explicitly asserted in these sermons. In one he says, “Zaccheus
was seen, and saw; but unless he had been seen, he would not have seen.
For ‘whom He predestinated, them also He called.’ In order that we may
see, we are seen; that we may love, we are loved. ‘My God, may His pity
prevent me!’” <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) And in another, at
more length: “His calling has preceded you, so that you may have a good
will. Cry out, ‘My God, let Thy mercy prevent me’ ([Ps. lviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)<span id="v.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>).
That you may be, that you may feel, that you may hear, that you may
consent, <span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxiv"></span>His mercy prevents you. It prevents you
in all things; and do you too prevent His judgment in something. In
what, do you say? In what? In confessing that you have all these things
from God, whatever you have of good; and from yourself whatever you have
of evil” (176, 5). “We owe therefore to Him that we are, that we are
alive, that we understand: that we are men, that we live well, that we
understand aright, we owe to Him. Nothing is ours except the sin that we
have. For what have we that we did not receive?” ([1 Cor. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p11.2"></span>)
(176, 6).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p12"></span>It was not long, however, before the
controversy was driven out of the region of sermons into that of regular
treatises. The occasion for Augustin’s first appearance in a written
document bearing on the controversy, was given by certain questions
which were sent to him for answer by “the tribune and notary”
Marcellinus, with whom he had cemented his intimacy at Carthage, the
previous year, when this notable official was presiding, by the
emperor’s orders, over the great conference of the catholics and
Donatists. The mere fact that Marcellinus, still at Carthage, where
Cœlestius had been brought to trial, wrote to Augustin at Hippo for
written answers to important questions connected with the Pelagian
heresy, speaks volumes for the prominent position he had already assumed
in the controversy. The questions that were sent, concerned the
connection of death with sin, the transmission of sin, the possibility
of a sinless life, and especially infants’ need of baptism. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) Augustin was immersed in abundant labours
when they reached him: <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) but he could
not resist this appeal, and that the less as the Pelagian controversy
had already grown to a place of the first importance in his eyes. The
result was his treatise, *On the Merits and Remission of Sins and on the
Baptism of Infants*, consisting of two books, and written in 412. The
first book of this work is an argument for original sin, drawn from the
universal reign of death in the world (2–8), from the teaching of [Rom.
v. 12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p14.1"></span> (9–20), and chiefly from the baptism of
infants (21–70). <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) It opens by
exploding the Pelagian contention that death is of nature, and Adam
would have died even had he not sinned, by showing that the penalty
threatened to Adam included physical death ([Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="v.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>),
and that it is due to him that we all die ([Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011), [1 Cor.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p15.2"></span>) (2–8). Then the Pelagian assertion that we
are injured in Adam’s sin only by its bad example, which we imitate, not
by any propagation from it, is tested by an exposition of [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.iii-p15.3"></span>
sq. (9–20). And then the main subject of the book is reached, and the
writer sharply presses the Pelagians with the universal and primeval
fact of the baptism of infants, as a proof of original sin (21–70). He
tracks out all their subterfuges,—showing the absurdity of the
assertions that infants are baptized for the remission of sins that they
have themselves committed since birth (22), or in order to obtain a
higher stage of salvation (23–28), or because of sin committed in some
previous state of existence (31–33). Then turning to the positive side,
he shows at length that the Scriptures teach that Christ came to save
sinners, that baptism is for the remission of sins, and that all that
partake of it are confessedly sinners (34 sq.); then he points out that
[John 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.iii-p15.4"></span>,
on which the Pelagians relied, cannot be held to distinguish between
ordinary salvation and a higher form, under the name of “the kingdom of
God” (58 sq.); and he closes by showing that the very manner in which
baptism was administered, with its exorcism and exsufflation, implied
the infant to be a sinner (63), and by suggesting that the peculiar
helplessness of infancy, so different not only from the earliest age of
Adam, but also from that of many young animals, may possibly be itself
penal (64–69). The second book treats, with similar fulness, the
question of the perfection of human righteousness in this life. After an
exordium which speaks of the will and its limitations, and of the need
of God’s assisting grace (1–6), the writer raises four questions. First,
whether it may be said to be possible, by God’s grace, for a man to
attain a condition of entire sinlessness in this life (7). This he
answers in the affirmative. Secondly, he asks, whether any one has ever
done this, or <span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxv"></span>may ever be expected to do it, and answers
in the negative on the testimony of Scripture (8–25). Thirdly, he asks
why not, and replies briefly because men are unwilling, explaining at
length what he means by this (26–33). Finally, he inquires whether any
man has ever existed, exists now, or will ever exist, entirely without
sin,—this question differing from the second inasmuch as that asked
after the attainment in this life of a state in which sinning should
cease, while this seeks a man who has never been guilty of sin, implying
the absence of original as well as of actual sin. After answering this
in the negative (34), Augustin discusses anew the question of original
sin. Here after expounding from the positive side (35–38) the condition
of man in paradise, the nature of his probation, and of the fall and its
effects both on him and his posterity, and the kind of redemption that
has been provided in the incarnation, he proceeds to answer certain
cavils (39 sq.), such as, “Why should children of baptized people need
baptism?”—“How can a sin be remitted to the father and held against the
child?”—“If physical death comes from Adam, ought we not to be released
from it on believing in Christ?”—and concludes with an exhortation to
hold fast to the exact truth, turning neither to the right nor
left,—neither saying that we have no sin, nor surrendering ourselves to
our sin (57 sq.).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p16"></span>After these books were completed,
Augustin came into possession of Pelagius’ *Commentary on Paul’s
Epistles*, which was written while he was living in Rome (before 410),
and found it to contain some arguments that he had not treated,—such
arguments, he tells us, as he had not imagined could be held by any
one. <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) Unwilling to re-open his
finished argument, he now began a long supplementary letter to
Marcellinus, which he intended to serve as a third and concluding book
to his work. He was some time in completing this letter. He had asked to
have the former two books returned to him; and it is a curious
indication of his overworked state of mind, that he forgot what he
wanted with them: <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) he visited
Carthage while the letter was in hand, and saw Marcellinus personally;
and even after his return to Hippo, it dragged along, amid many
distractions, slowly towards completion. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) Meanwhile, a long letter was written to
Honoratus, in which a section on the grace of the New Testament was
incorporated. At length the promised supplement was completed. It was
professedly a criticism of Pelagius’ Commentary, and therefore naturally
mentioned his name; but Augustin even goes out of his way to speak as
highly of his opponent as he can, <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)
—although it is apparent that his esteem is not very high for his
strength of mind, and is even less high for the moral quality that led
to his odd, oblique way of expressing his opinions. There is even a half
sarcasm in the way he speaks of Pelagius’ care and circumspection, which
was certainly justified by the event. The letter opens by stating and
criticising in a very acute and telling dialectic, the new arguments of
Pelagius, which were such as the following: “If Adam’s sin injured even
those who do not sin, Christ’s righteousness ought likewise to profit
even those who do not believe” (2–4); “No man can transmit what he has
not; and hence, if baptism cleanses from sin, the children of baptized
parents ought to be free from sin;” “God remits one’s own sins, and can
scarcely, therefore, impute another’s to us; and if the soul is created,
it would certainly be unjust to impute Adam’s alien sin to it” (5). The
stress of the letter, however, is laid upon two contentions,—1. That
whatever else may be ambiguous in the Scriptures, they are perfectly
clear that no man can have eternal life except in Christ, who came to
call sinners to repentance (7); and 2. That original sin in infants has
always been, in the Church, one of the fixed facts, to be used as a
basis of argument, in order to reach the truth in other matters, and has
never itself been called in question before (10–14). At this point, the
writer returns to the second and third of the new arguments of Pelagius
mentioned above, and discusses them more fully (15–20), closing with a
recapitulation of the three great points that had been raised; viz.,
that both death and sin are derived from Adam’s sin by all his
posterity; that infants need salvation, <span id="page_xxvi">p.
xxvi</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxvi"></span>and hence baptism; and
that no man ever attains in this life such a state of holiness that he
cannot truly pray, “Forgive us our trespasses.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p21"></span>Augustin was now to learn that one
service often entails another. Marcellinus wrote to say that he was
puzzled by what had been said in the second book of this work, as to the
possibility of man’s attaining to sinlessness in this life, while yet it
was asserted that no man ever had attained, or ever would attain, it.
How, he asked, can that be said to be possible which is, and which will
remain, unexampled? In reply, Augustin wrote, during this same year
(412), and sent to his noble friend, another work, which he calls *On
the Spirit and the Letter*, from the prominence which he gives in it to
the words of [2 Cor. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) He did
not content himself with a simple, direct answer to Marcellinus’
question, but goes at length into a profound disquisition into the roots
of the doctrine, and thus gives us, not a mere explanation of a former
contention, but a new treatise on a new subject,—the absolute necessity
of the grace of God for any good living. He begins by explaining to
Marcellinus that he has affirmed the possibility while denying the
actuality of a sinless life, on the ground that all things are possible
to God,—even the passage of a camel through the eye of a needle, which
nevertheless has never occurred (1, 2). For, in speaking of man’s
perfection, we are speaking really of a work of God,—and one which is
none the less His work because it is wrought through the instrumentality
of man, and in the use of his free will. The Scriptures, indeed, teach
that no man lives without sin, but this is only the proclamation of a
matter of fact; and although it is thus contrary to fact and Scripture
to assert that men may be found that live sinlessly, yet such an
assertion would not be fatal heresy. What is unbearable, is that men
should assert it to be possible for man, unaided by God, to attain this
perfection. This is to speak against the grace of God: it is to put in
man’s power what is only possible to the almighty grace of God (3, 4).
No doubt, even these men do not, in so many words, exclude the aid of
grace in perfecting human life,—they affirm God’s help; but they make it
consist in His gift to man of a perfectly free will, and in His addition
to this of commandments and teachings which make known to him what he is
to seek and what to avoid, and so enable him to direct his free will to
what is good. What, however, does such a “grace” amount to? (5). Man
needs something more than to know the right way: he needs to love it, or
he will not walk in it; and all mere teaching, which can do nothing more
than bring us knowledge of what we ought to do, is but the letter that
killeth. What we need is some inward, Spirit-given aid to the keeping of
what by the law we know ought to be kept. Mere knowledge slays: while to
lead a holy life is the gift of God,—not only because He has given us
will, nor only because He has taught us the right way, but because by
the Holy Spirit He sheds love abroad in the hearts of all those whom He
has predestinated, and will call and justify and glorify ([Rom.
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span id="v.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>).
To prove this, he states to be the object of the present treatise; and
after investigating the meaning of [2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.iii-p22.2"></span>,
and showing that “the letter” there means the law as a system of
precepts, which reveals sin rather than takes it away, points out the
way rather than gives strength to walk in it, and therefore slays the
soul by shutting it up under sin,—while “the Spirit” is God’s Holy Ghost
who is shed abroad in our hearts to give us strength to walk aright,—he
undertakes to prove this position from the teachings of the Epistle to
the Romans at large. This contention, it will be seen, cut at the very
roots of Pelagianism: if all mere teaching slays the soul, as Paul
asserts, then all that what they called “grace” could, when alone, do,
was to destroy; and the upshot of “helping” man by simply giving him
free will, and pointing out the way to him, would be the loss of the
whole race. Not that the law is sin: Augustin teaches that it is holy
and good, and God’s instrument in salvation. Not that free will is done
away: it is by free will that men are led into holiness. But the purpose
of the law (he teaches) is to make men so feel their lost estate as to
seek the help by which alone they may be saved; and will is only then
liberated to do good when grace has <span id="page_xxvii">p.
xxvii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxvii"></span>made it free. “What
the law of works enjoins by menace, that the law of faith secures by
faith. What the law of works does is to say, ‘Do what I command thee;’
but by the law of faith we say to God, ‘Give me what thou
commandest.’”(22). <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) In the midst of
this argument, Augustin is led to discuss the differentiating
characteristics of the Old and New Testaments; and he expounds at length
(33–42) the passage in [Jer. xxxi.
31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>, showing that, in the prophet’s view, the
difference between the two covenants is that in the Old, the law is an
external thing written on stones; while in the New, it is written
internally on the heart, so that men now wish to do what the law
prescribes. This writing on the heart is nothing else, he explains, than
the shedding abroad by the Holy Spirit of love in our hearts, so that we
love God’s will, and therefore freely do it. Towards the end of the
treatise (50–61), he treats in an absorbingly interesting way of the
mutual relations of free will, faith, and grace, contending that all
co-exist without the voiding of any. It is by free will that we believe;
but it is only as grace moves us, that we are able to use our free will
for believing; and it is only after we are thus led by grace to believe,
that we obtain all other goods. In prosecuting this analysis, Augustin
is led to distinguish very sharply between the faculty and use of free
will (58), as well as between ability and volition (53). Faith is an act
of the man himself; but only as he is given the power from on high to
will to believe, will he believe (57, 60).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p24"></span>By this work, Augustin completed, in his
treatment of Pelagianism, the circle of that triad of doctrines which he
himself looked upon as most endangered by this heresy, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) —original sin, the imperfection of human
righteousness, the necessity of grace. In his mind, the last was the
kernel of the whole controversy; and this was a subject which he could
never approach without some heightened fervour. This accounts for the
great attractiveness of the present work,—through the whole fabric of
which runs the golden thread of the praise of God’s ineffable grace. In
Canon Bright’s opinion, it “perhaps, next to the ‘Confessions,’ tells us
most of the thoughts of that ‘rich, profound, and affectionate mind’ on
the soul’s relations to its God.” <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p27"></span>After the publication of these treatises,
the controversy certainly did not lull; but it relapsed for nearly three
years again, into less public courses. Meanwhile, Augustin was busy,
among other most distracting cares (Eph. 145:0, [Eph.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000)<span id="v.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>),
still defending the grace of God, by letters and sermons. A fair
illustration of his state of mind at this time, may be obtained from his
letter to Anastasius (145), which assuredly must have been written soon
after the treatise *On the Spirit and the Letter*. Throughout this
letter, there are adumbrations of the same train of thought that filled
this treatise; and there is one passage which may almost be taken as a
summary of it. Augustin is so weary of the vexatious cares that filled
his life, that he is ready to long for the everlasting rest, and yet
bewails the weakness which allowed the sweetness of external things
still to insinuate itself into his heart. Victory over, and emancipation
from, this, he asserts, “cannot, without God’s grace, be achieved by the
human will, which is by no means to be called free so long as it is
subject to enslaving lusts.” Then he proceeds: “The law, therefore, by
teaching and commanding what cannot be fulfilled without grace,
demonstrates to man his weakness, in order that the weakness, thus
proved, may resort to the Saviour, by whose healing the will may be able
to do what it found impossible in its weakness. So, then, the law brings
us to faith, faith obtains the Spirit in fuller measure, the Spirit
sheds love abroad in us, and love fulfils the law. For this reason the
law is called a schoolmaster, under whose threatening and severity
‘whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered.’ But
‘how shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed?’ Wherefore,
that the letter without the Spirit may not kill, the life-giving Spirit
is given to those that believe and call upon Him; but the love of God is
poured out into our hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given to us, so
that the words of the same apostle, ‘Love is the fulfilling of the law,’
may be realized. Thus the law is good to him that uses it lawfully; and
he uses it lawfully, who, understanding wherefore it was given, betakes
himself, under the pressure of its threatening, <span
id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxviii"></span>to liberating grace. Whoever
ungratefully despises this grace by which the ungodly is justified, and
trusts in his own strength for fulfilling the law, being ignorant of
God’s righteousness, and going about to establish his own righteousness,
is not submitting himself to the righteousness of God; and therefore the
law is made to him not a help to pardon, but the bond of guilt; not
because the law is evil, but because ‘sin,’ as it is written, ‘works
death to such persons by that which is good.’ For by the commandment, he
sins more grievously, who, by the commandment, knows how evil are the
sins which he commits.” Although Augustin states clearly that this
letter is written against those “who arrogate too much to the human
will, imagining that, the law being given, the will is, of its own
strength, sufficient to fulfil the law, though not assisted by any grace
imparted by the Holy Ghost, in addition to instruction in the law,”—he
refrains still from mentioning the names of the authors of this
teaching, evidently out of a lingering tenderness in his treatment of
them. This will help us to explain the courtesy of a note which he sent
to Pelagius himself at about this time, in reply to a letter he had
received some time before from him; of which Pelagius afterwards (at the
Synod of Diospolis) made, to say the least of it, an ungenerous use.
This note, <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Augustin tells us, was
written with “tempered praises” (wherefrom we see his lessening respect
for the man), and so as to admonish Pelagius to think rightly concerning
grace,—so far as could be done without raising the dregs of the
controversy in a formal note. This he accomplished by praying from the
Lord for him, those good things by which he might be good forever, and
might live eternally with Him who is eternal; and by asking his prayers
in return, that he, too, might be made by the Lord such as he seemed to
suppose he already was. How Augustin could really intend these prayers
to be understood as an admonition to Pelagius to look to God for what he
was seeking to work out for himself, is fully illustrated by the closing
words of this almost contemporary letter to Anastasius: “Pray,
therefore, for us,” he writes, “that we may be righteous,—an attainment
wholly beyond a man’s reach, unless he know righteousness, and be
willing to practise it, but one which is immediately realized when he is
perfectly willing; but this cannot be in him unless he is healed by the
grace of the Spirit, and aided to be able.” The point had already been
made in the controversy, that, by the Pelagian doctrine, so much power
was attributed to the human will, that no one ought to pray, “Lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p29"></span>If he was anxious to avoid personal
controversy with Pelagius himself in the hope that he might even yet be
reclaimed, Augustin was equally anxious to teach the truth on all
possible occasions. Pelagius had been intimate, when at Rome, with the
pious Paulinus, bishop of Nola; and it was understood that there was
some tendency at Nola to follow the new teachings. It was, perhaps, as
late as 414, when Augustin made reply in a long letter, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) to a request of Paulinus’ for an
exposition of certain difficult Scriptures, which had been sent him
about 410. <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) Among them was [Rom. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028)<span id="v.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>;
and, in explaining it, Augustin did not withhold a tolerably complete
account of his doctrine of predestination, involving the essence of his
whole teaching as to grace: “For when he had said, ‘according to the
election they are beloved for their father’s sake,’ he added, ‘for the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance.’ You see that those are
certainly meant who belong to the number of the predestinated.…‘Many
indeed are called, but few chosen;’ but those who are elect, these are
called ‘according to His purpose;’ and it is beyond doubt that in them
God’s foreknowledge cannot be deceived. These He foreknew and
predestinated to be conformed to the image of His Son, in order that He
might be the first born among many brethren. But ‘whom He predestinated,
them He also called.’ This calling is ‘according to His purpose,’ this
calling is ‘without repentance,’”etc., quoting [Rom. v.
28-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#028)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p31.2"></span>. Then continuing, he says, “Those are not in
this vocation, who do not persevere unto the end in the faith that
worketh by love, although they walk in it a little while.…But the reason
why some belong to it, and some do not, can easily be hidden, but cannot
be unjust. For is there injustice <span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>
<span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxix"></span>with God? God forbid! For this
belongs to those high judgments which, so to say, terrified the
wondering apostle to look upon.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p32"></span>Among the most remarkable of the
controversial sermons that were preached about this time, especial
mention is due to two that were delivered at Carthage, midsummer of 413.
The former of these <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) was preached on
the festival of John the Baptist’s birth (June 24), and naturally took
the forerunner for its subject. The nativity of John suggesting the
nativity of Christ, the preacher spoke of the marvel of the incarnation.
He who was in the beginning, and was the Word of God, and was Himself
God, and who made all things, and in whom was life, even this one “came
to us. To whom? To the worthy? Nay, but to the unworthy! For Christ died
for the ungodly, and for the unworthy, though He was worthy. We indeed
were unworthy whom He pitied; but He was worthy who pitied us, to whom
we say, ‘For Thy pity’s sake, Lord, free us!’ Not for the sake of our
preceding merits, but ‘for Thy pity’s sake, Lord, free us;’ and ‘for Thy
name’s sake be propitious to our sins,’ not for our merit’s sake.…For
the merit of sins is, of course, not reward, but punishment.” He then
dwelt upon the necessity of the incarnation, and the necessity of a
mediator between God and “the whole mass of the human race alienated
from Him by Adam.” Then quoting [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>, he
asserts that it is not our varying merits, but God’s grace alone, that
makes us differ, and that we are all alike, great and small, old and
young, saved by one and the same Saviour. “What then, some one says,” he
continues, “even the infant needs a liberator? Certainly he needs one.
And the witness to it is the mother that faithfully runs to church with
the child to be baptized. The witness is Mother Church herself, who
receives the child for washing, and either for dismissing him \[from
this life\] freed, or nurturing him in piety.…Last of all, the tears of
his own misery are witness in the child himself.…Recognize the misery,
extend the help. Let all put on bowels of mercy. By as much as they
cannot speak for themselves, by so much more pityingly let us speak for
the little ones,”—and then follows a passage calling on the Church to
take the grace of infants in their charge as orphans committed to their
care, which is in substance repeated from a former sermon. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The speaker proceeded to quote [Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="v.ii.iii-p34.1"></span>,
and apply it. If Jesus came to save from sins, and infants are brought
to Him, it is to confess that they, too, are sinners. Then, shall they
be withheld from baptism? “Certainly, if the child could speak for
himself, he would repel the voice of opposition, and cry out, ‘Give me
Christ’s life! In Adam I died: give me Christ’s life; in whose sight I
am not clean, even if I am an infant whose life has been but one day in
the earth.’” “No way can be found,” adds the preacher, “of coming into
the life of this world except by Adam; no way can be found of escaping
punishment in the next world except by Christ. Why do you shut up the
one door?” Even John the Baptist himself was born in sin; and absolutely
no one can be found who was born apart from sin, until you find one who
was born apart from Adam. “‘By one man sin entered into the world, and
by sin, death; and so it passed through upon all men.’ If these were my
words, could this sentiment be expressed more expressly, more clearly,
more fully?”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p35"></span>Three days afterwards, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) on the invitation of the Bishop of
Carthage, Augustin preached a sermon professedly directed against the
Pelagians, <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) which takes up the
threads hinted at in the former discourse, and develops a full polemic
with reference to the baptism of infants. He began, formally enough,
with the determination of the question in dispute. The Pelagians concede
that infants should be baptized. The only question is, for what are they
baptized? We say that they would not otherwise have salvation and
eternal life; but they say it is not for salvation, not for eternal
life, but for the kingdom of God.…“The child, they say, although not
baptized, by the desert of his innocence, in that he has no sin at all,
either actual or original, either from him<span id="page_xxx">p.
xxx</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxx"></span>self or contracted from
Adam, necessarily has salvation and eternal life even if not baptized;
but is to be baptized for this reason,—that he may enter into the
kingdom of God, i.e., into the kingdom of heaven.” He then shows that
there is no eternal life outside the kingdom of heaven, no middle place
between the right and left hand of the judge at the last day, and that,
therefore, to exclude one from the kingdom of God is to consign him to
the pains of eternal fire; while, on the other side, no one ascends into
heaven unless he has been made a member of Christ, and this can only be
by faith,—which, in an infant’s case, is professed by another in his
stead. He then treats, at length, some of the puzzling questions with
which the Pelagians were wont to try the catholics; and then breaking
off suddenly, he took a volume in his hands. “I ask you,” he said, “to
bear with me a little: I will read somewhat. It is St. Cyprian whom I
hold in my hand, the ancient bishop of this see. What he thought of the
baptism of infants,—nay, what he has shown that the Church always
thought,—learn in brief. For it is not enough for them to dispute and
argue, I know not what impious novelties: they even try to charge us
with asserting something novel. It is on this account that I read here
St. Cyprian, in order that you may perceive that the orthodox
understanding and catholic sense reside in the words which I have been
just now speaking to you. He was asked whether an infant ought to be
baptized before he was eight days old, seeing that by the ancient law no
infant was allowed to be circumcised unless he was eight days old. A
question arose from this as to the day of baptism,—for concerning the
origin of sin there was no question; and therefore from this thing of
which there was no question, that question that had arisen was settled.”
And then he read to them the passage out of Cyprian’s letter to Fidus,
which declared that he, and all the council with him, unanimously
thought that infants should be baptized at the earliest possible age,
lest they should die in their inherited sin, and so pass into eternal
punishment. <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) The sermon closed with
a tender warning to the teachers of these strange doctrines: he might
call them heretics with truth, but he will not; let the Church seek
still their salvation, and not mourn them as dead; let them be exhorted
as friends, not striven with as enemies. “They disparage us,” he says,
“we will bear it; let them not disparage the rule \[of faith\], let them
not disparage the truth; let them not contradict the Church, which
labours every day for the remission of infants’ original sin. This thing
is settled. The errant disputer may be borne with in other questions
that have not been thoroughly canvassed, that are not yet settled by the
full authority of the Church,—their error should be borne with: it ought
not to extend so far, that they endeavour to shake even the very
foundation of the Church!” He hints that although the patience hitherto
exhibited towards them is “perhaps not blameworthy,” yet patience may
cease to be a virtue, and become culpable negligence: in the mean time,
however, he begs that the catholics should continue amicable, fraternal,
placid, loving, long suffering.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p39"></span>Augustin himself gives us a view of the
progress of the controversy at this time in a letter written in
414. <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) The Pelagians had everywhere
scattered the seeds of their new error; and although some, by his
ministry and that of his brother workers, had, “by God’s mercy,” been
cured of their pest, yet they still existed in Africa, especially about
Carthage, and were everywhere propagating their opinions in
subterraneous whispers, for fear of the judgment of the Church. Wherever
they were not refuted, they were seducing others to their following; and
they were so spread abroad that he did not know where they would break
out next. Nevertheless, he was still unwilling to brand them as
heretics, and was more desirous of healing them as sick members of the
Church than of cutting them off finally as too diseased for cure. Jerome
also tells us that the poison was spreading in both the East and the
West, and mentions particularly as seats where it showed itself the
islands of Rhodes and Sicily. Of Rhodes we know nothing further; but
from Sicily an appeal came to Augustin in 414 from one Hilary, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) setting forth that there were <span
id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxi"></span>certain Christians about Syracuse who
taught strange doctrines, and beseeching Augustin to help him in dealing
with them. The doctrines were enumerated as follows: “They say (1) that
man can be without sin, (2) and can easily keep the commandments of God
if he will; (3) that an unbaptized infant, if he is cut off by death,
cannot justly perish, since he is born without sin; (4) that a rich man
that remains in his riches cannot enter the kingdom of God, except he
sell all that he has;…(5) that we ought not to swear at all;” (6) and,
apparently, that the Church is to be in this world without spot or
blemish. Augustin suspected that these Sicilian disturbances were in
some way the work of Cœlestius, and therefore in his answer <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) informs his correspondent of what had
been done at the Synod of Carthage (412) against him. The long letter
that he sent back follows the inquiries in the order they were put by
Hilary. To the first he replies, in substance, as he had treated the
same matter in the second book of the treatise, *On the Merits and
Forgiveness of Sins*, that it was opposed to Scripture, but was less a
heresy than the wholly unbearable opinion that this state of sinlessness
could be attained without God’s help. “But when they say that free will
suffices to man for fulfilling the precepts of the Lord, even though
unaided to good works by God’s grace and the gift of the Holy Spirit, it
is to be altogether anathematized and detested with all execrations. For
those who assert this are inwardly alien from God’s grace, because being
ignorant of God’s righteousness, like the Jews of whom the apostle
speaks, and wishing to establish their own, they are not subject to
God’s righteousness, since there is no fulfilment of the law except
love; and of course the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, not by
ourselves, nor by the force of our own will, but by the Holy Ghost who
is given to us.” Dealing next with the second point, he drifts into the
matter he had more fully developed in his work *On the Spirit and the
Letter*. “Free will avails for God’s works,” he says, “if it be divinely
aided, and this comes by humble seeking and doing; but when deserted by
divine aid, no matter how excellent may be its knowledge of the law, it
will by no means possess solidity of righteousness, but only the
inflation of ungodly pride and deadly arrogance. This is taught us by
that same Lord’s Prayer; for it would be an empty thing for us to ask
God ‘Lead us not into temptation,’ if the matter was so placed in our
power that we would avail for fulfilling it without any aid from Him.
For this free will is free in proportion as it is sound, but it is sound
in proportion as it is subject to divine pity and grace. For it
faithfully prays, saying, ‘Direct my ways according to Thy word, and let
no iniquity reign over me.’ For how is that free over which iniquity
reigns? But see who it is that is invoked by it, in order that it may
not reign over it. For it says not, ‘Direct my ways according to free
will because no iniquity shall rule over me,’ but ‘Direct my ways
according to Thy *word, and let no iniquity rule over me*.’ It is a
prayer, not a promise; it is a confession, not a profession; it is a
wish for full freedom, not a boast of personal power. For it is not
every one ‘who confides in his own power,’ but ‘every one who calls on
the name of God, that shall be saved.’ ‘But how shall they call upon
Him,’ he says, ‘in whom they have not believed?’ Accordingly, then, they
who rightly believe, believe in order to call on Him in whom they have
believed, and to avail for doing what they receive in the precepts of
the law; since what the law commands, faith prays for.” “God, therefore,
commands continence, and gives continence; He commands by the law, He
gives by grace; He commands by the letter, He gives by the spirit: for
the law without grace makes the transgression to abound, and the letter
without the spirit kills. He commands for this reason,—that we who have
endeavoured to do what He commands, and are worn out in our weakness
under the law, may know how to ask for the aid of grace; and if we have
been able to do any good work, that we may not be ungrateful to Him who
aids us.” The answer to the third point traverses the ground that was
fully covered in the first book of the treatise *On the Merits and
Forgiveness of Sins*, beginning by opposing the Pelagians to Paul in
[Rom. v. 12-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>: “But when they say that an infant, cut off
by death, unbaptized, cannot perish since he is born without sin,—it is
not this that the apostle says; and <span id="page_xxxii">p.
xxxii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxii"></span>I think that it is
better to believe the apostle than them.” The fourth and fifth questions
were new in this controversy; and it is not certain that they belong
properly to it, though the legalistic asceticism of the Pelagian leaders
may well have given rise to a demand on all Christians to sell what they
had, and give to the poor. This one of the points, Augustin treats at
length, pointing out that many of the saints of old were rich, and that
the Lord and His apostles always so speak that their counsels avail to
the right use, not the destruction, of wealth. Christians ought so to
hold their wealth that they are not held by it, and by no means prefer
it to Christ. Equal good sense and mildness are shown in his treatment
of the question concerning oaths, which he points out were used by the
Lord and His apostles, but advises to be used as little as possible lest
by the custom of frequent oaths we learn to swear lightly. The question
as to the Church, he passes over as having been sufficiently treated in
the course of his previous remarks.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p43"></span>To the number of those who had been
rescued from Pelagianism by his efforts, Augustin was now to have the
pleasure of adding two others, in whom he seems to have taken much
delight. Timasius and James were two young men of honorable birth and
liberal education, who had, by the exhortation of Pelagius, been moved
to give up the hope that they had in this world, and enter upon the
service of God in an ascetic life. <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69)
Naturally, they had turned to him for instruction, and had received a
book to which they had given their study. They met somewhere with some
of Augustin’s writings, however, and were deeply affected by what he
said as to grace, and now began to see that the teaching of Pelagius
opposed the grace of God by which man becomes a Christian. They gave
their book, therefore, to Augustin, saying that it was Pelagius’, and
asking him for Pelagius’ sake, and for the sake of the truth, to answer
it. This was done, and the resulting book, *On Nature and Grace*, sent
to the young men, who returned a letter of thanks <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) in which they professed their conversion
from their error. In this book, too, which was written in 415, Augustin
refrained from mentioning Pelagius by name, <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) feeling it better to spare the man while
not sparing his writings. But he tells us, that, on reading the book of
Pelagius to which it was an answer, it became clear to him beyond any
doubt that his teaching was distinctly anti-Christian; <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) and when speaking of his own book
privately to a friend, he allows himself to call it “a considerable book
against *the heresy* of Pelagius, which he had been constrained to write
by some brethren whom he had persuaded to adopt his fatal error, denying
the grace of Christ.” <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) Thus his
attitude towards the persons of the new teachers was becoming ever more
and more strained, in despite of his full recognition of the excellent
motives that might lie behind their “zeal not according to knowledge.”
This treatise opens with a recognition of the zeal of Pelagius, which,
as it burns most ardently against those who, when reproved for sin, take
refuge in censuring their nature, Augustin compares with the heathen
view as expressed in Sallust’s saying, “the human race falsely complains
of its own nature,” <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) and which he
charges with not being according to knowledge, and proposes to oppose by
an equal zeal against all attempts to render the cross of Christ of none
effect. He then gives a brief but excellent summary of the more
important features of the catholic doctrine concerning nature and grace
(2–7). Opening the work of Pelagius, which had been placed in his hands,
he examines his doctrine of sin, its nature and effects. Pelagius, he
points out, draws a distinction, sound enough in itself, between what is
“possible” and what is “actual,” but applies it unsoundly to sin, when
he says that every man has the *possibility* of being without sin (8–9),
and therefore without condemnation. Not so, says Augustin; an infant who
dies unbaptized has no possibility of salvation open to him; and the man
who has lived and died in a land where it was impossible for him to hear
the name of Christ, has had no possibility open to him of becoming
righteous by nature and free will. If this be not so, Christ is dead in
vain, since all men then might have accomplished their salvation, even
if Christ had never died (10). Pelagius, moreover, he shows, exhibits a
tendency to deny the sinful character of all sins <span
id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxiii"></span>that are impossible to avoid, and so
treats of sins of ignorance as to show that he excuses them (13–19).
When he argues that no sin, because it is not a substance, can change
nature, which is a substance, Augustin replies that this destroys the
Saviour’s work,—for how can He save from sins if sins do not corrupt?
And, again, if an act cannot injure a substance, how can abstention from
food, which is a mere act, kill the body? In the same way sin is not a
substance; but God is a substance,—yea, the height of substance, and
only true sustenance of the reasonable creature; and the consequence of
departure from Him is to the soul what refusal of food is to the body
(22). To Pelagius’ assertion that sin cannot be punished by more sin,
Augustin replies that the apostle thinks differently ([Rom. i.
21-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p49.1"></span>). Then putting his finger on the main point
in controversy, he quotes the Scriptures as declaring the present
condition of man to be that of spiritual death. “The truth then
designates as *dead* those whom this man declares to be unable to be
damaged or corrupted by sin,—because, forsooth, he has discovered sin to
be no substance!” (25). It was by free will that man passed into this
state of death; but a dead man needs something else to revive him,—he
needs nothing less than a Vivifier. But of vivifying grace, Pelagius
knew nothing; and by knowing nothing of a Vivifier, he knows nothing of
a Saviour; but rather by making nature of itself able to be sinless, he
glorifies the Creator at the expense of the Saviour (39). Next is
examined Pelagius’ contention that many saints are enumerated in the
Scriptures as having lived sinlessly in this world. While declining to
discuss the question of fact as to the Virgin Mary (42), Augustin
opposes to the rest the declaration of John in [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.iii-p49.2"></span>, as
final, but still pauses to explain why the Scriptures do not mention the
sins of all, and to contend that all who ever were saved under the Old
Testament or the New, were saved by the sacrificial death of Christ, and
by faith in Him (40–50). Thus we are brought, as Augustin says, to the
core of the question, which concerns, not the fact of sinlessness in any
man, but man’s ability to be sinless. This ability Pelagius affirms of
all men, and Augustin denies of all “unless they are justified by the
grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ and Him crucified” (51).
Thus, the whole discussion is about grace, which Pelagius does not admit
in any true sense, but places only in the nature that God has made (52).
We are next invited to attend to another distinction of Pelagius’, in
which he discriminates sharply between the nature that God has made, the
crown of which is free will, and the use that man makes of this free
will. The endowment of free will is a “capacity;” it is, because given
by God in our making, a necessity of nature, and not in man’s power to
have or not have. It is the right use of it only, which man has in his
power. This analysis, Pelagius illustrates at length, by appealing to
the difference between the possession and use of the various bodily
senses. The ability to see, for instance, he says, is a necessity of our
nature; we do not make it, we cannot help having it; it is ours only to
use it. Augustin criticises this presentation of the matter with great
sharpness (although he is not averse to the analysis itself),—showing
the inapplicability of the illustrations used,—for, he asks, is it not
possible for us to blind ourselves, and so no longer have the ability to
see? and would not many a man like to control the “use” of his
“capacity” to hear when a screechy saw is in the neighbourhood? (55);
and as well the falsity of the contention illustrated, since Pelagius
has ignored the fall, and, even were that not so, has so ignored the
need of God’s aid for all good, in any state of being, as to deny it
(56). Moreover, it is altogether a fallacy, Augustin argues, to contend
that men have the “ability” to make every use we can conceive of our
faculties. We *cannot* wish for unhappiness; God *cannot* deny Himself
(57); and just so, in a corrupt nature, the mere possession of a
*faculty of choice* does not imply the ability to use that faculty for
not sinning. “Of a man, indeed, who has his legs strong and sound, it
may be said admissibly enough, ‘whether he will or not, he has the
capacity of walking;’ but if his legs be broken, however much he may
wish, he has not the ‘capacity.’ The nature of which our author speaks
is corrupted” (57). What, then, can he mean by saying that, whether we
will or not, we have the capacity of not sinning,—a statement so
opposite to Paul’s in [Rom. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span id="v.ii.iii-p49.3"></span>?
Some space is next given to an attempted rebuttal by Pelagius of the
testimony of [Gal. v. 17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p49.4"></span>, on the ground that the “flesh” <span
id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxiv"></span>there does not refer to the baptized
(60–70); and then the passages are examined which Pelagius had quoted
against Augustin out of earlier writers,—Lactantius (71), Hilary (72),
Ambrose (75), John of Constantinople (76), Xystus,—a blunder of
Pelagius, who quoted from a Pythagorean philosopher, mistaking him for
the Roman bishop Sixtus (57), Jerome (78), and Augustin himself (80).
All these writers, Augustin shows, admitted the universal sinfulness of
man,—and especially he himself had confessed the necessity of grace in
the immediate context of the passage quoted by Pelagius. The treatise
closes (82 sq.) with a noble panegyric on that love which God sheds
abroad in the heart, by the Holy Ghost, and by which alone we can be
made keepers of the law.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p50"></span>The treatise *On Nature and Grace* was as
yet unfinished, when the over-busy <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)
scriptorium at Hippo was invaded by another young man seeking
instruction. This time it was a zealous young presbyter from the
remotest part of Spain, “from the shore of the ocean,”—Paulus Orosius by
name, whose pious soul had been afflicted with grievous wounds by the
Priscillianist and Origenist heresies that had broken out in his
country, and who had come with eager haste to Augustin, on hearing that
he could get from him the instruction which he needed for confuting
them. Augustin seems to have given him his heart at once; and, feeling
too little informed as to the special heresies which he wished to be
prepared to controvert, persuaded him to go on to Palestine to be taught
by Jerome, and gave him introductions which described him as one “who is
in the bond of catholic peace a brother, in point of age a son, and in
honour a fellow-presbyter,—a man of quick understanding, ready speech,
and burning zeal.” His departure to Palestine gave Augustin an
opportunity to consult with Jerome on the one point that had been raised
in the Pelagian controversy on which he had not been able to see light.
The Pelagians had early argued, <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
that, if souls are created anew for men at their birth, it would be
unjust in God to impute Adam’s sin to them. And Augustin found himself
unable either to prove that souls are transmitted (*traduced*, as the
phrase is), or to show that it would not involve God in injustice to
make a soul only to make it subject to a sin committed by another.
Jerome had already put himself on record as a believer in both original
sin and the creation of souls at the time of birth. Augustin feared the
logical consequences of this assertion, and yet was unable to refute it.
He therefore seized this occasion to send a long treatise on the origin
of the soul to his friend, with the request that he would consider the
subject anew, and answer his doubts. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) In this treatise he stated that he was
fully persuaded that the soul had fallen into sin, but by no fault of
God or of nature, but of its own free will; and asked when could the
soul of an infant have contracted the guilt, which, unless the grace of
Christ should come to its rescue by baptism, would involve it in
condemnation, if God (as Jerome held, and as he was willing to hold with
him, if this difficulty could be cleared up) makes each soul for each
individual at the time of birth? He professed himself embarrassed on
sucha supposition by the penal sufferings of infants, the pains they
endured in this life, and much more the danger they are in of eternal
damnation, into which they actually go unless saved by baptism. God is
good, just, omnipotent: how, then, can we account for the fact that “in
Adam all die,” if souls are created afresh for each birth? “If new souls
are made for men,” he affirms, “individually at their birth, I do not
see, on the one hand, that they could have any sin while yet in infancy;
nor do I believe, on the other hand, that God condemns any soul which He
sees to have no sin;” “and yet, whoever says that those children who
depart out of this life without partaking of the sacrament of baptism,
shall be made alive in Christ, certainly contradicts the apostolic
declaration,” and “he that is not made alive in Christ must necessarily
remain under the condemnation of which the apostle says that by the
offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation.”
“Wherefore,” he adds to his correspondent, “if that <span
id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxv"></span>opinion of yours does not contradict this
firmly grounded article of faith, let it be mine also; but if it does,
let it no longer be yours.” <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) So far
as obtaining light was concerned, Augustin might have spared himself the
pain of this composition: Jerome simply answered <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) that he had no leisure to reply to the
questions submitted to him. But Orosius’ mission to Palestine was big
with consequences. Once there, he became the accuser of Pelagius before
John of Jerusalem, and the occasion, at least, of the trials of Pelagius
in Palestine during the summer and winter of 415 which issued so
disastrously, and ushered in a new phase of the conflict.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p56"></span>Meanwhile, however, Augustin was ignorant
of what was going on in the East, and had his mind directed again to
Sicily. About a year had passed since he had sent thither his long
letter to Hilary. Now his conjecture that Cœlestius was in some way at
the bottom of the Sicilian outbreak, received confirmation from a paper
which certain catholic brethren brought out of Sicily, and which was
handed to Augustin by two exiled Spanish bishops, Eutropius and Paul.
This paper bore the title, *Definitions Ascribed to Cœlestius*, and
presented internal evidence, in style and thought, of being correctly so
ascribed. <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) It consisted of three
parts, in the first of which were collected a series of brief and
compressed “definitions,” or “ratiocinations” as Augustin calls them, in
which the author tries to place the catholics in a logical dilemma, and
to force them to admit that man can live in this world without sin. In
the second part, he adduced certain passages of Scripture in defence of
his doctrine. In the third part, he undertook to deal with the texts
that had been quoted against his contention, not, however, by examining
into their meaning, or seeking to explain them in the sense of his
theory, but simply by matching them with others which he thought made
for him. Augustin at once (about the end of 415) wrote a treatise in
answer to this, which bears the title of *On the Perfection of Man’s
Righteousness*. The distribution of the matter in this work follows that
of the treatise to which it is an answer. First of all (1–16), the
“ratiocinations” are taken up one by one and briefly answered. As they
all concern sin, and have for their object to prove that man cannot be
accounted a sinner unless he is able, in his own power, wholly to avoid
sin,—that is, to prove that a plenary natural ability is the necessary
basis of responsibility,—Augustin argues *per contra* that man can
entail a sinfulness on himself for which and for the deeds of which he
remains responsible, though he is no longer able to avoid sin; thus
admitting that for the race, plenary ability must stand at the root of
sinfulness. Next (17–22) he discusses the passages which Cœlestius had
advanced in defence of his teachings, viz., (1) passages in which God
commands men to be without sin, which Augustin meets by saying that the
point is, whether these commands are to be fulfilled *without God’s
aid*, in the body of this death, while absent from the Lord (17–20); and
(2) passages in which God declares that His commandments are not
grievous, which Augustin meets by explaining that all God’s commandments
are fulfilled only by *Love*, which finds nothing grievous; and that
this love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, without whom
we have only fear, to which the commandments are not only grievous, but
impossible. Lastly, Augustin patiently follows Cœlestius through his odd
“oppositions of texts,” explaining carefully all that he had adduced, in
an orthodox sense (23–42). In closing, he takes up Cœlestius’ statement,
that “it is quite possible for man not to sin even in word, if God so
will,” pointing out how he avoids saying “if God give him His help,” and
then proceeds to distinguish carefully between the differing assertions
of sinlessness that may be made. To say that any man ever lived, or will
live, without needing forgiveness, is to contradict [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.iii-p57.1"></span>,
and must imply that he does not need a Saviour, against [Matt.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span id="v.ii.iii-p57.2"></span>.
To say that after his sins have been forgiven, any one has ever remained
without sin, contradicts [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.iii-p57.3"></span> and
[Matt. vi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p57.4"></span>. Yet, if God’s help be allowed, this
contention is not so wicked as the other; and the great heresy is to
deny the necessity of God’s constant grace, for which we pray when we
say, “Lead us not into temptation.”

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxvi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p58"></span>Tidings were now (416) beginning to reach
Africa of what was doing in the East. There was diligently circulated
everywhere, and came into Augustin’s hands, an epistle of Pelagius’ own
“filled with vanity,” in which he boasted that fourteen bishops had
approved his assertion that “man can live without sin, and easily keep
the commandments if he wishes,” and had thus “shut the mouth of
opposition in confusion,” and “broken up the whole band of wicked
conspirators against him.” Soon afterwards a copy of an “apologetical
paper,” in which Pelagius used the authority of the Palestinian bishops
against his adversaries, not altogether without disingenuousness, was
sent by him to Augustin through the hands of a common acquaintance,
Charus by name. It was not accompanied, however, by any letter from
Pelagius; and Augustin wisely refrained from making public use of it.
Towards midsummer Orosius came with more authentic information, and
bearing letters from Jerome and Heros and Lazarus. It was apparently
before his coming that a controversial sermon was preached, only a
fragment of which has come down to us. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) So far as we can learn from the extant
part, its subject seems to have been the relation of prayer to
Pelagianism; and what we have, opens with a striking anecdote: “When
these two petitions—‘Forgive us our debts as we also forgive our
debtors,’ and ‘Lead us not into temptation’—are objected to the
Pelagians, what do you think they reply? I was horrified, my brethren,
when I heard it. I did not, indeed, hear it with my own ears; but my
holy brother and fellow-bishop Urbanus, who used to be presbyter here,
and now is bishop of Sicca,” when he was in Rome, and was arguing with
one who held these opinions, pressed him with the weight of the Lord’s
Prayer, and “what do you think he replied to him? ‘We ask God,’ he said,
‘not to lead us into temptation, lest we should suffer something that is
not in our power,—lest I should be thrown from my horse; lest I should
break my leg; lest a robber should slay me, and the like. For these
things,’ he said, ‘are not in my power; but for overcoming the
temptations of my sins, I both have ability if I wish to use it, and am
not able to receive God’s help.’ <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)
You see, brethren,” the good bishop adds, “how malignant this heresy is:
you see how it horrifies all of you. Have a care that you be not taken
by it.” He then presses the general doctrine of prayer as proving that
all good things come from God, whose aid is always necessary to us, and
is always attainable by prayer; and closes as follows: “Consider, then,
these things, my brethren, when any one comes to you and says to you,
‘What, then, are we to do if we have nothing in our power, unless God
gives all things? God will not then crown us, but He will crown
Himself.’ You already see that this comes from that vein: it is a vein,
but it has poison in it; it is stricken by the serpent; it is not sound.
For what Satan is doing to-day is seeking to cast out from the Church by
the poison of heretics, just as he once cast out from Paradise by the
poison of the serpent. Let no one tell you that this one was acquitted
by the bishops: there was an acquittal, but it was his confession, so to
speak, his amendment, that was acquitted. For what he said before the
bishops seemed catholic; but what he wrote in his books, the bishops who
pronounced the acquittal were ignorant of. And perchance he was really
convinced and amended. For we ought not to despair of the man who
perchance preferred to be united to the catholic faith, and fled to its
grace and aid. Perchance this was what happened. But, in any event, it
was not the heresy that was acquitted, but the man who denied the
heresy.” <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p62"></span>The coming of Orosius must have dispelled
any lingering hope that the meaning of the council’s finding was that
Pelagius had really recanted. Councils were immediately assembled at
Carthage and Mileve, and the documents which Orosius had brought were
read before them. We know nothing of their proceedings except what we
can gather from the letters which they sent <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) to Innocent at Rome, seeking his aid in
their condemnation of the heresy now so nearly approved in Palestine. To
these two official letters, Augustin, in company with four other
bishops, added a <span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxvii"></span>third private letter, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) in which they took care that Innocent
should be informed on all the points necessary to his decision. This
important letter begins almost abruptly with a characterization of
Pelagianism as inimical to the grace of God, and has grace for its
subject throughout. It accounts for the action of the Palestinian synod,
as growing out of a misunderstanding of Pelagius’ words, in which he
seemed to acknowledge grace, which these catholic bishops understood
naturally to mean that grace of which they read in the Scriptures, and
which they were accustomed to preach to their people,—the grace by which
we are justified from iniquity, and saved from weakness; while he meant
nothing more than that by which we are given free will at our creation.
“For if these bishops had understood that he meant only that grace which
we have in common with the ungodly and with all, along with whom we are
men, while he denied that by which we are Christians and the sons of
God, they not only could not have patiently listened to him,—they could
not even have borne him before their eyes.” The letter then proceeds to
point out the difference between grace and natural gifts, and between
grace and the law, and to trace out Pelagius’ meaning when he speaks of
grace, and when he contends that man can be sinless without any really
inward aid. It suggests that Pelagius be sent for, and thoroughly
examined by Innocent, or that he should be examined by letter or in his
writings; and that he be not cleared until he unequivocally confessed
the grace of God in the catholic sense, and anathematized the false
teachings in the books attributed to him. The book of Pelagius which was
answered in the treatise *On Nature and Grace* was enclosed, with this
letter, with the most important passages marked: and it was suggested
that more was involved in the matter than the fate of one single man,
Pelagius, who, perhaps, was already brought to a better mind; the fate
of multitudes already led astray, or yet to be deceived by these false
views, was in danger.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p65"></span>At about this same time (417), the
tireless bishop sent a short letter <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)
to a Hilary, who seems to be Hilary of Norbonne, which is interesting
from its undertaking to convey a characterization of Pelagianism to one
who was as yet ignorant of it. It thus brings out what Augustin
conceived to be its essential features. “An effort has been made,” we
read, “to raise a certain new heresy, inimical to the grace of Christ,
against the Church of Christ. It is not yet openly separated from the
Church. It is the heresy of men who dare to attribute so much power to
human weakness that they contend that this only belongs to God’s
grace,—that we are created with free will and the possibility of not
sinning, and that we receive God’s commandments which are to be
fulfilled by us; but, for keeping and fulfilling these commandments, we
do not need any divine aid. No doubt, the remission of sins is necessary
for us; for we have no power to right what we have done wrong in the
past. But for avoiding and overcoming sins in the future, for conquering
all temptations with virtue, the human will is sufficient by its natural
capacity without any aid of God’s grace. And neither do infants need the
grace of the Saviour, so as to be liberated by it through His baptism
from perdition, seeing that they have contracted no contagion of
damnation from Adam.” <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) He engages
Hilary in the destruction of this heresy, which ought to be
“concordantly condemned and anathematized by all who have hope in
Christ,” as a “pestiferous impiety,” and excuses himself for not
undertaking its full refutation in a brief letter. A much more important
letter was sent off, at about the same time, to John of Jerusalem, who
had conducted the first Palestinian examination of Pelagius, and had
borne a prominent part in the synod at Diospolis. He sent with it a copy
of Pelagius’ book which he had examined in his treatise *On Nature and
Grace*, as well as a copy of that reply itself, and asked John to send
him an authentic copy of the proceedings at Diospolis. He took this
occasion seriously to warn his brother bishop against the wiles of
Pelagius, and begged him, if he loved Pelagius, to let men see that he
did not so love him as to be deceived by him. He pointed out that in the
book sent with the letter, Pelagius called nothing the grace of God
except nature; and that he affirmed, and even vehemently contended, that
by free will alone, human nature was able to suffice for itself for
working righteousness and keeping <span id="page_xxxviii">p.
xxxviii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxviii"></span>all God’s
commandments; whence any one could see that he opposed the grace of God
of which the apostles spoke in [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span id="v.ii.iii-p67.1"></span>,
and contradicted, as well, all the prayers and benedictions of the
Church by which blessings were sought for men from God’s grace. “If you
love Pelagius, then,” he continued, “let him, too, love you as
himself,—nay, more than himself; and let him not deceive you. For when
you hear him confess the grace of God and the aid of God, you think he
means what you mean by it. But let him be openly asked whether he
desires that we should pray God that we sin not; whether he proclaims
the assisting grace of God, without which we would do much evil; whether
he believes that even children who have not yet been able to do good or
evil are nevertheless, on account of one man by whom sin entered into
the world, sinners in him, and in need of being delivered by the grace
of Christ.” If he openly denies such things, Augustin would be pleased
to hear of it.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p68"></span>Thus we see the great bishop sitting in
his library at Hippo, placing his hands on the two ends of the world.
That nothing may be lacking to the picture of his universal activity, we
have another letter from him, coming from about this same time, that
exhibits his care for the individuals who had placed themselves in some
sort under his tutelage. Among the refugees from Rome in the terrible
times when Alaric was a second time threatening the city, was a family
of noble women,—Proba, Juliana, and Demetrias, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) —grandmother, mother, and daughter,—who,
finding an asylum in Africa, gave themselves to God’s service, and
sought the friendship and counsel of Augustin. In 413 the granddaughter
“took the veil” under circumstances that thrilled the Christian world,
and brought out letters of congratulation and advice from Augustin and
Jerome, and also from Pelagius. This letter of Pelagius seems not to
have fallen into Augustin’s way until now (416): he was so disturbed by
it that he wrote to Juliana a long letter warning her against its evil
counsels. <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) It was so shrewdly
phrased, that, at first sight, Augustin was himself almost persuaded
that it did somehow acknowledge the grace of God; but when he compared
it with others of Pelagius’ writings, he saw that here, too, he was
using ambiguous phrases in a non-natural sense. The object of his letter
(in which Alypius is conjoined, as joint author) to Juliana is to warn
her and her holy daughter against all opinions that opposed the grace of
God, and especially against the covert teaching of the letter of
Pelagius to Demetrias. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) “In this
book,” he says, “were it lawful for such an one to read it, a virgin of
Christ would read that her holiness and all her spiritual riches are to
spring from no other source than herself; and thus before she attains to
the perfection of blessedness, she would learn—which may God forbid!—to
be ungrateful to God.” Then, after quoting the words of Pelagius, in
which he declares that “earthly riches came from others, but your
spiritual riches no one can have conferred on you but yourself; for
these, then, you are justly praised, for these you are deservedly to be
preferred to others,—for they can exist only from yourself and in
yourself,” he continues: “Far be it from any virgin to listen to
statements like these. Every virgin of Christ understands the innate
poverty of the human heart, and therefore declines to be adorned
otherwise than by the gifts of her spouse.…Let her not listen to him who
says, ‘No one can confer them on you but yourself, and they cannot exist
except from you and in you:’ but to him who says, ‘We have this treasure
in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us.’ And be not surprised that we speak of these things as yours,
and not from you; for we speak of daily bread as ‘ours,’ but yet add
‘give it to us,’ lest it should be thought it was from ourselves.”
Again, he warns her that grace is not mere knowledge any more than mere
nature; and that Pelagius, even when using the word “grace,” means no
inward or efficient aid, but mere nature or knowledge or forgiveness of
past sins; and beseeches her not to forget the God of all grace from
whom ([Wis. 1:20](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#021)<span id="v.ii.iii-p71.1"></span>)
Demetrias had that very virgin continence which was so justly her boast.

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xxxix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p72"></span>With the opening of 417, came the answers
from Innocent to the African letters. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) And although they were marred by much
boastful language concerning the dignity of his see, which could not but
be distasteful to the Africans, they admirably served their purpose in
the satisfactory manner in which they, on the one hand, asserted the
necessity of the “daily grace, and help of God,” for our good living,
and, on the other, determined that the Pelagians had denied this grace,
and declared their leaders Pelagius and Cœlestius deprived of the
communion of the Church until they should “recover their senses from the
wiles of the Devil by whom they are held captive according to his will.”
Augustin may be pardoned for supposing that a condemnation pronounced by
two provincial synods in Africa, and heartily concurred in by the Roman
bishop, who had already at Jerusalem been recognized as in some sort the
fit arbiter of this Western dispute, should settle the matter. If
Pelagius had been before jubilant, Augustin found this a suitable time
for his rejoicing.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p74"></span>About the same time with Innocent’s
letters, the official proceedings of the synod of Diospolis at last
reached Africa, and Augustin lost no time (early in 417) in publishing a
full account and examination of them, thus providing us with that
inestimable boon, a full contemporary history of the chief events
connected with the controversy up to this time. This treatise, which is
addressed to Aurelius, bishop of Carthage, opens with a brief
explanation of Augustin’s delay heretofore, in discussing Pelagius’
defence of himself in Palestine, as due to his not having received the
official copy of the Proceedings of the Council at Diospolis (1–2*a*).
Then Augustin proceeds at once to discuss at length the doings of the
synod, point by point, following the official record step by step
(2*b*-45). He treats at large here eleven items in the indictment, with
Pelagius’ answers and the synod’s decision, showing that in all of them
Pelagius either explained away his heresy, taking advantage of the
ignorance of the judges of his books, or else openly repudiated or
anathematized it. When the twelfth item of the indictment was reached
(41*b*-43), Augustin shows that the synod was so indignant at its
character (it charged Pelagius with teaching that men cannot be sons of
God unless they are sinless, and with condoning sins of ignorance, and
with asserting that choice is not free if it depends on God’s help, and
that pardon is given according to merit), that, without waiting for
Pelagius’ answer, it condemned the statement, and Pelagius at once
repudiated and anathematized it (43). How could the synod act in such
circumstances, he asks, except by acquitting the man who condemned the
heresy? After quoting the final judgment of the synod (44), Augustin
briefly characterizes it and its effect (45) as being indeed all that
could be asked of the judges, but of no moral weight to those better
acquainted than they were with Pelagius’ character and writings. In a
word, they approved his answers to them, as indeed they ought to have
done; but they by no means approved, but both they and he condemned, his
heresies as expressed in his writings. To this statement, Augustin
appends an account of the origin of Pelagianism, and of his relations to
it from the beginning, which has the very highest value as history
(46–49); and then speaks of the character and doubtful practices of
Pelagius (50–58), returning at the end (59–65) to a thorough canvass of
the value of the acquittal which he obtained by such doubtful practices
at the synod. He closes with an indignant account of the outrages which
the Pelagians had perpetrated on Jerome (66).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p75"></span>This valuable treatise is not, however,
the only account of the historical origin of Pelagianism that we have,
from Augustin’s hands. Soon after the death of Innocent (March 12, 417),
he found occasion to write a very long letter <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) to the venerable Paulinus of Nola, in
which he summarized both the history of and the arguments against this
“worldly philosophy.” He begins by saying that he knows Paulinus has
loved Pelagius as a servant of God, but is ignorant in what way he now
loves him. For he himself not only has loved him, but loves him still,
but in different ways. Once he loved him as apparently a brother in the
true faith: now he loves him in the longing that God will by His mercy
free him from his noxious opinions against God’s grace. <span
id="page_xl">p. xl</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xl"></span>He is not
merely following report in so speaking of him: no doubt report did for a
long time represent this of him, but he gave the less heed to it because
report is accustomed to lie. But a book of his <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) at last came into his hands, which left
no room for doubt, since in it he asserted repeatedly that God’s grace
consisted of the gift to man of the capacity to will and act, and thus
reduced it to what is common to pagans and Christians, to the ungodly
and godly, to the faithful and infidels. He then gives a brief account
of the measures that had been taken against Pelagius, and passes on to a
treatment of the main matters involved in the controversy,—all of which
gather around the one magic word of “the grace of God.” He argues first
that we are all lost,—in one mass and concretion of perdition,—and that
God’s grace alone makes us to differ. It is therefore folly to talk of
deserving the beginnings of grace. Nor can a faithful man say that he
merits justification by his faith, although it is given to faith; for at
once he hears the words, “what hast thou that thou didst not receive?”
and learns that even the deserving faith is the gift of God. But if,
peering into God’s inscrutable judgments, we go farther, and ask why,
from the mass of Adam, all of which undoubtedly has fallen from one into
condemnation, this vessel is made for honor, that for dishonor,—we can
only say that we do not know more than the fact; and God’s reasons are
hidden, but His acts are just. Certain it is that Paul teaches that all
die in Adam; and that God freely chooses, by a sovereign election, some
out of that sinful mass, to eternal life; and that He knew from the
beginning to whom He would give this grace, and so the number of the
saints has always been fixed, to whom he gives in due time the Holy
Ghost. Others, no doubt, are called; but no others are elect, or “called
according to his purpose.” On no other body of doctrines, can it be
possibly explained that some infants die unbaptized, and are lost. Is
God unjust to punish innocent children with eternal pains? And are they
not innocent if they are not partakers of Adam’s sin? And can they be
saved from that, save by the undeserved, and that is the gratuitous,
grace of God? The account of the Proceedings at the Palestinian synod is
then taken up, and Pelagius’ position in his latest writings is quoted
and examined. “But why say more?” he adds.…“Ought they not, since they
call themselves Christians, to be more careful than the Jews that they
do not stumble at the stone of offence, while they subtly defend nature
and free will just like philosophers of this world who vehemently strive
to be thought, or to think themselves, to attain for themselves a happy
life by the force of their own will? Let them take care, then, that they
do not make the cross of Christ of none effect by the wisdom of word ([1
Cor. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p77.1"></span>), and thus stumble at the rock of offence.
For human nature, even if it had remained in that integrity in which it
was created, could by no means have served its own Creator without His
aid. Since then, without God’s grace it could not keep the safety it had
received, how can it without God’s grace repair what it has lost?” With
this profound view of the Divine immanence, and of the necessity of His
moving grace in all the acts of all his creatures, as over against the
heathen-deistic view of Pelagius, Augustin touched in reality the
deepest point in the whole controversy, and illustrated the essential
harmony of all truth. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p79"></span>The sharpest period of the whole conflict
was now drawing on. <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) Innocent’s
death brought Zosimus to the chair of the Roman See, and the efforts
which he made to re-instate Pelagius and Cœlestius now began (September,
417). How little the Africans were likely to yield to his remarkable
demands, may be seen from a sermon <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
which Augustin preached on the 23d of September, while Zosimus’ letter
(written on the 21st of September) was on its way to Africa. The
preacher took his text from [John vi.
54-66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p81.1"></span>. “We hear here,” he said, “the true Master,
the <span id="page_xli">p. xli</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xli"></span>Divine Redeemer, the human Saviour,
commending to us our ransom, His blood. He calls His body food, and His
blood drink; and, in commending such food and drink, He says, ‘Unless
you eat My flesh, and drink My blood, ye shall have no life in you.’
What, then, is this eating and drinking, but to live? Eat life, drink
life; you shall have life, and life is whole. This will come,—that is,
the body and blood of Christ will be life to every one,—if what is taken
visibly in the sacrament is in real truth spiritually eaten and
spiritually drunk. But that He might teach us that even to believe in
Him is of gift, not of merit, He said, ‘No one comes to Me, except the
Father who sent Me draw him.’ *Draw* him, not *lead* him. This violence
is done to the *heart*, not the flesh. Why do you marvel? Believe, and
you come; love, and you are drawn. Think not that this is harsh and
injurious violence; it is soft, it is sweet; it is sweetness itself that
draws you. Is not the sheep drawn when the succulent herbage is shown to
him? And I think that there is no compulsion of the body, but an
assembling of the desire. So, too, do you come to Christ; wish not to
plan a long journey,—when you believe, then you come. For to Him who is
everywhere, one comes by loving, not by taking a voyage. No doubt, if
you come not, it is your work; but if you come, it is God’s work. And
even after you have come, and are walking in the right way, become not
proud, lest you perish from it: ‘happy are those that confide in Him,’
not in *themselves*, but in *Him*. We are saved by grace, not of
ourselves: it is the gift of God. Why do I continually say this to you?
It is because there are men who are ungrateful to grace, and attribute
much to unaided and wounded nature. It is true that man received great
powers of free will at his creation; but he lost them by sinning. He has
fallen into death; he has been made weak; he has been left half dead in
the way, by robbers; the good Samaritan has lifted him up upon his ass,
and borne him to the inn. Why should we boast? But I am told that it is
enough that sins are remitted in baptism. But does the removal of sin
take away weakness too? What! will you not see that after pouring the
oil and the wine into the wounds of the man left half dead by the
robbers, he must still go to the inn where his weakness may be healed?
Nay, so long as we are in this life we bear a fragile body; it is only
after we are redeemed from corruption that we shall find no sin, and
receive the crown of righteousness. Grace, that was hidden in the Old
Testament, is now manifest to the whole world. Even though the Jew may
be ignorant of it, why should Christians be enemies of grace? why
presumptuous of themselves? why ungrateful to grace? For, why did Christ
come? Was not nature already here,—that very nature by the praise of
which you are beguiled? Was not the law here? But the apostle says, ‘If
righteousness is of the law, then is Christ dead in vain.’ What the
apostle says of the law, that we say to these men about nature: if
righteousness is by nature, then Christ is dead in vain. What then was
said of the Jews, this we see repeated in these men. They have a zeal
for God: I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not
according to knowledge. For, being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and
wishing to establish their own, they are not subject to the
righteousness of God. My brethren, share my compassion. Where you find
such men, wish no concealment; let there be no perverse pity in you:
where you find them, wish no concealment at all. Contradict and refute,
resist, or persuade them to us. For already two councils have, in this
cause, sent letters to the Apostolic See, whence also rescripts have
come back. The cause is ended: would that the error might some day end!
Therefore we admonish so that they may take notice, we teach so that
they may be instructed, we pray so that their way be changed.” Here is
certainly tenderness to the persons of the teachers of error; readiness
to forgive, and readiness to go all proper lengths in recovering them to
the truth. But here is also absolute firmness as to the truth itself,
and a manifesto as to policy. Certainly, on the lines of the policy here
indicated, the Africans fought out the coming campaign. They met in
council at the end of this year, or early in the next (418); and
formally replied to Zosimus, that the cause had been tried, and was
finished, and that the sentence that had been already pronounced against
Pelagius and Cœlestius should remain in force until they should
unequivocally acknowledge that “we are aided by the grace of God through
Christ, not only to know, but to do, what is right, and that <span
id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlii"></span>in
each single act; so that without grace we are unable to have, think,
speak, or do anything belonging to piety.” As we may see Augustin’s hand
in this, so, doubtless, we may recognize it in that remarkable piece of
engineering which crushed Zosimus’ plans within the next few months.
There is, indeed, no direct proof that it was due to Augustin, or to the
Africans under his leading, or to the Africans at all, that the State
interfered in the matter; it is even in doubt whether the action of the
Empire was put forth as a rescript, or as a self-moved decree: but
surely it is difficult to believe that such a *<span
id="v.ii.iii-p81.2"></span>coup de théâtre*could have been prepared for
Zosimus by chance; and as it is well known, both that Augustin believed
in the righteousness of civil penalty for heresy, and invoked it on
other occasions, and defended and used it on this, and that he had
influential friends at court with whom he was in correspondence, it
seems, on internal grounds, altogether probable that he was the *Deus ex
machinâ* who let loose the thunders of ecclesiastical and civil
enactment simultaneously on the poor Pope’s devoted head.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p82"></span>The “great African Council” met at
Carthage, on the 1st of May, 418; and, after its decrees were issued,
Augustin remained at Carthage, and watched the effect of the combination
of which he was probably one of the moving causes. He had now an
opportunity to betake himself once more to his pen. While still at
Carthage, at short notice, and in the midst of much distraction, he
wrote a large work, in two books which have come down to us under the
separate titles of *On the Grace of Christ*, and *On Original Sin*, at
the instance of another of those ascetic families which formed so marked
a feature in those troubled times. Pinianus and Melania, the daughter of
Albina, were husband and wife, who, leaving Rome amid the wars with
Alaric, had lived in continence in Africa for some time, but now in
Palestine had separated, he to become head of a monastery, and she an
inmate of a convent. While in Africa, they had lived at Sagaste under
the tutelage of Alypius, and in the enjoyment of the friendship and
instruction of Augustin. After retiring to Bethlehem, like the other
holy ascetics whom he had known in Africa, they kept up their relations
with him. Like the others, also, they became acquainted with Pelagius in
Palestine, and were well-nigh deceived by him. They wrote to Augustin
that they had begged Pelagius to condemn in writing all that had been
alleged against him, and that he had replied in the presence of them
all, that “he anathematized the man who either thinks or says that the
grace of God whereby Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners is
not necessary, not only for every hour and for every moment, but also
for every act of our lives,” and asserted that “those who endeavor to
disannul it are worthy of everlasting punishment.” <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) Moreover, they wrote that Pelagius had
read to them, out of his book that he had sent to Rome, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) his assertion “that infants ought to be
baptized with the same formula of sacramental words as adults.” <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) They wrote that they were delighted to
hear these words from Pelagius, as they seemed exactly what they had
been desirous of hearing; and yet they preferred consulting Augustin
about them, before they were fully committed regarding them. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) It was in answer to this appeal, that
the present work was written; the two books of which take up the two
points in Pelagius’ asseveration,—the theme of the first being “the
assistance of the Divine grace towards our justification, by which God
co-operates in all things for good to those who love Him, and whom He
first loved, giving to them that He may receive from them,”—while the
subject of the second is “the sin which by one man has entered the world
along with death, and so has passed upon all men.” <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)

<span id="v.ii.iii-p88"></span>The first book, *On the Grace of Christ*,
begins by quoting and examining Pelagius’ anathema of all those who deny
that grace is necessary for every action (2 sq.). Augustin confesses
that this would deceive all who were not fortified by knowledge of
Pelagius’ writings; but asserts that in the light of them it is clear
that he means that grace is always necessary, because we need
continually to remember the forgiveness of our sins, the example of
Christ, the teaching of the law, and the like. Then he enters (4 sq.)
upon an examination of Pelagius’ scheme of human <span
id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xliii"></span>faculties, and quotes at length his
account of them given in his book, *In Defence of Free Will,* wherein he
distinguishes between the *possibilitas (posse), voluntas (velle),* and
*actio (esse)*, and declares that the first only is from God and
receives aid from God, while the others are entirely ours, and in our
own power. Augustin opposes to this the passage in [Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="v.ii.iii-p88.1"></span>
(6), and then criticises (7 sq.) Pelagius’ ambiguous acknowledgment that
God is to be praised for man’s good works, “because the capacity for any
action on man’s part is from God,” by which he reduces all grace to the
primeval endowment of nature with “capacity” (*possibilitas, posse*),
and the help afforded it by the law and teaching. Augustin points out
the difference between law and grace, and the purpose of the former as a
pedagogue to the latter (9 sq.), and then refutes Pelagius’ further
definition of grace as consisting in the promise of future glory and the
revelation of wisdom, by an appeal to Paul’s thorn in the flesh, and his
experience under its discipline (11 sq.). Pelagius’ illustrations from
our senses, of his theory of natural faculty, are then sharply tested
(16); and the criticism on the whole doctrine is then made and pressed
(17 sq.), that it makes God equally sharer in our blame for evil acts as
in our praise for good ones, since if God does help, and His help is
only His gift to us of ability to act in either part, then He has
equally helped to the evil deeds as to the good. The assertion that this
“capacity of either part” is the fecund root of both good and evil is
then criticised (19 sq.), and opposed to [Matt. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#018)<span id="v.ii.iii-p88.2"></span>,
with the result of establishing that we must seek two roots in our
dispositions for so diverse results,—covetousness for evil, and love for
good,—not a single root for both in nature. Man’s “capacity,” it is
argued, is the root of nothing; but it is capable of both good and evil
according to the moving cause, which, in the case of evil, is
man-originated, while, in the case of good, it is from God (21). Next,
Pelagius’ assertion that grace is given according to our merits (23 sq.)
is taken up and examined. It is shown, that, despite his anathema,
Pelagius holds to this doctrine, and in so extreme a form as explicitly
to declare that man comes and cleaves to God by his freedom of will
alone, and without God’s aid. He shows that the Scriptures teach just
the opposite (24–26); and then points out how Pelagius has confounded
the functions of knowledge and love (27 sq.), and how he forgets that we
cannot have merits until we love God, while John certainly asserts that
*God loved us first* ([1 John iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.iii-p88.3"></span>).
The representation that what grace does is to render obedience *easier*
(28–30), and the twin view that prayer is only relatively necessary, are
next criticised (32). That Pelagius never acknowledges real grace, is
then demonstrated by a detailed examination of all that he had written
on the subject (31–45). The book closes (46–80) with a full refutation
of Pelagius’ appeal to Ambrose, as if he supported him; and exhibition
of Ambrose’s contrary testimony as to grace and its necessity.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p89"></span>The object of the second book—*On
Original Sin*—is to show, that, in spite of Pelagius’ admissions as to
the baptism of infants, he yet denies that they inherit original sin and
contends that they are born free from corruption. The book opens by
pointing out that there is no question as to Cœlestius’ teaching in this
matter (2–8), as he at Carthage refused to condemn those who say that
Adam’s sin injured no one but himself, and that infants are born in the
same state that Adam was in before the fall, and openly asserted at Rome
that there is no sin *ex traduce*. As for Pelagius, he is simply more
cautious and mendacious than Cœlestius: he deceived the Council at
Diospolis, but failed to deceive the Romans (5–13), and, as a matter of
fact (14–18), teaches exactly what Cœlestius does. In support of this
assertion, Pelagius’ *Defence of Free Will* is quoted, wherein he
asserts that we are born neither good nor bad, “but with a capacity for
either,” and “as without virtue, so without vice; and previous to the
action of our own proper will, that that alone is in man which God has
formed” (14). Augustin also quotes Pelagius’ explanation of his anathema
against those who say Adam’s sin injured only himself, as meaning that
he has injured man by setting a bad “example,” and his even more sinuous
explanation of his anathema against those who assert that infants are
born in the same condition that Adam was in before he fell, as meaning
that they are *infants* and he was a *man!* (16–18). With this
introduction to them, Augustin next treats of Pelagius’ subterfuges
(19–25), and then animadverts on <span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>
<span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xliv"></span>the importance of the issue
(26–37), pointing out that Pelagianism is not a mere error, but a deadly
heresy, and strikes at the very centre of Christianity. A counter
argument of the Pelagians is then answered (38–45), “Does not the
doctrine of original sin make marriage an evil thing?” No, says
Augustin, marriage is ordained by God, and is good; but it is a diseased
good, and hence what is born of it is a good nature made by God, but
this good nature in a diseased condition,—the result of the Devil’s
work. Hence, if it be asked why God’s gift produces any thing for the
Devil to take possession of, it is to be answered that God gives his
gifts liberally ([Matt. v. 45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p89.1"></span>), and makes men; but the Devil makes these
men sinners (46). Finally, as Ambrose had been appealed to in the former
book, so at the end of this it is shown that he openly proclaimed the
doctrine of original sin, and here too, before Pelagius, condemned
Pelagius (47 sq.).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p90"></span>What Augustin means by writing to
Pinianus and his family that he was more oppressed by work at Carthage
than anywhere else, may perhaps be illustrated from his diligence in
preaching while in that capital. He seems to have been almost constantly
in the pulpit, during this period “of the sharpest conflict with
them,” <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) preaching against the
Pelagians. There is one series of his sermons, of the exact dates of
which we can be pretty sure, which may be adverted to here,—Sermons 151
and 152, preached early in October, 418; Sermon 155 on Oct. 14, 156 on
Oct.17, and 26 on Oct. 18; thus following one another almost with the
regularity of the days. The first of these was based on [Rom. vii.
15-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p91.1"></span>, which he declares to contain dangerous
words if not properly understood; for men are prone to sin, and when
they hear the apostle so speaking they do evil, and think they are like
him. They are meant to teach us, however, that the life of the just in
this body is a war, not yet a triumph: the triumph will come only when
death is swallowed up in victory. It would, no doubt, be better not to
have an enemy than even to conquer. It would be better not to have evil
desires: but we have them; therefore, let us not go after them. If they
rebel against us, let us rebel against them; if they fight, let us
fight; if they besiege, let us besiege: let us look only to this, that
they do not conquer. With some evil desires we are born: others we make,
by bad habit. It is on account of those with which we are born, that
infants are baptized; that they may be freed from the guilt of
inheritance, not from any evil of custom, which, of course, they have
not. And it is on account of these, too, that our war must be endless:
the concupiscence with which we are born cannot be done away as long as
we live; it may be diminished, but not done away. Neither can the law
free us, for it only reveals the sin to our greater apprehension. Where,
then, is hope, save in the superabundance of grace? The next sermon
(152) takes up the words in [Rom. viii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.iii-p91.2"></span>,
and points out that the inward aid of the Spirit brings all the help we
need. “We, like farmers in the field, work from without: but, if there
were no one who worked from within, the seed would not take root in the
ground, nor would the sprout arise in the field, nor would the shoot
grow strong and become a tree, nor would branches and fruit and leaves
be produced. Therefore the apostle distinguishes between the work of the
workmen and of the Creator ([1 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p91.3"></span>).
If God give not the increase, empty is this sound within your ears; but
if he gives, it avails somewhat that we plant and water, and our labor
is not in vain.” He then applies this to the individual, striving
against his lusts; warns against Manichean error; and distinguishes
between the three laws,—the law of sin, the law of faith, and the law of
deeds,—defending the latter, the law of Moses, against the Manicheans;
and then he comes to the words of the text, and explains its chief
phrases, closing thus: “What other do we read here than that Christ is a
sacrifice for sin?…Behold by what ‘sin’ he condemned sin: by the
sacrifice which he made for sins, he condemned sin. This is the law of
the Spirit of life which has freed you from the law of sin and death.
For that other law, the law of the letter, the law that commands, is
indeed good; ‘the commandment is holy and just and good:’ but ‘it was
weak by the flesh,’ and what it commanded it could not <span
id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlv"></span>bring
about in us. Therefore there is one law, as I began by saying, that
reveals sin to you, and another that takes it away: the law of the
letter reveals sin, the law of grace takes it away.” Sermon 155 covers
the same ground, and more, taking the broader text, [Rom. viii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.iii-p91.4"></span>,
and fully developing its teaching, especially as discriminating between
the law of sin and the law of Moses and the law of faith; the law of
Moses being the holy law of God written with His finger on the tables of
stone, while the law of the Spirit of life is nothing other than the
same law written in the heart, as the prophet ([Jer.
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#033)<span id="v.ii.iii-p91.5"></span>)
clearly declares. So written, it does not terrify from without, but
soothes from within. Great care is also taken, lest by such phrases as,
“walk in the Spirit, not in the flesh,” “who shall deliver me from the
body of this death?” a hatred of the body should be begotten. “Thus you
shall be freed from the body of this death, not by having no body, but
by having another one and dying no more. If, indeed, he had not added,
‘of this death,’ perchance an error might have been suggested to the
human mind, and it might have been said, ‘You see that God does not wish
us to have a body.’ But He says, ‘the body of this death.’ Take away
death, and the body is good. Let our last enemy, death, be taken away,
and my dear flesh will be mine for eternity. For no one can ever ‘hate
his own flesh.’ Although the ‘spirit lusts against the flesh, and the
flesh against the spirit,’ although there is now a battle in this house,
yet the husband is seeking by his strife not the ruin of, but concord
with, his wife. Far be it, far be it, my brethren, that the spirit
should hate the flesh in lusting against it! It hates the vices of the
flesh; it hates the wisdom of the flesh; it hates the contention of
death. This corruption shall put on incorruption,—this mortal shall put
on immortality; it is sown a natural body; it shall rise a spiritual
body; and you shall see full and perfect concord,—you shall see the
creature praise the Creator.” One of the special interests of such
passages is to show, that, even at this early date, Augustin was careful
to guard his hearers from Manichean error while proclaiming original
sin. One of the sermons which, probably, was preached about this time
(153), is even entitled, “Against the Manicheans openly, but tacitly
against the Pelagians,” and bears witness to the early development of
the method that he was somewhat later to use effectively against
Julian’s charges of Manicheanism against the catholics. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) Three days afterwards, Augustin
preached on the next few verses, [Rom. viii.
12-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p92.1"></span>, but can scarcely be said to have risen to
the height of its great argument. The greater part of the sermon is
occupied with a discussion of the law, why it was given, how it is
legitimately used, and its usefulness as a pedagogue to bring us to
Christ; then of the need of a mediator; and then, of what it is to live
according to the flesh, which includes living according to merely human
nature; and the need of mortifying the flesh in this world. All this, of
course, gave full opportunity for opposing the leading Pelagian errors;
and the sermon is brought to a close by a direct polemic against their
assertion that the function of grace is only to make it more easy to do
what is right. “With the sail more easily, with the oar with more
difficulty: nevertheless even with the oar we can go. On a beast more
easily, on foot with more difficulty: nevertheless progress can be made
on foot. It is not true! For the true Master who flatters no one, who
deceives no one,—the truthful Teacher and very Saviour to whom the most
grievous pedagogue has led us,—when he was speaking about good works,
i.e., about the fruits of the twigs and branches, did not say, ‘Without
me, indeed, you can do something, but you will do it more easily with
me;’ He did not say, ‘You can make your fruit without me, but more
richly with me.’ He did not say this! Read what He said: it is the holy
gospel,—bow the proud necks! Augustin does not say this: the Lord says
it. What says the Lord? ‘Without me you can do *nothing!*’” On the very
next day, he was again in the pulpit, and taking for his text chiefly
the [Ps. 95](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#000)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p92.2"></span>. <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) The
preacher began <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) by quoting the
[Ps. 95.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p94.1"></span>, and laying stress on the words “our Maker.”
‘No Christian,’ he said, ‘doubted that God had made him, and that in
such a sense that God created not only the <span id="page_xlvi">p.
xlvi</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlvi"></span>first man, from whom
all have descended, but that God to-day creates every man,—as He said to
one of His saints, “Before that I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee.”
At first He created man apart from man; now He creates man from man:
nevertheless, whether man apart from man, or man from man, “it is He
that made us, and not we ourselves.” Nor has He made us and then
deserted us; He has not cared to make us, and not cared to keep us. Will
He who made us without being asked, desert us when He is besought? But
is it not just as foolish to say, as some say or are ready to say, that
God made them men, but they make themselves righteous? Why, then, do we
pray to God to make us righteous? The first man was created in a nature
that was without fault or flaw. He was made righteous: he did not make
himself righteous; what he did for himself was to fall and break his
righteousness. This God did not do: He permitted it, as if He had said,
“Let him desert Me; let him find himself; and let his misery prove that
he has no ability without Me.” In this way God wished to show man what
free will was worth without God. O evil free will without God! Behold,
man was made good; and by free will man was made evil! When will the
evil man make himself good by free will? When good, he was not able to
keep himself good; and now that he is evil, is he to make himself good?
Nay, behold, He that made us has also made us “His people” ([Ps. xciv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p94.2"></span>).
This is a distinguishing gift. Nature is common to all, but grace is
not. It is not to be confounded with nature; but if it were, it would
still be gratuitous. For certainly no man, before he existed, deserved
to come into existence. And yet God has made him, and that not like the
beasts or a stock or a stone, but in His own image. Who has given this
benefit? He gave it who was in existence: he received it who was not.
And only He could do this, who calls the things that are not as though
they were: of whom the apostle says that “He chose us before the
foundation of the world.” We have been made in this world, and yet the
world was not when we were chosen. Ineffable! wonderful! They are chosen
who are not: neither does He err in choosing, nor choose in vain. He
chooses, and has elect whom He is to create to be chosen: He has them in
Himself; not indeed in His nature, but in His prescience. Let us not,
then, glory in ourselves, or dispute against grace. If we are men, He
made us. If we are believers, He made us this too. He who sent the Lamb
to be slain has, out of wolves, made us sheep. This is grace. And it is
an even greater grace than that grace of nature by which we were all
made men.’ “I am continually endeavouring to discuss such things as
these,” said the preacher, “against a new heresy which is attempting to
rise; because I wish you to be fixed in the good, untouched by the
evil.…For, disputing against grace in favor of free will, they became an
offence to pious and catholic ears. They began to create horror; they
began to be avoided as a fixed pest; it began to be said of them, that
they argued against grace. And they found such a device as this:
‘Because I defend man’s free will, and say that free will is sufficient
in order that I may be righteous,’ says one, ‘I do not say that it is
without the grace of God.’ The ears of the pious are pricked up, and he
who hears this, already begins to rejoice: ‘Thanks be to God! He does
not defend free will without the grace of God! There is free will, but
it avails nothing without the grace of God.’ If, then, they do not
defend free will without the grace of God, what evil do they say?
Expound to us, O teacher, what grace you mean? ‘When I say,’ he says,
‘the free will of man, you observe that I say “*of man*”?’ What then?
‘Who created man?’ God. ‘Who gave him free will?’ God. ‘If, then, God
created man, and God gave man free will, whatever man is able to do by
free will, to whose grace does he owe it, except to His who made him
with free will?’ And this is what they think they say so acutely! You
see, nevertheless, my brethren, how they preach that general grace by
which we were created and by which we are men; and, of course, we are
men in common with the ungodly, and are Christians apart from them. It
is this grace by which we are Christians, that we wish them to preach,
this that we wish them to acknowledge, this that we wish,—of which the
apostle says, ‘I do not make void the grace of God, for if righteousness
is by the law, Christ is dead in vain.’” Then the true function of the
law is explained, as a revealer of our sinfulness, and a pedagogue to
lead us to Christ: the Mani<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlvii"></span>chean view of the Old Testament law is
attacked, but its insufficiency for salvation is pointed out; and so we
are brought back to the necessity of grace, which is illustrated from
the story of the raising of the dead child in [2 Kings iv.
18-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#018)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p94.3"></span>,—the dead child being Adam; the ineffective
staff (by which we ought to walk), the law; but the living prophet,
Christ with his grace, which we must preach. “The prophetic staff was
not enough for the dead boy: would dead nature itself have been enough?
Even this, by which we are made, although we nowhere read of it under
this name, we nevertheless, because it is given gratuitously, confess to
be grace. But we show to you a greater grace than this, by which we are
Christians.…This is the grace by Jesus Christ our Lord: it was He that
made us,—both before we were at all, it was He that made us, and now,
after we are made, it is He that has made us all righteous,—and not we
ourselves.” There was but one mass of perdition from Adam, to which
nothing was due but punishment; and from that mass vessels have been
made unto honor. “Rejoice because you have escaped; you have escaped the
death that was due,—you have received the life that was not due. ‘But,’
you ask, ‘why did He make me unto honor, and another unto dishonor?’
Will you who will not hear the apostle saying, ‘O man, who art thou that
repliest against God?’ hear Augustin?…Do you wish to dispute with me?
Nay, wonder with me, and cry out with me, ‘Oh the depth of the riches!’
Let us both be afraid,—let us both cry out, ‘Oh the depth of the
riches!’ Let us both agree in fear, lest we perish in error.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p95"></span>Augustin was not less busy with his pen,
during these months, than with his voice. Quite a series of letters
belong to the last half of 418, in which he argues to his distant
correspondents on the same themes which he was so iterantly trying to
make clear to his Carthaginian auditors. One of the most interesting of
these was written to a fellow-bishop, Optatus, on the origin of the
soul. <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) Optatus, like Jerome, had
expressed himself as favoring the theory of a special creation of each
at birth; and Augustin, in this letter as in the paper sent to Jerome,
lays great stress on so holding our theories on so obscure a matter as
to conform to the indubitable fact of the transmission of sin. This
fact, such passages as [1 Cor. 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[Rom. 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p96.1"></span>, make certain; and in stating this, Augustin
takes the opportunity to outline the chief contents of the catholic
faith over against the Pelagian denial of original sin and grace: that
all are born under the contagion of death and in the bond of guilt; that
there is no deliverance except in the one Mediator, Christ Jesus; that
before His coming men received him as promised, now as already come, but
with the same faith; that the law was not intended to save, but to shut
up under sin and so force us back upon the one Saviour; and that the
distribution of grace is sovereign. Augustin pries into God’s sovereign
counsels somewhat more freely here than is usual with him. “But why
those also are created who, the Creator foreknew, would belong to
damnation, not to grace, the blessed apostle mentions with as much
succinct brevity as great authority. For he says that God, ‘wishing to
show His wrath and demonstrate His power,’ etc. ([Rom. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)<span id="v.ii.iii-p96.2"></span>).
Justly, however, would he seem unjust in forming vessels of wrath for
perdition, if the whole mass from Adam were not condemned. That,
therefore, they are made on birth vessels of anger, belongs to the
punishment due to them; but that they are made by re-birth vessels of
mercy, belongs to the grace that is not due to them. God, therefore,
shows his wrath,—not, of course, perturbation of mind, such as is called
wrath among men, but a just and fixed vengeance.…He shows also his
power, by which he makes a good use of evil men, and endows them with
many natural and temporal goods, and bends their evil to admonition and
instruction of the good by comparison with it, so that these may learn
from them to give thanks to God that they have been made to differ from
them, not by their own deserts which were of like kind in the same mass,
but by His pity.…But by creating so many to be born who, He foreknew,
would not belong to his grace, so that they are more by an incomparable
multitude than those whom he deigned to predestinate as children of the
promise into the glory of His Kingdom,—He wished to show by this very
<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlviii"></span>multitude of the rejected how entirely
of no moment it is to the just God what is the multitude of those most
justly condemned. And that hence also those who are redeemed from this
condemnation may understand, that what they see rendered to so great a
part of the mass was the due of the whole of it,—not only of those who
add many others to original sin, by the choice of an evil will, but as
well of so many children who are snatched from this life without the
grace of the Mediator, bound by no bond except that of original sin
alone.” With respect to the question more immediately concerning which
the letter was written, Augustin explains that he is willing to accept
the opinion that souls are created for men as they are born, if only it
can be made plain that it is consistent with the original sin that the
Scriptures so clearly teach. In the paper sent to Jerome, the
difficulties of creationism are sufficiently urged; this letter is
interesting on account of its statement of some of the difficulties of
traducianism also,—thus evidencing Augustin’s clear view of the peculiar
complexity of the problem, and justifying his attitude of balance and
uncertainty between the two theories. ‘The human understanding,’ he
says, ‘can scarcely comprehend how a soul arises from a parent’s soul in
the offspring; or is transmitted to the offspring as a candle is lighted
from a candle and thence another fire comes into existence without loss
to the former one. Is there an incorporeal seed for the soul, which
passes, by some hidden and invisible channel of its own, from the father
to the mother, when it is conceived in the woman? Or, even more
incredible, does it lie enfolded and hidden within the corporeal seed?’
He is lost in wonder over the question whether, when conception does not
take place, the immortal seed of an immortal soul perishes; or, does the
immortality attach itself to it only when it lives? He even expresses
the doubt whether traducianism will explain what it is called in to
explain, much better than creationism; in any case, who denies that God
is the maker of every soul? [Is.
57.16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p96.3"></span>) says, “I have made every breath;” and the
only question that can arise is as to method,—whether He “makes every
breath from the one first breath, just as He makes every body of man
from the one first body; or whether he makes new bodies indeed, from the
one body, but new souls out of nothing.” Certainly nothing but Scripture
can determine such a question; but where do the Scriptures speak
unambiguously upon it? The passages to which the creationists point only
affirm the admitted fact that God makes the soul; and the traducianists
forget that the word “soul” in the Scriptures is ambiguous, and can mean
“man,” and even a “dead man.” What more can be done, then, than to
assert what is certain, viz., that sin is propagated, and leave what is
uncertain in the doubt in which God has chosen to place it?

<span id="v.ii.iii-p97"></span>This letter was written not long after
the issue of Zosimus’ *Tractoria,* demanding the signature of all to
African orthodoxy; and Augustin sends Optatus “copies of the recent
letters which have been sent forth from the Roman see, whether specially
to the African bishops or generally to all bishops,” on the Pelagian
controversy, “lest perchance they had not yet reached” his
correspondent, who, it is very evident, he was anxious should thoroughly
realize “that the authors, or certainly the most energetic and noted
teachers,” of these new heresies, “had been condemned in the whole
Christian world by the vigilance of episcopal councils aided by the
Saviour who keeps His Church, as well as by two venerable overseers of
the Apostolical see, Pope Innocent and Pope Zosimus, unless they should
show repentance by being convinced and reformed.” To this zeal we owe it
that the letter contains an extract from Zosimus’ *Tractoria,* one of
the two brief fragments of that document that have reached our day.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p98"></span>There was another ecclesiastic in Rome,
besides Zosimus, who was strongly suspected of favoring the
Pelagians,—the presbyter Sixtus, who afterwards became Pope Sixtus III.
But when Zosimus sent forth his condemnation of Pelagianism, Sixtus sent
also a short letter to Africa addressed to Aurelius of Carthage, which,
though brief, indicated a considerable vigor against the heresy which he
was commonly believed to have before defended, <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) and which claimed him as its
own. <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) Some months afterwards, he
sent another similar, but longer, letter to Augustin and Alypius, more
fully <span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_xlix"></span>expounding his rejection of “the fatal
dogma” of Pelagius, and his acceptance of “that grace of God freely
given by Him to small and great, to which Pelagius’ dogma was
diametrically opposed.” Augustin was overjoyed with these developments.
He quickly replied in a short letter <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) in which he expresses the delight he
has in learning from Sixtus’ own hand that he is not a defender of
Pelagius, but a preacher of grace. And close upon the heels of this he
sent another much longer letter, <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)
in which he discusses the subtler arguments of the Pelagians with an
anxious care that seems to bear witness to his desire to confirm and
support his correspondent in his new opinions. Both letters testify to
Augustin’s approval of the persecuting measures which had been
instituted by the Roman see in obedience to the emperor; and urge on
Sixtus his duty not only to bring the open heretics to deserved
punishment, but to track out those who spread their poison secretly, and
even to remember those whom he had formerly heard announcing the error
before it had been condemned, and who were now silent through fear, and
to bring them either to open recantation of their former beliefs, or to
punishment. It is pleasanter to recall our thoughts to the dialectic of
these letters. The greater part of the second is given to a discussion
of the gratuitousness of grace, which, just because grace, is given to
no preceding merits. Many subtle objections to this doctrine were
brought forward by the Pelagians. They said that “free will was taken
away if we asserted that man did not have even a good will without the
aid of God;” that we made “God an accepter of persons, if we believed
that without any preceding merits He had mercy on whom He would, and
whom He would He called, and whom He would He made religious;” that “it
was unjust, in one and the same case, to deliver one and punish
another;” that, if such a doctrine is preached, “men who do not wish to
live rightly and faithfully, will excuse themselves by saying that they
have done nothing evil by living ill, since they have not received the
grace by which they might live well;” that it is a puzzle “how sin can
pass over to the children of the faithful, when it has been remitted to
the parents in baptism;” that “children respond truly by the mouth of
their sponsors that they believe in remission of sins, but not because
sins are remitted to *them*, but because they believe that sins are
remitted in the church or in baptism to those in whom they are found,
not to those in whom they do not exist,” and consequently they said that
“they were unwilling that infants should be so baptized unto remission
of sins as if this remission took place in them,” for (they contend)
“they have no sin; but they are to be baptized, although without sin,
with the same rite of baptism through which remission of sins takes
place in any that are sinners.” This last objection is especially
interesting  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) because it
furnishes us with the reply which the Pelagians made to the argument
that Augustin so strongly pressed against them from the very act and
ritual of baptism, as implying remission of sins. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) His rejoinder to it here is to point
to the other parts of the same ritual, and to ask why, then, infants are
exorcised and exsufflated in baptism. “For, it cannot be doubted that
this is done fictitiously, if the Devil does not rule over them; but if
he rules over them, and they are therefore not falsely exorcised and
exsufflated, why does that prince of sinners rule over them except
because of sin?” On the fundamental matter of the gratuitousness of
grace, this letter is very explicit. “If we seek for the deserving of
hardening, we shall find it.…But if we seek for the deserving of pity,
we shall not find it; for there is none, lest grace be made a vanity if
it is not given gratis, but rendered to merits. But, should we say that
faith preceded and in it there is desert of grace, what desert did man
have before faith that he should receive faith? For, what did he have
that he did not receive? and if he received it, why does he glory as if
he received it not? For as man would not have wisdom, understanding,
prudence, fortitude, knowledge, piety, fear of God, unless he had
received (according to the prophet) the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, of prudence and fortitude, of knowledge and piety and the
fear of God; as he would not have justice, love, continence, except the
spirit was received of whom the apostle says, ‘For you did not receive
the spirit of fear, but of <span id="page_l">p. l</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_l"></span>virtue, and love, and continence:’ so he
would not have faith unless he received the spirit of faith of whom the
same apostle says, ‘Having then the same spirit of faith, according to
what is written, “I believed and therefore spoke,” we too believe and
therefore speak.’ But that He is not received by desert, but by His
mercy who has mercy on whom He will, is manifestly shown where he says
of himself, ‘I have obtained mercy to be faithful.’” “If we should say
that the merit of prayer precedes, that the gift of grace may
follow,…even prayer itself is found among the gifts of grace” ([Rom.
viii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p104.1"></span>). “It remains, then, that faith itself,
whence all righteousness takes beginning;…it remains, I say, that even
faith itself is not to be attributed to the human will which they extol,
nor to any preceding merits, since from it begin whatever good things
are merits: but it is to be confessed to be the gratuitous gift of God,
since we consider it true grace, that is, without merits, inasmuch as we
read in the same epistle, ‘God divides out the measure of faith to each’
([Rom. xii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p104.2"></span>). Now, good works are done by man, but
faith is wrought in man, and without it these are not done by any man.
For all that is not of faith is sin” ([Rom. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.iii-p104.3"></span>).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p105"></span>By the same messenger who carried this
important letter to Sixtus, Augustin sent also a letter to
Mercator, <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) an African layman who
was then apparently at Rome, but who was afterwards (in 429) to render
service by instructing the Emperor Theodosius as to the nature and
history of Pelagianism, and so preventing the appeal of the Pelagians to
him from being granted. Now he appears as an inquirer: Augustin, while
at Carthage, had received a letter from him in which he had consulted
him on certain questions that the Pelagians had raised, but in such a
manner as to indicate his opposition to them. Press of business had
compelled the postponement of the reply until this later date. One of
the questions that Mercator had put concerned the Pelagian account of
infants sharing in the one baptism unto remission of sins, which we have
seen Augustin answering when writing to Sixtus. In this letter he
replies: “Let them, then, hear the Lord ([John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span id="v.ii.iii-p106.1"></span>).
Infants, therefore, who made believers by others, by whom they are
brought to baptism, are, of course, unbelievers by others, if they are
in the hands of such as do not believe that they should be brought,
inasmuch as they believe they are nothing profited; and accordingly, if
they believe by believers, and have eternal life, they are unbelievers
by unbelievers, and shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on
them. For it is not said, ‘it *comes* on them,’ but ‘it *abideth* on
them,’ because it was on them from the beginning, and will not be taken
from them except by the grace of God through Jesus Christ, our
Lord.…Therefore, when children are baptized, the confession is made that
they are believers, and it is not to be doubted that those who are not
believers are condemned: let them, then, dare to say now, if they can,
that they contract no evil from their origin to be condemned by the just
God, and have no contagion of sin.” The other matter on which Mercator
sought light concerned the statement that universal death proved
universal sin:  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) he reported that
the Pelagians replied that not even death was universal,—that Enoch, for
instance, and Elijah, had not died. Augustin adds those who are to be
found living at the second advent, who are not to die, but be “changed;”
and replies that [Rom. v. 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p107.1"></span> is perfectly explicit that there is no
death in the world except that which comes from sin, and that God a
Saviour, and we cannot at all “deny that He is able to do that, now, in
any that he wishes, without death, which we undoubtingly believe is to
be done in so many after death.” He adds that the difficult question is
not why Enoch and Elijah did not die, if death is the punishment of sin;
but why, such being the case, the justified ever die; and he refers his
correspondent to his book *On the Baptism of Infants <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115)* for a resolution of this greater
difficulty.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p109"></span>It was probably at the very end of 418
that Augustin wrote a letter of some length <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) to Asellicus, in reply to one which he
had written on “avoiding the deception of Judaism,” to the primate of
the Bizacene province, and which that ecclesiastic had sent to Augustin
for answering. He discusses in this the law of the Old Testament. He
opens by pointing out that the apostle forbids Christians to Judaize
([Gal. ii. 14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p110.1"></span>), and explains that it is not merely the
ceremonial <span id="page_li">p. li</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_li"></span>law that we may not depend upon, “but also
what is said in the law, ‘Thou shalt not covet’ (which no one, of
course, doubts is to be said to Christians too), does not justify man,
except by faith in Jesus Christ and the grace of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.” He then expounds the use of the law: “This, then, is
the usefulness of the law: that it shows man to himself, so that he may
know his weakness, and see how, by the prohibition, carnal concupiscence
is rather increased than healed.…The use of the law is, thus, to
convince man of his weakness, and force him to implore the medicine of
grace that is in Christ.” “Since these things are so,” he adds, “those
who rejoice that they are Israelites after the flesh, and glory in the
law apart from the grace of Christ, these are those concerning whom the
apostle said that ‘being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and wishing to
establish their own, they are not subject to God’s righteousness;’ since
he calls ‘God’s righteousness’ that which is from God to man; and ‘their
own,’ what they think that the commandments suffice for them to do
without the help and gift of Him who gave the law. But they are like
those who, while they profess to be Christians, so oppose the grace of
Christ, that they suppose that they fulfil the divine commands by human
powers, and, ‘wishing to establish their own,’ are ‘not subject to the
righteousness of God,’ and so, not indeed in name, but yet in error,
Judaize. This sort of men found heads for themselves in Pelagius and
Cœlestius, the most acute asserters of this impiety, who by God’s recent
judgment, through his diligent and faithful servants, have been deprived
even of catholic communion, and, on account of an impenitent heart,
persist still in their condemnation.”

<span id="v.ii.iii-p111"></span>At the beginning of 419, a considerable
work was published by Augustin on one of the more remote corollaries
which the Pelagians drew from his teachings. It had come to his ears,
that they asserted that his doctrine condemned marriage: “if only sinful
offspring come from marriage,” they asked, “is not marriage itself made
a sinful thing?” The book which Augustin composed in answer to this
query, he dedicated to, and sent along with an explanatory letter to,
the Comes Valerius, a trusted servant of the Emperor Honorius, and one
of the most steady opponents at court of the Pelagian heresy. Augustin
explains <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) why he has desired to
address the book to him: first, because Valerius was a striking example
of those continent husbands of which that age furnishes us with many
instances, and, therefore, the discussion would have especial interest
for him; secondly, because of his eminence as an opponent of
Pelagianism; and, thirdly, because Augustin had learned that he had read
a Pelagian document in which Augustin was charged with condemning
marriage by defending original sin.  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) The book in question is the first book
of the treatise *On Marriage and Concupiscence*. It is, naturally,
tinged, or rather stained, with the prevalent ascetic notions of the
day. Its doctrine is that marriage is good, and God is the maker of the
offspring that comes from it, although now there can be no begetting and
hence no birth without sin. Sin made concupiscence, and now
concupiscence perpetuates sinners. The specific object of the work, as
it states it itself, is “to distinguish between the evil of carnal
concupiscence, from which man, who is born therefrom, contracts original
sin, and the good of marriage” (I. 1). After a brief introduction, in
which he explains why he writes, and why he addresses his book to
Valerius (1–2), Augustin points out that conjugal chastity, like its
higher sister-grace of continence, is God’s gift. Thus copulation, but
only for the propagation of children, has divine allowance (3–5). Lust,
or “shameful concupiscence,” however, he teaches, is not of the essence,
but only an accident, of marriage. It did not exist in Eden, although
true marriage existed there; but arose from, and therefore only after,
sin (6–7). Its addition to marriage does not destroy the good of
marriage: it only conditions the character of the offspring (8). Hence
it is that the apostle allows marriage, but forbids the “disease of
desire” ([1 Thess. iv. 3-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p113.1"></span>); and hence the Old-Testament saints were
even permitted more than one wife, because, by multiplying wives, it was
not lust, but offspring, that was increased (9–10). Nevertheless,
fecundity is not to be thought the only good of marriage: true <span
id="page_lii">p. lii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lii"></span>marriage
can exist without offspring, and even without cohabitation (11–13), and
cohabitation is now, under the New Testament, no longer a duty as it was
under the Old Testament (14–15), but the apostle praises continence
above it. We must, then, distinguish between the goods of marriage, and
seek the best (16–19). But thus it follows that it is not due to any
inherent and necessary evil in marriage, but only to the presence, now,
of concupiscence in all cohabitation, that children are born under sin,
even the children of the regenerate, just as from the seed of olives
only oleasters grow (20–24). And yet again, concupiscence is not itself
sin in the regenerate; it is remitted as guilt in baptism: but it is the
daughter of sin, and it is the mother of sin, and in the unregenerate it
is itself sin, as to yield to it is even to the regenerate (25–39).
Finally, as so often, the testimony of Ambrose is appealed to, and it is
shown that he too teaches that all born from cohabitation are born
guilty (40). In this book, Augustin certainly seems to teach that the
bond of connection by which Adam’s sin is conveyed to his offspring is
not mere descent, or heredity, or mere inclusion in him, in a realistic
sense, as partakers of the same numerical nature, but concupiscence.
Without concupiscence in the act of generation, the offspring would not
be a partaker of Adam’s sin. This he had taught also previously, as,
e.g., in the treatise *On Original Sin*, from which a few words may be
profitably quoted as succinctly summing up the teaching of this book on
the subject: “It is, then, manifest, that that must not be laid to the
account of marriage, in the absence of which even marriage would still
have existed.…Such, however, is the present condition of mortal men,
that the connubial intercourse and lust are at the same time in
action.…Hence it follows that infants, although incapable of sinning,
are yet not born without the contagion of sin,…not, indeed, because of
what is lawful, but on account of that which is unseemly: for, from what
is lawful, nature is born; from what is unseemly, sin” (42).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p114"></span>Towards the end of the same year (419),
Augustin was led to take up again the vexed question of the origin of
the soul,—both in a new letter to Optatus, <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) by the zeal of the same monk, Renatus,
who had formerly brought Optatus’ inquiries to his notice,—in an
elaborate treatise entitled *On the Soul and its Origin*, by way of
reply to a rash adventure of a young man named Vincentius Victor, who
blamed him for his uncertainty on such a subject, and attempted to
determine all the puzzles of the question, though, as Augustin insists,
on assumptions that were partly Pelagian and partly worse. Optatus had
written in the hope that Augustin had heard by this time from Jerome, in
reply to the treatise he had sent him on this subject. Augustin, in
answering his letter, expresses his sorrow that he has not yet been
worthy of an answer from Jerome, although five years had passed away
since he wrote, but his continued hope that such an answer will in due
time come. For himself, he confesses that he has not yet been able to
see how the soul can contract sin from Adam and yet not itself be
contracted from Adam; and he regrets that Optatus, although holding that
God creates each soul for its birth, has not sent him the proofs on
which he depends for that opinion, nor met its obvious difficulties. He
rebukes Optatus for confounding the question of whether God makes the
soul, with the entirely different one of how he makes it, whether *ex
propagine* or *sive propagine*. No one doubts that God makes the soul,
as no one doubts that He makes the body. But when we consider how he
makes it, sobriety and vigilance become necessary lest we should
unguardedly fall into the Pelagian heresy. Augustin defends his attitude
of uncertainty, and enumerates the points as to which he has no doubt:
viz., that the soul is spirit, not body; that it is rational or
intellectual; that it is not of the nature of God, but is so far a
mortal creature that it is capable of deterioration and of alienation
from the life of God, and so far immortal that after this life it lives
on in bliss or punishment forever; that it was not incarnated because
of, or according to, preceding deserts acquired in a previous existence,
yet that it is under the curse of sin which it derives from Adam, and
therefore in all cases alike needs redemption in Christ.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p116"></span><span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>
<span id="v.ii.iii-Page_liii"></span>The whole subject of the nature and
origin of the soul, however, is most fully discussed in the four books
which are gathered together under the common title of *On the Soul and
its Origin*. Vincentius Victor was a young layman who had recently been
converted from the Rogatian heresy; on being shown by his friend Peter,
a presbyter, a small work of Augustin’s on the origin of the soul, he
expressed surprise that so great a man could profess ignorance on a
matter so intimate to his very being, and, receiving encouragement,
wrote a book for Peter in which he attacked and tried to solve all the
difficulties of the subject. Peter received the work with transports of
delighted admiration; but Renatus, happening that way, looked upon it
with distrust, and, finding that Augustin was spoken of in it with scant
courtesy, felt it his duty to send him a copy of it, which he did in the
summer of 419. It was probably not until late in the following autumn
that Augustin found time to take up the matter; but then he wrote to
Renatus, to Peter, and two books to Victor himself, and it is these four
books together which constitute the treatise that has come down to us.
The first book is a letter to Renatus, and is introduced by an
expression of thanks to him for sending Victor’s book, and of kindly
feeling towards and appreciation for the high qualities of Victor
himself (1–3). Then Victor’s errors are pointed out,—as to the nature of
the soul (4–9), including certain far-reaching corollaries that flow
from these (10–15), as well as, as to the origin of the soul (16–30);
and the letter closes with some remarks on the danger of arguing from
the silence of Scripture (31), on the self-contradictions of Victor
(34), and on the errors that must be avoided in any theory of the origin
of the soul that hopes to be acceptable,—to wit, that souls become
sinful by an alien original sin, that unbaptized infants need no
salvation, that souls sinned in a previous state, and that they are
condemned for sins which they have not committed but would have
committed had they lived longer. The second book is a letter to Peter,
warning him of the responsibility that rests on him as Victor’s trusted
friend and a clergyman, to correct Victor’s errors, and reproving him
for the uninstructed delight he had taken in Victor’s crudities. It
opens by asking Peter what was the occasion of the great joy which
Victor’s book brought him? could it be that he learned from it, for the
first time, the old and primary truths it contained? (2–3); or was it
due to the new errors that it proclaimed,—seven of which he enumerates?
(4–16). Then, after animadverting on the dilemma in which Victor stood,
of either being forced to withdraw his violent assertion of creationism,
or else of making God unjust in His dealings with new souls (17), he
speaks of Victor’s unjustifiable dogmatism in the matter (18–21), and
closes with severely solemn words to Peter on his responsibility in the
premises (22–23). In the third and fourth books, which are addressed to
Victor, the polemic, of course, reaches its height. The third book is
entirely taken up with pointing out to Victor, as a father to a son, the
errors into which he has fallen, and which, in accordance with his
professions of readiness for amendment, he ought to correct. Eleven are
enumerated: 1. That the soul was made by God out of Himself (3–7); 2.
That God will continuously create souls forever (8); 3. That the soul
has desert of good before birth (9); 4. (contradictingly), That the soul
has desert of evil before birth (10); 5. That the soul deserved to be
sinful before any sin (11); 6. That unbaptized infants are saved (12);
7. That what God predestinates may not occur (13); 8. That [Wisd. iv.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.iii-p116.1"></span> is
spoken of infants (14); 9. That some of the mansions with the Father are
outside of God’s kingdom (15–17); 10. That the sacrifice of Christ’s
blood may be offered for the unbaptized (18); 11. That the unbaptized
may attain at the resurrection even to the kingdom of heaven (19). The
book closes by reminding Victor of his professions of readiness to
correct his errors, and warning him against the obstinacy that makes the
heretic (20–23). The fourth book deals with the more personal elements
of the controversy, and discusses the points in which Victor had
expressed dissent from Augustin. It opens with a statement of the two
grounds of complaint that Victor had urged against Augustin; viz., that
he refused to express a confident opinion as to the origin of the soul,
and that he affirmed that the soul was not corporeal, but spirit (1–2).
These two complaints are then taken up at length (2–16 and 17–37). To
the first, Augustin replies that man’s knowledge is at best limited,
<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_liv"></span>and often most limited about the things
nearest to him; we do not know the constitution of our bodies; and,
above most others, this subject of the origin of the soul is one on
which no one but God is a competent witness. Who remembers his birth?
Who remembers what was before birth? But this is just one of the
subjects on which God has not spoken unambiguously in the Scriptures.
Would it not be better, then, for Victor to imitate Augustin’s cautious
ignorance, than that Augustin should imitate Victor’s rash assertion of
errors? That the soul is not corporeal, Augustin argues (18–35) from the
Scriptures and from the phenomena of dreams; and then shows, in
opposition to Victor’s trichotomy, that the Scriptures teach the
identity of “soul” and “spirit” (36–37). The book closes with a renewed
enumeration of Victor’s eleven errors (38), and a final admonition to
his rashness (39). It is pleasant to know that Augustin found in this
case, also, that righteousness is the fruit of the faithful wounds of a
friend. Victor accepted the rebuke, and professed his better instruction
at the hands of his modest but resistless antagonist.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p117"></span>The controversy now entered upon a new
stage. Among the evicted bishops of Italy who refused to sign Zosimus’
*Epistola Tractoria*, Julian of Eclanum was easily the first, and at
this point he appears as the champion of Pelagianism. It was a sad fate
that arrayed this beloved son of his old friend against Augustin, just
when there seemed to be reason to hope that the controversy was at an
end, and the victory won, and the plaudits of the world were greeting
him as the saviour of the Church. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) But the now fast-aging bishop was to
find, that, in this “very confident young man,” he had yet to meet the
most persistent and most dangerous advocate of the new doctrines that
had arisen. Julian had sent, at an earlier period, two letters to
Zosimus, one of which has come down to us as a “Confession of Faith,”
and the other of which attempted to approach Augustinian forms of speech
as much as possible; the object of both being to gain standing ground in
the Church for the Italian Pelagians. Now he appears as a Pelagian
controversialist; and in opposition to the book *On Marriage and
Concupiscence*, which Augustin had sent Valerius, he published an
extended work in four thick books addressed to Turbantius. Extracts from
the first of these books were sent by some one to Valerius, and were
placed by him in the hands of Alypius, who was then in Italy, for
transmission to Augustin. Meanwhile, a letter had been sent to Rome by
Julian, <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) designed to strengthen
the cause of Pelagianism there; and a similar one, in the names of the
eighteen Pelagianizing Italian bishops, was addressed to Rufus, bishop
of Thessalonica, and representative of the Roman see in that portion of
the Eastern Empire which was regarded as ecclesiastically a part of the
West, the design of which was to obtain the powerful support of this
important magnate, perhaps, also, a refuge from persecution within his
jurisdiction. These two letters came into the hands of the new Pope,
Boniface, who gave them also to Alypius for transmission to Augustin.
Thus provided, Alypius returned to Africa. The tactics of all these
writings of Julian were essentially the same; he attempted not so much
to defend Pelagianism, as to attack Augustinianism, and thus literally
to carry the war into Africa. He insisted that the corruption of nature
which Augustin taught was nothing else than Manicheism; that the
sovereignty of grace, as taught by him, was only the attribution of
“acceptance of persons,” and partiality, to God; and that his doctrine
of predestination was mere fatalism. He accused the anti-Pelagians of
denying the goodness of the nature that God had created, of the marriage
that He had ordained, of the law that He had given, of the free will
that He had implanted in man, as well as the perfection of His
saints. <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) He insisted that this
teaching also did dishonour to baptism itself which it professed so to
honour, inasmuch as it asserted the continuance of concupiscence after
baptism,—and thus taught that baptism does not take away sins, but only
shaves them off as one shaves his beard, and leaves the roots whence the
sins may grow anew, and need cutting down again. He complained bitterly
of the way in which Pelagianism had been condemned,—that bishops had
been compelled to sign a definition of dogma, not in council <span
id="page_lv">p. lv</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lv"></span>assembled,
but sitting at home; and he demanded a rehearing of the whole case
before a lawful council, lest the doctrine of the Manichees should be
forced upon the acceptance of the world.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p121"></span>Augustin felt a strong desire to see the
whole work of Julian against his book *On Marriage and Concupiscence*
before he undertook a reply to the excerpts sent him by Valerius; but he
did not feel justified in delaying obedience to that officer’s request,
and so wrote at once two treatises, one an answer to these excerpts, for
the benefit of Valerius, constituting the second book of his *On
Marriage and Concupiscence*; and the other, a far more elaborate
examination of the letters sent by Boniface, which bears the title,
*Against Two Letters of the Pelagians*. The purpose of the second book
of *On Marriage and Concupiscence*, Augustin himself states, in its
introductory sentences, to be “to reply to the taunts of his adversaries
with all the truthfulness and scriptural authority he could command.” He
begins (2) by identifying the source of the extracts forwarded to him by
Valerius, with Julian’s work against his first book, and then remarks
upon the garbled form in which he is quoted in them (3–6), and passes on
to state and refute Julian’s charge that the catholics had turned
Manicheans (7–9). At this point, the refutation of Julian begins in good
earnest, and the method that he proposes to use is stated; viz., to
adduce the adverse statements, and refute them one by one (10).
Beginning at the beginning, he quotes first the title of the paper sent
him, which declares that it is directed against “those who condemn
matrimony, and ascribe its fruit to the Devil” (11), which certainly,
says Augustin, does not describe him or the catholics. The next twenty
chapters (10–30), accordingly, following Julian’s order, labour to prove
that marriage is good, and ordained by God, but that its good includes
*fecundity* indeed, but not *concupiscence,* which arose from sin, and
contracts sin. It is next argued, that the doctrine of original sin does
not imply an evil origin for man (31–51); and in the course of this
argument, the following propositions are especially defended: that God
makes offspring for good and bad alike, just as He sends the rain and
sunshine on just and unjust (31–34); that God makes everything to be
found in marriage except its *flaw*, concupiscence (35–40); that
marriage is not the cause of original sin, but only the channel through
which it is transmitted (41–47); and that to assert that evil cannot
arise from what is good leaves us in the clutches of that very
Manicheism which is so unjustly charged against the catholics—for, if
evil be not eternal, what else was there from which it could arise but
something good? (48–51). In concluding, Augustin recapitulates, and
argues especially, that shameful concupiscence is of sin, and the author
of sin, and was not in paradise (52–54); that children are made by God,
and only marred by the Devil (55); that Julian, in admitting that Christ
died for infants, admits that they need salvation (56); that what the
Devil makes in children is not a substance, but an injury to a substance
(57–58); and that to suppose that concupiscence existed in any form in
paradise introduces incongruities in our conception of life in that
abode of primeval bliss (59–60).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p122"></span>The long and important treatise,
*Against Two Letters of the Pelagians*, consists of four books, the
first of which replies to the letter sent to Rome, and the other three
to that sent to Thessalonica. After a short introduction, in which he
thanks Boniface for his kindness, and gives reasons why heretical
writings should be answered (1–3), Augustin begins at once to rebut the
calumnies which the letter before him brings against the catholics
(4–28). These are seven in number: 1. That the catholics destroy free
will; to which Augustin replies that none are “forced into sin by the
necessity of their flesh,” but all sin by free will, though no man can
have a righteous will save by God’s grace, and that it is really the
Pelagians that destroy free will by exaggerating it (4–8); 2. That
Augustin declares that such marriage as now exists is not of God (9); 3.
That sexual desire and intercourse are made a device of the Devil, which
is sheer Manicheism (10–11); 4. That the Old-Testament saints are said
to have died in sin (12); 5. That Paul and the other apostles are
asserted to have been polluted by lust all their days; Augustin’s answer
to which includes a running commentary on [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p122.1"></span>
sq., in which (correcting his older exegesis) he shows that Paul is
giving here a transcript of his own experience as a typical Christian
(13–24); 6. That Christ is said not to have been free from sin (25); 7.
That baptism <span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_lvi"></span>does not give complete remission of sins,
but leaves roots from which they may again grow; to which Augustin
replies that baptism does remit all sins, but leaves concupiscence,
which, although not sin, is the source of sin (26–28). Next, the
positive part of Julian’s letter is taken up, and his profession of
faith against the catholics examined (29–41). The seven affirmations
that Julian makes here are designed as the obverse of the seven charges
against the catholics. He believed: 1. That free will is in all by
nature, and could not perish by Adam’s sin (29); 2. That marriage, as
now existent, was ordained by God (30); 3. That sexual impulse and
virility are from God (31–35); 4. That men are God’s work, and no one is
forced to do good or evil unwillingly, but are assisted by grace to
good, and incited by the Devil to evil (36–38); 5. That the saints of
the Old Testament were perfected in righteousness here, and so passed
into eternal life (39); 6. That the grace of Christ (ambiguously meant)
is necessary for all, and all children—even those of baptized
parents—are to be baptized (40); 7. And that baptism gives full
cleansing from all sins; to which Augustin pointedly asks, “What does it
do for infants, then?” (41). The book concludes with an answer to
Julian’s conclusion, in which he demands a general council, and charges
the catholics with Manicheism.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p123"></span>The second, third, and fourth books deal
with the letter to Rufus in a somewhat similar way, the second and third
books being occupied with the calumnies brought against the catholics,
and the fourth with the claims made by the Pelagians. The second begins
by repelling the charge of Manicheism brought against the catholics
(1–4), to which the pointed remark is added, that the Pelagians cannot
hope to escape condemnation because they are willing to condemn another
heresy; and then defends (with less success) the Roman clergy against
the charge of prevarication in their dealing with the Pelagians (5–8),
in the course of which all that can be said in defence of Zosimus’
wavering policy is said well and strongly. Next the charges against
catholic teaching are taken up and answered (9–16), especially the two
important accusations that they maintain fate under the name of grace
(9–12), and that they make God an “accepter of persons” (13–16).
Augustin’s replies to these charges are in every way admirable. The
charge of “fate” rests solely on the catholic denial that grace is given
according to preceding merits; but the Pelagians do not escape the same
charge when they acknowledge that the “fates” of baptized and unbaptized
infants do differ. It is, in truth, not a question of “fate,” but of
*gratuitous bounty;* and “it is not the catholics that assert fate under
the name of grace, but the Pelagians that choose to call divine grace by
the name of ‘fate’” (12). As to “acceptance of persons,” we must define
what we mean by that. God certainly does not accept one’s “person” above
another’s; He does not give to one rather than to another because He
sees something to please Him in one rather than another: quite the
opposite. He gives of His bounty to one while giving all their due to
all, as in the parable ([Matt. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.iii-p123.1"></span>
sq.). To ask why He does this, is to ask in vain: the apostle answers by
not answering ([Rom. ix](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#000)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p123.2"></span>.); and before the dumb infants, who are yet
made to differ, all objection to God is dumb. From this point, the book
becomes an examination of the Pelagian doctrine of prevenient merit
(17–23), concluding that God gives all by grace from the beginning to
the end of every process of doing good. 1. He commands the good; 2. He
gives the desire to do it; and, 3. He gives the power to do it: and all,
of His gratuitous mercy. The third book continues the discussion of the
calumnies of the Pelagians against the catholics, and enumerates and
answers six of them: viz., that the catholics teach, 1. That the
Old-Testament law was given, not to justify the obedient, but to serve
as cause of greater sin (2–3); 2. That baptism does not give entire
remission of sins, but the baptized are partly God’s and partly the
Devil’s (4–5); 3. That the Holy Ghost did not assist virtue in the Old
Testament (6–13); 4. That the Bible saints were not holy, but only less
wicked than others (14–15); 5. That Christ was a sinner by necessity of
His flesh (doubtless, Julian’s inference from the doctrine of race-sin)
(16); 6. That men will begin to fulfil God’s commandments only after the
resurrection (17–23). Augustin shows that at the basis of all these
calumnies lies either misapprehension or misrepresentation; and, in
concluding the book, enumerates the three chief points in the <span
id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_lvii"></span>Pelagian heresy, with the five claims
growing out of them, of which they most boasted, and then elucidates the
mutual relations of the three parties, catholics, Pelagians, and
Manicheans, with reference to these points, showing that the catholics
stand asunder from both the others, and condemn both (24–27). This
conclusion is really a preparation for the fourth book, which takes up
these five Pelagian claims, and, after showing the catholic position on
them all in brief (1–3), discusses them in turn (4–19): viz., the praise
of the creature (4–8), the praise of marriage (9), the praise of the law
(10–11), the praise of free will (12–16), and the praise of the saints
(17–18). At the end, Augustin calls on the Pelagians to cease to oppose
the Manicheans, only to fall into as bad heresy as theirs (19); and
then, in reply to their accusation that the catholics were proclaiming
novel doctrine, he adduces the testimony of Cyprian and Ambrose, both of
whom had received Pelagius’ praise, on each of the three main points of
Pelagianism (20–32),  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) and then
closes with the declaration that the “impious and foolish doctrine,” as
they called it, of the catholics, is immemorial truth (33), and with a
denial of the right of the Pelagians to ask for a general council to
condemn them (34). All heresies do not need an ecumenical synod for
their condemnation; usually it is best to stamp them out locally, and
not allow what may be confined to a corner to disturb the whole world.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p125"></span>These books were written late in 420, or
early in 421, and Alypius appears to have conveyed them to Italy during
the latter year. Before its close, Augustin, having obtained and read
the whole of Julian’s attack on the first book of his work *On Marriage
and Concupiscence*, wrote out a complete answer to it, <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) —a task that he was all the more
anxious to complete, on perceiving that the extracts sent by Valerius
were not only all from the first book of Julian’s treatise, but were
somewhat altered in the extracting. The resulting work, *Against
Julian*, one of the longest that he wrote in the whole course of the
Pelagian controversy, shows its author at his best: according to
Cardinal Noris’s judgment, he appears in it “almost divine,” and
Augustin himself clearly set great store by it. In the first book of
this noble treatise, after professing his continued love for Julian,
“whom he was unable not to love, whatever he \[Julian\] should say
against him” (35), he undertakes to show that in affixing the
opprobrious name of Manicheans on those who assert original sin, Julian
is incriminating many of the most famous fathers, both of the Latin and
Greek Churches. In proof of this, he makes appropriate quotations from
Irenæus, Cyprian, Reticius, Olympius, Hilary, Ambrose, Gregory
Nazianzenus, Basil, John of Constantinople. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) Then he argues, that, so far from the
catholics falling into Manichean heresy, Julian plays, himself, into the
hands of the Manicheans in their strife against the catholics, by many
unguarded statements, such as, e.g., when he says that an evil thing
cannot arise from what is good, that the work of the Devil cannot be
suffered to be diffused by means of a work of God, that a root of evil
cannot be placed within a gift of God, and the like. The second book
advances to greater detail, and adduces the five great arguments which
the Pelagians urged against the catholics, in order to test them by the
voice of antiquity. These arguments are stated as follows (2): “For you
say, ‘That we, by asserting original sin, affirm that the Devil is the
maker of infants, condemn marriage, deny that all sins are remitted in
baptism, accuse God of the guilt of sin, and produce despair of
perfection.’ You contend that all these are consequences, if we believe
that infants are born bound by the sin of the first man, and are
therefore under the Devil unless they are born again in Christ. For, ‘It
is the Devil that creates,’ you say, ‘if they are created from that
wound which the Devil inflicted on the human nature that was made at
first.’ ‘And marriage is condemned,’ you say, ‘if it is to be believed
to have something about it whence it produces those worthy of
condemnation.’ ‘And all sins are not remitted in baptism,’ you say, ‘if
there remains any evil in baptized couples whence evil offspring are
produced.’ ‘And how is God,’ you ask, ‘not unjust, if He, while
remitting their own sins to baptized persons, yet condemns their
offspring, <span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_lviii"></span>inasmuch as, although it is created by
Him, it yet ignorantly and involuntarily contracts the sins of others
from those very parents to whom they are remitted?’ ‘Nor can men
believe,’ you add, ‘that virtue—to which corruption is to be understood
to be contrary—can be perfected, if they cannot believe that it can
destroy the inbred vices, although, no doubt, these can scarcely be
considered vices, since he does not sin, who is unable to be other than
he was created.’” These arguments are then tested, one by one, by the
authority of the earlier teachers who were appealed to in the first
book, and shown to be condemned by them. The remaining four books follow
Julian’s four books, argument by argument, refuting him in detail. In
the third book it is urged that although God is good, and made man good,
and instituted marriage which is, therefore, good, nevertheless
concupiscence is evil, and in it the flesh lusts against the spirit.
Although chaste spouses use this evil well, continent believers do
better in not using it at all. It is pointed out, how far all this is
from the madness of the Manicheans, who dream of matter as essentially
evil and co-eternal with God; and shown that evil concupiscence sprang
from Adam’s disobedience and, being transmitted to us, can be removed
only by Christ. It is shown, also, that Julian himself confesses lust to
be evil, inasmuch as he speaks of remedies against it, wishes it to be
bridled, and speaks of the continent waging a glorious warfare. The
fourth book follows the second book of Julian’s work, and makes two
chief contentions: that unbelievers have no true virtues, and that even
the heathen recognize concupiscence as evil. It also argues that grace
is not given according to merit, and yet is not to be confounded with
fate; and explains the text that asserts that ‘God wishes all men to be
saved,’ in the sense that ‘all men’ means ‘all that are to be saved’
since none are saved except by His will. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) The fifth book, in like manner,
follows Julian’s third book, and treats of such subjects as these: that
it is due to sin that any infants are lost; that shame arose in our
first parents through sin; that sin can well be the punishment of
preceding sin; that concupiscence is always evil, even in those who do
not assent to it; that true marriage may exist without intercourse; that
the “flesh” of Christ differs from the “sinful flesh” of other men; and
the like. In the sixth book, Julian’s fourth book is followed, and
original sin is proved from the baptism of infants, the teaching of the
apostles, and the rites of exorcism and exsufflation incorporated in the
form of baptism. Then, by the help of the illustration drawn from the
olive and the oleaster, it is explained how Christian parents can
produce unregenerate offspring; and the originally voluntary character
of sin is asserted, even though it now comes by inheritance.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p129"></span>After the completion of this important
work, there succeeded a lull in the controversy, of some years duration;
and the calm refutation of Pelagianism and exposition of Christian
grace, which Augustin gave in his *Enchiridion*, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) might well have seemed to him his
closing word on this all-absorbing subject. But he had not yet given the
world all he had in treasure for it, and we can rejoice in the chance
that five or six years afterwards drew from him a renewed discussion of
some of the more important aspects of the doctrine of grace. The
circumstances which brought this about are sufficiently interesting in
themselves, and open up to us an unwonted view into the monastic life of
the times. There was an important monastery at Adrumetum, the
metropolitan city of the province of Byzacium, <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) from which a monk named Florus went
out on a journey of charity to his native country of Uzalis about 426.
On the journey he met with Augustin’s letter to Sixtus, <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) in which the doctrines of gratuitous
and prevenient grace were expounded. He was much delighted with it, and,
procuring a copy, sent it back to his monastery for the edification of
his brethren, while he himself went on to Carthage. At the monastery,
the letter created great disturbance: without the knowledge of the
abbot, Valentinus, it was read aloud to the monks, many of whom were
unskilled in theological questions; and some five or more were greatly
offended, and declared that free will was destroyed by it. A secret
strife arose among the brethren, some taking extreme grounds on both
sides. Of all this, Valentinus remained ignorant <span id="page_lix">p.
lix</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lix"></span>until the return of
Florus, who was attacked as the author of all the trouble, and who felt
it his duty to inform the abbot of the state of affairs. Valentinus
applied first to the bishop, Evodius, for such instruction as would make
Augustin’s letter clear to the most simple. Evodius replied, praising
their zeal and deprecating their contentiousness, and explaining that
Adam had full free will, but that it is now wounded and weak, and
Christ’s mission was as a physician to cure and recuperate it. “Let them
read,” is his prescription, “the words of God’s elders.…And when they do
not understand, let them not quickly reprehend, but pray to understand.”
This did not, however, cure the malecontents, and the holy presbyter
Sabrinus was appealed to, and sent a book with clear interpretations.
But neither was this satisfactory; and Valentinus, at last, reluctantly
consented that Augustin himself should be consulted,—fearing, he says,
lest by making inquiries he should seem to waver about the truth. Two
members of the community were consequently permitted to journey to
Hippo, but they took with them no introduction and no commendation from
their abbot. Augustin, nevertheless, received them without hesitation,
as they bore themselves with too great simplicity to allow him to
suspect them of deception. Now we get a glimpse of life in the great
bishop’s monastic home. The monks told their story, and were listened to
with courtesy and instructed with patience; and, as they were anxious to
get home before Easter, they received a letter for Valentinus <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) in which Augustin briefly explains the
nature of the misapprehension that had arisen, and points out that both
grace and free will must be defended, and neither so exaggerated as to
deny the other. The letter of Sixtus, he explains, was written against
the Pelagians, who assert that grace is given according to merit, and
briefly expounds the true doctrine of grace as necessarily gratuitous
and therefore prevenient. When the monks were on the point of starting
home, they were joined by a third companion from Adrumetum, and were led
to prolong their visit. This gave him the opportunity he craved for
their fuller instruction: he read with them and explained to them not
only his letter to Sixtus, from which the strife had risen, but much of
the chief literature of the Pelagian controversy, <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) copies of which also were made for
them to take home with them; and when they were ready to go, he sent by
them another and longer letter to Valentinus, and placed in their hands
a treatise composed for their especial use, which, moreover, he
explained to them. This longer letter is essentially an exhortation “to
turn aside neither to the right hand nor to the left,”—neither to the
left hand of the Pelagian error of upholding free will in such a manner
as to deny grace, nor to the right hand of the equal error of so
upholding grace as if we might yield ourselves to evil with impunity.
Both grace and free will are to be proclaimed; and it is true both that
grace is not given to merits, and that we are to be judged at the last
day according to our works. The treatise which Augustin composed for a
fuller exposition of these doctrines is the important work *On Grace and
Free Will.* After a brief introduction, explaining the occasion of his
writing, and exhorting the monks to humility and teachableness before
God’s revelations (1), Augustin begins by asserting and proving the two
propositions that the Scriptures clearly teach that man has free will
(2–5), and, as clearly, the necessity of grace for doing any good (6–9).
He then examines the passages which the Pelagians claim as teaching that
we must first turn to God, before He visits us with His grace (10–11),
and then undertakes to show that grace is not given to merit (12 sq.),
appealing especially to Paul’s teaching and example, and replying to the
assertion that forgiveness is the only grace that is not given according
to our merits (15–18), and to the query, “How can eternal life be both
of grace and of reward?” (19–21). The nature of grace, what it is, is
next explained (22 sq.). It is not the law, which gives only knowledge
of sin (22–24), nor nature, which would render Christ’s death needless
(25), nor mere forgiveness of sins, as the Lord’s Prayer (which should
be read with Cyprian’s comments on it) is enough to show (26). Nor will
it do to say that it is given to the merit of a good will, thus
distinguishing the good work which is of grace from the good will which
precedes grace (27–30); for the Scrip<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>
<span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lx"></span>tures oppose this, and our prayers
for others prove that we expect God to be the *first mover*, as indeed
both Scripture and experience prove that He is. It is next shown that
both free will and grace are concerned in the heart’s conversion
(31–32), and that love is the spring of all good in man (33–40), which,
however, we have only because God first loved us (38), and which is
certainly greater than knowledge, although the Pelagians admit only the
latter to be from God (40). God’s sovereign government of men’s wills is
then proved from Scripture (41–43), and the wholly gratuitous character
of grace is illustrated (44), while the only possible theodicy is found
in the certainty that the Lord of all the earth will do right. For,
though no one knows why He takes one and leaves another, we all know
that He hardens judicially and saves graciously,—that He hardens none
who do not deserve hardening, but none that He saves deserve to be saved
(45). The treatise closes with an exhortation to its prayerful and
repeated study (46).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p135"></span>The one request that Augustin made, on
sending this work to Valentinus, was that Florus, through whom the
controversy had arisen, should be sent to him, that he might converse
with him and learn whether he had been misunderstood, or himself had
misunderstood Augustin. In due time Florus arrived at Hippo, bringing a
letter <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) from Valentinus which
addresses Augustin as “Lord Pope” (*domine papa*), thanks him for his
“sweet” and “healing” instruction, and introduces Florus as one whose
true faith could be confided in. It is very clear, both from Valentinus’
letter and from the hints that Augustin gives, that his loving dealing
with the monks had borne admirable fruit: “none were cast down for the
worse, some were built up for the better.” <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) But it was reported to him that some
one at the monastery had objected to the doctrine he had taught them,
that “no man ought, then, to be rebuked for not keeping God’s
commandments; but only God should be besought that he might keep
them.” <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) In other words, it was
said that if all good was, in the last resort, from God’s grace, man
ought not to be blamed for not doing what he could not do, but God ought
to be besought to do for man what He alone could do: we ought, in a
word, to apply to the source of power. This occasioned the composition
of yet another treatise *On Rebuke and Grace*, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) the object of which was to explain the
relations of grace to human conduct, and especially to make it plain
that the sovereignty of God’s grace does not supersede our duty to
ourselves or our fellow-men. It begins by thanking Valentinus for his
letter and for sending Florus (whom Augustin finds well instructed in
the truth), thanking God for the good effect of the previous book, and
recommending its continued study, and then by briefly expounding the
Catholic faith concerning grace, free-will, and the law (1–2). The
general proposition that is defended is that the gratuitous sovereignty
of God’s grace does not supersede human means for obtaining and
continuing it (3 sq.). This is shown by the apostle’s example, who used
all human means for the prosecution of his work, and yet confessed that
it was “God that gave the increase” (3). Objections are then answered (4
sq.),—especially the great one that “it is not my fault if I do not do
what I have not received grace for doing” (6); to which Augustin replies
(7–10), that we deserve rebuke for our very unwillingness to be rebuked,
that on the same reasoning the prescription of the law and the preaching
of the gospel would be useless, that the apostle’s example opposes such
a position, and that our consciousness witnesses that we deserve rebuke
for not persevering in the right way. From this point an important
discussion arises, in this interest, of the gift of perseverance
(11–19), and of God’s election (20–24); the teaching being that no one
is saved who does not persevere, and all that are predestinated or
“called according to the purpose” (Augustin’s phrase for what we should
call “effectual calling”) will persevere, and yet that we co-operate by
our will in all good deeds, and deserve rebuke if we do not. Whether
Adam received the gift of perseverance, and, in general, the difference
between the grace given to him (which was that grace by which he could
stand) and <span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxi"></span>that now given to God’s children (which is
that grace by which we are actually made to stand), are next discussed
(26–38), with the result of showing the superior greatness of the gifts
of grace now to those given before the fall. The necessity of God’s
mercy at all times, and our constant dependence on it, are next
vigorously asserted (39–42); even in the day of judgment, if we are not
judged “with mercy” we cannot be saved (41). The treatise is brought to
an end by a concluding application of the whole discussion to the
special matter in hand, *rebuke* (43–49). Seeing that rebuke is one of
God’s means of working out his gracious purposes, it cannot be
inconsistent with the sovereignty of that grace; for, of course, God
predestinates the means with the end (43). Nor can we know, in our
ignorance, whether our rebuke is, in any particular case, to be the
means of amendment or the ground of greater condemnation. How dare we,
then, withhold it? Let it be, however, graduated to the fault, and let
us always remember its purpose (46–48). Above all, let us not dare hold
it back, lest we hold back from our brother the means of his recovery,
and, as well, disobey the command of God (49).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p140"></span>It was not long afterwards (about 427)
when Augustin was called upon to attempt to reclaim a Carthaginian
brother, Vitalis by name, who had been brought to trial on the charge of
teaching that the beginning of faith was not the gift of God, but the
act of man’s own free will (*ex propria voluntatis*). This was
essentially the semi-Pelagian position which was subsequently to make so
large a figure in history; and Augustin treats it now as necessarily
implying the basal idea of Pelagianism. In the important letter which he
sent to Vitalis, <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) he first argues
that his position is inconsistent with the prayers of the church. He,
Augustin, prays that Vitalis may come to the true faith; but does not
this prayer ascribe the origination of right faith to God? The Church so
prays for all men: the priest at the altar exhorts the people to pray
God for unbelievers, that He may convert them to the faith; for
catechumens, that He may breathe into them a desire for regeneration;
for the faithful, that by His aid they may persevere in what they have
begun: will Vitalis refuse to obey these exhortations, because,
forsooth, faith is of free will and not of God’s gift? Nay, will a
Carthaginian scholar array himself against Cyprian’s exposition of the
Lord’s Prayer? for he certainly teaches that we are to ask of God what
Vitalis says is to be had of ourselves. We may go farther: it is not
Cyprian, but Paul, who says, “Let us pray to God that we do no evil” ([2
Cor. xiii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p141.1"></span>); it is the Psalmist who says, “The steps
of man are directed by God” ([Ps. xxxvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.iii-p141.2"></span>).
“If we wish to defend free will, let us not strive against that by which
it is made free. For he who strives against grace, by which the will is
made free for refusing evil and doing good, wishes his will to remain
captive. Tell us, I beg you, how the apostle can say, ‘We give thanks to
the Father who made us fit to have our lot with the saints in light, who
delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of the Son of His love’ ([Col.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p141.3"></span>), if not He, but itself, frees our choice?
It is, then, a false rendering of thanks to God, as if He does what He
does not do; and he has erred who has said that ‘He makes us fit, etc.’
‘The grace of God,’ therefore, does not consist in the nature of
free-will, and in law and teaching, as the Pelagian perversity dreams;
but it is given for each single act by His will, concerning whom it is
written,”—quoting [Ps. lxvii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#010)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p141.4"></span>. About the middle of the letter, Augustin
lays down twelve propositions against the Pelagians, which are important
as communicating to us what he thought, at the end of the controversy,
were the chief points in dispute. “Since, therefore,” he writes, “we are
catholic Christians: 1. We know that new-born children have not yet done
anything in their own lives, good or evil, neither have they come into
the miseries of this life according to the deserts of some previous
life, which none of them can have had in their own persons; and yet,
because they are born carnally after Adam, they contract the contagion
of ancient death, by the first birth, and are not freed from the
punishment of eternal death (which is contracted by a just condemnation,
passing over from one to all), except they are by grace born again in
Christ. 2. We know that the grace of God is <span id="page_lxii">p.
lxii</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxii"></span>given neither to
children nor to adults according to our deserts. 3. We know that it is
given to adults for each several act. 4. We know that it is not given to
all men; and to those to whom it is given, it is not only not given
according to the merits of works, but it is not even given to them
according to the merits of their will; and this is especially apparent
in children. 5. We know that to those to whom it is given, it is given
by the gratuitous mercy of God. 6. We know that to those to whom it is
not given, it is not given by the just judgment of God. 7. We know that
we shall all stand before the tribunal of Christ, and each shall receive
according to what he has done through the body,—not according to what he
would have done, had he lived longer,—whether good or evil. 8. We know
that even children are to receive according to what they have done
through the body, whether good or evil. But according to what “they have
done” not by their own act, but by the act of those by whose responses
for them they are said both to renounce the Devil and to believe in God,
wherefore they are counted among the number of the faithful, and have
part in the statement of the Lord when He says, “Whosoever shall believe
and be baptized, shall be saved.” Therefore also, to those who do not
receive this sacrament, belongs what follows, “But whosoever shall not
have believed, shall be damned” ([Mark xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.iii-p141.5"></span>).
Whence these too, as I have said, if they die in that early age, are
judged, of course, according to what they have done through the body,
i.e., in the time in which they were in the body, when they believe or
do not believe by the heart and mouth of their sponsors, when they are
baptized or not baptized, when they eat or do not eat the flesh of
Christ, when they drink or do not drink His blood,—according to those
things, then, which they have done through the body, not according to
those which, had they lived longer, they would have done. 9. We know
that blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; and that what they would
have done had they lived longer, is not imputed to them. 10. We know
that those that believe, with their own heart, in the Lord, do so by
their own free will and choice. 11. We know that we who already believe
act with right faith towards those who do not wish to believe, when we
pray to God that they may wish it. 12. We know that for those who have
believed out of this number, we both ought and are rightly and truly
accustomed to return thanks to God, as for his benefits.” Certainly such
a body of propositions commends their author to us as Christian both in
head and heart: they are admirable in every respect; and even in the
matter of the salvation of infants, where he had not yet seen the light
of truth, he expresses himself in a way as engaging in its hearty faith
in God’s goodness as it is honorable in its loyalty to what he believed
to be truth and justice. Here his doctrine of the Church ran athwart and
clouded his view of the reach of grace; but we seem to see between the
lines the promise of the brighter dawn of truth that was yet to come.
The rest of the epistle is occupied with an exposition and commendation
of these propositions, which ranks with the richest passages of the
anti-Pelagian writings, and which breathes everywhere a yearning for his
correspondent which we cannot help hoping proved salutary to his faith.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p142"></span>It is not without significance, that the
error of Vitalis took a semi-Pelagian form. Pure Pelagianism was by this
time no longer a living issue. Augustin was himself, no doubt, not yet
done with it. The second book of his treatise *On Marriage and
Concupiscence*, which seems to have been taken to Italy by Alypius, in
421, received at once the attention of Julian, and was elaborately
answered by him, during that same year, in eight books addressed to
Florus. But Julian was now in Cilicia, and his book was slow in working
its way westward. It was found at Rome by Alypius, apparently in 427 or
428, and he at once set about transcribing it for his friend’s use. An
opportunity arising to send it to Africa before it was finished, he
forwarded to Augustin the five books that were ready, with an urgent
request that they should receive his immediate attention, and a promise
to send the other three as soon as possible. Augustin gives an account
of his progress in his reply to them in a letter written to
Quodvultdeus, apparently in 428. <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)
This deacon was urging Augustin to give the Church a succinct account of
all heresies; <span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span> <span
id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxiii"></span>and Augustin excuses himself from
immediately undertaking that task by the press of work on his hands. He
was writing his *Retractations,* and had already finished two books of
them, in which he had dealt with two hundred and thirty-two works. His
letters and homilies remained and he had given the necessary reading to
many of the letters. Also, he tells his correspondent, he was engaged on
a reply to the eight books of Julian’s new work. Working night and day,
he had already completed his response to the first three of Julian’s
books, and had begun on the fourth while still expecting the arrival of
the last three which Alypius had promised to send. If he had completed
the answer to the five books of Julian which he already had in hand,
before the other three reached him, he might begin the work which
Quodvultdeus so earnestly desired him to undertake. In due time,
whatever may have been the trials and labours that needed first to be
met, the desired treatise *On Heresies* was written (about 428), and the
eighty-eighth chapter of it gives us a welcome compressed account of the
Pelagian heresy, which may be accepted as the obverse of the account of
catholic truth given in the letter to Vitalis. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) But the composition of this work was
not the only interruption which postponed the completion of the second
elaborate work against Julian. It was in the providence of God that the
life of this great leader in the battle for grace should be prolonged
until he could deal with semi-Pelagianism also. Information as to the
rise of this new form of the heresy at Marseilles and elsewhere in
Southern Gaul was conveyed to Augustin along with entreaties, that, as
“faith’s great patron,” he would give his aid towards meeting it, by two
laymen with whom he had already had correspondence,—Prosper and
Hilary. <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) They pointed out <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) the difference between the new party
and thorough-going Pelagianism; but, at the same time, the essentially
Pelagianizing character of its formative elements. Its representatives
were ready, as a rule, to admit that all men were lost in Adam, and no
one could recover himself by his own free will, but all needed God’s
grace for salvation. But they objected to the doctrines of prevenient
and of irresistible grace; and asserted that man could initiate the
process of salvation by turning first to God, that all men could resist
God’s grace, and no grace could be given which they could not reject,
and especially they denied that the gifts <span id="page_lxiv">p.
lxiv</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxiv"></span>of grace came
irrespective of merits, actual or foreseen. They said that what Augustin
taught as to the calling of God’s elect according to His own purpose was
tantamount to fatalism, was contrary to the teaching of the fathers and
the true Church doctrine, and, even if true, should not be preached,
because of its tendency to drive men into indifference or despair.
Hence, Prosper especially desired Augustin to point out the dangerous
nature of these views, and to show that prevenient and co-operating
grace is not inconsistent with free will, that God’s predestination is
not founded on foresight of receptivity in its objects, and that the
doctrines of grace may be preached without danger to souls.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p147"></span>Augustin’s answer to these appeals was a
work in two books, *On the Predestination of the Saints*, the second
book of which is usually known under the separate title of *The Gift of
Perseverance*. The former book begins with a careful discrimination of
the position of his new opponents: they have made a right beginning in
that they believe in original sin, and acknowledge that none are saved
from it save by Christ, and that God’s grace leads men’s wills, and
without grace no one can suffice for good deeds. These things will
furnish a good starting-point for their progress to an acceptance of
predestination also (1–2). The first question that needs discussion in
such circumstances is, whether God gives the very beginnings of faith (3
sq.); since they admit that what Augustin had previously urged sufficed
to prove that faith was the gift of God so far as that the increase of
faith was given by Him, but not so far but that the beginning of faith
may be understood to be man’s, to which, then, God adds all other gifts
(compare 43). Augustin insists that this is no other than the Pelagian
assertion of grace according to merit (3), is opposed to Scripture
(4–5), and begets arrogant boasting in ourselves (6). He replies to the
objection that he had himself once held this view, by confessing it, and
explaining that he was converted from it by [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.iii-p147.1"></span>,
as applied by Cyprian (7–8), and expounds that verse as containing in
its narrow compass a sufficient answer to the present theories (9–11).
He answers, further, the objection that the apostle distinguishes faith
from works, and works alone are meant in such passages, by pointing to
[John vi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p147.2"></span>, and similar statements in Paul (12–16).
Then he answers the objection that he himself had previously taught that
God acted on foresight of faith, by showing that he was misunderstood
(17–18). He next shows that no objection lies against predestination
that does not lie with equal force against grace (19–22),—since
predestination is nothing but God’s foreknowledge of and preparation for
grace, and all questions of sovereignty and the like belong to grace.
Did God not know to whom he was going to give faith (19)? or did he
promise the results of faith, works, without promising the faith without
which, as going before, the works were impossible? Would not this place
God’s fulfilment of his promise out of His power, and make it depend on
man (20)? Why are men more willing to trust in their weakness than in
God’s strength? do they count God’s promises more uncertain than their
own performance (22)? He next proves the sovereignty of grace, and of
predestination, which is but the preparation for grace, by the striking
examples of infants, and, above all, of the human nature of Christ
(23–31), and then speaks of the twofold calling, one external and one
“according to purpose,”—the latter of which is efficacious and sovereign
(32–37). In closing, the semi-Pelagian position is carefully defined and
refuted as opposed, alike with the grosser Pelagianism, to the
Scriptures of both Testaments (38–42).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p148"></span>The purpose of the second book, which
has come down to us under the separate title of *On the Gift of
Perseverance*, is to show that that perseverance which endures to the
end is as much of God as the beginning of faith, and that no man who has
been “called according to God’s purpose,” and has received this gift,
can fall from grace and be lost. The first half of the treatise is
devoted to this theme (1–33). It begins by distinguishing between
temporary perseverance, which endures for a time, and that which
continues to the end (1), and affirms that the latter is certainly a
gift of God’s grace, and is, therefore, asked from God which would
otherwise be but a mocking petition (2–3). This, the Lord’s Prayer
itself might teach us, as under Cyprian’s exposition it does teach
us,—each petition being capable of being read as a <span
id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxv"></span>prayer
for perseverance (4–9). Of course, moreover, it cannot be lost,
otherwise it would not be “to the end.” If man forsakes God, of course
it is he that does it, and he is doubtless under continual temptation to
do so; but if he abides with God, it is God who secures that, and God is
equally able to *keep* one when drawn to Him, as He is to *draw* him to
Him (10–15). He argues anew at this point, that grace is not according
to merit, but always in mercy; and explains and illustrates the
unsearchable ways of God in His sovereign but merciful dealing with men
(16–25), and closes this part of the treatise by a defence of himself
against adverse quotations from his early work on *Free Will*, which he
has already corrected in his *Retractations*. The second half of the
book discusses the objections that were being urged against the
preaching of predestination (34–62), as if it opposed and enervated the
preaching of the Gospel. He replies that Paul and the apostles, and
Cyprian and the fathers, preached both together; that the same
objections will lie against the preaching of God’s foreknowledge and
grace itself, and, indeed, against preaching any of the virtues, as,
e.g., obedience, while declaring them God’s gifts. He meets the
objections in detail, and shows that such preaching is food to the soul,
and must not be withheld from men; but explains that it must be given
gently, wisely, and prayerfully. The whole treatise ends with an appeal
to the prayers of the Church as testifying that all good is from God
(63–65), and to the great example of unmerited grace and sovereign
predestination in the choice of one human nature without preceding
merit, to be united in one person with the Eternal Word,—an illustration
of his theme of the gratuitous grace of God which he is never tired of
adducing (66–67).

<span id="v.ii.iii-p149"></span>These books were written in 428–429, and
after their completion the unfinished work against Julian was resumed.
Alypius had sent the remaining three books, and Augustin slowly toiled
on to the end of his reply to the sixth book. But he was to be
interrupted once more, and this time by the most serious of all
interruptions. On the 28th of August, 430, with the Vandals thundering
at the gates of Hippo, full of good works and of faith, he turned his
face away from the strifes—whether theological or secular—of earth, and
entered into rest with the Lord whom he loved. The last work against
Julian was already one of the most considerable in size of all his
books; but it was never finished, and retains until to-day the
significant title of *The Unfinished Work*. Augustin had hesitated to
undertake this work, because he found Julian’s arguments too silly
either to deserve refutation, or to afford occasion for really edifying
discourse. And certainly the result falls below Augustin’s usual level,
though this is not due, as is so often said, to failing powers and great
age; for nothing that he wrote surpasses in mellow beauty and chastened
strength the two books, *On the Predestination of the Saints*, which
were written after four books of this work were completed. The plan of
the work is to state Julian’s arguments in his own words, and follow it
with his remarks; thus giving it something of the form of a dialogue. It
follows Julian’s work, book by book. The first book states and answers
certain calumnies which Julian had brought against Augustin and the
catholic faith on the ground of their confession of original sin. Julian
had argued, that, since God is just, He cannot impute another’s sins to
innocent infants; since sin is nothing but evil will, there can be no
sin in infants who are not yet in the use of their will; and, since the
freedom of will that is given to man consists in the capacity of both
sinning and not sinning, free will is denied to those who attribute sin
to nature. Augustin replies to these arguments, and answers certain
objections that are made to his work *On Marriage and Concupiscence*,
and then corrects Julian’s false explanations of certain Scriptures from
[John 8:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#000), [Rom.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000), [Rom.
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000)<span id="v.ii.iii-p149.1"></span>.
The second book is a discussion of [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.iii-p149.2"></span>,
which Julian had tried, like the other Pelagians, to explain by the
“imitation” of Adam’s bad example. The third book examines the abuse by
Julian of certain Old-Testament passages—in [Deut.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#000), [2 Kings
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#000), [Ezek.
18:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#000)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p149.3"></span>.—in his effort to show that God does not
impute the father’s sins to the children; as well as his similar abuse
of [Heb. xi](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p149.4"></span>. The charge of Manicheism, which was so
repetitiously brought by Julian against the catholics, is then examined
and refuted. The fourth book treats of Julian’s strictures on Augustin’s
*On Marriage and Concupiscence* ii. 4–11, and <span id="page_lxvi">p.
lxvi</span> <span id="v.ii.iii-Page_lxvi"></span>proves from [1 John ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016)<span id="v.ii.iii-p149.5"></span>
that concupiscence is evil, and not the work of God, but of the Devil.
He argues that the shame that accompanies it is due to its sinfulness,
and that there was none of it in Christ; also, that infants are born
obnoxious to the first sin, and proves the corruption of their origin
from [Wis. 10:10](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/apo/wis010.htm#011)<span id="v.ii.iii-p149.6"></span>.
The fifth book defends *On Marriage and Concupiscence* ii. 12 sq., and
argues that a sound nature could not have shame on account of its
members, and the need of regeneration for what is generated by means of
shameful concupiscence. Then Julian’s abuse of [1 Cor.
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000), [Rom.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#000), [Matt.
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017), Matt. 33:0<span
id="v.ii.iii-p149.7"></span>, with reference to *On Marriage and
Concupiscence* ii. 14, 20, 26, is discussed; and then the origin of
evil, and God’s treatment of evil in the world. The sixth book traverses
Julian’s strictures on *On Marriage and Concupiscence* ii. 34 sq., and
argues that human nature was changed for the worse by the sin of Adam,
and thus was made not only sinful, but the source of sinners; and that
the forces of free will by which man could at first do rightly if he
wished, and refrain from sin if he chose, were lost by Adam’s sin. He
attacks Julian’s definition of free will as “the capacity for sinning
and not sinning” (*possibilitas peccandi et non peccandi*); and proves
that the evils of this life are the punishment of sin,—including, first
of all, physical death. At the end, he treats of [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="v.ii.iii-p149.8"></span>.

<span id="v.ii.iii-p150"></span>Although the great preacher of grace was
taken away by death before the completion of this book, yet his work was
not left incomplete. In the course of the next year (431) the Ecumenical
Council of Ephesus condemned Pelagianism for the whole world; and an
elaborate treatise against the pure Pelagianism of Julian was already in
430 an anachronism. Semi-Pelagianism was yet to run its course, and to
work its way so into the heart of a corrupt church as not to be easily
displaced; but Pelagianism was to die with the first generation of its
advocates. As we look back now through the almost millennium and a half
of years that has intervened since Augustin lived and wrote, it is to
his *Predestination of the Saints*,—a completed, and well-completed,
treatise,—and not to *The Unfinished Work*, that we look as the crown
and completion of his labours for grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxii:40](1050009.htm#fr_39) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p3"></span> Compare his work written this year, *On
Several Questions to Simplicianus*. For the development of Augustin’s
theology, see the admirable statement in Neander’s *Church History*,
E.T., ii. 625 sq.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxii:41](1050009.htm#fr_40) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p4"></span> *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 46.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxii:42](1050009.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p5"></span> *On the Merits and Remission of Sins*,
iii. 12.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxii:43](1050009.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p7"></span> *Epistle* 157, 22.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxii:44](1050009.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p8"></span> *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 46.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxiii:45](1050009.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p9"></span> *Sermon* 176, 2.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxiii:46](1050009.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p10"></span> *Sermon* 174.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxiii:47](1050009.htm#fr_46) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p11"></span> Do.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxiv:48](1050009.htm#fr_47) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p13"></span> *On the Merits and Remission of Sins*,
iii. 1.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xxiv:49](1050009.htm#fr_48) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p14"></span> *On the Merits and Remission of Sins*,
i. 1. Compare *Epistle* 139.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xxiv:50](1050009.htm#fr_49) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p15"></span> On the prominence of infant baptism in
the controversy, and why it was so, see *Sermon* 165, 7 sq. “What do you
say? ‘Just this,’ he says, ‘that God creates every man immortal.’ Why,
then do infant children die? For if I say, ‘Why do adult men die?’ you
would say to me, ‘They have sinned.’ Therefore I do not argue about the
adults: I cite infancy as a witness against you,” and so on, eloquently
developing the argument.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xxv:51](1050009.htm#fr_50) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p17"></span> *On the Merits and Remission of Sins*,
iii. 1.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xxv:52](1050009.htm#fr_51) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p18"></span> *Letter* 139, 3.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xxv:53](1050009.htm#fr_52) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p19"></span> *Letter* 140.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xxv:54](1050009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p20"></span> See chaps. 1 and 5.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xxvi:55](1050009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p22"></span> *Sermon* 163 treats the text similarly.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xxvii:56](1050009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p23"></span> See this prayer beautifully illustrated
from Scripture in *On the Merits and Remission of* *Sins*, ii. 5.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xxvii:57](1050009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p25"></span> See above, p. xv.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xxvii:58](1050009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p26"></span> As quoted above, p. xx.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xxviii:59](1050009.htm#fr_58) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p28"></span> *Epistle* 146. See *On the Proceedings
of Pelagius*, 50, 51, 52.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xxviii:60](1050009.htm#fr_59) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p30"></span> *Epistle* 149. See especially 18 sq.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xxviii:61](1050009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p31"></span> *Epistle* 121.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xxix:62](1050009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p33"></span> *Sermon* 293.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xxix:63](1050009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p34"></span> *Sermon* 176, 2.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xxix:64](1050009.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p36"></span> The inscription says, “V Calendus
Julii,” i.e., June 27; but it also says, “*In natalis martyris
Guddentis*,” whose day appears to have been July 18. Some of the
martyrologies assign 28th of June to Gaudentius (which some copies read
here), but possibly none to Guddene.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xxix:65](1050009.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p37"></span> *Sermon* 294.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xxx:66](1050009.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p38"></span> The passage is quoted at length in *On
the Merits and Remission of Sins*, iii. 10. Compare *Against Two Letters
of the Pelagians*, iv. 23.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xxx:67](1050009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p40"></span> *Epistle* 157, 22.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xxx:68](1050009.htm#fr_67) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p41"></span> *Epistle* 156, among Augustin’s
*Letters*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xxxi:69](1050009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p42"></span> *Epistle*, 157, 22.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xxxii:70](1050009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p44"></span> *Epistles* 177, 6; and 179, 2.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xxxii:71](1050009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p45"></span> *Epistle* 168. *On the Proceedings of
Pelagius*, 48.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xxxii:72](1050009.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p46"></span> *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 47;
and *Epistle* 186, 1.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xxxii:73](1050009.htm#fr_72) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p47"></span> Compare *On Nature and Grace*, 7; and
*Epistle* 186, 1.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xxxii:74](1050009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p48"></span> *Epistle* 169, 13.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xxxii:75](1050009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p49"></span> *On Nature and Grace*, 1. Sallust’s
*Jugurtha*, prologue.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xxxiv:76](1050009.htm#fr_75) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p51"></span> For Augustin’s press of work just now,
see *Epistle* 169, 1 and 13.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xxxiv:77](1050009.htm#fr_76) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p52"></span> The argument occurs in Pelagius’
*Commentary on Paul*, written before 410, and is already before Augustin
in *On the Merits and Forgiveness of Sins*, etc., iii. 5.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xxxiv:78](1050009.htm#fr_77) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p53"></span> *Epistle* 166.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xxxv:79](1050009.htm#fr_78) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p54"></span> An almost contemporary letter to Oceanus
(*Epistle* 180, written in 416) adverts to the same subject and in the
same spirit, showing how much it was in Augustin’s thoughts. Compare
*Epistle* 180, 2 and 5.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xxxv:80](1050009.htm#fr_79) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p55"></span> *Epistle* 172.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xxxv:81](1050009.htm#fr_80) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p57"></span> See *On the Perfection of Man’s
Righteousness*, 1.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xxxvi:82](1050009.htm#fr_81) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p59"></span> Migne’s Edition of Augustin’s Works,
vol. v. pp. 1719-1723.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xxxvi:83](1050009.htm#fr_82) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p60"></span> Compare the words of Cicero quoted
above, p. xiv.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[xxxvi:84](1050009.htm#fr_83) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p61"></span> Compare the similar words in *Epistle*
177, 3, which was written, not only after what had occurred in Palestine
was known, but also after the condemnatory decisions of the African
synods.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[xxxvi:85](1050009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p63"></span> *Epistles* 175 and 176 in Augustin’s
*Letters*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[xxxvii:86](1050009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p64"></span> *Epistle* 177. The other bishops were
Aurelius, Alypius, Evodius, and Possidius.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[xxxvii:87](1050009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p66"></span> *Epistle* 178.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[xxxvii:88](1050009.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p67"></span> *Epistle* 179.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[xxxviii:89](1050009.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p69"></span> See vol. i. of this series, p. 459, and
the references there given. Compare Canon Robertson’s vivid account of
them in his *History of the Christian Church*, ii. 18, 145.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[xxxviii:90](1050009.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p70"></span> *Epistle* 188.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[xxxviii:91](1050009.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p71"></span> Compare *On the Grace of Christ*, 40. In
the succeeding sections, some of its statements are examined.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[xxxix:92](1050009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p73"></span> *Epistles* 181, 182, 183, among
Augustin’s *Letters*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[xxxix:93](1050009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p76"></span> *Epistle* 186, written conjointly with
Alypius.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[xl:94](1050009.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p77"></span> The book given him by Timasius and
James, to which *On Nature and Grace* is a reply.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[xl:95](1050009.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p78"></span> Compare also Innocent’s letter
(*Epistle* 181) to the Carthaginian Council, chap. 4, which also
Neander, *History of the Christian Church*, E.T., ii. 646, quotes in
this connection, as showing that Innocent “perceived that this dispute
was connected with a different way of regarding the relation of God’s
providence to creation.” As if Augustin did not see this too!

<span id="fn_95"></span>[xl:96](1050009.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p80"></span> The book addressed to Dardanus, in which
the Pelagians are confuted, but not named, belongs about at this time.
Compare *Retractations*, ii. 49.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[xl:97](1050009.htm#fr_96) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p81"></span> *Sermon* 131, preached at Carthage.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[xlii:98](1050009.htm#fr_97) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p83"></span> *On the Grace of Christ*, 2.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[xlii:99](1050009.htm#fr_98) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p84"></span> The so-called *Confession of Faith* sent
to Innocent after the Synod of Diospolis, but which arrived after
Innocent’s death.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[xlii:100](1050009.htm#fr_99) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p85"></span> *On Original Sin*, 1.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[xlii:101](1050009.htm#fr_100) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p86"></span> Do., 5.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[xlii:102](1050009.htm#fr_101) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p87"></span> *On the Grace of Christ*, 55.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[xliv:103](1050009.htm#fr_102) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p91"></span> *On the Gift of Perseverance*, 55.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[xlv:104](1050009.htm#fr_103) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p91.6"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p92"></span> Compare, below, pp. lv-lviii. Neander,
in the second volume (E.T.) of his *History of the Christian Church*,
discusses the matter in a very fair spirit.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[xlv:105](1050009.htm#fr_104) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p92.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p93"></span> English version, [Ps.
95.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.iii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[xlv:106](1050009.htm#fr_105) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p94"></span> *Sermon* 26.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[xlvii:107](1050009.htm#fr_106) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p96"></span> *Epistle* 190.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[xlviii:108](1050009.htm#fr_107) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p99"></span> See *Epistle* 194, 1.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[xlviii:109](1050009.htm#fr_108) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p100"></span> See *Epistle* 191, 1.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[xlix:110](1050009.htm#fr_109) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p101"></span> *Epistle* 191.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[xlix:111](1050009.htm#fr_110) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p102"></span> *Epistle* 194.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[xlix:112](1050009.htm#fr_111) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p103"></span> It appears to have been first reported
to Augustin, by Marius Mercator, in a letter received at Carthage. See
*Epistle* 193, 3.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[xlix:113](1050009.htm#fr_112) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p104"></span> As, for example, in *On the Merits and
Remission of Sins*, etc., i.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[l:114](1050009.htm#fr_113) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p106"></span> *Epistle* 193.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[l:115](1050009.htm#fr_114) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p107"></span> Compare *On Dulcitius’ Eight
Questions*, 3.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[l:116](1050009.htm#fr_115) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p108"></span> That is, *On the Merits and Remission
of Sins*, etc., ii. 30 sq.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[l:117](1050009.htm#fr_116) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p110"></span> *Epistle* 196.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[li:118](1050009.htm#fr_117) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p112"></span> *On Marriage and Concupiscence*, i. 2.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[li:119](1050009.htm#fr_118) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p112.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p113"></span> Compare the Benedictine Preface to *The
Unfinished Work*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[lii:120](1050009.htm#fr_119) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p115"></span> *Epistle* 202, *bis*. Compare *Epistle*
190.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[liv:121](1050009.htm#fr_120) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p118"></span> Compare *Epistle* 195.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[liv:122](1050009.htm#fr_121) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p119"></span> Julian afterwards repudiated this
letter, perhaps because of some falsifications it had suffered; it seems
to have been certainly his.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[liv:123](1050009.htm#fr_122) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p120"></span> Compare *Against Two Letters of the
Pelagians*, iii. 24: and see above, p. xv.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[lvii:124](1050009.htm#fr_123) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p123.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p124"></span> To wit: Cyprian’s testimony on original
sin (20-24), on gratuitous grace (25-26), on the imperfection of human
righteousness (27-28), and Ambrose’s testimony on original sin (29), on
gratuitous grace (30), and on the imperfection of human righteousness
(31).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[lvii:125](1050009.htm#fr_124) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p126"></span> Compare *Epistle* 207, written probably
in the latter half of 421.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[lvii:126](1050009.htm#fr_125) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p127"></span> That is, Chyrsostom.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[lviii:127](1050009.htm#fr_126) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p128"></span> Compare *On Rebuke and Grace*, 44, and
the footnote there.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[lviii:128](1050009.htm#fr_127) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p130"></span> See vol. iii. of this series, pp. 227
sq.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[lviii:129](1050009.htm#fr_128) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p131"></span> Now a portion of Tunis.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[lviii:130](1050009.htm#fr_129) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p131.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p132"></span> *Epistle* 194.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[lix:131](1050009.htm#fr_130) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p133"></span> *Epistle* 214.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[lix:132](1050009.htm#fr_131) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p134"></span> *Epistle* 215, 2 sq.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[lx:133](1050009.htm#fr_132) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p135.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p136"></span> *Epistle* 216.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[lx:134](1050009.htm#fr_133) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p136.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p137"></span> *On Rebuke and Grace*, 1.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[lx:135](1050009.htm#fr_134) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p138"></span> *Retractions*, ii. 67. Compare *On
Rebuke and Grace*, 5 sq.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[lx:136](1050009.htm#fr_135) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p138.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p139"></span> On the importance of this treatise for
Augustin’s doctrine of predestination, see Wiggers’ *Augustinianism and
Pelagianism*, E.T. p. 236, where a sketch of the history of this
doctrine in Augustin’s writings may be found.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[lxi:137](1050009.htm#fr_136) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p140.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p141"></span> *Epistle* 217.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[lxii:138](1050009.htm#fr_137) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p142.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p143"></span> *Epistle* 224.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[lxiii:139](1050009.htm#fr_138) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p144"></span> The account given of Pelagianism is as
follows: “They are in such degree enemies of the grace of God, by which
we have been predestined into the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ unto
Himself ([Eph. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.1"></span>), and by which we are delivered from the
power of darkness so as to believe in Him, and be translated into His
kingdom ([Col. i. 13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.2"></span>)—wherefore He says, ‘No man comes to Me,
except it be given him of My Father’ ([John vi.
66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.3"></span>)—and by which love is shed abroad in our
hearts ([Rom. v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.4"></span>), so that faith may work by love: that they
believe that man is able, without it, to keep all the Divine
commandments,—whereas, if this were true, it would clearly be an empty
thing that the Lord said, ‘Without Me ye can do nothing’ ([John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="v.ii.iii-p144.5"></span>).
When Pelagius was at length accused by the brethren, because he
attributed nothing to the assistance of God’s grace towards the keeping
of His commandments, he yielded to their rebuke, so far as not to place
this grace above free will, but with faithless cunning to subordinate
it, saying that it was given to men for this purpose; viz., that they
might be able more easily to fulfil by grace, what they were commanded
to do by free will. By saying, ‘that they might be able more easily,’
he, of course, wished it to be believed that, although with more
difficulty, nevertheless men were able without divine grace to perform
the divine commands. But that grace of God, without which we can do
nothing good, they say does not exist except in free will, which without
any preceding merits our nature received from Him; and that He adds His
aid only in that by His law and teaching we may learn what we ought to
do, but not in that by the gift of His Spirit we may do what we have
learned ought to be done. Accordingly, they confess that knowledge by
which ignorance is banished is divinely given to us, but deny that love
by which we may live a pious life is given; so that, forsooth, while
knowledge, which, without love, puffeth up, is the gift of God, love
itself, which edifieth so that knowledge may not puff up, is not the
gift of God ([1 Cor. viii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011)<span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.6"></span>). They also destroy the prayers which the
Church offers, whether for those that are unbelieving and resisting
God’s teaching, that they may be converted to God; or for the faithful,
that faith may be increased in them, and they may persevere in it. For
they contend that men do not receive these things from Him, but have
them from ourselves, saying, that the grace of God, by which we are
freed from impiety, is given according to our merits. Pelagius was
compelled, no doubt, to condemn this by his fear of being condemned by
the episcopal judgment in Palestine; but he is found to teach it still
in his later writings. They also advanced so far as to say that the life
of the righteous in this world is without sin, and the Church of Christ
is perfected by them in this mortality, to the point of being entirely
without spot or wrinkle ([Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="v.ii.iii-p144.7"></span>);
as if it were not the Church of Christ, that, in the whole world, cries
to God, ‘Forgive us our debts.’ They also deny that children, who are
carnally born after Adam, contract the contagion of ancient death from
their first birth. For they assert that they are born so without any
bond of original sin, that there is absolutely nothing that ought to be
remitted to them in the second birth, yet they are to be baptized; but
for this reason, that, adopted in regeneration, they may be admitted to
the kingdom of God, and thus be translated from good into better,—not
that they may be washed by that renovation from any evil of the old
bond. For although they be not baptized, they promise to them, outside
the kingdom of God indeed, but nevertheless, a certain eternal and
blessed life of their own. They also say that Adam himself, even had he
not sinned, would have died in the body, and that this death would not
have come as a desert to a fault, but as a condition of nature. Certain
other things also are objected to them, but these are the chief, and
also either all, or nearly all, the others may be understood to depend
on these.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[lxiii:140](1050009.htm#fr_139) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p144.8"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p145"></span> Compare *Epistles* 225, 1, and 156. It
is, of course, not certain that this is the same Hilary that wrote to
Augustin from Sicily, but it seems probable.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[lxiii:141](1050009.htm#fr_140) <span
id="v.ii.iii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p146"></span> In *Letters* 225 and 226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV](1050010)
