[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050698)  [Next](1050700.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27 \[XVII.\]—Augustin Did Not
Venture to Define Anything About the Propagation of the Soul.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>For whence comes it that he is so
careless about the Scriptures, which he talks of, as not to notice that
when he reads of human beings being from God, it is not merely, as he
contends, in respect of their soul and spirit, but also as regards their
body? For the apostle’s statement, “We are His offspring,” <span
id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377.md) this man supposes must not be
referred to the body, but only to the soul and spirit. If, indeed, our
human bodies are not of God, then that is false which the Scripture
says: “For of Him are all things, through Him are all things, and in Him
are all things.” <span id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378.md) Again, with
reference to the same apostle’s statement, “For as the woman is of the
man, so also is the man by the woman,” <span
id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379.md) let him explain to us what
propagation he would choose to be meant in the process,—that of the
soul, or of the body, or of both? But he will not allow that souls come
by propagation: it remains, therefore, that, according to him and all
who deny the propagation of souls, the apostle signified the masculine
and feminine body only, when he said, “As the woman is of the man, so
also is the man by the woman;” the woman having been made out of the
man, in order that the man might afterwards, by the process of birth,
come out of the woman. If, therefore, the apostle, when he said this,
did not intend the soul and spirit also to be understood, but only the
bodies of the two sexes, why does he immediately add, “But all things
are of God,” <span id="fr_2380"></span>[2381](#fn_2380.md) unless it be
that bodies also are of God? For so runs his entire statement: “As the
woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman; but all things are
of God.” Let, then, our disputant determine of what this is said. If of
men’s bodies, then, of course, even bodies are of God. How comes it to
pass, therefore, that whenever this person reads in Scripture the
phrase, “*of God*,” when man is in question, he will have the words
understood, not in reference to men’s bodies, but only as concerning
their souls and spirits? But if the expression, “All things are of God,”
was spoken both of the body of the two sexes, and of their soul and
spirit, it follows that in all things the woman is of the man, for the
woman comes from the man, and the man is by the woman: but all things of
God. What “all things” are meant, except those he was speaking of,
namely, the man of whom came the woman, and the woman who was of the
man, and also the man who came by the woman? For that man came not by
woman, out of whom came the woman; but only he who afterwards was born
of man by woman, just as men are now born. Hence it follows that if the
apostle, when he said the words we have quoted from him, spoke of men’s
bodies, undoubtedly the bodies of persons of both sexes are of God.
Furthermore, if he insists that nothing in man comes <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-Page_327"></span>from God except their souls and
spirits, then, of course, the woman is of the man even as regards her
soul and spirit; so that nothing is left to those who dispute against
the propagation of souls. But if he is for dividing the subject in such
a manner as to say that the woman is of the man as regards her body, but
is of God in respect of her soul and spirit, how, then, will that be
true which the apostle says, “All things of God,” if the woman’s body is
of the man in such a sense that it is not of God? Wherefore, allowing
that the apostle is more likely to speak the truth than that this person
must be preferred as an authority to the apostle, the woman is of the
man, whether in regard to her body only, or in reference to the entire
whole of which human nature consists (but we assert nothing on these
points as an absolute certainty, but are still inquiring after their
truth); and the man is through the woman, whether it be that his whole
nature as man is derived to him from his father, and is born in him
through the woman, or the flesh alone; about which points the question
is still undecided. “All things, however, are of God,” and about this
there is no question; and in this phrase are included the body, soul,
and spirit, both of the man and the woman. For even if they were not
born or derived from God, or emanated from Him as portions of His
nature, yet they are of God, inasmuch as whatever is created, formed,
and made by Him, has from Him the reality of its existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[326:2378](1050699.htm#fr_2377.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p3"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)<span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[326:2379](1050699.htm#fr_2378.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p4"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md)<span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[326:2380](1050699.htm#fr_2379.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012.md)<span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2380"></span>[326:2381](1050699.htm#fr_2380.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012.md)<span
id="xvii.iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1050700.md)
