[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050765)  [Next](1050767) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.x"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—The Fidelity of Memory; The
Unsearchable Treasure of Memory; The Powers of a Man’s Understanding
Sufficiently Understood by None.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.x-p2"></span>We often assume that we shall retain a
thing in our memory; and so thinking, we do not write it down. But
afterwards, when we wish to recall it, it refuses to come to mind; and
we are then sorry that we thought it would return to memory, or that we
did not secure it in writing so as to prevent its escape; and lo, on a
sudden, without our seeking it, it occurs to us. Then does it follow
that we were not ourselves when we thought this? And that we cease to be
the same thing that we were, when we are no longer able to think it? Now
how does it happen that I know not how we are abstracted from, and
denied to, ourselves; and similarly am ignorant how we are restored and
returned to ourselves? As if we are other persons, and elsewhere, when
we seek, but fail to find, what we deposited in our memory; and are
ourselves incapable of returning to ourselves, as if we were situated
somewhere else; but afterwards return again, on finding ourselves out.
For where do we make our quest, except in our own selves? And what is it
we search for, except our own selves? As if we were not actually at home
in our persons, but had gone somewhither. Do you not observe, even with
alarm, so deep a mystery? And what is all this but our own nature—not
what it has been, but such as it now is? And observe how much more we
seek than we comprehend. I have often believed that I could understand a
question which had been submitted to me, if I were to bestow thought
upon it. Well, I have bestowed the thought, but have not been able to
solve the question; and many a time I have not so believed, and yet have
been able to determine the point. The powers, then, of my own
understanding have not been really known to me; nor, I apprehend, have
they been to you either.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1050767)
