[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050246)  [Next](1050248.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.iv"></span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="xii.iv-Page_121"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>A Treatise on nature and grace, against
pelagius;</span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="xii.iv-p2.1"></span>by aurelius augustin, bishop of hippo;</span>

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xii.iv-p3.1"></span>Contained in One Book, addressed to timasius and
jacobus.</span>

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="xii.iv-p4.1"></span>written in the year of our lord 415.</span>

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>————————————

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>*He begins with a statement of what is to be
investigated concerning nature and grace; he shows that nature, as
propagated from the flesh of the sinful Adam, being no longer what God
made it at first,—faultless and sound,—requires the aid of grace, in
order that it may be redeemed from the wrath of God and regulated for
the perfection of righteousness: that the penal fault of nature leads to
a most righteous retribution: whilst grace itself is not rendered to any
deserts of ours, but is given gratuitously; and they who are not
delivered by it are justly condemned. He afterwards refutes, with
answers on every several point, a work by Pelagius, who supports this
self-same nature in opposition to grace; among other things especially,
in his desire to recommend the opinion that a man can live without sin,
he contended that nature had not been weakened and changed by sin; for,
otherwise, the matter of sin (which he thinks absurd) would be its
punishment, if the sinner were weakened to such a degree that he
committed more sin. He goes on to enumerate sundry righteous men both of
the Old and of the New Testaments: deeming these to have been free from
sin, he alleged the possibility of not sinning to be inherent in man;
and this he attributed to God’s grace, on the ground that God is the
author of that nature in which is inseparably inherent this possibility
of avoiding sin. Towards the end of this treatise there is an
examination of sundry extracts from old writers, which Pelagius adduced
in support of his views, and expressly from Hilary, Ambrose, and even
Augustin himself.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1050248.md)
