[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050687)  [Next](1050689) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16 \[XIII.\]—Difficulty in the
Opinion Which Maintains that Souls are Not by Propagation.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>This means, then, of settling the point
whereby the soul was sent into the flesh until what time it should be
delivered from the flesh,—seeing that the soul of an infant, which has
not grown old enough for the will to become free, is the case
supposed,—makes no discovery of the reason why condemnation should
overtake it without the reception of baptism, except the reason of
original sin. Owing to this sin, we do not deny that the soul is
righteously condemned, because for sin God’s righteous law has appointed
punishment. But then we ask, why the soul has been made to undergo this
sinful state, if it is not derived from that one primeval soul which
sinned in the first father of the human race. Wherefore, if God does not
condemn the innocent,—if He does not make guilty those whom He sees to
be innocent,—and if nothing liberates souls from either original sins or
personal ones but Christ’s baptism in Christ’s Church,—and if sins,
before they are committed, and much more when they have never been
committed, cannot be condemned by any righteous law: then this writer
cannot adduce any of these four cases; he must, if he can, explain, in
respect to the souls of infants, which, as they quit life without
baptism, are sent into condemnation, by what desert of theirs it is that
they, without having ever sinned, are consigned to a sinful flesh, there
to find the sin which is to secure their just condemnation. Moreover, if
he shrinks from these four cases which sound doctrine condemns,—that is
to say, if he has not the courage to maintain that souls, when they are
even without sin, are made sinful by God, or that they are freed from
the original sin that is in them without <span id="page_322">p.
322</span> <span id="xvii.iv.xvi-Page_322"></span>Christ’s sacrament, or
that they committed sin in some other state before they were sent into
the flesh, or that sins which they never committed are condemned in
them,—if, I say, he has not the courage to tell us these things because
they really do not deserve to be mentioned but should affirm that
infants do not inherit original sin, and have no reason why they should
be condemned should they depart hence without receiving the sacrament of
regeneration, he will without doubt, to his own condemnation, run into
the damnable heresy of Pelagius. To avoid this, how much better is it
for him to share my hesitation about the soul’s origin, without daring
to affirm that which he cannot comprehend by human reason nor defend by
divine authority! So shall he not be obliged to utter foolishness,
whilst he is afraid to confess his ignorance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1050689)
