[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050846)  [Next](1050848) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5 \[III.\]—The Calumny of the
Pelagians Against the Clergy of the Roman Church.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.v-p2"></span>Moreover, they accuse the Roman clergy,
writing, “That, driven by the fear of a command, they have not blushed
to be guilty of the <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="xviii.iv.v-Page_393"></span>crime of prevarication; so that,
contrary to their previous judgment, wherein by their proceedings they
had assented to the catholic dogma, they subsequently pronounced that
the nature of men is evil.” Nay, but the Pelagians had conceived, with a
false hope, that the new and execrable dogma of Pelagius or Cœlestius
could be made acceptable to the catholic intelligences of certain
Romans, when those crafty spirits—however perverted by a wicked error,
yet not contemptible, since they appeared rather to be deserving of
considerate correction than of easy condemnation—were treated with
somewhat more of lenity than the stricter discipline of the Church
required. For while so many and such important ecclesiastical documents
were passing and repassing between the Apostolical See and the African
bishops,  <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) —and,moreover, when
the proceedings in this matter in that see were completed, with
Cœlestius present and making answer,—what sort of a letter, what decree,
is found of Pope Zosimus, of venerable memory, wherein he prescribed
that it must be believed that man is born without any taint of original
sin? Absolutely he never said this—never wrote it at all. But since
Cœlestius had written this in his pamphlet, among those matters, merely,
on which he confessed that he was still in doubt and desired to be
instructed, the desire of amendment in a man of so acute an intellect,
who, if he could be put right, would assuredly be of advantage to many,
and not the falsehood of the doctrine, was approved. And therefore his
pamphlet was called catholic, because this also is the part of a
catholic disposition,—if by chance in any matters a man thinks
differently from what the truth demands, not with the greatest accuracy
to define those matters, but, if detected and demonstrated, to reject
them. For it was not to heretics, but to catholics, that the apostle was
speaking when he said, “Let us, therefore, as many as are perfect, be
thus minded; and if in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you.” <span id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627) This was
thought to have been the case in him when he replied that he consented
to the letters of Pope Innocent of blessed memory, in which all doubt
about this matter was removed. And in order that this might be made
fuller and more manifest in him, matters were delayed until letters
should come from Africa, in which province his craftiness had in some
sort become more evidently known. And afterwards these letters came to
Rome containing this, that it was not sufficient for men of more
sluggish and anxious minds that he confessed his general consent to the
letters of Bishop Innocent, but that he ought openly to anathematize the
mischievous statements which he had made in his pamphlet; lest if he did
not do so, many people of better intelligence should rather believe that
in his pamphlet those poisons of the faith had been approved by the
catholic see, because it had been affirmed by that see that that
pamphlet was catholic, than that they had been amended because of his
answer that he consented to the letters of Pope Innocent. Then,
therefore, when his presence was demanded, in order that by certain and
clear answers either the craft of the man or his correction might
plainly appear and remain doubtful to no one, he withdrew himself and
refused the examination. Neither would the delay which had already been
made for the advantage of others have taken place, if it could not be of
advantage to the pertinacity and madness of those who were excessively
perverse. But if, which be far from the case, it had so been judged in
the Roman Church concerning Cœlestius or Pelagius, that those dogmas of
theirs, which in themselves and with themselves Pope Innocent had
condemned, should be pronounced worthy of approval and maintenance, the
mark of prevarication would rather have to be branded on the Roman
clergy for this. But now, when the first letters of the most blessed
Pope Innocent, in reply to the letters of the African bishops,  <span
id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628) would have equally condemned this
error which these men are endeavouring to commend to us; and his
successor, the holy Pope Zosimus, would never have said, never have
written, that this dogma which these men think concerning infants is to
be held; nay, would even have bound Cœlestius by a repeated sentence,
when he endeavoured to clear himself, to a consent to the
above-mentioned letters of the Apostolic See;—assuredly, whatever in the
meanwhile was done more leniently concerning Cœlestius, provided the
stability of the most ancient and robust faith were maintained, was the
most merciful persuasion of correction, not the most pernicious approval
of wickedness; and that afterwards, by the same priesthood, Cœlestius
and Pelagius were condemned by repeated authority, was the proof of a
severity, for a little while intermitted, at length of necessity to be
carried out, not a denial of a previously-known truth or a new
acknowledgment of truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[393:2627](1050847.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="xviii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.v-p3"></span> See *On Original Sin*, 9, 5, 8.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[393:2628](1050847.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="xviii.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.v-p4"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span id="xviii.iv.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[393:2629](1050847.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="xviii.iv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.v-p5"></span> See Augustin’s *Letters*, 181, 182,
183.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1050848)
