[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050275)  [Next](1050277) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29 \[XXVI.\]—A Simile to Show that
God’s Grace is Necessary for Doing Any Good Work Whatever. God Never
Forsakes the Justified Man If He Be Not Himself Forsaken. <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) </span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p3"></span>Observe, indeed, how cautiously he
expresses himself: “God, no doubt, applies His mercy even to this
office, whenever it is necessary because man after sin requires help in
this way, not because God wished there should be a cause for such
necessity.” Do you not see how he does not say that God’s grace is
necessary to prevent us from sinning, but because we have sinned? Then
he adds: “But just in the same way it is the duty of a physician to be
ready to cure a man who is already wounded; although he ought not to
wish for a man who is sound to be wounded.” Now, if this simile suits
the subject of which we are treating, human nature is certainly
incapable of receiving a wound from sin, inasmuch as sin is not a
substance. As therefore, for example’s sake, a man who is lamed by a
wound is cured in order that his step for the future may be direct and
strong, its past infirmity being healed, so does the Heavenly Physician
cure our maladies, not only that they may cease any longer to exist, but
in order that we may ever afterwards be able to walk aright,—to which we
should be unequal, even after our healing, except by His continued help.
For after a medical man has administered a cure, in order that the
patient may be afterwards duly nourished with bodily elements and
ailments, for the completion and continuance of the said cure by
suitable means and help, he commends him to God’s good care, who bestows
these aids on all who live in the flesh, and from whom proceeded even
those means which \[the physician\] applied during the process of the
cure. For it is not out of any resources which he has himself created
that the medical man effects any cure, but out of the resources of Him
who creates all things which are required by the whole and by the sick.
God, however, whenever He—through “the one mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus”—spiritually heals the sick or raises the dead,
that is, justifies the ungodly, and when He has brought him to perfect
health, in other words, to the fulness of life and righteousness, does
not forsake, if He is not forsaken, in order that life may be passed in
constant piety and righteousness. For, just as the eye of the body, even
when completely sound, is unable to see unless aided by the brightness
of light, so also man, even when most fully justified, is unable to lead
a holy life, if he be not divinely assisted by the eternal light of
righteousness. God, therefore, heals us not only that He may blot out
the sin which we have committed, but, furthermore, that He may enable us
even to avoid sinning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[131:1203](1050276.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p2"></span> See the treatise *De Peccatorum
Meritis*, ii. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1050277)
