[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050006)  [Next](1050008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>I. The Origin and Nature of Pelagianism.</span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="v.ii.i-p2.1"></span>It</span> was inevitable that the energy of the
Church in intellectually realizing and defining its doctrines in
relation to one another, should first be directed towards the objective
side of Christian truth. The chief controversies of the first four
centuries and the resulting definitions of doctrine, concerned the
nature of God and the person of Christ; and it was not until these
theological and Christological questions were well upon their way to
final settlement, that the Church could turn its attention to the more
subjective side of truth. Meanwhile she bore in her bosom a full
recognition, side by side, of the freedom of the will, the evil
consequences of the fall, and the necessity of divine grace for
salvation. Individual writers, or even the several sections of the
Church, might exhibit a tendency to throw emphasis on one or another of
the elements that made up this deposit of faith that was the common
inheritance of all. The East, for instance, laid especial stress on free
will: and the West dwelt more pointedly on the ruin of the human race
and the absolute need of God’s grace for salvation. But neither did the
Eastern theologians forget the universal sinfulness and need of
redemption, or the necessity, for the realization of that redemption, of
God’s gracious influences; nor did those of the West deny the
self-determination or accountability of men. All the elements of the
composite doctrine of man were everywhere confessed; but they were
variously emphasized, according to the temper of the writers or the
controversial demands of the times. Such a state of affairs, however,
was an invitation to heresy, and a prophecy of controversy; just as the
simultaneous confession of the unity of God and the Deity of Christ, or
of the Deity and the humanity of Christ, inevitably carried in its train
a series of heresies and controversies, until the definitions of the
doctrines of the Trinity and of the person of Christ were complete. In
like manner, it was inevitable that sooner or later some one should
arise who would so one-sidedly emphasize one element or the other of the
Church’s teaching as to salvation, as to throw himself into heresy, and
drive the Church, through controversy with him, into a precise
definition of the doctrines of free will and grace in their mutual
relations.

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>This new heresiarch came, at the opening of
the fifth century, in the person of the British monk, Pelagius. The
novelty of the doctrine which he taught is repeatedly asserted by
Augustin <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) , and is evident to the
historian; but it consisted not in the emphasis that he laid on free
will, but rather in the fact that, in emphasizing free will, he denied
the ruin of the race and the necessity of grace. This was not only new
in Christianity; it was even anti-Christian. Jerome, <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span id="v.ii.i-Page_xiv"></span>as well as
Augustin, saw this at the time, and speaks of Pelagianism as the “heresy
of Pythagoras and Zeno;” <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) and modern
writers of the various schools have more or less fully recognized it.
Thus Dean Milman thinks that “the greater part” of Pelagius’ letter to
Demetrias “might have been written by an ancient academic;” <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) Dr. De Pressensé identifies the Pelagian
idea of liberty with that of Paganism; <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)
and Bishop Hefele openly declares that their fundamental doctrine, “that
man is virtuous entirely of his own merit, not of the gift of grace,”
seems to him “to be a rehabilitation of the general heathen view of the
world,” and compares with it Cicero’s words: <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) “For gold, lands, and all the blessings of
life, we have to return thanks to the Gods; but no one ever returned
thanks to the Gods for virtues.” <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) The
struggle with Pelagianism was thus in reality a struggle for the very
foundations of Christianity; and even more dangerously than in the
previous theological and Christological controversies, here the
practical substance of Christianity was in jeopardy. The real question
at issue was whether there was any need for Christianity at all; whether
by his own power man might not attain eternal felicity; whether the
function of Christianity was to save, or only to render an eternity of
happiness more easily attainable by man. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span>Genetically speaking, Pelagianism was the
daughter of legalism; but when it itself conceived, it brought forth an
essential deism. It is not without significance that its originators
were “a certain sort of monks;” that is, laymen of ascetic life. From
this point of view the Divine law is looked upon as a collection of
separate commandments, moral perfection as a simple complex of separate
virtues, and a distinct value as a meritorious demand on Divine
approbation is ascribed to each good work or attainment in the exercises
of piety. It was because this was essentially his point of view that
Pelagius could regard man’s powers as sufficient to the attainment of
sanctity,—nay, that he could even assert it to be possible for a man to
do more than was required of him. But this involved an essentially
deistic conception of man’s relations to his Maker. God had endowed His
creature with a capacity (*possibilitas*) or ability (*posse*) for
action, and it was for him to use it. Man was thus a machine, which,
just because it was well made, needed no Divine interference for its
right working; and the Creator, having once framed him, and endowed him
with the *posse*, henceforth leaves the *velle* and the *esse* to him.

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>At this point we have touched the central
and formative principle of Pelagianism. It lies in the assumption of the
plenary ability of man; his ability to do all that righteousness can
demand,—to work out not only his own salvation, but also his own
perfection. This is the core of the whole theory; and all the other
postulates not only depend upon it, but arise out of it. Both
chronologically and logically this is the root of the system.

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span>When we first hear of Pelagius, he is
already advanced in years, living in Rome in the odour of
sanctity, <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) and enjoying a well-deserved
reputation for zeal in exhorting others to a good life, which grew
especially warm against those who endeavoured to shelter themselves,
when charged with their sins, behind the weakness of nature. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) He was outraged by the universal excuses on
such occasions,—“It is hard!” “it is difficult!” “we are not able!” “we
are men!”—“Oh, blind madness!” he cried: “we accuse God of a twofold
ignorance,—that He does not seem to know what He has made, nor what He
has commanded,—as if forgetting the human weakness of which He is
Himself the Author, He has imposed laws on man which He cannot
endure.” <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) He himself tells us <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) that it was his custom, therefore,
whenever he had to speak on moral improvement and the conduct of a holy
life, to begin by pointing out the power and quality of human nature,
and by showing what it was capable of doing. For (he says) he esteemed
it of small use to exhort men to what they deemed impossible: hope must
rather be our companion, and all longing and effort die when we despair
of attaining. So exceedingly ardent an advocate was he <span
id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="v.ii.i-Page_xv"></span>of man’s
unaided ability to do all that God commanded, that when Augustin’s noble
and entirely scriptural prayer—“Give what Thou commandest, and command
what Thou wilt”—was repeated in his hearing, he was unable to endure it;
and somewhat inconsistently contradicted it with such violence as almost
to become involved in a strife. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) The
powers of man, he held, were gifts of God; and it was, therefore, a
reproach against Him as if He had made man ill or evil, to believe that
they were insufficient for the keeping of His law. Nay, do what we will,
we cannot rid ourselves of their sufficiency: “whether we will, or
whether we will not, we have the capacity of not sinning.” <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) “I say,” he says, “that man is able to be
without sin, and that he is able to keep the commandments of God;” and
this sufficiently direct statement of human ability is in reality the
hinge of his whole system.

<span id="v.ii.i-p20"></span>There were three specially important
corollaries which flowed from this assertion of human ability, and
Augustin himself recognized these as the chief elements of the
system. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) It would be inexplicable on
such an assumption, if no man had ever used his ability in keeping God’s
law; and Pelagius consistently asserted not only that all might be
sinless if they chose, but also that many saints, even before Christ,
had actually lived free from sin. Again, it follows from man’s
inalienable ability to be free from sin, that each man comes into the
world without entailment of sin or moral weakness from the past acts of
men; and Pelagius consistently denied the whole doctrine of original
sin. And still again, it follows from the same assumption of ability
that man has no need of supernatural assistance in his striving to obey
righteousness; and Pelagius consistently denied both the need and
reality of divine grace in the sense of an inward help (and especially
of a prevenient help) to man’s weakness.

<span id="v.ii.i-p22"></span>It was upon this last point that the
greatest stress was laid in the controversy, and Augustin was most of
all disturbed that thus God’s grace was denied and opposed. No doubt the
Pelagians spoke constantly of “grace,” but they meant by this the primal
endowment of man with free will, and the subsequent aid given him in
order to its proper use by the revelation of the law and the teaching of
the gospel, and, above all, by the forgiveness of past sins in Christ
and by Christ’s holy example. <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)
Anything further than this external help they utterly denied; and they
denied that this external help itself was absolutely necessary,
affirming that it only rendered it easier for man to do what otherwise
he had plenary ability for doing. Chronologically, this contention seems
to have preceded the assertion which must logically lie at its base, of
the freedom of man from any taint, corruption, or weakness due to sin.
It was in order that they might deny that man needed help, that they
denied that Adam’s sin had any further effect on his posterity than
might arise from his bad example. “Before the action of his own proper
will,” said Pelagius plainly, “that only is in man which God
made.” <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) “As we are procreated
without virtue,” he said, “so also without vice.” <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) In a word, “Nothing that is good and
evil, on account of which we are either praiseworthy or blameworthy, is
born with us,—it is rather done by us; for we are born with capacity for
either, but provided with neither.” <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)
So his later follower, Julian, plainly asserts his “faith that God
creates men obnoxious to no sin, but full of natural innocence, and with
capacity for voluntary virtues.” <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) So
intrenched is free will in nature, that, according to Julian, it is
“just as complete after sins as it was before sins;” <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) and what this means may be gathered from
Pelagius’ definition in the “Confession of Faith,” that he sent to
Innocent: “We say that man is always able both to sin and not to sin, so
as that we may confess that we have free will.” That sin in such
circumstances was so common as to be well-nigh universal, was accounted
for by the bad example of Adam and the power of habit, the latter being
simply the <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="v.ii.i-Page_xvi"></span>result of imitation of the former. “Nothing
makes well-doing so hard,” writes Pelagius to Demetrias, “as the long
custom of sins which begins from childhood and gradually brings us more
and more under its power until it seems to have in some degree the force
of nature (*vim naturæ*).” He is even ready to allow for the force of
habit in a broad way, on the world at large; and so divides all history
into progressive periods, marked by God’s (external) grace. At first the
light of nature was so strong that men by it alone could live in
holiness. And it was only when men’s manners became corrupt and
tarnished nature began to be insufficient for holy living, that by God’s
grace the Law was given as an addition to mere nature; and by it “the
original lustre was restored to nature after its blush had been
impaired.” And so again, after the habit of sinning once more prevailed
among men, and “the law became unequal to the task of curing it,” <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) Christ was given, furnishing men with
forgiveness of sins, exhortations to imitation of the example and the
holy example itself. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) But though
thus a progressive deterioration was confessed, and such a deterioration
as rendered desirable at least two supernatural interpositions (in the
giving of the law and the coming of Christ), yet no corruption of
nature, even by growing habit, is really allowed. It was only an
ever-increasing facility in imitating vice which arose from so long a
schooling in evil; and all that was needed to rescue men from it was a
new explanation of what was right (in the law), or, at the most, the
encouragement of forgiveness for what was already done, and a holy
example (in Christ) for imitation. Pelagius still asserted our
continuous possession of “a free will which is unimpaired for sinning
and for not sinning;” and Julian, that “our free will is just as full
after sins as it was before sins;” although Augustin does not fail to
twit him with a charge of inconsistency. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)

<span id="v.ii.i-p32"></span>The peculiar individualism of the Pelagian
view of the world comes out strongly in their failure to perceive the
effect of habit on nature itself. Just as they conceived of virtue as a
complex of virtuous acts, so they conceived of sin exclusively as an
act, or series of disconnected acts. They appear not to have risen above
the essentially heathen view which had no notion of holiness apart from
a series of acts of holiness, or of sin apart from a like series of
sinful acts. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) Thus the will was
isolated from its acts, and the acts from each other, and all organic
connection or continuity of life was not only overlooked but
denied. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) After each act of the will,
man stood exactly where he did before: indeed, this conception scarcely
allows for the existence of a “man”—only a willing machine is left, at
each click of the action of which the spring regains its original
position, and is equally ready as before to reperform its function. In
such a conception there was no place for character: freedom of will was
all. Thus it was not an unnatural mistake which they made, when they
forgot the man altogether, and attributed to the faculty of free will,
under the name of “*possibilitas*” or “*posse*,” the ability that
belonged rather to the man whose faculty it is, and who is properly
responsible for the use he makes of it. Here lies the essential error of
their doctrine of free will: they looked upon freedom in its *form*
only, and not in its *matter*; and, keeping man in perpetual and
hopeless equilibrium between good and evil, they permitted no growth of
character and no advantage to himself to be gained by man in his
successive choices of good. It need not surprise us that the type of
thought which thus dissolved the organism of the man into a congeries of
disconnected voluntary acts, failed to comprehend the solidarity of the
race. To the Pelagian, Adam was a man, nothing more; and it was simply
unthinkable that any act of his that left his own subsequent acts
uncommitted, could entail sin and guilt upon other men. The same alembic
that dissolved the individual into a succession of voluntary acts, could
not fail to separate the race into a heap of unconnected units. If sin,
as Julian declared, is nothing but will, and the will itself remained
intact after each act, how could the individual act of an individual
will condition the acts of men as yet unborn? By “imitation” of his act
alone could <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.i-Page_xvii"></span> (under such a conception) other men be
affected. And this carried with it the corresponding view of man’s
relation to Christ. He could forgive us the sins we had committed; He
could teach us the true way; He could set us a holy example; and He
could exhort us to its imitation. But He could not touch us to enable us
to will the good, without destroying the absolute equilibrium of the
will between good and evil; and to destroy this was to destroy its
freedom, which was the crowning good of our divinely created nature.
Surely the Pelagians forgot that man was not made for will, but will for
man.

<span id="v.ii.i-p35"></span>In defending their theory, as we are told
by Augustin, there were five claims that they especially made for
it. <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) It allowed them to praise as
was their due, the creature that God had made, the marriage that He had
instituted, the law that He had given, the free will which was His
greatest endowment to man, and the saints who had followed His counsels.
By this they meant that they proclaimed the sinless perfection of human
nature in every man as he was brought into the world, and opposed this
to the doctrine of original sin; the purity and holiness of marriage and
the sexual appetites, and opposed this to the doctrine of the
transmission of sin; the ability of the law, as well as and apart from
the gospel, to bring men into eternal life, and opposed this to the
necessity of inner grace; the integrity of free will to choose the good,
and opposed this to the necessity of divine aid; and the perfection of
the lives of the saints, and opposed this to the doctrine of universal
sinfulness. Other questions, concerning the origin of souls, the
necessity of baptism for infants, the original immortality of Adam, lay
more on the skirts of the controversy, and were rather consequences of
their teaching than parts of it. As it was an obvious fact that all men
died, they could not admit that Adam’s death was a consequence of sin
lest they should be forced to confess that his sin had injured all men;
they therefore asserted that physical death belonged to the very nature
of man, and that Adam would have died even had he not sinned. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) So, as it was impossible to deny that the
Church everywhere baptized infants, they could not refuse them baptism
without confessing themselves innovators in doctrine; and therefore they
contended that infants were not baptized for forgiveness of sins, but in
order to attain a higher state of salvation. Finally, they conceived
that if it was admitted that souls were directly created by God for each
birth, it could not be asserted that they came into the world soiled by
sin and under condemnation; and therefore they loudly championed this
theory of the origin of souls.

<span id="v.ii.i-p38"></span>The teachings of the Pelagians, it will be
readily seen, easily welded themselves into a system, the essential and
formative elements of which were entirely new in the Christian Church;
and this startlingly new reading of man’s condition, powers, and
dependence for salvation, it was, that broke like a thunderbolt upon the
Western Church at the opening of the fifth century, and forced her to
reconsider, from the foundations, her whole teaching as to man and his
salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiii:1](1050007.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span> *On* *the Merits and Remission of Sins*,
iii. 6, 11, 12; *Against Two Letters of the Pelagians*, iv. 32; *Against
Julian*, i. 4; *On Heresies*, 88; and often elsewhere. Jerome found
*roots* for the theory in Origen and Rufinus (*Letter* 133, 3), but this
is a different matter. Compare *On Original Sin*, 25.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xiv:2](1050007.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span> Preface to Book iv. of his work on
Jeremiah.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xiv:3](1050007.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span> *Latin Christianity*, i. 166, note 2.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiv:4](1050007.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span> *Trois Prem. Siécles*, ii. 375.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiv:5](1050007.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span> *De Natura Deorum*, iii. 36.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xiv:6](1050007.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span> *History of the Councils of the Church*
(E.T.), ii. 446, note 3.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiv:7](1050007.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span> Compare the excellent statement in
Thomasius’ *Dogmengeschichte*, i. 483.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xiv:8](1050007.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p14"></span> *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 46; *On
the Merits and Remission of Sins*, iii. 1; Epistle 186, etc.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiv:9](1050007.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p15"></span> *On* *Nature and Grace*, 1.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xiv:10](1050007.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p16"></span> *Epistle to Demetrias*, 16.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xiv:11](1050007.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p17"></span> Do. 2 and 19.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xv:12](1050007.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p18"></span> *On the Gift of Perseverance*, 53.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xv:13](1050007.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p19"></span> *On Nature and Grace*, 49.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xv:14](1050007.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p21"></span> *On the Gift of Perseverance*, 4; *Against
Two Letters of the Pelagians*, iii. 24; iv. 2 sq.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xv:15](1050007.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p23"></span> *On the Spirit and the Letter*, 4; *On
Nature and Grace*, 53; *On the Proceedings of Pelagius*, 20, 22, 38; *On
the Grace of Christ*, 2, 3, 8, 31, 42, 45; *Against Two Letters of the
Pelagians*, iv. 11; *On Grace and Free Will*, 23-26, and often.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xv:16](1050007.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p24"></span> *On Original Sin*, 14.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xv:17](1050007.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p25"></span> *On Original Sin*, 14.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xv:18](1050007.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p26"></span> *On Original Sin*, 14.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xv:19](1050007.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p27"></span> *The Unfinished Work*, iii. 82.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xv:20](1050007.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p28"></span> Do. i. 91; compare do. i. 48, 60; ii. 20.
“There is nothing of sin in man, if there is nothing of his own will.”
“There is no original sin in infants at all.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xvi:21](1050007.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p29"></span> *On Original Sin*, 30.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xvi:22](1050007.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p30"></span> *On the Grace of Christ*, 43.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xvi:23](1050007.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p31"></span> *The Unfinished Work*, i. 91; compare 69.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xvi:24](1050007.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p33"></span> Dr. Matheson finely says (*Expositor*, i.
ix. 21), “There is the same difference between the Chrstian and Pagan
idea of prayer as there is between the Christian and Pagan idea of sin.
Paganism knows nothing of sin, it knows only sins: it has no conception
of the principle of evil, it comprehends only a succession of sinful
acts.” This is Pelagianism too.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xvi:25](1050007.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p34"></span> Compare Schaff, *Church History*, iii.
804; and Thomasius’ *Dogmengeschichte*, i. 487-8.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xvii:26](1050007.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p36"></span> *Against Two Letters of the Pelagians*,
iii. 25, and iv. at the beginning.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xvii:27](1050007.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="v.ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p37"></span> This belongs to the earlier Pelagianism;
Julian was ready to admit that death came from Adam, but not sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](1050008.md)
