[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050150)  [Next](1050152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.v.ii"></span>

<span id="x.v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.v.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2 \[II.\]—Pelagius’ Objection; Infants
Reckoned Among the Number of Believers and the Faithful.</span>

<span id="x.v.ii-p2"></span>In these terms, then, the argument is
stated:—“But they who deny the transmission of sin endeavour to impugn
it thus: If (say they) Adam’s sin injured even those who do not sin,
therefore Christ’s righteousness also profits even those who do not
believe; because ‘In like manner, nay, much more,’ he says, ‘are men
saved by one, than they had previously perished by one.’” Now to this
argument, I repeat, I advanced no reply in the two books which I
previously addressed to you; nor, indeed, had I proposed to myself such
a task. But now I beg you first of all to observe, when they say, “If
Adam’s sin injures even those who do not sin, then Christ’s
righteousness also profits even those who do not believe,” how absurd
and false they judge it to be, that the righteousness of Christ should
profit even those who do not believe; and that thence they think to put
together such an argument as this: That no more could the first man’s
sin possibly do injury to infants who commit no sin, than the
righteousness of Christ can benefit any who do not believe. Let them
therefore tell us what is the benefit of Christ’s <span id="page_70">p.
70</span> <span id="x.v.ii-Page_70"></span>righteousness to baptized
infants; let them by all means tell us what they mean. For of course,
since they do not forget that they are Christians themselves, they have
no doubt that there is some benefit. But whatever be this benefit, it is
incapable (as they themselves assert) of benefiting those who do not
believe. Whence they are compelled to class baptized infants in the
number of believers, and to assent to the authority of the Holy
Universal Church, which does not account those unworthy of the name of
believers, to whom the righteousness of Christ could be, according to
them, of no use except as believers. As, therefore, by the answer of
those, through whose agency they are born again, the Spirit of
righteousness transfers to them that faith which, of their own will,
they could not yet have; so the sinful flesh of those, through whose
agency they are born, transfers to them that injury, which they have not
yet contracted in their own life. And even as the Spirit of life
regenerates them in Christ as believers, so also the body of death had
generated them in Adam as sinners. The one generation is carnal, the
other Spiritual; the one makes children of the flesh, the other children
of the Spirit; the one children of death, the other children of the
resurrection; the one the children of the world, the other the children
of God; the one children of wrath, the other children of mercy; and thus
the one binds them under original sin, the other liberates them from the
bond of every sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1050152)
