[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050991)  [Next](1050993) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.xi"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xx.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Further Replies to Those Who Object to
Rebuke.</span>

<span id="xx.xi-p2"></span>But wherefore do they, who are unwilling be
rebuked, say, “Only prescribe to me, and pray for me that I may do what
you prescribe?” Why do they not rather, in accordance with their own
evil inclination, reject these things also, and say, “I wish you neither
to prescribe to me, nor to pray for me”? For what man is shown to have
prayed for Peter, that God should give him the repentance wherewith he
bewailed the denial of his Lord? What man instructed Paul in the divine
precepts which pertain to the Christian faith? When, therefore, he was
heard preaching the gospel, and saying, “For I certify you, brethren,
that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. For I neither
received it from man, nor did I learn it, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ,” <span id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) —would it be replied
to him: “Why are you troubling us to receive and to learn from you that
which you have not received nor learnt from man? He who gave to you is
able also to give to us in like manner as to you.” Moreover, if they
dare not say this, but suffer the gospel to be preached to them by man,
although it cannot be given to man by man, let them concede also that
they ought to be rebuked by those who are set over them, by whom
Christian grace is preached; although it is not denied that God is able,
even when no man rebukes, to correct whom He will, and to lead him on to
the wholesome mortification of repentance by the most hidden and mighty
power of His medicine. And as we are not to cease from prayer on behalf
of those whom we desire to be corrected,—even although without any man’s
prayer on behalf of Peter, the Lord looked upon him and caused him to
bewail his sin,—so we must not neglect rebuke, although God can make
those whom He will to be corrected, even when not rebuked. But a man
then profits by rebuke when He pities and aids who makes those whom He
will to profit even without rebuke. But wherefore these are called to be
reformed in one way, those in another way, and others in still another
way, after different and innumerable manners, be it far from us to
assert that it is the business of the clay to judge, but of the potter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[474:3264](1050992.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="xx.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p3"></span> [Gal. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011)<span id="xx.xi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050993)
