[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050310)  [Next](1050312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.lxviii"></span>

<span id="xii.lxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.lxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 64.—Pelagius’ Admission as Regards
the Unbaptized, Fatal.</span>

<span id="xii.lxviii-p2"></span>Now, as touching these two good
substances which the good God created, how, against the reasoning of
this man, in the case of unbaptized persons, can they be contrary the
one to the other? Will he be sorry to have said this too, which he
admitted out of some regard to the Christians’ faith? For when he asked,
“How, in the case of any person who is already baptized, can it be that
his flesh is contrary to him?” he intimated, of course, that in the case
of unbaptized persons it is possible for the flesh to be contrary. For
why insert the clause, “*who is already baptized,*” when without such an
addition he might have put his question thus: “How in the case of any
person can the flesh be contrary?” and when, in order to prove this, he
might have subjoined that argument of his, that as both body and spirit
are good (made as they are by the good Creator), they therefore cannot
be contrary to each other? Now, suppose unbaptized persons (in whom, at
any rate, he confesses that the flesh is contrary) were to ply him with
his own arguments, and say to him, Who made man’s spirit? he must
answer, God. Suppose they asked him again, Who created the flesh? and he
answers, The same God, I believe. Suppose their third question to be, Is
the God good who created both? and his reply to be, Nobody doubts it.
Suppose once more they put to him his yet remaining inquiry, Are not
both good, since the good Creator made them? and he confesses it. Then
surely they will cut his throat with his own sword, when they force home
his conclusion on him, and say: Since therefore the spirit of man is
good, and his flesh good, as made by the good Creator, how can it be
that the two being good should be contrary to one another? Here,
perhaps, he will reply: I beg your pardon, I ought not to have said that
the flesh cannot be contrary to the spirit in any baptized person, as if
I meant to imply that it is contrary in the unbaptized; but I ought to
have made my statement general, to the effect that the flesh in no man’s
case is contrary. Now see into what a corner he drives himself. See what
a man will say, who is unwilling to cry out with the apostle, “Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God, through Jesus
<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="xii.lxviii-Page_144"></span>Christ our Lord.” <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) “But why,” he asks, “should I so
exclaim, who am already baptized in Christ? It is for them to cry out
thus who have not yet received so great a benefit, whose words the
apostle in a figure transferred to himself,—if indeed even they say so
much.” Well, this defence of nature does not permit even these to utter
this exclamation! For in the baptized, there is no nature; and in the
unbaptized, nature is not! Or if even in the one class it is allowed to
be corrupted, so that it is not without reason that men exclaim, “O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death?”
to the other, too, help is brought in what follows: “The grace of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord;” then let it at last be granted that
human nature stands in need of Christ for its Physician.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[144:1282](1050311.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="xii.lxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.lxviii-p3"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span id="xii.lxviii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 65](1050312)
