[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050081)  [Next](1050083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.lxiv"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.lxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 64.—A Twofold Mistake Respecting
Infants.</span>

<span id="x.iii.lxiv-p2"></span>You see how great a difference there is
amongst those whom I have been opposing at such length and persistency
in this work,—one of whom has <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="x.iii.lxiv-Page_41"></span>written the book which contains the
points I have refuted to the best of my ability. You see as I was
saying, the important difference existing between such of them as
maintain that infants are absolutely pure and free from all sin, whether
original or actual; and those who suppose that so soon as born infants
have contracted actual sins of their own, from which they need cleansing
by baptism. The latter class, indeed, by examining the Scriptures, and
considering the authority of the whole Church as well as the form of the
sacrament itself, have clearly seen that by baptism remission of sins
accrues to infants; but they are either unwilling or unable to allow
that the sin which infants have is original sin. The former class,
however, have clearly seen (as they easily might) that in the very
nature of man, which is open to the consideration of all men, the tender
age of which we speak could not possibly commit any sin whatever in its
own proper conduct; but, to avoid acknowledging original sin, they
assert that there is no sin at all in infants. Now in the truths which
they thus severally maintain, it so happens that they first of all
mutually agree with each other, and subsequently differ from us in
material aspect. For if the one party concede to the other that
remission of sins takes place in all infants which are baptized, whilst
the other concedes to their opponents that infants (as infant nature
itself in its silence loudly proclaims) have as yet contracted no sin in
their own living, then both sides must agree in conceding to us, that
nothing remains but original sin, which can be remitted in baptism to
infants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 65](1050083.md)
