[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050299)  [Next](1050301.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.lvii"></span>

<span id="xii.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.lvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53 \[XLV.\]—Pelagius Distinguishes
Between a Power and Its Use.</span>

<span id="xii.lvii-p2"></span>Well, are there other things to listen to?
Yes, certainly; both to listen to, and correct and guard against. “Now,
when it is said,” he says, “that the very ability is not at all of man’s
will, but of the Author of nature,—that is, God,—how can that possibly
be understood to be without the grace of God which is deemed especially
to belong to God?” Already we begin to see what he means; but that we
may not lie under any mistake, he explains himself with greater breadth
and clearness: “That this may become still plainer, we must,” says he,
“enter on a somewhat fuller discussion of the point. Now we affirm that
the possibility of anything lies not so much in the ability of a man’s
will as in the necessity of nature.” He then proceeds to illustrate his
meaning by examples and similes. “Take,” says he, “for instance, my
ability to speak. That I am able to speak is not my own; but that I do
speak is my own,—that is, of my own will. And because the act of my
speaking is my own, I have the power of alternative action,—that is to
say, both to speak and to refrain from speaking. But because my ability
to speak is not my own, that is, is not of my own determination and
will, it is of necessity <span id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259.md) that
I am always able to speak; and though I wished not to be able to speak,
I am unable, nevertheless, to be unable to speak, unless perhaps I were
to deprive myself of that member whereby the function of speaking is to
be performed.” Many means, indeed, might be mentioned whereby, if he
wish it, a man may deprive himself of the possibility of speaking,
without removing the organ of speech. If, for instance, anything were to
happen to a man to destroy his voice, he would be unable to speak,
although the members remained; for a man’s voice is of course no member.
There may, in short, be an injury done to the member internally, short
of the actual loss of it. I am, however, unwilling to press the argument
for a word; and it may be replied to me in the contest, Why, even to
injure is to lose. But yet we can so contrive matters, by closing and
shutting the mouth with bandages, as to be quite incapable of opening
it, and to put the opening of it out of our power, although it was quite
in our own power to shut it while the strength and healthy exercise of
the limbs remained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[139:1260](1050300.htm#fr_1259.md) <span
id="xii.lvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.lvii-p3"></span> Necesse est me semper loqui posse. This
obscure sentence seems to point to Pelagius’ former statement: Cujusque
rei possibilitatem non tam in arbitrii humani potestate quàm in *naturæ
necessitate* consistere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1050301.md)
