[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050983)  [Next](1050985) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.iii"></span> <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="xx.iii-Page_471"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>A Treatise on rebuke and grace,</span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="xx.iii-p2.1"></span>by aurelius augustin, bishop of hippo;</span>

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xx.iii-p3.1"></span>In One Book,</span>

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xx.iii-p4.1"></span>addressed to valentine, and with him to the
monks of adrumetum.</span>

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span><span class="c44"><span
id="xx.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d. 426 or 427</span>

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>————————————

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>*In the beginning the writer sets forth what
is the Catholic faith concerning law, concerning free will, and
concerning grace. He teaches that the grace of God by Jesus Christ is
that by which alone men are delivered from evil, and without which they
do absolutely no good; and this not only by the fact that it points out
what is to be done, but that it also supplies the means of doing it with
love, since God bestows on men the inspiration of a good will and deed.
He teaches that the rebuke of evil men who have not received this grace
is neither unjust—since they are evil by their own will—nor useless,
although it must be confessed that it is only by God’s agency that it
can avail. That perseverance in good is truly a great gift of God, but
that still the rebuke of one who has not persevered must not on that
account be neglected; and that if a man who has not received this gift
should relapse of his own will into sin, he is not only deserving of
rebuke, but if he should continue in evil until his death, he is
moreover worthy of eternal damnation. That it is inscrutable why one
should receive this gift and another should not receive it. That of
those who are predestinated none can perish. And that the perseverance,
which all do not receive who are here called children of God, is
constantly given to all those who are truly children by God’s
foreknowledge and predestination. He answers the question which suggests
itself concerning Adam—in what way he sinned by not persevering, since
he did not receive perseverance. He shows that such assistance was at
the first given to him, as that without it he could not continue if he
would, not as that with it it must result that he would. But that now
through Christ is given us not only such help as that without it we
cannot continue even if we will, but moreover such and so great as that
by it we will. He proves that the number of the predestinated, to whom a
gift of this kind is appropriated, is certain, and can neither be
increased nor* <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="xx.iii-Page_472"></span>*diminished. And since it is unknown who
belongs to that number, and who does not, that medicinal rebuke must be
applied to all who sin, lest they should either themselves perish, or be
the ruin of others. Finally, he concludes that neither is rebuke
prohibited by grace, nor is grace denied by rebuke.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1050985)
