[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050529)  [Next](1050531.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Pelagius’ Attempt to Deceive the
Apostolic See; He Inverts the Bearings of the Controversy.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xix-p2"></span>But I would have you carefully observe
the way in which Pelagius endeavoured by deception to overreach even the
judgment of the bishop of the Apostolic See on this very question of the
baptism of infants. He sent a letter to Rome to Pope Innocent of blessed
memory; and when it found him not in the flesh, it was handed to the
holy Pope Zosimus, and by him directed to us. In this letter he
complains of being “defamed by certain persons for refusing the
sacrament of baptism to infants, and promising the kingdom of heaven
irrespective of Christ’s redemption.” The objections, however, are not
urged against them in the manner he has stated. For they neither deny
the sacrament of baptism to infants, nor do they promise the kingdom of
heaven to any irrespective of the redemption of Christ. As regards,
therefore, his complaint of being defamed by sundry persons, he has set
it forth in such terms as to be able to give a ready answer to the
alleged charge against him, without injury to his own dogma. \[XVIII.\]
The real objection against them is, that they refuse to confess that
unbaptized infants are liable to the condemnation of the first man, and
that original sin has been transmitted to them and requires to be purged
by regeneration; their contention being that infants must be baptized
solely for being admitted into the kingdom of heaven, as if they could
only have eternal death apart from the kingdom of heaven, who cannot
have eternal life without partaking of the Lord’s body and blood. This,
I would have you know, is the real objection to them respecting the
baptism of infants; and not as he has represented it, for the purpose of
enabling himself to save his own dogmas while answering what is actually
a proposition of his own, under colour of meeting an objection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1050531.md)
