[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050166)  [Next](1050168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="x.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18 \[X.\]—Is the Soul Derived by
Natural Propagation?</span>

<span id="x.v.xviii-p2"></span>Well, but “if the soul is not propagated,
but the flesh alone, then the latter alone has propagation of sin, and
it alone deserves punishment:” this is what they think, saying “that it
is unjust that the soul which is only recently produced, and that not
out of Adam’s substance, should bear the sin of another committed so
long ago.” Now observe, I pray you, how the circumspect Pelagius felt
the question about the soul to be a very difficult one, and acted
accordingly,—for the words which I have just quoted are copied from his
book. He does not say absolutely, “Because the soul is not propagated,”
but hypothetically, *If the soul is not propagated*, rightly determining
on so obscure a subject (on which we can find in Holy Scriptures no
certain and obvious testimonies, or with very great difficulty discover
any) to speak with hesitation rather than with confidence. Wherefore I
too, on my side, answer this proposition with no hasty assertion: If the
soul is not propagated, where is the justice that, what has been but
recently created and is quite free from the contagion of sin, should be
compelled in infants to endure the passions and other torments of the
flesh, and, what is more terrible still, even the attacks of evil
spirits? For never does the flesh so suffer anything of this kind that
the living and feeling soul does not rather undergo the punishment. If
this, indeed, is shown to be just, it may be shown, on the same terms,
with what justice original sin comes to exist in our sinful flesh, to be
subsequently cleansed by the sacrament of baptism and God’s gracious
mercy. If the former point cannot be shown, I imagine that the latter
point is equally incapable of demonstration. We must therefore either
bear with both positions in silence, and remember that we are human, or
else we must prepare, at some other time, another work on the soul, if
it shall appear necessary, discussing the whole question with caution
and sobriety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1050168)
