[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050486)  [Next](1050488.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—Why the Pelagians Deemed
Prayers to Be Necessary. The Letter Which Pelagius Despatched to Pope
Innocent with an Exposition of His Belief.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.xxxii-p2"></span>Now I will say nothing at present
about the works of Cœlestius, or those tracts of his which <span
id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span id="xv.iii.xxxii-Page_228"></span>he
produced in those ecclesiastical proceedings, <span
id="fr_1866"></span>[1867](#fn_1866.md) copies of the whole of which we
have taken care to send to you, along with another letter which we
deemed it necessary to add. If you carefully examine all these
documents, you will observe that he does not posit the grace of God,
which helps us whether to avoid evil or to do good, beyond the natural
choice of the will, but only in the law and teaching. Thus he even
asserts that their very prayers are necessary for the purpose of showing
men what to desire and love. All these documents, however, I may omit
further notice of at present; for Pelagius himself has lately forwarded
to Rome both a letter and an exposition of his belief, addressing it to
Pope Innocent, of blessed memory, of whose death he was ignorant. Now in
this letter he says that “there are certain subjects about which some
men are trying to vilify him. One of these is, that he refuses to
infants the sacrament of baptism, and promises the kingdom of heaven to
some, independently of Christ’s redemption. Another of them is, that he
so speaks of man’s ability to avoid sin as to exclude God’s help, and so
strongly confides in free will that he repudiates the help of divine
grace.” Now, as touching the perverted opinion he holds about the
baptism of infants (although he allows that it ought to be administered
to them), in opposition to the Christian faith and catholic truth, this
is not the place for us to enter on an accurate discussion, for we must
now complete our treatise on the assistance of grace, which is the
subject we undertook. Let us see what answer he makes out of this very
letter to the objection which he has proposed concerning this matter.
Omitting his invidious complaints about his opponents, we approach the
subject before us; and find him expressing himself as follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[228:1867](1050487.htm#fr_1866.md) <span
id="xv.iii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.xxxii-p3"></span> Augustin again mentions a short
treatise by Cœlestius produced by him at Rome in some proceedings of the
church there, below, in ch. 36 (xxxiii.), and also in his work *De
Peccato Originali*, chs. 2 and 5 (ii., v.), etc. Those acts of the Roman
church were drawn up (as Augustin testifies in his *Contra duas
Epistolas Pelagianorum*, ii. 3, “when Cœlestius was present to answer
charges laid against him”) in the time of Pope Zosimus, <span
class="c16"><span id="xv.iii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>A.D.</span> 417.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1050488.md)
