[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050644)  [Next](1050646.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxix"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 38 \[XXIII.\]—Jovinian Used
Formerly to Call Catholics Manicheans; The Arians Also Used to Call
Catholics Sabellians.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxxix-p2"></span>“By your new mode of controversy,”
says he, “you both profess to be a catholic and patronize Manichæus,
inasmuch as you designate matrimony both as a great good and a great
evil.” Now he is utterly ignorant of what he says, or pretends to be
ignorant. Or else he does not understand what we say, or does not wish
it to be understood. But if he does not understand, he is impeded by the
pre-occupation of error; or if he does not wish our meaning to be
understood, then obstinacy is the fault with which he defends his error.
Jovinian, too, who endeavoured a few years ago to found a new heresy,
used to declare that the catholics patronized the Manicheans, because in
opposition to him they preferred holy virginity to marriage. But this
man is sure to reply, that he does not agree with Jovinian in his
indifference about marriage and virginity. I do not myself say that this
is their opinion; still these new heretics must allow, by the fact of
Jovinian’s playing off the Manicheans upon the catholics, that the
expedient is not a novel one. We then declare that marriage is a good,
not an evil. But just as the Arians charge us with being Sabellians,
although we do not say that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost
are one and the same, as the Sabellians hold; but affirm that the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost have one and the same nature, as
the catholics believe: so do the Pelagians cast the Manicheans in our
teeth, although we do not declare marriage to be an evil, as the
Manicheans pretend, but affirm that evil accrued to the first man and
woman, that is to say, to the first married pair, and from them passed
on to all men, as the catholics hold. As, however, the Arians, while
avoiding the Sabellians, fall into worse company, because they have had
the audacity to divide not the Persons of the Trinity, but the natures;
so the Pelagians, in their efforts to escape from the pestilent error of
the Manicheans, by taking the opposite extreme, are convicted of
entertaining worse sentiments than the Manicheans themselves touching
the fruit of matrimony, inasmuch as they believe that infants stand in
no need of Christ as their Physician.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](1050646.md)
