[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050736)  [Next](1050738.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Examination of Victor’s Simile:
Does Man Give Out Nothing by Breathing?</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.v-p2"></span>Prove now yourself what I say, for your
own satisfaction in your own case; emit breath by exhalation, and see
whether you can continue long without catching back your breath; then
again catch it back by inhalation, and see what discomfort you
experience unless you again emit it. Now, when we inflate a bag, as you
prescribe, we do, in fact, the same thing which we do to maintain life,
except that in the case of the artificial experiment our inhalation is
somewhat stronger, in order that we may emit a stronger breath, so as to
fill and distend the bag by compressing the air we blow into it, rather
in the manner of a hard puff than of the gentle process of ordinary
breathing and respiration. On what ground, then, do you say, “We suffer
no injury whenever we transfer breath from ourselves to any object, nor
do we ever remember experiencing any damage to ourselves from inflating
a bag, the full quality and entire quantity of our own breath remaining
in us notwithstanding the process”? It is very plain, my son, if ever
you have inflated a bag, that you did not carefully observe your own
performance. For you do not perceive what you lose by the act of
inflation by reason of the immediate recovery of your breath. But you
can learn all this with the greatest ease if you would simply prefer
doing so to stiffly maintaining your own statements for no other reason
than because you have made them—not inflating the bag, but inflated
yourself to the full, and inflating your hearers (whom you should rather
edify and instruct by veritable facts) with the empty prattle of your
turgid discourse. In the present case I do not send you to any other
teacher than your own self. Breathe, then, a good breath into the bag;
shut your mouth instantly, hold tight your nostrils, and in this way
discover the truth of what I say to you. For when you begin to suffer
the intolerable inconvenience which accompanies the experiment, what is
it you wish to recover by opening your mouth and releasing your
nostrils? Surely there would be nothing to recover if your supposition
be a correct one, that you have lost nothing whenever you breathe.
Observe what a plight you would be in, if by inhalation you did not
regain what you had parted with by your breath<span id="page_346">p.
346</span> <span id="xvii.vi.v-Page_346"></span>ing outwards. See, too,
what loss and injury the insufflation would produce, were it not for the
repair and reaction caused by respiration. For unless the breath which
you expend in filling the bag should all return by the re-opened channel
to discharge its function of nourishing yourself, what, I wonder, would
be left remaining to you,—I will not say to inflate another bag, but to
supply your very means of living?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1050738.md)
