[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050430)  [Next](1050432) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.l"></span>

<span id="xiv.l-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.l-p1.1"></span>Chapter 46 \[XXII.\]—How Pelagius Became Known to
Augustin; Cœlestius Condemned at Carthage.</span>

<span id="xiv.l-p2"></span>Now, that I may especially refer to my own
relation to him, I first became acquainted with Pelagius’ name, along
with great praise of him, at a distance, and when he was living at Rome.
Afterwards reports began to reach us, that he disputed against the grace
of God. This caused me much pain, for I could not refuse to believe the
statements of my informants; but yet I was desirous of ascertaining
information on the matter either from himself or from some treatise of
his, that, in case I should have to discuss the question with him, it
should be on grounds which he could not disown. On his arrival, however,
in Africa, he was in my absence kindly received on our coast of Hippo,
where, as I found from our brethren, nothing whatever of this kind was
heard from him; because he left earlier than was expected. On a
subsequent occasion, indeed, I caught a glimpse of him, once or twice,
to the best of my recollection, when I was very much occupied in
preparing for the conference which we were to hold with the heretical
Donatists; but he hastened away across the sea. Meanwhile the doctrines
connected with his name were warmly maintained, and passed from mouth to
mouth, among his reputed followers—to such an extent that Cœlestius
found his way before an ecclesiastical tribunal, and reported opinions
well suited to his perverse character. We thought it would be a better
way of proceeding against them, if, without mentioning any names of
individuals, the errors themselves were met and refuted; and the men
might thus be brought to a right mind by the fear of a condemnation from
the Church rather than be punished by the actual condemnation. And so
both by books and by popular discussions we ceased not to oppose the
evil doctrines in question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](1050432)
