[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050635)  [Next](1050637) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxx"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—The Same Continued. Augustin
Also Asserts that God Forms Man at Birth.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxx-p2"></span>Though I have given special attention to
the point, I have failed to discover what assistance he could obtain
from this deceitful use of Scripture, except that he wanted to produce
the apostle as a witness, and by him to prove, what we also assert, that
God forms man of human seed. And inasmuch as no passage directly
occurred to him, he deceitfully manipulated this particular one; fearing
no doubt that, if the apostle should chance to seem to have spoken of
corn seeds, and not of human, in this passage, we should have suggested
to us at once by such procedure of his, how to refute him: not indeed as
the pure-minded advocate of a chastened will, but as the impudent
proclaimer of a profligate voluptuousness. But from the very seeds,
forsooth, which the farmers sow in their fields he can be refuted. For
why can we not suppose that God could have granted to man in his happy
state in paradise, the same course with regard to his own seed which we
see granted to the seeds of corn, in such wise that the former might be
sown without any shameful lust, the members of generation simply obeying
the inclination of the will; just as the latter is sown without any
shameful lust, the hands of the husbandman merely moving in obedience to
his will? There being, indeed, this difference, that <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="xvi.vi.xxx-Page_295"></span>the
desire of begetting children in the parent is a nobler one than that
which characterizes the farmer, of filling his barns. Then, again, why
might not the almighty Creator, with His incontaminable ubiquity, and
his power of creating from human seed just what it pleased Him, have
operated in women, with respect to what He even now makes, in the
self-same manner as He operates in the ground with corn seeds according
to His will, making blessed mothers conceive without lustful passion,
and bring forth children without parturient pains, inasmuch as there was
not (in that state of happiness, and in the body which was not as yet
the body of this death, but rather of that life) in woman when receiving
seed anything to produce shame, as there was nothing when giving birth
to offspring to cause pain? Whoever refuses to believe this, or is
unwilling to have it supposed that, while men previous to any sin lived
in that happy state of paradise, such a condition as that which we have
sketched could not have been permitted in God’s will and kindness, must
be regarded as the lover of shameful pleasure, rather than the encomiast
of desirable fecundity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1050637)
