[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050606)  [Next](1050608) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.i-Page_281"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>preliminary notes on the second book.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p3.1"></span>(1) From the Preface of Augustin’s “Unfinished
Work Against Julianus.”</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p4.1"></span>I Wrote</span> a treatise, under the title *On
Marriage and Concupiscence*, and addressed it to the Count <span
class="c16"><span id="xvi.vi.i-p4.2"></span>Valerius</span>, on learning
that he had been informed of the Pelagians that they charge us with
condemning marriage. Now in that treatise I showed the distinction, as
criticially and accurately as I was able, between the good of marriage
and the evil of carnal concupiscence,—an evil which is well used by
conjugal chastity. On receiving my treatise, the illustrious man whom I
have named sent me in a short paper <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) a few sentences culled from a work
of Julianus, <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) a Pelagian
heretic. In this work he has thought fit to extend to four books his
answer to the before-mentioned treatise of mine, which is limited to one
book only, *On Marriage and Concupiscence*. I do not know to whom we
were indebted for the said extracts: he confined his selection,
evidently on purpose, to the first book of Julianus’ work. At the
request of Valerius, I lost no time in drawing up my answer to the
extracts. And thus it happened that I have written a second book also
under the same title; and in reply to this Julianus has drawn up to
eight books, in excess of his loquacious powers.

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p7"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p7.1"></span>(2) From Augustin’s Epistle to Claudius
\[CCVII.\].</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p8"></span>“Whoever has perused this second book of
mine, addressed (as the first was) to the Count Valerius, and drawn up
(as, indeed, both were) for his use, will have discovered that there are
some points in which I have not answered Julianus, but that I meant my
work rather for him who made the extracts from that writer’s books, and
who did not arrange them in the order in which he found them. He deemed
some considerable alteration necessary in his arrangement, very probably
with the view of appropriating by this method as his own the thoughts
which evidently were another person’s.”

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span id="xvi.vi.i-Page_283"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p9"></span><span class="c25"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p9.1"></span>Book II. <span
id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) </span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p11"></span>Augustin, in this latter book, refutes
sundry sentences which had been culled by some unknown author from the
first of four books that Julianus had published in opposition to the
former book of his treatise “On Marriage and Concupiscence;” which
sentences had been forwarded to him at the instance of the Count
Valerius. He vindicates the Catholic doctrine of original sin from his
opponent’s cavils and subtleties, and particularly shows how diverse it
is from the infamous heresy of the Manicheans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[281:2191](1050607.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="xvi.vi.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p5"></span> In chartula.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[281:2192](1050607.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="xvi.vi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p6"></span> \[This able and learned man was much the
most formidable of the Pelagian writers. Besides this book, Augustin
wrote three large works against him, the treatise *Against Two Letters
of the Pelagians*, and the two treatises *Against Julian* the last of
which is usually called *The Unfinished Work* from the circumstance that
Augustin left it incomplete at his death. Julian was a son of a dear
friend of Augustin, and was himself much loved by him. He became a
“lector” in 404, and was ordained bishop by Innocent I. about 417. Under
Zosimus’ vacillating policy he took strong ground on the Pelagian side,
and, refusing to sign Zosimus’ *Tractoria*, was exiled with his
seventeen fellow-recusants, and passed his long life in vain endeavours
to obtain recognition for the Pelagian party. His writings included two
letters to Zosimus, a *Confession of Faith*, the two letters answered in
*Against Two Letters of the Pelagians* (though he seems to have
repudiated the former of these), and two large books against Augustin,
the first of which was his four books against the first book of the
present treatise, against extracts from which the second book was
written, whilst Augustin’s *Against Julian*, in six books, traverses the
whole work. To this second book Julian replied in a rejoinder addressed
to Florus, and consisting of eight books. Augustin’s *Unfinished Work*
is a reply to this. Julian’s character was as noble as his energy was
great and his pen acute. He stands out among his fellow-Pelagians as the
sufferer for conscience’ sake. A full account of his works may be read
in the Preface to Augustin’s *Unfinished Work*, with which may be
compared the article on him in Smith and Wace’s *Dictionary of Christian
Biography*—W.\]

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[283:2193](1050607.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="xvi.vi.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.i-p10"></span> Written <span class="c16"><span
id="xvi.vi.i-p10.1"></span>A.D</span>. 420.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1050608)
