[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050682)  [Next](1050684.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Martyrdom for Christ Supplies
the Place of Baptism. The Faith of the Thief Who Was Crucified Along
with Christ Taken as Martyrdom and Hence for Baptism.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xi-p2"></span>Accordingly, the thief, who was no
follower of the Lord previous to the cross, but His confessor upon the
cross, from whose case a presumption is sometimes taken, or attempted,
against the sacrament of baptism, is reckoned by St. Cyprian <span
id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348.md) among the martyrs who are baptized
in their own blood, as happens to many unbaptized persons in times of
hot persecution. For to the fact that he confessed the crucified Lord so
much weight is attributed and so much availing value assigned by Him who
knows how to weigh and value such evidence, as if he had been crucified
for the Lord. Then, indeed, his faith on the cross flourished when that
of the disciples failed, and that without recovery if it had not bloomed
again by the resurrection of Him before the terror of whose death it had
drooped. They despaired of Him when dying,—he hoped when joined with Him
in dying; they fled from the author of life,—he prayed to his companion
in punishment; they grieved as for the death of a man,—he believed that
after death He was to be a king; they forsook the sponsor of their
salvation,—he honoured the companion of His cross. There was discovered
in him the full measure of a martyr, who then believed in Christ when
they fell away who were destined to be martyrs. All this, indeed, was
manifest to the eyes of the Lord, who at once bestowed so great felicity
on one who, though not baptized, was yet washed clean in the blood, as
it were, of martyrdom. But even of ourselves, who cannot reflect with
how much faith, how much hope, how much charity he might have undergone
death for Christ when living, who begged life of Him when dying? Besides
all this, there is the circumstance, which is not incredibly reported,
that the thief who then believed as he hung by the side of the crucified
Lord was sprinkled, as in a most sacred baptism, with the water which
issued from the wound of the Saviour’s side. I say nothing of the fact
that nobody can prove, since none of us knows that he had not been
baptized previous to his condemnation. However, let every man take this
in the sense he may prefer; only let no rule about baptism affecting the
Saviour’s own precept be taken from this example of the thief; and let
no one promise for the case of unbaptized infants, between damnation and
the kingdom of heaven, some middle place of rest and happiness, such as
he pleases and where he pleases. For this is what the heresy of Pelagius
promised them: he neither fears damnation for infants, whom he does not
regard as having any original sin, nor does he give them the hope of the
kingdom of heaven, since they do not approach to the sacrament of
baptism. As for this man, however, although he acknowledges that infants
are involved in original sin, he yet boldly promises them, even without
baptism, the kingdom of heaven. This even the Pelagians had not the
boldness to do, though asserting infants to be absolutely without sin.
See, then, what a network of presumptuous opinion he entangles, unless
he regret having committed such views to writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[319:2349](1050683.htm#fr_2348.md) <span
id="xvii.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xi-p3"></span> Cyprian’s *Letter to Jubianus*. See
likewise Augustin’s work *Against the Donatists*, iv. 29; also *On
Leviticus*, question 84; also his *Retractations*, ii. 18, 55.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050684.md)
