[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050722)  [Next](1050724.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15 \[XI.\]—Victor “Decides” That
Oblations Should Be Offered Up for Those Who Die Unbaptized.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.xv-p2"></span>Still he chafes with indecision, and is
well-nigh suffocated in the terrible straits of his theory; for very
likely he descries with a more sensitive eye than you, the amount of
evil which he enunciates, to the effect that original sin in infants is
effaced without Christ’s sacrament of baptism. It is, indeed, for the
purpose of finding an escape to some extent, and tardily, in the
Church’s sacraments that he says: “In their behalf I most certainly
decide that constant oblations and incessant sacrifices must be offered
up on the part of the holy priests.” Well, then, you may take him if you
like for your arbiter, if it were not enough to have him as your
instructor. Let him decide that you must offer up the sacrifice of
Christ’s body even for those who have not been incorporated into Christ.
Now this is quite a novel idea, and foreign to the Church’s discipline
and the rule of truth: and yet, when daring to propound it in his books,
he does not modestly say, I rather think; he does not say, I suppose; he
does not say, I am of opinion; nor does he say, I at least would
suggest, or mention;—but he says, I give it as my decision; so that,
should we be (as might be likely) offended by the novelty or the
perverseness of his opinion, we might be overawed by the authority of
his judicial determination. It is your own concern, my brother, how to
be able to bear him as your instructor in these views. Catholic priests,
however, of right feeling (and among them you ought to take your place)
could never keep quiet—God forbid it—and hear this man pronounce his
decisions, when they would wish him rather to recover his senses, and be
sorry both for having entertained such opinions, and for having gone so
far as to commit them to writing, and chastise himself with the most
wholesome discipline of repentance. “Now it is,” says he; “on this
example of the Maccabees who fell in battle that I ground the necessity
of doing this. When they offered stealthily some interdicted sacrifices,
and after they had fallen in the battle, we find,” says he, “that this
remedial measure was at once resorted to by the priests,—sacrifices were
offered up to liberate their souls, which had been bound by the guilt of
their forbidden conduct.” <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415.md) But
he says all this, as if (according to his reading of the story) those
atoning sacrifices were offered up for uncircumcised persons, as he has
decided that these sacrifices of ours must be offered up for unbaptized
persons. For circumcision was the sacrament of that period, which
prefigured the baptism of our day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[338:2416](1050723.htm#fr_2415.md) <span
id="xvii.v.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xv-p3"></span> This is a loose reference to the
narrative in [2 Macc. xii. 39-45](../../../bib/apo/ma2012.htm#039.md)<span
id="xvii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1050724.md)
