[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050730)  [Next](1050732) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23 \[XVII.\]—Who They are that are
Not Injured by Reading Injurious Books.</span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxiii-p2"></span>Forasmuch, then, as he has both
commenced and terminated his books with such safeguards, and has placed
on your shoulders the religious burden of their correction and
emendation, I only trust that he may find in you all that he has asked
you for, that you may “correct him righteously in mercy, and reprove
him; whilst the oil of the sinner which anoints his head” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434) is absent from your hands and
eyes,—even the indecent compliance of the flatterer, and the deceitful
leniency of the sycophant. If, however, you decline to apply correction
when you see anything to amend, you offend against love; but if he does
not appear to you to require correction, because you think him to be
right in his opinions, then you are wise against truth. He, therefore,
is a better man (since he is only too ready to be corrected, if a true
censurer be at hand) than yourself, if either knowing him to be in error
you despise him with derision, or ignorant of his wandering course you
at the same time closely follow his error. Everything, therefore, which
you find in the books that he has addressed and forwarded to you, I beg
you to consider with sobriety and vigilance; and you will perhaps make
fuller discoveries than I have myself of statements which deserve to be
censured. And as for such of their contents as are worthy of praise and
approbation,—whatever good you have learnt therein, and by his
instruction, which perhaps you were really ignorant of before, tell us
plainly what it is, that all may know that it was for this particular
benefit that you expressed your obligations to him, and not for the
manifold statements in his books which call for their
disapproval,—*all*, I mean, who, like yourself, heard him read his
writings, or who afterwards read the same for themselves: lest in his
ornate style they may drink poison, as out of a choice goblet, at your
instance, though not after your own example, because they know not
precisely what it is you have drunk yourself, and what you have left
untasted, and because, from your high character, they suppose that
whatever is drunk out of this fountain would be for their health. For
what else are hearing, and reading, and copiously depositing things in
the memory, than several processes of drinking? The Lord, however,
foretold concerning His faithful followers, that even “if they should
drink any deadly thing, it should not hurt them.” <span
id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435) And thus it happens that they who
read with judgment, and bestow their approbation on whatever is
commendable according to the rule of faith, and disapprove of things
which ought to be reprobated, even if they commit to their memory
statements which are declared to be worthy of disapproval, they receive
no harm from the poisonous and depraved nature of the sentences. To
myself, through the Lord’s mercy, it can never become a matter of the
least regret, that, actuated by our previous love, I have given your
reverend and religious self advice and warning on these points, in
whatever way you may receive the admonition for which I have regarded
you as possessing the first claim upon me. Abundant thanks, indeed,
shall I give unto Him in whose mercy it is most salutary to put one’s
trust, if this letter of mine shall either find or else make your faith
both free from the depraved and erroneous opinions which I have been
able herein to point out from this man’s books, and sound in catholic
integrity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[342:2435](1050731.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="xvii.v.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxiii-p3"></span> [Ps. cxli.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)<span id="xvii.v.xxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[342:2436](1050731.htm#fr_2435) <span
id="xvii.v.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v.xxiii-p4"></span> [Mark xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018)<span
id="xvii.v.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](1050732)
