[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050198)  [Next](1050200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23 \[XIV.\]—How the Decalogue Kills, If
Grace Be Not Present.</span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p2"></span>Although, therefore, the apostle seems to
reprove and correct those who were being persuaded to be circumcised, in
such terms as to designate by the word “*law*” circumcision itself and
other similar legal observances, which are now rejected as shadows of a
future substance by Christians who yet hold what those shadows
figuratively promised; he at the same time nevertheless would have it to
be clearly understood that the law, by which he says no man is
justified, lies not merely in those sacramental institutions which
contained promissory figures, but also in those works by which whosoever
has done them lives holily, and amongst which occurs this prohibition:
“Thou shalt not covet.” Now, to make our statement all the clearer, let
us look at the Decalogue itself. It is certain, then, that Moses on the
mount received the law, that he might deliver it to the people, written
on tables of stone by the finger of God. It is summed up in these ten
commandments, in which there is no precept about circumcision, nor
anything concerning those animal sacrifices which have ceased to be
offered by Christians. Well, now, I should like to be told what there is
in these ten commandments, except the observance of the Sabbath, which
ought not to be kept by a Christian,—whether it prohibit the making and
worshipping of idols and of any other gods than the one true God, or the
taking of God’s name in vain; or prescribe honour to parents; or give
warning against fornication, murder, theft, false witness, adultery, or
coveting other men’s property? Which of these commandments would any one
say that the Christian ought not to keep? Is it possible to contend that
it is not the law which was written on those two tables that the apostle
describes as “the letter that killeth,” but the law of circumcision and
the other sacred rites which are now abolished? But then how can we
think so, when in the law occurs this precept, “Thou shall not covet,”
by which very commandment, notwithstanding its being holy, just, and
good, “sin,” says the apostle, “deceived me, and by it slew me?” <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809.md) What else can this be than “the
letter” that “killeth”?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_809"></span>[93:810](1050199.htm#fr_809.md) <span
id="xi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p3"></span> See [Rom. vii.
7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md)<span id="xi.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1050200.md)
