[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050918)  [Next](1050920.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Further Appeals to Cyprian’s
Teaching.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p2"></span>Does that holy and so memorable
instructor of the Churches in the word of truth, deny that there is free
will in men, because he attributes to God the whole of your righteous
living? Does he reproach God’s law, because he intimates that man is not
justified by it, seeing that he declares that what that law commands
must be obtained from the Lord God by prayers? Does he assert fate under
the name of grace, by saying that we must boast in nothing, since
nothing is our own? Does he, like these, believe that the Holy Spirit is
in such wise the aider of virtue, as if that very virtue which it
assists springs from ourselves, when, asserting that nothing is our own,
he mentions in this respect that the apostle said, “For what hast thou
that thou hast not received?” and says that the most excellent virtue,
that is, patience, does not begin from us, and afterwards receive aid by
the Spirit of God, but from Him Himself takes its source, from Him takes
its origin? Finally, he confesses that neither good purpose, nor desire
of virtue, nor good dispositions, begin to be in men without God’s
grace, when he says that “we must boast in nothing, since nothing is our
own.” What is so established in free will as what the law says, that we
must not worship an idol, must not commit adultery, must do no murder?
Nay, these crimes, and such like, are of such a kind that, if any one
should commit them, he is removed from the communion of the body of
Christ. And yet, if the blessed Cyprian thought that our own will was
sufficient for not committing these crimes, he would not in such wise
understand what we say in the Lord’s Prayer, “Give us this day our daily
bread,” as that he should assert that we ask “that we may not by the
interposition of some heinous sin—by being prevented as abstaining, and
not communicating, from partaking of the heavenly bread—be separated
from Christ’s body.” Let these new heretics answer <span
id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="xviii.vi.xxvi-Page_429"></span>of
a surety what good merit precedes, in men who are enemies of the name of
Christ? For not only have they no good merit, but they have, moreover,
the very worst merit. And yet, Cyprian even thus understands what we say
in the prayer, “Thy will be done in heaven, and in earth:” that we pray
also for those very persons who in this respect are called *earth*. We
pray, therefore, not only for the unwilling, but also for the objecting
and resisting. What, then, do we ask, but that from unwilling they may
be made willing; from objecting, consenting; from resisting, loving? And
by whom, but by Him of whom it is written, “The will is prepared by
God”? <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861.md) Let them, then, who
disdain, if they do not do any evil and if they do any good, to glory,
not in themselves, but in the Lord, learn to be catholics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[429:2862](1050919.htm#fr_2861.md) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p3"></span> [Prov. viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036.md)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050920.md)
