[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050780)  [Next](1050782.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25 \[XVII.\]—The Disembodied Soul
May Think of Itself Under a Bodily Form.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.xxv-p2"></span>You must not, however, suppose that I
say all this as if denying it to be possible that the soul of a dead
man, like a person asleep, may think either good or evil thoughts in the
similitude of his body. For, in dreams, when we suffer anything harsh
and troublesome, we are, of course, <span id="page_365">p. 365</span>
<span id="xvii.vii.xxv-Page_365"></span>still ourselves; and if the
distress do not pass away when we awake, we experience very great
suffering. But to suppose that they are veritable bodies in which we are
hurried, or flit, about hither and thither in dreams, is the idea of a
person who has thought only carelessly on such subjects; for it is in
fact mainly by these imaginary sights that the soul is proved to be
non-corporeal; unless you choose to call even the objects which we see
so often in our dreams, besides ourselves, bodies, such as the sky, the
earth, the sea, the sun, the moon, the stars, and rivers, mountains,
trees, or animals. Whoever takes these phantoms to be bodies, is
incredibly foolish; although they are certainly very like bodies. Of
this character also are those phenomena which are demonstrably of divine
significance, whether seen in dreams or in a trance. Who can possibly
trace out or describe their origin, or the material of which they
consist? It is, beyond question, spiritual, not corporeal. Now things of
this kind, which look like bodies, but are not really corporeal, are
formed in the thoughts of persons when they are awake, and are held in
the depths of their memories, and then out of these secret recesses, by
some wonderful and ineffable process, they come out to view in the
operation of our memory, and present themselves as if palpably before
our eyes. If, therefore, the soul were a material body, it could not
possibly contain so many things and such large forms of bodily
substances in its scope of thought, and in the spaces of its memory;
for, according to your own definition, “it does not exceed this external
body in its own corporeal substance.” Possessing, therefore, no
magnitude of its own, what capacity has it to hold the images of vast
bodies, spaces, and regions? What wonder is it, then, if it actually
itself appears to itself in the likeness of its own body, even when it
appears without a body? For it never appears to itself in dreams with
its own body; and yet in the very similitude of its own body it runs
hither and thither through known and unknown places, and beholds many
sad and joyous sights. I suppose, however, that you really would not,
yourself, be so bold as to maintain that there is true corporeity in
that form of limb and body which the soul seems to itself to possess in
dreams. For at that rate that will be a real mountain which it appears
to ascend; and that a material house which it seems to enter; and that a
veritable tree, with real wood and bulk, beneath which it apparently
reclines; and that actual water which it imagines itself to drink. All
the things with which it is conversant, as if they were corporeal, would
be undoubted bodies, if the soul were itself corporeal, as it ranges
about amongst them all in the likeness of a body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1050782.md)
