[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050750)  [Next](1050752) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19 \[XIII.\]—His Eleventh Error.
(See Above in Book I. 15 \[XII.\] and Book II. 16.)</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xix-p2"></span>Once more, if you desire to be a
catholic, do not believe, or say, or teach that “some of those persons
who have departed this life without Christ’s baptism, do not in the
meantime go into the kingdom of heaven, but into paradise; yet
afterwards in the resurrection of the dead they attain also to the
blessedness of the kingdom of heaven.” Even the Pelagian heresy was not
daring enough to grant them this, although it holds that infants do not
contract original sin. You, however, as a catholic, confess that they
are born in sin; and yet by some unaccountable perverseness in the novel
opinion you put forth, you assert that they are absolved from that sin
with which they were born, and admitted into the kingdom of heaven
without the baptism which saves. Nor do you seem to be aware how much
below Pelagius himself you are in your views on this point. For he,
being alarmed by that sentence of the Lord which does not permit
unbaptized persons to enter into the kingdom of heaven, does not venture
to send infants thither, although he believes them to be free from all
sin; whereas you have so little regard for what is written, “Except a
man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God,” <span id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453) that (to say
nothing of the error which induces you recklessly to sever paradise from
the kingdom of God) you do not hesitate to promise to certain persons,
whom you, as a catholic, believe to be born un<span id="page_351">p.
351</span> <span id="xvii.vi.xix-Page_351"></span>der guilt, both
absolution from this guilt and the kingdom of heaven, even when they die
without baptism. As if you could possibly be a true catholic because you
build up the doctrine of original sin against Pelagius, if you show
yourself a new heretic against the Lord, by pulling down His statement
respecting baptism. For our own part, beloved brother, we do not desire
thus to gain victories over heretics: vanquishing one error by another,
and, what is still worse, a less one by a greater. You say, “Should any
one perhaps be reluctant to allow that paradise was temporarily bestowed
in the meantime on the souls of the dying thief and of Dinocrates, while
there still remains to them the reversion of the kingdom of heaven at
the resurrection, seeing that the principal passage stands in the way of
the opinion, ‘Except a man be born again of water and the Holy Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven,’ he may still hold my
ungrudging assent on this point; only let him do full honour to both the
effect and the aim <span id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454) of the
divine mercy and foreknowledge.” These are your own words, and in them
you express your agreement with the man who says that paradise is
conferred on certain unbaptized for a time, in such a sense that at the
resurrection there is in store for them the reward of the kingdom of
heaven, in opposition to “that principal passage” which has determined
that none shall enter into that kingdom who has not been born again of
water and the Holy Ghost. Pelagius was afraid to oppose himself to this
“principal passage” of the Gospel, and he did not believe that any (whom
he still did not suppose to be sinners) would enter into the kingdom of
heaven unbaptized. You, on the contrary, acknowledge that infants have
original sin, and yet you absolve them from it without the laver of
regeneration, and send them for a temporary residence in paradise, and
subsequently permit them to enter even into the kingdom of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[350:2454](1050751.htm#fr_2453) <span
id="xvii.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xix-p3"></span> [John iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="xvii.vi.xix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[351:2455](1050751.htm#fr_2454) <span
id="xvii.vi.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xix-p4"></span> Et effectum et affectum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1050752)
