[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050076)  [Next](1050078.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii.lix"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.iii.lix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 59.—The Context of Their Chief
Text.</span>

<span id="x.iii.lix-p2"></span>“Now there was,” we read, “a man of the
Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: the same came to Jesus
by night, and said unto Him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come
from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God
be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus saith unto Him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he
enter the second time into his mother’s womb, and be born? Jesus
answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which
is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but
canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one
that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus answered and said unto Him, How
can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master
of Israel, and knowest not these things? Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye
receive not our witness. If I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And
no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven,
even the Son of man which is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) even
so must the Son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved the world,
that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not His Son
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through Him
might be saved. He that believeth on Him is not condemned; but he that
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the
name of the only-begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the
light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.
But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God.” <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md) Thus far the Lord’s discourse wholly
relates to the subject of our present inquiry; from this point the
sacred historian digresses to another matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_417"></span>[38:418](1050077.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="x.iii.lix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lix-p3"></span> [Num. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009.md)<span id="x.iii.lix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[38:419](1050077.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="x.iii.lix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii.lix-p4"></span> [John iii.
1-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md)<span id="x.iii.lix-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 60](1050078.md)
