[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050179)  [Next](1050181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Theirs is a Much More Serious Error,
Requiring a Very Vigorous Refutation, Who Deny God’s Grace to Be
Necessary.</span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>They, however, must be resisted with the
utmost ardor and vigor who suppose that without God’s help, the mere
power of the human will in itself, can either perfect righteousness, or
advance steadily towards it; and when they begin to be hard pressed
about their presumption in asserting that this result can be reached
without the divine assistance, they check themselves, and do not venture
to utter such an opinion, because they see how impious and insufferable
it is. But they allege that such attainments are not made without God’s
help on this account, namely, because God both created man with the free
choice of his will, and, by giving him commandments, teaches him,
Himself, how man ought to live; and indeed assists him, in that He takes
away his ignorance by instructing him in the knowledge of what he ought
to avoid and to desire in his actions: and thus, by means of the
free-will naturally implanted within him, he enters on the way which is
pointed out to him, and by persevering in a just and pious course of
life, deserves to attain to the blessedness of eternal life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1050181.md)
