[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050892)  [Next](1050894.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi"></span> <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="xviii.vi-Page_416"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c25"><span
id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>Book IV.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>After having set aside in the former books
the calumnies hurled against the Catholics, Augustin here proceeds to
open up the snares which lie hidden in the remaining part of the second
epistle of the Pelagians, in the five heads of their doctrine—in the
praise, to wit, of the creature, the praise of marriage, the praise of
the law, the praise of free will, and the praise of the saints; in
connection with which heads the Pelagians malignantly boast that they
are at issue not more with the Manicheans than with the Catholics. Hence
these five points may bring us back to this, that they put forward their
threefold error—namely, the two first, the denial of original sin; the
two following, the assertion that grace is given according to merits;
the fifth, their statement that the saints had not sinned in this life.
Augustin shows that both heresies, that of the Manicheans and that of
the Pelagians, are opposed and equally odious to the Catholic faith,
whereby we profess, first, that the nature created by a good God was
good, but that, nevertheless, it is in need of a Saviour because of
original sin, which passed into all men from the transgression of the
first man: then secondly, that marriage is good, truly instituted by
God, but that that concupiscence is evil which was associated with
marriage by sin: also thirdly that the law of God is good, but in such
wise as only to manifest sin, not to take it away: that fourthly free
will is assuredly inherent in the nature of man, but that now, however,
it is so enslaved that it does not avail to the doing of righteousness,
unless when it shall have been made free by grace: but that fifthly the
saints, whether of the Old or New Testament, were indeed endued with a
righteousness, which was true but not perfect, nor so full that they
should be free from all sin. In conclusion, he brings forward the
testimonies of Cyprian and Ambrose on behalf of the Catholic faith, some
concerning original sin, others about the assistance of grace, and the
last concerning the imperfection of present righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1050894.md)
