[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050764)  [Next](1050766.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9 \[VII.\]—Our Ignorance of
Ourselves Illustrated by the Remarkable Memory of One Simplicius.</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.ix-p2"></span>Observe now, while we are, while we
live, while we know that we live, while we are certain that we possess
memory, understanding, and will; who boast of ourselves as having a
great knowledge of our own nature;—observe, I say, how entirely ignorant
we are of what avail to us is our memory, or our understanding, or our
will. A certain man who from his youth has been a friend of mine, named
Simplicius, is a person of accurate and astonishing memory. I once asked
him to tell me what were the last lines but one of all the books of
Virgil; he immediately answered my question without the least
hesitation, and with perfect accuracy. I then asked him to repeat the
preceding lines; he did so. And I really believe that he could have
repeated Virgil line after line backward. For wherever I wished, I made
trial whether he could do it, and he did it. Similarly in prose, from
any of Cicero’s orations, which he had learnt by heart, he would perform
a similar feat at our request, by reciting backwards as far as we
wished. Upon our expressing astonishment, he called God to witness that
he had no idea of this ability of his previous to that trial. So far,
therefore, as memory is concerned, his mind only then learnt its own
power; and such discovery would at no time be possible except by trial
and experiment. Moreover, he was of course the very same man before he
tried his powers; how was it, then, that he was ignorant of himself?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1050766.md)
