[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050628)  [Next](1050630.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Shall We Be Ashamed of What We
Do, or of What God Does?</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxiii-p2"></span>It is, however, of *pleasure* that
this man spoke in his passage, because pleasure can be even honourable:
of carnal concupiscence, or lust, which produces shame, he made no
mention. In some subsequent words, however, he uncovered his
susceptibility of shame; and he was unable to dissemble what nature
herself has prescribed so forcibly. “There is also,” says he, “that
statement: ‘Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and
shall cleave unto his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh.’” Then
after these words of God, he goes on to offer some of his own, saying:
“That he might express faith in works, the prophet approached very near
to a perilling of modesty.” What a confession! How clear and extorted
from him by the force of truth! The prophet, it would seem, to express
faith in works, almost imperilled modesty, when he said, “They twain
shall become one flesh;” wishing it to be understood of the sexual union
of the male and the female. Let the cause be alleged, why the prophet,
in expressing the works of God, should approach so near an imperilling
of modesty? Is it then the case that the works of man ought not to
produce shame, but must be gloried in at all events, and that the works
of God must produce shame? Is it, that in setting forth and expressing
the works of God the prophet’s love or labour receives no honour, but
his modesty is imperilled? What, then, was it possible for God to do,
which it would be a shame for His prophet to describe? And, what is a
weightier question still, could a man be ashamed of any work which not
man, but God, has made in man? whereas workmen in all cases strive, with
all the labour and diligence in their power, to avoid shame in the works
of their own hands. The truth, however, is, that we are ashamed of that
very thing which made those primitive human beings ashamed, when they
covered their loins. That is the penalty of sin; that is the plague and
mark of sin; that is the temptation and very fuel of sin; that is the
law in our members warring against the law of our mind; that is the
rebellion against our own selves, proceeding from our very selves, which
by a most righteous retribution is rendered us by our disobedient
members. It is this which makes us ashamed, and justly ashamed. If it
were not so, what could be more ungrateful, more irreligious in us, if
in our members we were to suffer confusion of face, not for our own
fault or penalty, but because of the works of God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1050630.md)
