[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050387)  [Next](1050389.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Discussion of Pelagius’ First
Answer.</span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>Now to say that “a man is by the knowledge
of the law assisted towards not sinning,” is a different assertion from
saying that “a man cannot be without sin unless he has acquired a
knowledge of the law.” We see, for example, that corn-floors may be
threshed without threshing-sledges,—however much these may assist the
operation if we have them; and that boys can find their way to school
without the pedagogue,—however valuable for this may be the office of
pedagogues; and that many persons recover from sickness without
physicians,—although the doctor’s skill is clearly of greatest use; and
that men sometimes live on other aliments besides bread,—however
valuable the use of bread must needs be allowed to be; and many other
illustrations may occur to the thoughtful reader, without our prompting.
From which examples we are undoubtedly reminded that there are two sorts
of aids. Some are indispensable, and without their help the desired
result could not be attained. Without a ship, for instance, no man could
take a voyage; no man could speak without a voice; without legs no man
could walk; without light nobody could see; and so on in numberless
instances. Amongst them this also may be reckoned, that without God’s
grace no man can live rightly. But then, again, there are other helps,
which render us assistance in such a way that we might in some other way
effect the object to which they are ordinarily auxiliary in their
absence. Such are those which I have already mentioned,—the
threshing-sledges for threshing corn, the pedagogue for conducting the
child, medical art applied to the recovery of health, and other like
instances. We have therefore to inquire to which of these two classes
belongs the knowledge of the law,—in other words, to consider in what
way it helps us towards the avoidance of sin. If it be in the sense of
indispensable aid without which the end cannot be attained; not only was
Pelagius’ answer before the judges true, but what he wrote in his book
was true also. If, however, it be of such a character that it helps
indeed if it is present, but even if it be absent, then the result is
still possible to be attained by some other means,—his answer to the
judges was still true, and not unreasonably did it find favour with the
bishops that “man is assisted not to sin by the knowledge of the law;”
but what he wrote in his book is not true, that “there is no man without
sin except him who has acquired a knowledge of the law,”—a statement
which the judges left undiscussed, as they were ignorant of the Latin
language, and were content with the confession of the man who was
pleading his cause before them, especially as no one was present on the
other side who could oblige the interpreter to expose his meaning by an
explanation of the words of his book, and to show why it was that the
brethren were not groundlessly disturbed. For but very few persons are
thoroughly acquainted with the law. The mass of the members of Christ,
who are scattered abroad everywhere, being ignorant of the very profound
and complicated contents of the law, are commended by the piety of
simple faith and unfailing hope in God, and sincere love. Endowed with
such gifts, they trust that by the grace of God they may be purged from
their sins through our Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1050389.md)
