[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050524)  [Next](1050526) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14 \[XIII.\]—He Shows That, Even
After the Synod of Palestine, Pelagius Held the Same Opinions as
Cœlestius on the Subject of Original Sin.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>I see, however, that it may be most
justly demanded of me, that I do not defer my promised demonstration,
that he actually entertains the same views as Cœlestius. In the first
book of his more recent work, written in defence of free will (which
work he mentions in the letter he despatched to Rome), he says:
“Everything good, and everything evil, on account of which we are either
laudable or blameworthy, is not born with us but done by us: for we are
born not fully developed, but with a capacity for either conduct; and we
are procreated as without virtue, so also without vice; and previous to
the action of our own proper will, that alone is in man which God has
formed.” Now you perceive that in these words of Pelagius, the dogma of
both these men is contained, that infants are born without the contagion
of any sin from Adam. It is therefore not astonishing that Cœlestius
refused to condemn such as say that Adam’s sin injured only himself, and
not the human race; and that infants are at their birth in the same
state in which Adam was before the transgression. But it is very much to
be wondered at, that Pelagius had the effrontery to anathematize these
opinions. For if, as he alleges, “evil is not born with us, and we are
procreated without fault, and the only thing in man previous to the
action of his own will is what God has formed,” then of course the sin
of Adam did only injure himself, inasmuch as it did not pass on to his
offspring. For there is not any sin which is not an evil; or a sin that
is not a fault; or else sin was created by God. But he says: “Evil is
not born with us, and we are procreated without fault; and the only
thing in men at their birth is what God has formed.” Now, since by this
language he supposes it to be most true, that, according to the
well-known sentence of his: “Adam’s sin was injurious to himself alone,
and not to the human race,” why did Pelagius condemn this, if it were
not for the purpose of deceiving his catholic judges? By parity of
reasoning, it may also be argued: “If <span id="page_241">p. 241</span>
<span id="xv.iv.xiv-Page_241"></span>evil is not born with us, and if we
are procreated without fault, and if the only thing found in man at the
time of his birth is what God has formed,” it follows beyond a doubt
that “infants at their birth are in the same condition that Adam was
before the transgression,” in whom no evil or fault was inherent, and in
whom that alone existed which God had formed. And yet Pelagius
pronounced anathema on all those persons “who hold now, or have at any
time held, that newborn babes are placed by their birth in the same
state that Adam was in before the transgression,”—in other words, are
without any evil, without any fault, having that only which God had
formed. Now, why again did Pelagius condemn this tenet also, if it were
not for the purpose of deceiving the catholic Synod, and saving himself
from the condemnation of an heretical innovator?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1050526)
