[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050916)  [Next](1050918.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—The Dilemma Proposed to the
Pelagians.</span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p2"></span>What will be said to such things as
these, by those who are not only the forsakers, but also the persecutors
of God’s grace? What will they say to such things as these? On what
ground is the “possession of Paradise” restored to us? How are we
restored to Paradise if we have never been there? Or how have we been
there, except because we were there in Adam? And how do we belong to
that “judgment” which was spoken against the transgressor, if we do not
inherit injury from the transgressor? Finally, he thinks that infants
are to be baptized, even before the eighth day; lest “by the contagion
of the ancient death, contracted in the first birth,” the souls of the
infants should perish. How do they perish if they who are born even of
believing men are not held by the devil until they are born again in
Christ, and plucked out from the power of darkness, and transferred into
His kingdom? And who says that the souls of those who are born will
perish unless they are born again? No other than he who so praises the
Creator and the creature, the workman and the work, as to restrain and
correct the horror of human feeling with which men refuse to kiss
infants fresh from the womb, by interposing the veneration of the
Creator Himself, saying that in the kiss of infants of that age the
recent hands of God were to be considered! Did he, then, in confessing
original sin, condemn either nature or marriage? Did he, because he
applied to the infant born guilty from Adam, the cleansing of
regeneration, therefore deny God as the Creator of those that were born?
Because, in his dread that souls of any age whatever should perish, he,
with his council of colleagues, decided that even before the eighth day
they were to be delivered by the sacrament of baptism, did he therefore
accuse marriage, when, indeed, in the case of an infant,—whether born of
marriage or of adultery, yet because it was born a man,—he declared that
the recent hands of God were worthy even of the kiss of peace? If, then,
the holy bishop and most glorious martyr Cyprian could think that
original sin in infants must be healed by the medicine of Christ,
without denying the praise of the creature, without denying the praise
of marriage, why does a novel pestilence, although it does not dare to
call such an one as him a Manichean, think that another person’s fault
is to be objected against catholics who maintain these things, in order
to conceal its own? So the most lauded commentator on the divine
declarations, before even the slightest taint of the Manichean plague
had touched our lands, without any reproach of the divine work and of
marriage, confesses original sin,—not saying that Christ was stained
with any spot of sin, nor yet comparing with Him the flesh of sin in
others that were born, to whom by means of the likeness of sinful flesh
He might afford the aid of cleansing; neither is he deterred by the
obscure question of the origin of souls, from confessing that those who
are made free by the grace of Christ return into Paradise. Does he say
that the condition of death passed upon men from Adam without the
contagion of sin? For it is not on account of avoiding the death of the
body, but on account of the sin which entered by one man into the
world, <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850.md) that he says that help
is to be afforded by baptism to infants, however fresh they may be from
the womb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[427:2851](1050917.htm#fr_2850.md) <span
id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p3"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md)<span
id="xviii.vi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1050918.md)
