[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050650)  [Next](1050652) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xlv"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 44 \[XXVII.\]—The Pelagians Argue
that If Sin Comes by Birth, All Married People Deserve
Condemnation.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xlv-p2"></span>What, then, is his object when he
inquires of us, “By what means sin may be found in an infant, through
the will, or through marriage, or through its parents”? He speaks,
indeed, in such a way as if he had an answer to all these questions, and
as if by clearing all of sin together he would have nothing remain in
the infant whence sin could be found. I beg your attention to his very
words: “Through what,” says he, “is sin found in an infant? Through the
will? But there has never been one in him? Through marriage? But this
appertains to the parents’ work, of whom you had previously declared
that in this action they had not sinned; though it appears from your
subsequent words that you did not make this concession truly. Marriage,
therefore,” he says, “must be condemned, since it furnished the cause of
the evil. Yet marriage only indicates the work of personal agents. The
parents, therefore, who by their coming together afforded occasion for
the sin, are properly de<span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.xlv-Page_301"></span>serving of the condemnation. It does not
then admit of doubt,” says he, “any longer, if we are to follow your
opinion, that married persons are handed over to eternal punishment, it
being by their means brought about that the devil has come to exercise
dominion over men. And what becomes of what you just before had said,
that man was the work of God? Because if through their birth it happens
that evil is in men, and through the evil that the devil has power over
men, so in fact you declare the devil to be the author of men, from whom
comes their origin at birth. If, however, you believe that man is made
by God, and that husband and wife are innocent, see how impossible is
your standpoint, that original sin is derived from them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](1050652)
