[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050759)  [Next](1050761) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4 \[III.\]—Is the Question of
Breath One that Concerns the Soul, or Body, or What?</span>

<span id="xvii.vii.iv-p2"></span>But to what, in your judgment, does
that which we discussed in our former book concerning the breath of man
belong?—to the nature of the soul, seeing that it is the soul which
effects it in man; or to that of the body, since the body is moved by
the soul to effect it; or to that of this air, by whose alternation of
action it is discovered to effect it; or rather to all three, that is to
say, to the soul as that which moves the body, and to the body which by
its motion receives and emits the breath, and also to the circumambient
air which raises by its entrance, and by its departure depresses? And
yet you were evidently ignorant of all this, learned and eloquent though
you are, when you supposed, and said, and wrote, and read in the
presence of the crowd assembled to hear your opinion, that it was out of
our own nature that we inflated a bag, and yet had no diminution of our
nature at all by the operation; although you might most easily ascertain
how we accomplish the process, not by any tedious examination of the
pages either of human or of inspired writings, but by a simple
investigation of your own physical action, whenever you liked. This,
then, being the case, how can I trust you to teach me concerning the
origin of souls,—a subject which I confess myself to be ignorant of,—you
who are actually ignorant of what you are doing unintermittingly with
your nose and mouth, and of why you are doing it? May the Lord bring it
to pass that you may be advised by me, and accept rather than resist so
manifest a truth, and one so ready to your hand. May you also not
interrogate your lungs about the bag inflation in such a temper as to
prefer inflating them in opposition to me, rather than acquiesce in
their tuition, when they answer your inquiry with entire truth,—not by
speech and altercation, but by breath and respiration. Then I could bear
with you patiently while you correct and reproach me for my ignorance of
the origin of souls; nay, I could even warmly thank you, if, besides
inflicting on me rebuke, you would convince me with truth. For if you
could teach me the truth I am ignorant of, it would be my duty to bear
with all patience any blows you might deal against me, not in word only,
but even with hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1050761)
