[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050665)  [Next](1050667.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.lx"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.lx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 59 \[XXXV.\]—The Pelagians Can Hardly
Venture to Place Concupiscence in Paradise Before the Commission of
Sin.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.lx-p2"></span>This being the case, let him think what
he pleases about this concupiscence of the flesh and about the lust
which lords it over the unchaste, has to be mastered by the chaste, and
yet is to be blushed at both by the chaste and the unchaste; for I see
plainly he is much pleased with it. Let him not hesitate to praise what
he is ashamed to name; let him call it (as he has in fact called it) the
vigour of the members, and let him not be afraid of the honor of chaste
ears; let him designate it the power of the members, and let him not
care about the impudence. Let him say, if his blushes permit him, that
if no one had sinned, this vigour must have flourished like a flower in
paradise; nor would there have been any need to cover that which would
<span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="xvi.vi.lx-Page_308"></span>have been so moved that no one should
have felt ashamed; rather, with a wife provided, it would have been ever
exercised and never repressed, lest so great a pleasure should ever be
denied to so vast a happiness. Far be it from being thought that such
blessedness could in such a spot fail to have what it wished, or ever
experience in mind or body what it disliked. And so, should the motion
of lust precede men’s will, then the will would immediately follow it.
The wife, who ought certainly never to be absent in this happy state of
things, would be urged on by it, whether about to conceive or already
pregnant; and, either a child would be begotten, or a natural and
laudable pleasure would be gratified,—for perish all seed rather than
disappoint the appetite of so good a concupiscence. Only be sure that
the united pair do not apply themselves to that use of each other which
is contrary to nature, then (with so modest a reservation) let them use,
as often as they would have delight, their organs of generation, created
for the purpose. But what if this very use, which is contrary to nature,
should peradventure give them delight; what if the aforesaid laudable
lust should hanker even after such delight; I wonder whether they should
pursue it because it was sweet, or loathe it because it was base? If
they should pursue it to gratification, what becomes of all thought
about honour? If they should loathe it, where is the peaceful composure
of so good a happiness? But at this point perchance his blushes will
awake, and he will say that so great is the tranquillity of this happy
state, and so entire the orderliness which may have existed in this
state of things, that carnal concupiscence never preceded these persons’
will: only whenever they themselves wished, would it then arise; and
only then would they entertain the wish, when there was need for
begetting children; and the result would be, that no seed would ever be
emitted to no purpose, nor would any embrace ever ensue which would not
be followed by conception and birth; the flesh would obey the will, and
concupiscence would vie with it in subserviency. Well, if he says all
this of the imagined happy state, he must at least be pretty sure that
what he describes does not now exist among men. And even if he will not
concede that lust is a corrupt condition, let him at least allow that
through the disobedience of the man and woman in the happy state the
very concupiscence of their flesh was corrupted, so that what would once
be excited obediently and orderly is now moved disobediently and
inordinately, and that to such a degree that it is not obedient to the
will of even chaste-minded husbands and wives, so that it is excited
when it is not wanted; and whenever it is necessary, it never, indeed,
follows their will, but sometimes too hurriedly, at other times too
tardily, exerts its own movements. Such, then, is the rebellion of this
concupiscence which the primitive pair received for their own
disobedience, and transfused by natural descent to us. It certainly was
not at their bidding, but in utter disorder, that it was excited, when
they covered their members, which at first were worthy to be gloried in,
but had then become a ground of shame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 60](1050667.md)
