[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050891)  [Next](1050893) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.v.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[X.\]—The Pelagians Still
Strive After a Hiding-Place, by Introducing the Needless Question of the
Origin of the Soul.</span>

<span id="xviii.v.xxvi-p2"></span>The Pelagians, indeed, add to the
clouds which envelop their lurking-places the unnecessary question
concerning the origin of the soul, for the purpose of erecting a
hiding-place by disturbing manifest things by the obscurity of other
matters. For they say “that we guard the continuous propagation of souls
with the continuous propagation of sin.” And where and when they have
read this, either in the addresses or in the writings of those who
maintain the catholic faith against this, I do not know; because,
although I find something written by catholics on the subject, yet the
defence of the truth had not yet been undertaken against those men,
neither was there any anxiety to answer them. But this I say, that
according to the Holy Scriptures original sin is so manifest, and that
this is put away in infants by the laver of regeneration is confirmed by
such antiquity and authority of the catholic faith, notorious by such a
clear concurrent testimony of the Church, that what is argued by the
inquiry or affirmation of anybody concerning the origin of the soul, if
it is contrary to this, cannot be true. Wherefore, whoever builds up,
either concerning the soul or any other obscure matter, any edifice
whence he may destroy this, which is true, best founded, and best known,
whether he is a son or an enemy of the Church, must either be corrected
or avoided. But let this be the end of this Book, that the things which
follow may have another beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](1050893)
