[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050159)  [Next](1050161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.v.xi"></span>

<span id="x.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="x.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—The Ancients Assumed Original
Sin.</span>

<span id="x.v.xi-p2"></span>You see with what confidence this great man
expresses himself after the ancient and undoubted rule of faith. In
advancing such very certain statements, his object was by help of these
firm conclusions to prove the uncertain point which had been submitted
to him by his correspondent, and concerning which he informs him that a
decree of a council had been passed, to the effect that, if an infant
were brought even before the eighth day after his birth, no one should
hesitate to baptize him. Now it was not then determined or confirmed by
the council that infants were held bound by original sin as if it were
new, or as if it were attacked by the opposition of some one; but when
another controversy was being conducted, and the question was discussed,
in reference to the law of the circumcision of the flesh, whether they
ought to be baptized before the eighth day. None agreed with the person
who denied this; because it was not an open question admitting of
discussion, but was fixed and unassailable, that the soul would forfeit
eternal salvation if it ended this life without obtaining the sacrament
of baptism: but at the same time infants fresh from the womb were held
to be affected only by the guilt of original sin. On this account,
although remission of sins was easier in their case, because the sins
were derived from another, it was nevertheless indispensable. It was on
sure grounds like these that the uncertain question of the eighth day
was solved, and the council decided that after a man was born, not a day
ought to be lost in rendering him that succour which should prevent his
perishing for ever. When also a reason was given for the circumcision of
the flesh as being itself a shadow of what was to be, its purport was
not that we should understand that baptism ought to be administered on
the eighth day after birth, but rather that we are spiritually
circumcised in the resurrection of Christ, who rose from the dead on the
third day, indeed, after His passion, but among the days of the week, by
which time is counted, on the eighth, that is, on the first day after
the Sabbath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1050161)
