[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050696)  [Next](1050698) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—Just as the Mother Knows Not
Whence Comes Her Child Within Her, So We Know Not Whence Comes the
Soul.</span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxv-p2"></span>How I wish that, on so profound a
question, so long as he is ignorant what he should say, he would imitate
the mother of the Maccabean youths! Although she knew very well that she
had conceived children of her husband, and that they had been created
for her by the Creator of all, both in body and in soul and spirit, yet
she says, “I cannot tell, my sons, how ye came into my womb.” Well now,
I only wish this man would tell us that which she was ignorant of! She,
of course, knew (on the points I have mentioned) how they came into her
womb as to their bodily substance, because she could not possibly doubt
that she had conceived them by her husband. She furthermore
confessed—because this, too, she was, of course, well aware of—that it
was God who gave them their soul and spirit, and that it was He also who
formed for them their features and their limbs. What was it, then, that
she was so ignorant of? Was it not probably (what we likewise are
equally unable to determine) whether the soul and spirit, which God no
doubt bestowed upon them, was derived to them from their parents, or
breathed into them separately as it had been into the first man? But
whether it was this, or some other particular respecting the
constitution of human nature, of which she was ignorant, she frankly
confessed her ignorance; and did not venture to defend at random what
she knew nothing about. Nor would this man say to her, what he has not
been ashamed to say to us: “Man being in honour doth not understand; he
is compared to the senseless cattle, and is like unto them.” <span
id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) Behold how that woman said of her
sons, “I cannot tell how ye came into my womb,” and yet she is not
compared to the senseless brutes. “I cannot tell,” she said; then, as if
they would inquire of her why she was ignorant, she went on to say, “For
it was not I who gave you spirit and soul.” He, therefore, who gave them
that gift, knows whence He made what He gave, whether He communicated it
by propagation, or breathed it as a fresh creation,—a point which (this
man says) I for my part know nothing of. “Nor was it I that formed the
features and members of every one of you.” He, however, who formed them,
knows whether He formed them with the soul, or gave the soul to them
after they had been formed. She had no idea of the manner, this or that,
in which her sons came into her womb; only one thing was she sure of,
that He who gave her all she had would restore to her what He gave. But
this man would choose out what that woman was ignorant of, on so
profound and abstruse a fact of our nature; only he would not judge her,
if in error; nor compare her, if ignorant, to the senseless cattle.
Whatever the point was about which she was ignorant, it certainly
pertained to man’s nature; and yet anybody would be blameless for such
ignorance. Wherefore, I too, on my side, say concerning my soul, I have
no certain knowledge how it came into my body; for it was not I who gave
it to myself. He who gave it to me knows whether He imparted it to me
from my father, or created it afresh for me, as He did for the first
man. But even I shall know, when He Himself shall teach me, in His own
good time. Now, however, I do not know; nor am I ashamed, like him, to
confess my ignorance of what I know not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[325:2375](1050697.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="xvii.iv.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv.xxv-p3"></span> [Ps. xlviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012)<span id="xvii.iv.xxv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1050698)
