[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050399)  [Next](1050401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xix"></span>

<span id="xiv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—The Same Continued.</span>

<span id="xiv.xix-p2"></span>How then should there not be a feeling of
just disquietude entertained by the children of promise, children of the
free Jerusalem, which is eternal in the heavens, when they see that by
the words of Pelagius the distinction which has been drawn by Apostolic
and catholic authority is abolished, and Agar is supposed to be by some
means on a par with Sarah? He therefore does injury to the scripture of
the Old Testament with heretical impiety, who with an impious and
sacrilegious face denies that it was inspired by the good, supreme, and
very God,—as Marcion does, as Manichæus does, and other pests of similar
opinions. On this account (that I may put into as brief a space as I can
what my own views are on the subject), as much injury is done to the New
Testament, when it is put on the same level with the Old Testament, as
is inflicted on the Old itself when men deny it to be the work of the
supreme God of goodness. Now, when Pelagius in his answer gave as his
reason for saying that even in the Old Testament there was a promise of
the kingdom of heaven, the testimony of the prophet Daniel, who most
plainly foretold that the saints should receive the kingdom of the Most
High, it was fairly decided that the statement of Pelagius was not
opposed to the catholic faith, although not according to the distinction
which shows that the earthly promises of Mount Sinai are the proper
characteristics of the Old Testament; nor indeed was the decision an
improper one, considering that mode of speech which designates all the
canonical Scriptures which were given to men before the Lord’s coming in
the flesh by <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="xiv.xix-Page_190"></span>the title of the “Old Testament.” The
kingdom of the Most High is of course none other than the kingdom of
God; otherwise, anybody might boldly contend that the kingdom of God is
one thing, and the kingdom of heaven another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1050401)
