[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050444)  [Next](1050446) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.lxiv"></span>

<span id="xiv.lxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xiv.lxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 60 \[XXXV.\]—The Synod’s Condemnation
of His Doctrines.</span>

<span id="xiv.lxiv-p2"></span>This is the concluding clause of their
judgment. The synod said: “Now forasmuch as we have received
satisfaction in these inquiries from the monk Pelagius, who has been
present, who yields assent to godly doctrines, and rejects and
anathematizes those which are contrary to the Church, we confess him
still to belong to the communion of the catholic Church.” Now, there are
two facts concerning the monk Pelagius here contained with entire
perspicuity in this brief statement of the holy bishops who judged him:
one, that “he yields assent to godly doctrines;” the other, that “he
rejects and anathematizes those which are contrary to the Church.” On
account of these two concessions, Pelagius was pronounced to be “in the
communion of the catholic Church.” Let us, in pursuit of our inquiry,
briefly recapitulate the entire facts, in order to discover what were
the words he used which made those two points so clear, as far as men
were able at the moment to form a judgment as to what were manifest
points. For among the allegations which were made against him, he is
said to have rejected and anathematized, as “contrary,” all the
statements which in his answer he denied were his. Let us, then,
summarize the whole case as far as we can.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 61](1050446)
