[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050632)  [Next](1050634) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.vi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[XIII.\]—The Child in No Sense
Formed by Concupiscence.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi.xxvii-p2"></span>But as he was speaking of Abraham and
Sarah, he goes on to say: “If, indeed, you were to affirm that the
natural use was strong in them, and there was no offspring, my answer
will be: Whom the Creator promised, the Creator also gave; the child
which is born is not the work of cohabitation, but of God. He, indeed,
who made the first man of the dust, fashions all men out of seed. As,
therefore, the dust of the earth, which was taken as the material, was
not the author of man; so likewise that power of sexual pleasure which
forms and commingles the seminal elements does not complete the entire
process of man’s making, but rather presents to God, out of the
treasures of nature, material with which He vouchsafes to make the human
being.” Now the whole of this statement of his, except where he says,
that the seminal elements are formed and commingled by sexual pleasure,
would be correctly expressed by him were he only earnest in making it to
defend the catholic sense. To us, however, who are fully aware what he
strives to make out of it, he speaks indeed correctly in a perverse
manner. The exceptional statement to the general truth, which I do not
deny belongs to this passage, is untrue for this reason, because the
pleasure in question of carnal concupiscence does not form the seminal
elements. These are already in the body, and are formed by the same true
God who created the body itself. They do not receive their existence
from the libidinous pleasure, but are excited and emitted in company
with it. Whether, indeed, such pleasure accompanies the commingling of
the seminal elements of the two sexes in the womb, is a question which
perhaps women may be able to determine from their inmost feelings; but
it is improper for us to push an idle curiosity so far. That
concupiscence, however, which we have to be ashamed of, and the shame of
which has given to our secret members their shameful designation,
*pudenda*, had no existence in the body during its life in paradise
before the entrance of sin; but it began to exist “in the body of this
death” after sin, the rebellion of the members retaliating man’s own
disobedience. Without this concupiscence it was quite possible to effect
the function of the wedded pair in the procreation of children: just as
many a laborious work is accomplished by the compliant operation of our
other limbs, without any lascivious heat; for they are simply moved by
the direction of the will, not excited by the ardour of concupiscence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1050634)
