[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050753)  [Next](1050755.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvii.vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22 \[XV.\]—A Summary
Recapitulation of the Errors of Victor.</span>

<span id="xvii.vi.xxii-p2"></span>What these particular errors are, I
have, to the best of my ability, already explained. But I will run over
them again with a brief recapitulation. One is, “That God did not make
the soul out of nothing, but out of His own self.” A *second* is, that
“just as God who gives is Himself ever existent, so is He ever giving
souls through infinite time.” The *third* is, that “the soul lost some
merit by the flesh, which it had had previous to the flesh.” The
*fourth* is, that “the soul by means of the flesh recovers its ancient
condition, and is born again through the very same flesh by which it had
deserved to be polluted.” The *fifth* is, that “the soul deserved to be
sinful, previous to any sin.” The *sixth* is, that “infants which are
forestalled by death before they are baptized, may yet attain to
forgiveness of their original sins.” The *seventh* is, that “they whom
the Lord has predestinated to be baptized may be taken away from his
predestination, or die before that has been accomplished in them which
the Almighty has predestined.” The *eighth* is, that “it is of infants
who are fore-stalled by death, before they are born again in Christ,
that the Scripture says, ‘Speedily was he taken away, lest wickedness
should alter his understanding,’” with the remainder of the passage to
the same effect in the Book of Wisdom. The *ninth* is, that “there are
outside the kingdom of God some of those mansions which the Lord said
were in His Father’s house.” The *tenth* is, that “the sacrifice of
Christians ought to be offered in behalf of those who have departed out
of the body without being baptized.” The *eleventh* is, that “some of
those persons who have departed this life without the baptism of Christ
do not in the meanwhile go into the kingdom, but into paradise;
afterwards, however, in the resurrection of the dead, they attain even
to the blessedness of the kingdom of heaven.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1050755.md)
