[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050327)  [Next](1050329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.lxxxv"></span>

<span id="xii.lxxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xii.lxxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 81.—Augustin Quotes Himself on Free
Will.</span>

<span id="xii.lxxxv-p2"></span>In order, however, that my meaning on
this subject may be clear not merely to him, but also to such persons as
have not read those treatises of mine on Free Will, which your author
has read, and who have not only not read them, but perchance do read
him; I must go on to quote out of my books what he has omitted, but
which, if he had perceived and quoted in his book, no controversy would
be left between us on this subject. For immediately after those words of
mine which he has quoted, I expressly added, and (as fully as I could)
worked out, the train of thought which might occur to any one’s mind, to
the following effect: “And yet some actions are disapproved of, even
when they are done in ignorance, and are judged deserving of
chastisement, as we read in the inspired authorities.” After taking some
examples out of these, I went on to speak also of infirmity as follows:
“Some actions also deserve disapprobation, that are done from necessity;
as when a man wishes to act rightly and cannot. For whence arise those
utterances: ‘For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I
would not, that I do’?” <span id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339.md) Then,
after quoting some other passages of the Holy Scriptures to the same
effect, I say: “But all these are the sayings of persons who are coming
out of that condemnation of <span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="xii.lxxxv-Page_150"></span>death; for if this is not man’s
punishment, but his nature, then those are no sins.” Then, again, a
little afterwards I add: “It remains, therefore, that this just
punishment come of man’s condemnation. Nor ought it to be wondered at,
that either by ignorance man has not free determination of will to
choose what he will rightly do, or that by the resistance of carnal
habit (which by force of mortal transmission has, in a certain sense,
become engrafted into his nature), though seeing what ought rightly to
be done and wishing to do it, he yet is unable to accomplish it. For
this is the most just penalty of sin, that a man should lose what he has
been unwilling to make good use of, when he might with ease have done so
if he would; which, however, amounts to this, that the man who knowingly
does not do what is right loses the ability to do it when he wishes.
For, in truth, to every soul that sins there accrue these two penal
consequences—ignorance and difficulty. Out of the ignorance springs the
error which disgraces; out of the difficulty arises the pain which
afflicts. But to approve of falsehoods as if they were true, so as to
err involuntarily, and to be unable, owing to the resistance and pain of
carnal bondage, to refrain from deeds of lust, is not the nature of man
as he was created, but the punishment of man as under condemnation.
When, however, we speak of a free will to do what is right, we of course
mean that liberty in which man was created.” Some men at once deduce
from this what seems to them a just objection from the transfer and
transmission of sins of ignorance and difficulty from the first man to
his posterity. My answer to such objectors is this: “I tell them, by way
of a brief reply, to be silent and to cease from murmuring against God.
Perhaps their complaint might have been a proper one, if no one from
among men had stood forth a vanquisher of error and of lust; but when
there is everywhere present One who calls off from himself, through the
creature by so many means, the man who serves the Lord, teaches him when
believing, consoles him when hoping, encourages him when loving, helps
him when endeavouring, hears him when praying,—it is not reckoned to you
as a fault that you are involuntarily ignorant, but that you neglect to
search out what you are ignorant of; nor is it imputed to you in censure
that you do not bind up the limbs that are wounded, but that you despise
him who wishes to heal them.” <span id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340.md)
In such terms did I exhort them, as well as I could, to live
righteously; nor did I make the grace of God of none effect, without
which the now obscured and tarnished nature of man can neither be
enlightened nor purified. Our whole discussion with them on this subject
turns upon this, that we frustrate not the grace of God which is in
Jesus Christ our Lord by a perverted assertion of nature. In a passage
occurring shortly after the last quoted one, I said in reference to
nature: “Of nature itself we speak in one sense, when we properly
describe it as that human nature in which man was created faultless
after his kind; and in another sense as that nature in which we are born
ignorant and carnally minded, owing to the penalty of condemnation,
after the manner of the apostle, ‘We ourselves likewise were by nature
children of wrath, even as others.’” <span
id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[149:1340](1050328.htm#fr_1339.md) <span
id="xii.lxxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.lxxxv-p3"></span> [Rom. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.lxxxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[150:1341](1050328.htm#fr_1340.md) <span
id="xii.lxxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.lxxxv-p4"></span> *De Libero Arbitrio*, iii. 19.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[150:1342](1050328.htm#fr_1341.md) <span
id="xii.lxxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.lxxxv-p5"></span> [Eph. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.lxxxv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 82](1050329.md)
