[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1050849)  [Next](1050851) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xviii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—The Catholic Faith Concerning
Infants.</span>

<span id="xviii.iv.viii-p2"></span>What do they say to these things who
dare also to write their mischievous impieties, and dare to send them to
the Eastern bishops? Cœlestius is held to have given consent to the
letters of the venerable Innocent; the letters themselves of the prelate
mentioned are read, and he writes that infants who are not baptized
cannot have life. And who will deny that, as a consequence, they have
death, if they have not life? Whence, then, in infants, is so wretched a
penalty as that, if there is no original fault? How, then, are the Roman
clergy charged with prevarication by those forsakers of the faith and
opponents of grace under Bishop Zosimus, as if they had had any other
view in the subsequent condemnation of Cœlestius and Pelagius than that
which they had in a former one under Innocent? Because, certainly, since
by the letters of the venerable Innocent concerning the abode of infants
in eternal death unless they were baptized in Christ, the antiquity of
the catholic faith shone forth, assuredly he would rather be a
prevaricator from the Roman Church who should <span id="page_395">p.
395</span> <span id="xviii.iv.viii-Page_395"></span>deviate from that
judgment; and since with God’s blessing this did not happen, but that
judgment itself was constantly maintained in the repeated condemnation
of Cœlestius and Pelagius, let them understand that they themselves are
in the position wherein they accuse others of being, and let them
hereafter be healed of their prevarication from the faith. Because the
catholic faith does not say that the nature of man is bad in as far as
he was made man at first by the Creator; nor now is what God creates in
that nature when He makes men from men, his evil; but what he derives
from that sin of the first man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1050851)
