[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051126)  [Next](1051128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 45.—Exhortation to Other Gifts of
God in Like Manner.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xlvii-p2"></span>Nor do those on whose account I am
saying these things, who cry out that exhortation is checked by the
preaching of predestination and grace, exhort to those gifts alone which
they contend are not given by God, but are from ourselves, such as are
the beginning of faith, and perseverance in it even to the end. This
certainly they ought to do, in such a way as only to exhort unbelievers
to believe, and believers to continue to believe. But those things which
with us they do not deny to be God’s gifts, so as that with us they
demolish the error of the Pelagians, such as modesty, continence,
patience, and other virtues that pertain to a holy life, and are
obtained by faith from the Lord, they ought to show as needing to be
prayed for, and to pray for only, either for themselves or others; but
they ought not to exhort any one to strive after them and retain them.
But when they exhort to these things, according to their ability, and
confess that men ought to be exhorted,—certainly they show plainly
enough that exhortations are not hindered by that preaching, whether
they are exhortations to faith or to perseverance to the end, because we
also preach that such things are God’s gifts, and are not given by any
man to himself, but are given by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](1051128.md)
