[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051087)  [Next](1051089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6 \[III.\]—The Third Petition. How
Heaven and Earth are Understood in the Lord’s Prayer.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.viii-p2"></span>The third petition is, “Thy will be
done in heaven and in earth;” or, as it is read in many codices, and is
more frequently made use of by petitioners, “As in heaven, so also in
earth,” which many people understand, “As the holy angels, so also may
we do thy will.” That teacher and martyr will have heaven and earth,
however, to be understood as spirit and flesh, and says that we pray
that we may do the will of God with the full concord of both. He saw in
these words also another meaning, congruous to the soundest faith, of
which meaning I have already spoken above,—to wit, that for unbelievers,
who are as yet *earth*, bearing in their first birth only the earthly
man, believers are understood to pray, who, being clothed with the
heavenly man, are not unreasonably called by the name of *heaven*; where
he plainly shows that the beginning of faith also is God’s gift, since
the holy Church prays not only for believers, that faith may be
increased or may continue in them, but, moreover, for unbelievers, that
they may begin to have what they have not had at all, and against which,
besides, they were indulging hostile feelings. Now, however, I am
arguing not concerning the beginning of faith, of which I have already
spoken much in the former book, but of that perseverance which must be
had even to the end,—which assuredly even the saints, who do the will of
God, seek when they say in prayer, “Thy will be done.” For, since it is
already done in them, why do they still ask that it may be done, except
that they may persevere in that which they have begun to be?
Nevertheless, it may here be said that the saints do not ask that the
will of God may be done in heaven, but that it may be done in earth as
in heaven,—that is to say, that earth may imitate heaven, that is, that
man may imitate the angel, or that an unbeliever may imitate a believer;
and thus that the saints are asking that that may be which is not yet,
not that that which is may continue. For, by whatever holiness men may
be distinguished, they are not yet equal to the angels of God; not yet,
therefore, is the will of God done in them as it is in heaven. And if
this be so, in that portion indeed in which we ask that men from
unbelievers may become believers, it is not perseverance, but beginning,
that seems to be asked for; but in that in which we ask that men may be
made equal to the angels of God in doing God’s will,—where the saints
pray for this, they are found to be praying for perseverance; since no
one attains to that highest blessedness which is in the kingdom, unless
he shall persevere unto the end in that holiness which he has received
on earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1051089)
