[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051113)  [Next](1051115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32 \[XIII.\]—The Inscrutability
of God’s Free Purposes.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>But now, since we are now treating of
the gift of perseverance, why is it that aid is afforded to the person
about to die who is not baptized, while to the baptized person about to
fall, aid is not afforded, so as to die before? Unless, perchance, we
shall still listen to that absurdity by <span id="page_538">p.
538</span> <span id="xxi.iii.xxxiv-Page_538"></span>which it is said
that it is of no advantage to any one to die before his fall, because he
will be judged according to those actions which God foreknew that he
would have done if he had lived. Who can hear with patience this
perversity, so violently opposed to the soundness of the faith? Who can
bear it? And yet they are driven to say this who do not confess that
God’s grace is not bestowed in respect of our deservings. They, however,
who will not say that any one who has died is judged according to those
things which God foreknew that he would have done if he had lived,
considering with how manifest a falsehood and how great an absurdity
this would be said, have no further reason to say, what the Church
condemned in the Pelagians, and caused to be condemned by Pelagius
himself,—that the grace of God, namely, is given according to our
merits,—when they see some infants not regenerated taken from this life
to eternal death, and others regenerated, to eternal life; and those
themselves that are regenerated, some going hence, persevering even to
the end, and others kept in this life even until they fall, who
certainly would not have fallen if they had departed hence before their
lapse; and again some falling, but not departing from this life until
they return, who certainly would have perished if they had departed
before their return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1051115.md)
