[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051134)  [Next](1051136.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.lv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.lv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 53.—Augustin’s “Confessions.”</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lv-p2"></span>And which of my smaller works has been
able to be more generally and more agreeably known than the books of my
*Confessions?* And although I published them before the Pelagian heresy
had come into existence, certainly in them I said to my God, and said it
frequently, “Give what Thou commandest, and command what Thou
willest.” <span id="fr_3690"></span>[3691](#fn_3690.md) Which words of
mine, Pelagius at Rome, when they were mentioned in his presence by a
certain brother and fellow bishop of mine, could not bear; and
contradicting somewhat too excitedly, nearly came to a quarrel with him
who had mentioned them. But what, indeed, does God primarily and chiefly
command, but that we believe on Him? And this, therefore, He Himself
gives, if it is well said to Him, “Give what Thou commandest.” And,
moreover, in those same books, in respect of what I have related
concerning my conversion, when God converted me to that faith which,
with a most miserable and raging talkativeness, I was destroying, do you
not remember that it was so narrated how I showed that I was granted to
the faithful and daily tears of my mother, that I should not
perish? <span id="fr_3691"></span>[3692](#fn_3691.md) Where certainly I
declared that God by His grace converted to the true faith the wills of
men, which were not only averse to it, but even adverse to it. Further,
in what manner I besought God concerning my growth in perseverance, you
know, and you are able to review if you wish it. Therefore, that all the
gifts of God which in that work I either asked for or praised, were
foreknown by God that He would give, and that He could never be ignorant
of the persons to whom He would give them, who can dare, I will not say
to deny, but even to doubt? This is the manifest and assured
predestination of the saints, which subsequently necessity compelled me
more carefully and laboriously to defend when I was already disputing
against the Pelagians. For I learnt that each special heresy introduced
its own peculiar questions into the Church—against which the sacred
Scripture might be more carefully defended than if no such necessity
compelled their defence. And what compelled those passages of Scripture
in which predestination is commended to be defended more abundantly and
clearly by that labour of mine, than the fact that the Pelagians say
that God’s grace is given according to our merits; for what else is this
than an absolute denial of grace?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3690"></span>[547:3691](1051135.htm#fr_3690.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.lv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lv-p3"></span> *Confessions*, Book x. chs. 19, 31, and
37.

<span id="fn_3691"></span>[547:3692](1051135.htm#fr_3691.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.lv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lv-p4"></span> *Confessions*, Book iii. chs. 11 and
12, Book ix. ch. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54](1051136.md)
