[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051045)  [Next](1051047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.x"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—It is God’s Grace Which Specially
Distinguishes One Man from Another.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.x-p2"></span>In this the apostle’s most evident
intention, in which he speaks against human pride, so that none should
glory in man but in God, it is too absurd, as I think, to suppose God’s
natural gifts, whether man’s entire and perfected nature itself as it
was bestowed on him in his first state, or the remains, whatever they
may be, of his degraded nature. For is it by such gifts as these, which
are common to all men, that men are distinguished from men? But here he
first said, “For who maketh thee to differ?” and then added, “And what
hast thou that thou hast not received?” Because a man, puffed up against
another, might say, “My faith makes me to differ,” or “My
righteousness,” or anything else of the kind. In reply to such notions,
the good teacher says, “But what hast thou that thou hast not received?”
And from whom but from Him who maketh thee to differ from another, on
whom He bestowed not what He bestowed on thee? “Now if,” says he, “thou
hast received it, why dost thou glory as if thou receivedst it not?” Is
he concerned, I ask, about anything else save that he who glorieth
should glory in the Lord? But nothing is so opposed to this feeling as
for any one to glory concerning his own merits in such a way as if he
himself had made them for himself, and not the grace of God,—a grace,
however, which makes the good to differ from the wicked, and is not
common to the good and the wicked. Let the grace, therefore, whereby we
are living and reasonable creatures, and are distinguished from cattle,
be attributed to nature; let that grace also by which, among men
themselves, the handsome are made to differ from the ill-formed, or the
intelligent from the stupid, or anything of that kind, be ascribed to
nature. But he whom the apostle was rebuking did not puff himself up as
contrasted with cattle, nor as contrasted with any other man, in respect
of any natural endowment which might be found even in the worst of men.
But he ascribed to himself, and not to God, some good gift which
pertained to a holy life, and was puffed up therewith when he deserved
to hear the rebuke, “Who hath made thee to differ? and what hast thou
that thou receivedst not?” For though the capacity to have faith is of
nature, is it also of nature to have it? “For all men have not
faith,” <span id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455.md) although all men have
the capacity to have faith. But the apostle does not say, “And what hast
thou capacity to have, the capacity to have which thou receivedst not?”
but he says, “And what hast thou which thou receivedst not?”
Accordingly, the capacity to have faith, <span
id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456.md) as the capacity to have love,
belongs to men’s nature; but to have faith, even as to have love,
belongs to the grace of believers. That nature, therefore, in which is
given to us the capacity of having faith, does not distinguish man from
man, but faith itself makes the believer to differ from the unbeliever.
And thus, when it is said, “For who maketh thee to differ? and what hast
thou that thou receivedst not?” if any one dare to say, “I have faith of
myself, I did not, therefore, receive it,” he directly contradicts this
most manifest truth,—not because it is not in the choice of man’s will
to believe or not to believe, but because in the elect the will is
prepared by the Lord. Thus, moreover, the passage, “For who maketh thee
to differ? and what hast thou that thou receivedst not?” refers to that
very faith which is in the will of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[503:3456](1051046.htm#fr_3455.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.x-p3"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002.md)<span id="xxi.ii.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[503:3457](1051046.htm#fr_3456.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.x-p4"></span> Thence says Bernard, in his treatise *On
Grace and Free Will*, ch. i.: “God is the author of salvation. Free will
is only capable of it.” Comp. *On the Calling of the Gentiles*, Book ii.
ch. 2, and Fulgentius, *On the Incarnation and Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ*, chs. 22, 23, and 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1051047.md)
