[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051021)  [Next](1051023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.xli"></span>

<span id="xx.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xx.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter 38.—What is the Nature of the Gift of
Perseverance that is Now Given to the Saints.</span>

<span id="xx.xli-p2"></span>And thus God willed that His saints should
not—even concerning perseverance in goodness itself—glory in their own
strength, but in Himself, who not only gives them aid such as He gave to
the first man, without which they cannot persevere if they will, but
causes in them also the will; that since they will not persevere unless
they both can and will, both the capability and the will to persevere
should be bestowed on them by the liberality of divine grace. Because by
the Holy Spirit their will is so much enkindled that they therefore can,
because they so will; and they therefore so will because God works in
them to will. For if in so much weakness of this life (in which
weakness, however, for the sake of checking pride, strength behoved to
be perfected) their own will should be left to themselves, that they
might, if they willed, continue in the help of God, without which they
could not persevere, and God should not work in them to will, in the
midst of so many and so great weaknesses their will itself would give
way, and they would not be able to persevere, for the reason that
failing from infirmity they would not will, or in the weakness of will
they would not so will that they would be able. Therefore aid is brought
to the infirmity of human will, so that it might be unchangeably and
invincibly <span id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373.md) influenced by
divine grace; and thus, although weak, it still might not fail, nor be
overcome by any adversity. Thus it happens that man’s will, weak and
incapable, in good as yet small, may persevere by God’s strength; while
the will of the first man, strong and healthful, having the power of
free choice, did not persevere in a greater good; because although God’s
help was not wanting, without which it could not persevere if it would,
yet it was not such a help as that by which God would work in man to
will. Certainly to the strongest He yielded and permitted to do what He
willed; to those that were weak He has reserved that by His own gift
they should most invincibly will what is good, and most invincibly
refuse to forsake this. Therefore when Christ says, “I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not,” <span
id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374.md) we may understand that it was said
to him who is built upon the rock. And thus the man of God, not only
because he has obtained mercy to be faithful, but also because faith
itself does not fail, if he glories, must glory in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[487:3374](1051022.htm#fr_3373.md) <span
id="xx.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xli-p3"></span> “*Insuperabiliter*,” the reading of the
best <span class="c16"><span id="xx.xli-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> Some
editions read “*inseparabiliter*,” in a dogmatic interest.

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[487:3375](1051022.htm#fr_3374.md) <span
id="xx.xli-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xx.xli-p4"></span> [Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032.md)<span id="xx.xli-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](1051023.md)
