[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051104)  [Next](1051106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Why for the People of Tyre and
Sidon, Who Would Have Believed, the Miracles Were Not Done Which Were
Done in Other Places Which Did Not Believe.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p2"></span>For if we are asked why such miracles
were done among those who, when they saw them, would not believe them,
and were not done among those who would have believed them if they had
seen them, what shall we answer? Shall we say what I have said in that
book <span id="fr_3605"></span>[3606](#fn_3605.md) wherein I answered some
six questions of the Pagans, yet without prejudice of other matters
which the wise can inquire into? This indeed I said, as you know, when
it was asked why Christ came after so long a time: “that at those times
and in those places in which His gospel was not preached, He foreknew
that all men would, in regard of His preaching, be such as many were in
His bodily presence,—people, namely, who would not believe on Him, even
though the dead were raised by Him.” Moreover, a little after in the
same book, and on the same question, I say, “What wonder, if Christ knew
in former ages that the world was so filled with unbelievers, that He
was, with reason, unwilling for His gospel to be preached to them whom
He foreknew to be such as would not believe either His words or His
miracles”? Certainly we cannot say this of Tyre and Sidon; and in their
case we recognise that those divine judgments had reference to those
causes of predestination, without prejudice to which hidden causes I
said that I was then answering such questions as those. Certainly it is
easy to accuse the unbelief of the Jews, arising as it did from their
free will, since they refused to believe in such great wonders done
among themselves. And this the Lord, reproaching them, declares when He
says, “Woe unto thee, Chorazin and Bethsaida, because if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have been done in you, they
would long ago have repented in dust and ashes.” <span
id="fr_3606"></span>[3607](#fn_3606.md) But can we say that even the
Tyrians and Sidonians would have refused to believe such mighty works
done among them, or would not have believed them if they had been done,
when the Lord Himself bears witness to them that they would have
repented with great humility if those signs of divine power had been
done among them? And yet in the day of judgment they will be punished;
although with a less punishment than those cities which would not
believe the mighty works done in them. For the Lord goes on to say,
“Nevertheless, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon in the day of judgment than for you.” <span
id="fr_3607"></span>[3608](#fn_3607.md) Therefore the former shall be
punished with greater severity, the latter with less; but yet they shall
be punished. Again, if the dead are judged even in respect of deeds
which they would have done if they had lived, assuredly since these
would have been believers if the gospel had been preached to them with
so great miracles, they certainly ought not to be punished; but they
will be punished. It is therefore false that the dead are judged in
respect also of those things which they would have done if the gospel
had reached them when they were <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.xxv-Page_534"></span>alive. And if this is false, there is
no ground for saying, concerning infants who perish because they die
without baptism, that this happens in their case deservedly, because God
foreknew that if they should live and the gospel should be preached to
them, they would hear it with unbelief. It remains, therefore, that they
are kept bound by original sin alone, and for this alone they go into
condemnation; and we see that in others in the same case this is not
remitted, except by the gratuitous grace of God in regeneration; and
that, by His secret yet righteous judgment—because there is no
unrighteousness with God—that some, who even after baptism will perish
by evil living, are yet kept in this life until they perish, who would
not have perished if bodily death had forestalled their lapse into sin,
and so come to their help. Because no dead man is judged by the good or
evil things which he would have done if he had not died, otherwise the
Tyrians and Sidonians would not have suffered the penalties according to
what they did; but rather according to those things that they would have
done, if those evangelical mighty works had been done in them, they
would have obtained salvation by great repentance, and by the faith of
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3605"></span>[533:3606](1051105.htm#fr_3605.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p3"></span> Epistle 102, question 2; see the first
volume of this series, p. 418.

<span id="fn_3606"></span>[533:3607](1051105.htm#fr_3606.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p4"></span> [Luke x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013.md)<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3607"></span>[533:3608](1051105.htm#fr_3607.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p5"></span> [Matt. xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022.md)<span id="xxi.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1051106.md)
