[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051009)  [Next](1051011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.xxix"></span>

<span id="xx.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xx.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26 \[X.\]—Whether Adam Received the
Gift of Perseverance.</span>

<span id="xx.xxix-p2"></span>Here arises another question, not
reasonably to be slighted, but to be approached and solved in the help
of the Lord in whose hand are both we and our discourses. <span
id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339.md) For I am asked, in respect of this
gift of God which is to persevere in good to the end, what I think of
the first man himself, who assuredly was made upright without any fault.
And I do not say: If he had not perseverance, how was he without fault,
seeing that he was in want of so needful a gift of God? For to this
interrogatory the answer is easy, that he had not perseverance, because
he did not persevere in that goodness in which he was without sin; for
he began to have sin from the point at which he fell; and if he began,
certainly he was without sin before he had begun. For it is one thing
not to have sin, and it is another not to abide in that goodness in
which there is no sin. Because in that very fact, that he is not said
never to have been without sin, but he is said not to have continued
without sin, beyond all doubt it is demonstrated that he was without
sin, seeing that he is blamed for not having continued in that goodness.
But it should rather be asked and discussed with greater pains in what
way we can answer those who say, “If in that uprightness in which he was
made without sin he had perseverance, beyond all doubt he persevered in
it; and if he persevered, he certainly did not sin, and did not forsake
that his uprightness. But that he did sin, and was a forsaker of
goodness, the Truth declares. Therefore he had not perseverance in that
goodness; and if he had it not, he certainly received it not. For how
should he have both received perseverance, and not have persevered?
Further, if he had it not because he did not receive it, what sin did he
commit by not persevering, if he did not receive perseverance? For it
cannot be said that he did not receive it, for the reason that he was
not separated by the bestowal of grace from the mass of perdition.
Because that mass of perdition did not as yet exist in the human race
before he had sinned from whom the corrupted source was derived.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[482:3340](1051010.htm#fr_3339.md) <span
id="xx.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.xxix-p3"></span> [Wisd. vii.
16](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#016.md)<span id="xx.xxix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1051011.md)
