[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051135)  [Next](1051137.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.lvi"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.lvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 54 \[XXI.\]—Beginning and End of
Faith is of God.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lvi-p2"></span>Therefore that this opinion, which is
unpleasing to God, and hostile to those gratuitous benefits of God
whereby we are delivered, may be destroyed, I maintain that both the
beginning of faith and the perseverance therein, even to the end, are,
according to the Scriptures—of which I have already quoted many—God’s
gifts. Because if we say that the beginning of faith is of ourselves, so
that by it we deserve to receive <span id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.lvi-Page_548"></span>other gifts of God, the Pelagians
conclude that God’s grace is given according to our merits. And this the
catholic faith held in such dread, that Pelagius himself, in fear of
condemnation, condemned it. And, moreover, if we say that our
perseverance is of ourselves, not of God, they answer that we have the
beginning of our faith of ourselves in such wise as the end, thus
arguing that we have that beginning of ourselves much more, if of
ourselves we have the continuance unto the end, since to perfect is much
greater than to begin; and thus repeatedly they conclude that the grace
of God is given according to our merits. But if both are God’s gifts,
and God foreknew that He would give these His gifts (and who can deny
this?), predestination must be preached,—that God’s true grace, that is,
the grace which is not given according to our merits, may be maintained
with insuperable defence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 55](1051137.md)
