[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051119)  [Next](1051121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xl"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter 38 \[XV.\]—Against the Preaching of
Predestination the Same Objections May Be Alleged as Against
Predestination.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xl-p2"></span>But they say, as you write: “That no one
can be aroused by the incentives of rebuke if it be said in the assembly
of the Church to the multitude of hearers: The definite meaning of God’s
will concerning predestination stands in such wise, that some of you
will receive the will to obey and will come out of unbelief unto faith,
or will receive perseverance and abide in the faith; but others who are
lingering in the delight of sins have not yet arisen, for the reason
that the aid of pitying grace has not yet <span id="page_541">p.
541</span> <span id="xxi.iii.xl-Page_541"></span>indeed raised you up.
But yet, if there are any whom by His grace He has predestinated to be
chosen, who are not yet called, ye shall receive that grace by which you
may will and be chosen; and if any obey, if ye are predestinated to be
rejected, the strength to obey shall be withdrawn from you, so that you
may cease to obey.” Although these things may be said, they ought not so
to deter us from confessing the true grace of God,—that is, the grace
which is not given to us in respect of our merits,—and from confessing
the predestination of the saints in accordance therewith, even as we are
not deterred from confessing God’s foreknowledge, although one should
thus speak to the people concerning it, and say: “Whether you are now
living righteously or unrighteously, you shall be such by and by as the
Lord has foreknown that you will be,—either good, if He has foreknown
you as good, or bad, if He has foreknown you as bad.” For if on the
hearing of this some should be turned to torpor and slothfulness, and
from striving should go headlong to lust after their own desires, is it
therefore to be counted that what has been said about the foreknowledge
of God is false? If God has foreknown that they will be good, will they
not be good, whatever be the depth of evil in which they are now
engaged? And if He has foreknown them evil, will they not be evil,
whatever goodness may now be discerned in them? There was a man in our
monastery, who, when the brethren rebuked him for doing some things that
ought not to be done, and for not doing some things that ought to be
done, replied, “Whatever I may now be, I shall be such as God has
foreknown that I shall be.” And this man certainly both said what was
true, and was not profited by this truth for good, but so far made way
in evil as to desert the society of the monastery, and become a dog
returned to his vomit; and, nevertheless, it is uncertain what he is yet
to become. For the sake of souls of this kind, then, is the truth which
is spoken about God’s foreknowledge either to be denied or to be kept
back,—at such times, for instance, when, if it is not spoken, other
errors are incurred?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](1051121.md)
