[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051108)  [Next](1051110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Reference to the
“Retractations.”</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p2"></span>Finally, in the first book of the
*Retractations*, <span id="fr_3613"></span>[3614](#fn_3613) which work
of mine you have not yet read, when I had come to the reconsidering of
those same books, that is, on the subject of Free Will, I thus spoke:
“In these books,” I say, “many things were so discussed that on the
occurring of some questions which either I was not able to elucidate, or
which required a long discussion at once, they were so deferred as that
from either side, or from all sides, of those questions in which what
was most in harmony with the truth did not appear, yet my reasoning
might be conclusive for this, namely, that whichever of them might be
true, God might be believed, or even be shown, to be worthy of praise.
Because that discussion was undertaken for the sake of those who deny
that the origin of evil is derived from the free choice of the will, and
contend that God,—if He be so,—as the Creator of all natures, is worthy
of blame; desiring in that manner, according to the error of their
impiety (for they are Manicheans), to introduce a certain immutable
nature of evil co-eternal with God.” Also, after a little time, in
another place I say: “Then it was said, From this misery, most
righteously inflicted on sinners, God’s grace delivers, because man of
his own accord, that is, by free will, could fall, but could not also
rise. To this misery of just condemnation belong the ignorance and the
difficulty which every man suffers from the beginning of his birth, and
no one is delivered from that evil except by the grace of God. And this
misery the Pelagians will not have to descend from a just condemnation,
because they deny original sin; although even if the ignorance and
difficulty were the natural beginnings of man, God would not even thus
deserve to be reproached, but to be praised, as I have argued in the
same third book. <span id="fr_3614"></span>[3615](#fn_3614) Which
argument must be regarded as against the Manicheans, who do not receive
the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, in which original sin is
narrated; and whatever thence is read in the apostolic epistles, they
contend was introduced <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-Page_536"></span>with a detestable impudence by the
corrupters of the Scriptures, assuming that it was not said by the
apostles. But against the Pelagians that must be maintained which both
Scriptures commend, as they profess to receive them.” These things I
said in my first book of *Retractations*, when I was reconsidering the
books on Free Will. Nor, indeed, were these things all that were said by
me there about these books, but there were many others also, which I
thought it would be tedious to insert in this work for you, and not
necessary; and this I think you also will judge when you have read all.
Although, therefore, in the third book on Free Will I have in such wise
argued concerning infants, that even if what the Pelagians say were
true,—that ignorance and difficulty, without which no man is born, are
elements, not punishments, of our nature,—still the Manicheans would be
overcome, who will have it that the two natures, to wit, of good and
evil, are co-eternal. Is, therefore, the faith to be called in question
or forsaken, which the catholic Church maintains against those very
Pelagians, asserting as she does that it is original sin, the guilt of
which, contracted by generation, must be remitted by regeneration? And
if they confess this with us, so that we may at once, in this matter of
the Pelagians, destroy error, why do they think that it must be doubted
that God can deliver even infants, to whom He gives His grace by the
sacrament of baptism, from the power of darkness, and translate them
into the kingdom of the Son of His love? <span
id="fr_3615"></span>[3616](#fn_3615) In the fact, therefore, that He
gives that grace to some, and does not give it to others, why will they
not sing to the Lord His mercy and judgment? <span
id="fr_3616"></span>[3617](#fn_3616) Why, however, is it given to these,
rather than to those,—who has known the mind of the Lord? who is able to
look into unsearchable things? who to trace out that which is past
finding out?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3613"></span>[535:3614](1051109.htm#fr_3613) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p3"></span> *Retractations*, Book i. ch. 9.

<span id="fn_3614"></span>[535:3615](1051109.htm#fr_3614) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p4"></span> *Retractations*, Book i. ch. 20.

<span id="fn_3615"></span>[536:3616](1051109.htm#fr_3615) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p5"></span> [Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3616"></span>[536:3617](1051109.htm#fr_3616) <span
id="xxi.iii.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p6"></span> [Ps. c.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000)<span id="xxi.iii.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1051110)
