[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051139)  [Next](1051141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.lx"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.lx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 58.—The Doctrine to Be Applied with
Discrimination.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.lx-p2"></span>Now, therefore, the definite
determination of God’s will concerning predestination is of such a kind
that some from unbelief receive the will to obey, and are converted to
the faith or persevere in the faith, while others who abide in the
delight of damnable sins, even if they have been predestinated, have not
yet arisen, because the aid of pitying grace has not yet lifted them up.
For if any are not yet called whom by His grace He has predestinated to
be elected, they will receive that grace whereby they may will to be
elected, and may be so; and if any obey, but have not been predestinated
to His kingdom and glory, they are for a season, and will not abide in
the same obedience to the end. Although, then, these things are true,
yet they must not be so said to the multitude of hearers as that the
address may be applied to themselves also, and those words of those
people may be said to them which you have set down in your letter, and
which I have above introduced: “The definite determination of God’s will
concerning predestination is of such a kind that some of you from
unbelief shall receive the will to obey, and come to the faith.” What
need is there for saying, “Some of you”? For if we speak to God’s
Church, if we speak to believers, why do we say that “some of them” had
come to the faith, and seem to do a wrong to the rest, when we may more
fittingly say the definite determination of the will of God concerning
predestination is of such a kind that from unbelief you shall receive
the will to obey, and come to the faith, and shall receive perseverance,
and abide to the end?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](1051141)
