[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051085)  [Next](1051087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Three Leading Points of the
Pelagian Doctrine.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.vi-p2"></span>Read with a little more attention its
exposition in the treatise of the blessed martyr Cyprian, which he wrote
concerning this matter, the title of which is, *On the Lord’s Prayer*;
and see how many years ago, and what sort of an antidote was prepared
against those poisons which the Pelagians were one day to use. For there
are three points, as you know, which the catholic Church chiefly
maintains against them. One of these is, that the grace of God is not
given according to our merits; because even every one of the merits of
the righteous is God’s gift, and is conferred by God’s grace. The second
is, that no one lives in this corruptible body, however righteous he may
be, without sins of some kind. The third is, that man is born obnoxious
to the first man’s sin, and bound by the chain of condemnation, unless
the guilt which is contracted by generation be loosed by regeneration.
Of these three points, that which I have placed last is the only one
that is not treated of in the above-named book of the glorious martyr;
but of the two others the discourse there is of such perspicuity, that
the above-named heretics, modern enemies of the grace of Christ, are
found to have been convicted long before they were born. Among these
merits of the saints, then, which are no merits unless they are the
gifts of God, he says that perseverance also is God’s gift, in these
words: “We say, ‘Hallowed be Thy name;’ not that we ask for God that He
may be hallowed by our prayers, but that we beseech of Him that His name
may be hallowed in us. But by whom is God sanctified, since He Himself
sanctifies? Well, because He says, Be ye holy because I also am holy, we
ask and entreat that we, who were sanctified in baptism, may persevere
in that which we have begun to be.” <span
id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567.md) And a little after, still arguing
about that self-same matter, and teaching that we entreat perseverance
from the Lord, which we could in no wise rightly and truly do unless it
were His gift, he says: “We pray that this sanctification may abide in
us; and because our Lord and Judge warns the man that was healed and
quickened by Him to sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto him, we
make this supplication in our constant prayers; we ask this, day and
night, that the sanctification and quickening which is received from the
grace of God may be preserved by His protection.” <span
id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568.md) That teacher, therefore,
understands that we are asking from Him for perseverance in
sanctification, that is, that we should persevere in sanctification,
when we who are sanctified say, “Hallowed be Thy name.” For what else is
it to ask for what we have already received, than that it be given to us
also not to cease from its possession? As, therefore, the saint, when he
asks God that he may be holy, is certainly asking that he may continue
to be holy, so certainly the chaste person also, when he asks that he
may be chaste, the continent that he may be continent, the righteous
that he may be righteous, the pious that he may be pious, and the
like,—which things, against the Pelagians, we maintain to be God’s
gifts,—are asking, without doubt, <span id="page_528">p. 528</span>
<span id="xxi.iii.vi-Page_528"></span>that they may persevere in those
good things which they have acknowledged that they have received. And if
they receive this, assuredly they also receive perseverance itself, the
great gift of God, whereby His other gifts are preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[527:3568](1051086.htm#fr_3567.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.vi-p3"></span> Cyprian, *On the Lord’s Prayer*; see
*The Ante-Nicene Fathers*, vol. v. p. 450.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[527:3569](1051086.htm#fr_3568.md) <span
id="xxi.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.vi-p4"></span> Cyprian, *On the Lord’s Prayer*, as
above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1051087.md)
