[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051122)  [Next](1051124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.xliii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 41.—Predestination Defined as
Only God’s Disposing of Events in His Foreknowledge.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xliii-p2"></span>For either predestination must be
preached, in the way and degree in which the Holy Scripture plainly
declares it, so that in the predestinated the gifts and calling of God
may be without repentance; or it must be avowed that God’s grace is
given according to our merits,—which is the opinion of the Pelagians;
although that opinion of theirs, as I have often said already, may be
read in the Proceedings of the Eastern bishops to have been condemned by
the lips of Pelagius himself. <span id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661)
Further, those on whose account I am discoursing are only removed from
the heretical perversity of the Pelagians, inasmuch as, although they
will not confess that they who by God’s grace are made obedient and so
abide, are predestinated, they still confess, nevertheless, that this
grace precedes their will to whom it is given; in such a way certainly
as that grace may not be thought to be given freely, as the truth
declares, but rather according to the merits of a preceding will, as the
Pelagian error says, in contradiction to the truth. Therefore, also,
grace precedes faith; otherwise, if faith precedes grace, beyond a doubt
will also precedes it, because there cannot be faith without will. But
if grace precedes faith because it precedes will, certainly it precedes
all obedience; it also precedes love, by which alone God is truly and
pleasantly obeyed. And all these things grace works in him to whom it is
given, and in whom it precedes all these things. \[XVII.\] Among these
benefits there remains perseverance unto the end, which is daily asked
for in vain from the Lord, if the Lord by His grace does not effect it
in him whose prayers He hears. See now how foreign it is from the truth
to deny that perseverance even to the end of this life is the gift of
God; since He Himself puts an end to this life when He wills, and if He
puts an end before a fall that is threatening, He makes the man to
persevere even unto the end. But more marvellous and more manifest to
believers is the largess of God’s goodness, that this grace is given
even to infants, although there is no obedience at that age to which it
may be given. To whomsoever, therefore, God gives His gifts, beyond a
doubt He has foreknown that He will bestow them on them, and in His
foreknowledge He has prepared them for them. Therefore, those whom He
predestinated, them He also called with that calling which I am not
reluctant often to make mention of, of which it is said, “The gifts and
calling of God are without repentance.” <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) For the ordering of His future
works in His foreknowledge, which cannot be deceived and changed, is
absolute, and is nothing but, predestination. But, as he whom God has
foreknown to be chaste, although he may regard it as uncertain, so acts
as to be chaste, so he whom He has predestinated to be chaste, although
he may regard that as uncertain, does not, therefore, fail to act so as
to be chaste because he hears that he is to be what he will be by the
gift of God. Nay, rather, his love rejoices, and he is not puffed up as
if he had not received it. Not only, therefore, is he not hindered from
this work by the preaching of predestination, but he is even assisted to
it, so that although he glories he may glory in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[542:3662](1051123.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="xxi.iii.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xliii-p3"></span> See above, *On the Proceedings of
Pelagius*, ch. 30.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[542:3663](1051123.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="xxi.iii.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.xliii-p4"></span> [Rom. xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.iii.xliii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](1051124)
