[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051026)  [Next](1051028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.xlvi"></span>

<span id="xx.xlvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xx.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 43 \[XIV.\]—Rebuke and Grace Do Not Set
Aside One Another.</span>

<span id="xx.xlvi-p2"></span>Let men then suffer themselves to be
rebuked when they sin, and not conclude against grace from the rebuke
itself, nor from grace against rebuke; because both the righteous
penalty of sin is due, and righteous rebuke belongs to it, if it is
medicinally applied, even although the salvation of the ailing man is
uncertain; so that if he who is rebuked belongs to the number of the
predestinated, rebuke may be to him a wholesome medicine; and if he does
not belong to that number, rebuke may be to him a penal infliction.
Under that very uncertainty, therefore, it must of love be applied,
although its result is unknown; and prayer must be made on his behalf to
whom it is applied, that he may be healed. But when men either come or
return into the way of righteousness by means of rebuke, who is it that
worketh salvation in their hearts but that God who giveth the increase,
whoever plants and waters, and whoever labours on the fields or
shrubs,—that God whom no man’s will resists when He wills to give
salvation? For so to will or not to will is in the power of Him who
willeth or willeth not, as not to hinder the divine will nor overcome
the divine power. For even concerning those who do what He wills not, He
Himself does what He will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](1051028.md)
