[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1051082)  [Next](1051084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="xxi.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1 \[I.\]—Of the Nature of the
Perseverance Here Discoursed of.</span>

<span id="xxi.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="xxi.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>I Have</span> now to consider the subject
of perseverance with greater care; for in the former book also I said
some things on this subject when I was discussing the beginning of
faith. I assert, therefore, that the perseverance by which we persevere
in Christ even to the end is the gift of God; and I call that the end by
which is finished that life wherein alone there is peril of falling.
Therefore it is uncertain whether any one has received this gift so long
as he is still alive. For if he fall before he dies, he is, of course,
said not to have persevered; and most truly is it said. How, then,
should he be said to have received or to have had perseverance who has
not persevered? For if any one have continence, and fall away from that
virtue and become incontinent,—or, in like manner, if he have
righteousness, if patience, if even faith, and fall away, he is rightly
said to have had these virtues and to have them no longer; for he was
continent, or he was righteous, or he was patient, or he was believing,
as long as he was so; but when he ceased to be so, he no longer is what
he was. But how should he who has not persevered have ever been
persevering, since it is only by persevering that any one shows himself
persevering,—and this he has not done? But lest any one should object to
this, and say, If from the time at which any one became a believer he
has lived—for the sake of argument—ten years, and in the midst of them
has fallen from the faith, has he not persevered for five years? I am
not contending about words. If it be thought that this also should be
called perseverance, as it were for so long as it lasts, assuredly he is
not to be said to have had in any degree that perseverance of which we
are now discoursing, by which one perseveres in Christ even to the end.
And the believer of one year, or of a period as much shorter as may be
conceived of, if he has lived faithfully until he died, has rather had
this perseverance than the believer of many years’ standing, if a little
time before his death he has fallen away from the stedfastness of his
faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1051084.md)
