[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saab01)  [Next](saab03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Salaman and Absal*, by Jami, tr. Edward Fitzgerald, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### LIFE OF JÁMI.

<span class="small">\[I hope the following disproportionate Notice of
Jámi's Life will be amusing enough to excuse its length. I found most of
it at the last moment in Rosenzweig's "Biographische Notizen" of Jámi,
from whose own, and Commentator's, Works it purports to be
gathered.\]</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Núruddín Abdurrahman</span>, Son of Maulána
Nizamuddin <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Ahmed, and descended on the
Mother's side from One of the Four great "<span
class="smallcaps">Fathers</span>" of Islamism, was born A.H. 817, A.D.
1414, in Jám, a little Town of Khorásan, whither (according to the Heft
Aklím—"Seven Climates") his Grandfather had migrated from Desht of
Ispahán, and from which the Poet ultimately took his Takhalus, or Poetic
name, <span class="smallcaps">Jámi</span>. This word also signifies "A
Cup;" wherefore, he says, "Born in Jám, and dipt in the "*Jam*" of Holy
Lore, for a double reason I must be called <span
class="smallcaps">Jámi</span> in the Book of Song." He was celebrated
afterwards in other Oriental Titles—"Lord of Poets"—"Elephant of
Wisdom," &c., but often liked to call himself "The Ancient of Herát,"
where he mainly resided.

When Five Years old he received the name of Núruddín—the "Light of
Faith," and even so early began to show the Metal, and take the Stamp
that distinguished him through Life. In 1419, a famous Sheikh, Khwájah
Mehmed

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Parsa, then in the
last year of his Life, was being carried through Jám. "I was not then
Five Years old," says Jámi, "and my Father, who with his Friends went
forth to salute him, had me carried on the Shoulders of one of the
Family and set down before the Litter of the Sheikh, who gave a Nosegay
into my hand. Sixty years have passed, and methinks I now see before me
the bright Image of the Holy Man, and feel the Blessing of his Aspect,
from which I date my after Devotion to that Brotherhood in which I hope
to be enrolled."

So again, when Maulána Fakhruddín Loristani had alighted at his Mother's
house—"I was then so little that he set me upon his Knee, and with his
Fingers drawing the Letters of '<span class="smallcaps">Ali</span>' and
'<span class="smallcaps">Omar</span>' in the Air, laughed delightedly to
hear me spell them. He also by his Goodness sowed in my Heart the Seed
of his Devotion, which has grown to Increase within me—in which I hope
to live, and in which to die. Oh God! Dervish let me live, and Dervish
die; and in the Company of the Dervish do Thou quicken me to Life
again!"

Jámi first went to a School at Herát; and afterward to one founded by
the Great Timúr at Samarcand. There he not only outstript his Fellows in
the very Encyclopaedic Studies of Persian Education, but even puzzled
the Doctors in Logic, Astronomy, and Theology; who, however, with
unresenting Gravity welcomed him

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —"Lo! a new Light
added to our Galaxy!"—In the wider Field of Samarcand he might have
liked to remain; but Destiny liked otherwise, and a Dream recalled him
to Herát. A Vision of the Great Súfi Master there, Mehmed Saaduddín
Kaschgari, of the Nakhsbend Order of Dervishes, appeared to him in his
Sleep, and bade him return to One who would satisfy all Desire. Jámi
went back to Herát; he saw the Sheikh discoursing with his Disciples by
the Door of the Great Mosque; day after day passed by without daring to
present himself; but the Master's Eye was upon him; day by day draws him
nearer and nearer—till at last the Sheikh announces to those about
him—"Lo! this Day have I taken a Falcon in my Snare!"

Under him Jámi began his Súfi Noviciate, with such Devotion, and under
such Fascination from the Master, that going, he tells us, but for one
Summer Day's Holiday into the Country, one single Line was enough to
"lure the Tassel-gentle back again;"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Lo! here am I, and Thou look’st on the
Rose!"</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> By and bye he
withdraws, by course of Súfi Instruction, into Solitude so long and
profound, that on his Return to Men he has almost lost the Power of
Converse with them. At last, when duly taught, and duly authorized to
teach as Súfi Doctor, he yet will not, though solicited by those who had
seen such a Vision of Him as had drawn Himself to Herát;

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

and not till the Evening of his Life is he to be seen with White hairs
taking that place by the Mosque which his departed Master had been used
to occupy before.

Meanwhile he had become Poet, which no doubt winged his Reputation and
Doctrine far and wide through Nations to whom Poetry is a vital Element
of the Air they breathe. "A Thousand times," he says, "I have repented
of such Employment; but I could no more shirk it than one can shirk what
the Pen of Fate has written on his Forehead"—"As Poet I have resounded
through the World; Heaven filled itself with my Song, and the Bride of
Time adorned her Ears and Neck with the Pearls of my Verse, whose coming
Caravan the Persian Hafíz and Saadi came forth gladly to salute, and the
Indian Khosrú and Hasan hailed as a Wonder of the World." "The Kings of
India and Rúm greet me by Letter: the Lords of Irák and Tabríz load me
with Gifts; and what shall I say of those of Khorasán, who drown me in
an Ocean of Munificence?"

This, though Oriental, is scarcely Bombast. Jámi was honoured by Princes
at home and abroad, and at the very time they were cutting one another's
Throats; by his own Sultan Abou Saïd; by Hasan Beg of Mesopotamia—"Lord
of Tabríz"—by whom Abou Saïd was defeated, dethroned, and slain; by
Mahomet II. of Turkey—"King of Rúm"—who in his turn defeated Hasan; and
lastly by

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Husein Mirza
Baikara, who extinguished the Prince whom Hasan had set up in Abou's
Place at Herát. Such is the House that Jack builds in Persia.

As Hasan Beg, however—the <span class="smallcaps">Usuncassan</span> of
old European Annals—is singularly connected with the present Poem, and
with probably the most important event in Jámi's Life, I will briefly
follow the Steps that led to that as well as other Princely Intercourse.

In A.H. 877, A.D. 1472, Jámi set off on his Pilgrimage to Mecca. He,
and, on his Account, the Caravan he went with, were honourably and
safely escorted through the intervening Countries by order of their
several Potentates as far as Bagdad. There Jámi fell into trouble by the
Treachery of a Follower he had reproved, and who (born 400 Years too
soon) misquoted Jámi's Verse into disparagement of <span
class="smallcaps">Ali</span>, the Darling Imám of Persia. This getting
wind at Bagdad, the thing was brought to solemn Tribunal, at which Hasan
Beg's two Sons assisted. Jámi came victoriously off; his Accuser
pilloried with a dockt Beard in Bagdad Marketplace: but the Poet was so
ill pleased with the stupidity of those who believed the Report, that,
standing in Verse upon the Tigris’ side, he calls for a Cup of Wine to
seal up Lips of whose Utterance the Men of Bagdad were unworthy.

After 4 months’ stay there, during which he visits at Helleh the Tomb of
Ali's Son, Husein, who had fallen at

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kerbela, he sets
forth again—to Najaf, where he says his Camel sprang forward at sight of
Ali's own Tomb—crosses the Desert in 22 days, meditating on the
Prophet's Glory, to Medina; and so at last to <span
class="smallcaps">Mecca</span>, where, as he sang in a Ghazal, he went
through all Mahommedan Ceremony with a Mystical Understanding of his
Own.

He then turns Homeward: is entertained for 45 days at Damascus, which he
leaves the very Day before the Turkish Mahomet's Envoys come with 5000
Ducats to carry him to Constantinople. Arriving at Amida, the Capital of
Mesopotamia (Diyak bakar), he finds War broken out in full Flame between
that Mahomet and Hasan Beg, King of the Country, who has Jámi honourably
escorted through the dangerous Roads to Tabríz; there receives him in
Diván, "frequent and full" of Sage and Noble (Hasan being a great
Admirer of Learning), and would fain have him abide at Court awhile.
Jámi, however, is intent on Home, and once more seeing his aged
Mother—for *he* is turned of Sixty!—and at last touches Herát in the
Month of Schaaban, 1473, after the Average Year's absence.

This is the <span class="smallcaps">Hasan</span>, "in Name and Nature
*Handsome*" (and so described by some Venetian Ambassadors of the Time),
of whose protection Jámi speaks in the Preliminary Vision of this Poem,
which he dedicates to Hasan's Son, Yacúb Beg:

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

who, after the due murder of an Elder Brother, succeeded to the Throne;
till all the Dynasties of "Black and White Sheep" together were swept
away a few years after by Ismael, Founder of the Sofí Dynasty in Persia.

Arrived at home, Jámi finds Husein Mirza Baikara, last of the Timúridae,
fast seated there; having probably slain ere Jámi went the Prince whom
Hasan had set up; but the date of a Year or Two may well wander in the
Bloody Jungle of Persian History. Husein, however, receives Jámi with
open Arms; Nisamuddín Ali Schír, his Vizir, a Poet too, had hailed in
Verse the Poet's Advent from Damascus as "The Moon rising in the West;"
and they both continued affectionately to honour him as long as he
lived.

Jámi sickened of his mortal Illness on the 13th of Moharrem, 1492—a
Sunday. His Pulse began to fail on the following Friday, about the Hour
of Morning Prayer, and stopped at the very moment when the Muezzin began
to call to Evening. He had lived Eighty-one years. Sultan Husein
undertook the Burial of one whose Glory it was to have lived and died in
Dervish Poverty; the Dignities of the Kingdom followed him to the Grave;
where 20 days afterward was recited in presence of the Sultan and his
Court an Eulogy composed by the Vizír, who also laid the first Stone of
a Monument to his Friend's Memory—the first Stone of

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Tarbet’i Jámi,"
in the Street of Mesched, a principal Thoro’fare of the City of Herát.
For, says Rosenzweig, it must be kept in mind that Jámi was reverenced
not only as a Poet and Philosopher, but as a Saint also; who not only
might work a Miracle himself, but leave the Power lingering about his
Tomb. It was known that once in his Life, an Arab, who had falsely
accused him of selling a Camel he knew to be mortally unsound, had very
shortly after died, as Jámi had predicted, and on the very selfsame spot
where the Camel fell. And that Libellous Rogue at Bagdad—he, putting his
hand into his Horse's Nose-bag to see if "das Thier" has finisht his
Corn, had his Fore-finger bitten off by the same—"von demselben der
Zeigefinger abgebissen"—of which "Verstümmlung" he soon died—I suppose,
as he ought, of Lock jaw.

The Persians, who are adepts at much elegant Ingenuity, are fond of
commemorating Events by some analogous Word or Sentence whose Letters,
cabalistically corresponding to certain Numbers, compose the Date
required. In Jámi's case they have hit upon the word "<span
class="smallcaps">Kas</span>," A Cup, whose signification brings his own
name to Memory, and whose relative Letters make up his 81 years. They
have *Taríks* also for remembering the Year of his Death: Rosenzweig
gives some; but Ouseley the prettiest, if it will hold:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Dúd az Khorásán bar ámed—  
"The smoke" of Sighs "went up from Khorásán."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No Biographer,
says Rosenzweig cautiously, records of Jámi that he had more than one
Wife (Grand-daughter of his Master Sheikh) and Four Sons; which,
however, are Five too many for the Doctrine of this Poem. Of the Sons,
Three died Infant; and the Fourth (born to him in very old Age), and for
whom he wrote some Elementary Tracts, and the more famous "Beharistan"
lived but a few years, and was remembered by his Father in the Preface
to his Chiradnameh Iskander—a book of Morals, which perhaps had also
been begun for the Boy's Instruction.

Of Jámi's wonderful Fruitfulness—"bewunderungswerther Fruchtbarkeit"—as
Writer, Rosenzweig names Forty-four offsprings—the Letters of the word
"Jám" completing by the aforesaid process that very Number. But Shár
Khán Lúdi in his "Memoirs of the Poets," says Ouseley, counts him Author
of *Ninety-nine* Volumes of Grammar, Poetry, and Theology, which "
continue to be universally admired in all parts of the Eastern World,
Iran, Turin, and Hindustan"—copied some of them into precious
Manuscript, illuminated with Gold and Painting, by the greatest Penmen
and Artists of the Time; one such—the "Beharistan"—said to have cost
Thousands of Pounds—autographed as one most precious treasure of their
Libraries by two Sovereign Descendants of <span
class="smallcaps">Timúr</span> upon the Throne of Hindustan; and now
reposited away from "the Drums and Tramplings" of Oriental

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Conquest in the
tranquil Seclusion of an English Library.

Of these Ninety-nine, or Forty-four Volumes few are known, and none
except the Present and one other Poem ever printed, in England, where
the knowledge of Persian might have been politically useful. The Poet's
name with us is almost solely associated with "<span
class="smallcaps">Yúsuf and Zulaikha</span>," which, with the other two
I have mentioned, count Three of the Brother Stars of that Constellation
into which Jámi, or his Admirers, have clustered his Seven best Mystical
Poems under the name of "<span class="smallcaps">Heft
Aurang</span>"—those "<span class="smallcaps">Seven Thrones</span>" to
which we of the West and North give our characteristic Name of "Great
Bear" and "Charles’s Wain."

He must have enjoyed great Favour and Protection from his Princes at
home, or he would hardly have ventured to write so freely as in this
Poem he does of Doctrine which exposed the Súfí to vulgar abhorrence and
Danger. Hafíz and others are apologized for as having been obliged to
veil a Divinity beyond what "<span class="smallcaps">The Prophet</span>"
dreamt of under the Figure of Mortal Cup and Cup-bearer. Jámi speaks in
Allegory too, by way of making a palpable grasp at the Skirt of the
Ineffable; but he also dares, in the very thick of Mahommedanism, to
talk of <span class="smallcaps">Reason</span> as sole Fountain of
Prophecy; and to pant for what would seem so Pantheistic an
Identification with the

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deity as shall
blind him to any distinction between Good and Evil. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

I must not forget one pretty passage of Jámi's Life. He had a nephew,
one Maulána Abdullah, who was ambitious of following his Uncle's
Footsteps in Poetry. Jámi first dissuaded him; then, by way of trial
whether he had a Talent as well as a Taste, bid him imitate Firdusi's
Satire on Shah Mahmúd. The Nephew did so well, that Jámi then encouraged
him to proceed; himself wrote the first Couplet of his First (and most
noted) Poem—Laila & Majnun.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">This Book of which the Pen has now laid the
Foundation,  
May the diploma of Acceptance one day befall it,—</span>

</div>

and Abdallah went on to write that and four other Poems which Persia
continues and multiplies in fine Manuscript and Illumination to the
present day, remembering their Author under his Takhalus of <span
class="smallcaps">Hátifi</span>—"The Voice from Heaven "and Last of the
so reputed Persian Poets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](saab02.htm#fr_0) Such final "uddins"
signify "<span class="smallcaps">Of the Faith</span>." "<span
class="smallcaps">Maulána</span>" may be taken as "<span
class="smallcaps">Master</span>" in Learning, Law, etc.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvii:1](saab02.htm#fr_1) "Je me souvíens d’un
Prédicateur à Ispahan qui, prêchant un jour dans une Place publique,
parla furieusement contre ces Soufys, disant qu’ ils étoient des Athées
à bruler; qu ’il s’étonnoit qu ’on les laissât vivre; et que de tuer un
Soufy étoit une Action plus agréable à Dieu que de conserver la Vie à
dix Hommes de Bien. Cinq ou Six Soufys qui étoient parmi les Auditeurs
se jettèrent sur lui après le Sermon et le battirent terriblement; et
comme je m’efforçois de les empêcher ils me disoient—'Un homme qui
prêche le Meurtre doit-il se plaindre d’être battu?'"—<span
class="smallcaps">Chardin</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Prologue](saab03)
