[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120267)  [Next](2120269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p2"></span>How the impatient and the patient are
to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 10.)  Differently to be
admonished are the impatient and the patient.  For the impatient are to
be told that, while <span id="page_30b">p. 30b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-Page_30b"></span>they neglect to bridle their spirit,
they are hurried through many steep places of iniquity which they seek
not after, inasmuch as fury drives the mind whither desire draws it not,
and, when perturbed, it does, not knowing, what it afterwards grieves
for when it knows.  The impatient are also to be told that, when carried
headlong by the impulse of emotion, they act in some ways as though
beside themselves, and are hardly aware afterwards of the evil they have
done; and, while they offer no resistance to their perturbation, they
bring into confusion even things that may have been well done when the
mind was calm, and overthrow under sudden impulse whatever they have
haply long built up with provident toil.  For the very virtue of
charity, which is the mother and guardian of all virtues, is lost
through the vice of impatience.  For it is written, *Charity is patient*
([1 Cor. xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p3.1"></span>).  Wherefore where patience is not,
charity is not.  Through this vice of impatience, too, instruction, the
nurse of virtues, is dissipated.  For it is written, *The instruction of
a man is known by his patience* ([Prov. xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p3.2"></span>).  Every man, then, is shewn to be by so
much less instructed as he is convicted of being less patient.  For
neither can he truly impart what is good through instruction, if in his
life he knows not how to bear what is evil in others with equanimity.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4"></span>Further, through this vice of
impatience for the most part the sin of arrogance pierces the mind;
since, when any one is impatient of being looked down upon in this
world, he endeavours to shew off any hidden good that he may have, and
so through impatience is drawn on to arrogance; and, while he cannot
bear contempt, he glories ostentatiously in self-display.  Whence it is
written, *Better is the patient than the arrogant* ([Eccles. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.1"></span>);
because, in truth, one that is patient chooses to suffer any evils
whatever rather than that his hidden good should come to be known
through the vice of ostentation.  But the arrogant, on the contrary,
chooses that even pretended good should be vaunted of him, lest he
should possibly suffer even the least evil.  Since, then, when patience
is relinquished, all other good things also that have been done are
overthrown, it is rightly enjoined on Ezekiel that in the altar of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.2"></span>God</span> a trench be
made; to wit, that in it the whole burnt-offerings laid on the altar
might be preserved ([Ezek. xliii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.3"></span>).  For, if there were not a trench in the
altar, the passing breeze would scatter every sacrifice that it might
find there.  But what do we take the altar of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.4"></span>God</span> to be but the soul of the
righteous man, which lays upon itself before His eyes as many sacrifices
as it has done good deeds?  And what is the trench of the altar but the
patience of good men, which, while it humbles the mind to endure
adversities, shews it to be placed low down after the manner of a
ditch?  Wherefore let a trench be made in the altar, lest the breeze
should scatter the sacrifice laid upon it:  that is, let the mind of the
elect keep patience, lest, stirred with the wind of impatience, it lose
even that which it has wrought well.  Well, too, this same trench is
directed to be of one cubit, because, if patience fails not, the measure
of unity is preserved.  Whence also Paul says, *Bear ye one another’s
burdens, and so ye shall fulfil the law Christ* ([Galat. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.5"></span>).  For the law of Christ is the charity of
unity, which they alone fulfil who are guilty of no excess even when
they are burdened.  Let the impatient hear what is written, *Better is
the patient than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that
taketh cities* ([Prov. xvi. 32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.6"></span>).  For victory over cities is a less
thing, because that which is subdued is without; but a far greater thing
is that which is conquered by patience, since the mind itself is by
itself overcome, and subjects itself to itself, when patience compels it
to bridle itself within.  Let the impatient hear what the Truth says to
His elect; *In your patience ye shall possess your souls* ([Luke xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.7"></span>).  For we are so wonderfully made that
reason possesses the soul, and the soul the body.  But the soul is
ousted from its right of possession of the body, if it is not first
possessed by reason.  Therefore the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.8"></span>Lord</span> pointed out patience as the
guardian of our state, in that He taught us to possess ourselves in it. 
Thus we learn how great is the sin of impatience, through which we lose
the very possession of what we are.  Let the impatient hear what is said
again through Solomon; *A fool uttereth all his mind, but a wise man
putteth it off, and reserves it until afterwards* ([Prov. xxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p4.9"></span>).  For one is so driven by the impulse of
impatience as to utter forth the whole mind, which the perturbation
within throws out the more quickly for this reason, that no discipline
of wisdom fences it round.  But the wise man puts it off, and reserves
it till afterwards.  For, when injured, he desires not to avenge himself
at the present time, because in his tolerance he even wishes that men
should be spared; but yet he is not ignorant that all things are
righteously avenged at the last judgment.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p5"></span>On the other hand the patient are to be
admonished that they grieve not inwardly for what they bear outwardly,
lest they spoil with the infection of malice within a sacrifice of so
great value which without they offer whole; <span id="page_31b">p.
31b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.x-Page_31b"></span>and lest the sin of
their grieving, not perceived by men, but yet seen as sin under the
divine scrutiny, be made so much the worse as it claims to itself the
fair shew of virtue before men.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6"></span>The patient therefore should be told to
study to love those whom they must needs bear with; lest, if love follow
not patience, the virtue exhibited be turned to a worse fault of
hatred.  Whence Paul, when he said, *Charity is patient*, forthwith
added, *Is kind* ([1 Cor. xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.1"></span>); shewing certainly that those whom in
patience she bears with in kindness also she ceases not to love.  Whence
the same excellent teacher, when he was persuading his disciples to
patience, saying, *Let all bitterness, and wrath, and indignation, and
clamour, and evil speaking be put away from you* ([Ephes. iv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.2"></span>), having as it were now set all outward
things in good order, turns himself to those that are within, when he
subjoins, *With all malice* ([Eph.
4.31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.3"></span>.); because, truly, in vain are
indignation, clamour, and evil speaking put away from the things that
are without, if in the things that are within malice, the mother of
vices, bears sway; and to no purpose is wickedness cut off from the
branches outside if it is kept at the root within to spring up in more
manifold ways.  Whence also the Truth in person says, *Love your
enemies, do good to them which hate you, and pray for them which
persecute you and say evil of you falsely* ([Luke vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.4"></span>).  It is virtue therefore before men to
bear with adversaries; but it is virtue before <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.5"></span>God</span> to love them; because the only
sacrifice which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.6"></span>God</span> accepts is that which, before
His eyes, on the altar of good work, the flame of charity kindles. 
Hence it is that to some who were patient, and yet did not love, He
says, *And why seest thou the mote in thy brother’s eye, and seest not
the beam in thine own eye?* ([Matt.
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003), [Luke
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#041)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.7"></span>).  For indeed the perturbation of
impatience is a mote; but malice in the heart is a beam in the eye.  For
that the breeze of temptation drives to and fro; but this confirmed
iniquity carries almost immoveably.  Rightly, however, it is there
subjoined, *Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own
eye, and then shall thou see to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s
eye* ([Matt. 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003), [Luke
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#041)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.x-p6.8"></span>.); as if it were said to the wicked mind,
inwardly grieving while shewing itself by patience outwardly as holy,
First shake off from thee the weight of malice, and then blame others
for the levity of impatience; lest, while thou takest no pains to
conquer pretence, it be worse for thee to bear with the faultiness of
others.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.x-p7"></span>For it usually comes to pass with the
patient that at the time, indeed, when they suffer hardships, or hear
insults, they are smitten with no vexation, and so exhibit patience as
to fail not to keep also innocence of heart; but, when after a while
they recall to memory these very same things that they have endured,
they inflame themselves with the fire of vexation, they seek reasons for
vengeance, and, in retracting, turn into malice the meekness which they
had in bearing.  Such are the sooner succoured by the preacher, if the
cause of this change be disclosed.  For the cunning adversary wages war
against two; that is, by inflaming one to be the first to offer insults,
and provoking the other to return insults under a sense of injury.  But
for the most part, while he is already conqueror of him who has been
persuaded to inflict the injury, he is conquered by him who bears the
infliction with an equal mind.  Wherefore, being victorious over the one
whom he has subjugated by incensing him, he lifts himself with all his
might against the other, and is grieved at his firmly resisting and
conquering; and so, because he has been unable to move him in the very
flinging of insults, he rests meanwhile from open contest, and provoking
his thought by secret suggestion, seeks a fit time for deceiving him. 
For, having lost in public warfare, he burns to lay hidden snares.  In a
time of quiet he returns to the mind of the conqueror, brings back to
his memory either temporal harms or darts of insults, and by exceedingly
exaggerating all that has been inflicted on him represents it as
intolerable:  and with so great vexation does he perturb the mind that
for the most part the patient one, led captive after victory, blushes
for having borne such things calmly, and is sorry that he did not return
insults, and seeks to pay back something worse, should opportunity be
afforded.  To whom, then, are these like but to those who by bravery are
victorious in the field, but by negligence are afterwards taken within
the gates of the city?  To whom are they like but to those whom a
violent attack of sickness removes not from life, but who die from a
relapse of fever coming gently on?  Therefore the patient are to be
admonished, that they guard their heart after victory; that they be on
the lookout for the enemy, overcome in open warfare, laying snares
against the walls of their mind; that they be the more afraid of a
sickness creeping on again; lest the cunning enemy, should he afterwards
deceive them, rejoice with the greater exultation in that he treads on
the necks of conquerors which had long been inflexible against him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the kindly-disposed and the envious are to be
admonished.](2120269)
