[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120350)  [Next](2120352) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p2"></span>To All the Bishops of Numidia.

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p3"></span>Gregory to all the Bishops of Numidia.

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p4"></span>If ever, most dear brethren in Christ,
a troublesome mixture of tares intrudes itself among green corn, it is
necessary for the hand of the husbandman to root it up entirely, lest
the future fruit of the fertile corn should be obstructed.  Wherefore
let us too, who, however unworthy, have undertaken the cultivation of
the field of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlix-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>, hasten to render the corn
pure from all offence of tares, that the field of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p4.2"></span>Lord</span> may fructify
with more abundant increase.  Now you requested through Hilarus our
chartulary <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) from our
predecessor of blessed memory that you might retain all the customs of
past time, which, from the beginnings of the ordinances of the blessed
Peter, Prince of the apostles, long antiquity has so far retained.  And
we, indeed, according to the tenour of your representation, allow your
custom (so long as it clearly makes no claim to the prejudice of the
catholic faith) to remain undisturbed, whether as to constituting
primates or as to other points; save that with respect to those who
attain to the episcopate from among the Donatists, we by all means
forbid them to be advanced to the dignity of primacy, even though their
standing should denote them for that position <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) .  But let it suffice them to take
care of the people committed to them, without aiming at the topmost
place of the primacy in preference to those prelates whom the Catholic
faith hath both taught and engendered in the bosom of the Church.  Do
you, therefore, most dear brethren, anticipate our admonitions in the
zeal of the charity of the Lord, knowing that the strict Judge will
bring into examination all we do, and will approve every one of us with
regard not to the prerogative of a higher rank, but to the merits of our
works.  I beseech you, therefore, love ye one another mutually, having
peace among yourselves in Christ, and with one purpose of heart oppose
ye heretics and enemies of the Church.  Be ye solicitous for the souls
of your neighbours:  persuade all ye can to faith by the preaching of
charity, holding before them also the terror of the future judgment;
inasmuch as ye are appointed to be shepherds, and the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> of the flocks
expects from the shepherds to whom He has committed them the fruit of a
multiplied flock.  And if He should foresee an augmentation of His own
flock through your bestowal of more diligent care upon it, He will
assuredly adorn you with manifold gifts of the heavenly kingdom. 
Furthermore, addressing to you the greeting of fraternal love, I pray
the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p6.2"></span>Lord</span>
that He would make you, whom He has chosen to be shepherds of souls,
worthy in His sight, and Himself so order our deeds here that He may
accept them as they deserve in the future life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[99b:1389](2120351.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iii.v.i.xlix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p5"></span> “Chartularius.  Qui chartas tractant,
qui chartis deserviunt.…Dignitas ecclesiastica etiam fuit.”  Du Cange. 
This Hilary is commended to Gennadius the Exarch of Africa, I. 75, and
again mentioned as Gregory’s Chartulary in Africa, II. 48; X. 37; XII.
28, 29.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[99b:1390](2120351.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iii.v.i.xlix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlix-p6"></span> See I. 74, note 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leo, Bishop in Corsica.](2120352)
