[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120193)  [Next](2120195) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p2.1"></span>On the Festival of the Nativity, VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p3"></span>I.  *The Incarnation an unceasing source
of joy.*

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p4"></span>Though all the divine utterances exhort
us, dearly beloved, to “rejoice in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> always <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) ,” yet to-day we are no doubt incited
to a full spiritual joy, when the mystery of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p5.2"></span>Lord’s</span> nativity is shining brightly
upon us <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) , so that we may have
recourse to that unutterable condescension of the Divine Mercy, whereby
the Creator of men deigned to become man, and be found ourselves in His
nature whom we worship in ours.  For <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p6.1"></span>God</span> the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p6.2"></span>God</span>, the only-begotten of the eternal
and not-begotten Father, remaining eternal “in the form of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p6.3"></span>God</span>,” and unchangeably
and without time <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) possessing the
property of being no way different to the Father He received “the form
of a slave” without loss of His own majesty, that He might advance us to
His state and not lower Himself to ours.  Hence both natures abiding in
possession of their own properties such unity is the result of the union
that whatever of Godhead is there is inseparable from the manhood:  and
whatever of manhood, is indivisible from the Godhead.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p8"></span>II.  *The Virgin’s conception explained.*

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p9"></span>In celebrating therefore the birthday of
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> and
Saviour, dearly beloved, let us <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="ii.v.xvi-Page_142"></span>entertain pure thoughts of the blessed
Virgin’s child-bearing, so as to believe that at no moment of time was
the power of the Word wanting to the flesh and soul which she conceived,
and that the temple of Christ’s body did not previously receive its form
and soul that its Inhabitant might come and take possession but through
Himself and in Himself was the beginning given to the New Man, so that
in the one Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p9.2"></span>God</span> and Man there might be Godhead
without a mother, and Manhood without a Father.  For her virginity
fecundated by the Holy Spirit at one and the same time brought forth
without trace of corruption both the offspring and the Maker of her
race.  Hence also the same <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p9.3"></span>Lord</span>, as the Evangelist relates, asked
of the Jews whose son they had learnt Christ to be on the authority of
the Scriptures, and when they replied that the tradition was He would
come of David’s seed, “How,” saith He, “doth David in the Spirit call
Him <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p9.4"></span>Lord</span>,
saying, the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p9.5"></span>Lord</span>
said to my <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p9.6"></span>Lord</span>:  sit thou on My right hand till I
place thy enemies as the footstool of thy feet <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) ?”  And the Jews could not solve the
question put, because they did not understand that in the one Christ
both the stock of David and the Divine nature were there prophesied.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p11"></span>III.  *In redeeming man, justice as well
as mercy had to be considered.*

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p12"></span>But the majesty of the Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p12.1"></span>God</span> in which He is
equal with the Father in its garb of a slave’s humility feared no
diminution, required no augmentation:  and the very effect of His mercy
which He expended on the restitution of man, He was able to bring about
solely by the power of His Godhead; so as to rescue the creature that
was made in the image of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p12.2"></span>God</span> from the yoke of his cruel
oppressor.  But because the devil had not shown himself so violent in
his attack on the first man as to bring him over to his side without the
consent of His free will, man’s voluntary sin and hostile desires had to
be destroyed in such wise that the standard of justice should not stand
in the way of the gift of Grace.  And therefore in the general ruin of
the entire human race there was but one remedy in the secret of the
Divine plan which could succour the fallen, and that was that one of the
sons of Adam should be born free and innocent of original transgression,
to prevail for the rest both by His example and His merits.  Still
further, because this was not permitted by natural generation, and
because there could be no offspring from our faulty stock without seed,
of which the Scripture saith, “Who can make a clean thing conceived of
an unclean seed? is it not Thou who art alone <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) ?” David’s <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p13.2"></span>Lord</span> was made David’s Son, and from
the fruit of the promised branch <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)
sprang One without fault, the twofold nature joining together into one
Person, that by one and the same conception and birth might spring our
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p14.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus
Christ, in Whom was present both true Godhead for the performance of
mighty works and true Manhood for the endurance of sufferings.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p15"></span>IV.  *All heresies proceed from failure
to believe the twofold nature of Christ.*

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p16"></span>The catholic Faith then, dearly beloved,
may scorn the errors of the heretics that bark against it, who, deceived
by the vanity of worldly wisdom, have forsaken the Gospel of Truth, and
being unable to understand the Incarnation of the Word, have constructed
for themselves out of the source of enlightenment occasion of
blindness.  For after investigating almost all false believers’
opinions, even those which presume to deny the Holy Spirit, we come to
the conclusion that hardly any one has gone astray, unless he has
refused to believe the reality of the two natures in Christ under the
confession of one Person.  For some have ascribed to the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p16.1"></span>Lord</span> only
manhood <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) , others only
Deity <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) .  Some have said that,
though there was in Him true Godhead, His flesh was unreal <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) .  Others have acknowledged that He
took true flesh but say that He had not the nature of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p19.1"></span>God</span> the Father; and
by assigning to His Godhead what belonged to His human substance, have
made for themselves a greater and a lesser <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p19.2"></span>God</span>, although there can be in true
Godhead no grades:  seeing that whatever is less than <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p19.3"></span>God</span>, is not <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p19.4"></span>God <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) </span>.  Others recognizing that
there is no difference between Father and Son, because they could not
understand unity of Godhead except in unity of Person, have maintained
that the Father is the same as the Son <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) :  so that to be born and nursed, to
suffer and die, to be buried and rise again, belonged to the same Father
who sustained throughout the Person of both <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> <span id="ii.v.xvi-Page_143"></span>Man and the Word. 
Certain have thought that our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p21.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ had a body not of
our substance but assumed from higher and subtler elements <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) :  whereas certain others have
considered that in the flesh of Christ there was no human soul, but that
the Godhead of the Word Itself fulfilled the part of soul <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) .  But their unwise assertion passes
into this form that, though they acknowledge the existence of a soul in
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p23.1"></span>Lord</span>, yet
they say it was devoid of mind, because the Godhead of Itself was
sufficient for all purposes of reason to the Man as well as to the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p23.2"></span>God</span> in Christ. 
Lastly the same people have dared to assert that a certain portion of
the Word was turned into Flesh, so that in the manifold varieties of
this one dogma, not only the nature of the flesh and of the soul but
also the essence of the Word Itself is dissolved.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p24"></span>V.  *Nestorianism and Eutychianism are
particularly to be avoided at the present time*.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p25"></span>There are many other astounding
falsehoods also which we must not weary your ears, beloved, with
enumerating.  But after all these various impieties, which are closely
connected by the relationship that exists between one form of blasphemy
and another, we call your devout attention to the avoiding of these two
errors in particular:  one of which, with Nestorius for its author, some
time ago attempted to gain ground, but ineffectually; the other, which
is equally damnable, has more recently sprung up with Eutyches as its
propounder.  The former dared to maintain that the blessed Virgin Mary
was the mother of Christ’s manhood only, so that in her conception and
childbearing no union might be believed to have taken place of the Word
and the Flesh:  because the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p25.1"></span>God</span> did not Himself become Son of Man,
but of His mere condescension linked Himself with created man.  This can
in no wise be tolerated by catholic ears, which are so imbued with the
gospel of Truth that they know of a surety there is no hope of salvation
for mankind unless He were Himself the Son of the Virgin who was His
mother’s Creator.  On the other hand this blasphemous propounder of more
recent profanity has confessed the union of the two Natures in Christ,
but has maintained that the effect of this very union is that of the two
one remained while the substance of the other no longer existed, which
of course could not have been brought to an end except by either
destruction or separation <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) .  But
this is so opposed to sound faith that it cannot be entertained without
loss of one’s Christian name.  For if the Incarnation of the Word is the
uniting of the Divine and human natures, but by the very fact of their
coming together that which was twofold became single, it was only the
Godhead that was born of the Virgin’s womb, and went through the
deceptive appearance of receiving nourishment and bodily growth:  and to
pass over all the changes of the human state, it was only the Godhead
that was crucified, dead, and buried:  so that according to those who
thus think, there is no reason to hope for the resurrection, and Christ
is not “the first-begotten from the dead <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) ;” because He was not One who ought to
have been raised again, if He had not been One who could be slain.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p28"></span>VI.  *The Deity and the Manhood were
present in Christ from the very first*.

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p29"></span>Keep far from your hearts, dearly
beloved, the poisonous lies of the devil’s inspirations, and knowing
that the eternal Godhead of the Son underwent no growth while with the
Father, be wise and consider that to the same nature to which it was
said in Adam, “Thou art earth, and unto earth shalt thou go <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) ,” it is said in Christ, “sit Thou on
My right hand <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) .”  According to
that Nature, whereby Christ is equal to the Father, the Only-begotten
was never inferior to the sublimity of the Father; nor was the glory
which He had with the Father a temporal possession; for He is on the
very right hand of the Father, of which it is said in Exodus, “Thy right
hand, O <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p31.2"></span>Lord</span>,
is glorified in power <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) ;” and in
Isaiah, “<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p32.2"></span>Lord</span>,
who hath believed our report? and the arm of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p32.3"></span>Lord</span>, to whom is it revealed <span
id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) ?”  The man, therefore, assumed into
the Son of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p33.2"></span>God</span>,
was in such wise received into the unity of Christ’s Person from His
very commencement in the body, that without the Godhead He was not
conceived, without the Godhead He was not brought forth, without the
Godhead He was not nursed.  It was the same Person in the wondrous acts,
and in the endurance of insults; through His human weakness crucified,
dead and buried:  through His Divine power, being <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> <span id="ii.v.xvi-Page_144"></span>raised the third day, He
ascended to the heavens, sat down at the right hand of the Father, and
in His nature as man received from the Father that which in His nature
as <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p33.3"></span>God</span> He
Himself also gave <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) .

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p35"></span>VII.  *The fulness of the Godhead is
imparted to the Body (the Church) through the Head, (Christ).*

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p36"></span>Meditate, dearly beloved on these things
with devout hearts, and be always mindful of the apostle’s injunction,
who admonishes all men, saying, “See lest any one deceive you through
philosophy and vain deceit according to the tradition of men, and not
according to Christ; for in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily, and ye have been filled in Him <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) .”  He said not “spiritually” but
“bodily,” that we may understand the substance of flesh to be real,
where there is the dwelling in the body of the fulness of the Godhead: 
wherewith, of course, the whole Church is also filled, which, clinging
to the Head, is the body of Christ; who liveth and reigneth with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xvi-p37.2"></span>God</span> for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_828"></span>[141:829](2120194.htm#fr_828) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p5"></span> [Phil. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[141:830](2120194.htm#fr_829) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p6"></span> *Nativitatis Dominicæ sacramento nobis
clarius coruscante*:  cf. XXVI. chap. 1, note 1.  I have no doubt that
*sacramentum* here is almost equivalent to “the festival with its sacred
observances” (cf. Bright’s n. 8), but I have preferred to translate it
as uniformly as possible by the same word “mystery.”  Cf. Sermon XXXI.
chap. 1.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[141:831](2120194.htm#fr_830) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p7"></span> In contradiction of the Arian’s position
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p7.1"></span>ἦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xvi-p7.2"></span>ν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>: 
cf. Lett. XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 2, *de æterno natus est coæternus:  non
posterior tempore.*

<span id="fn_831"></span>[142:832](2120194.htm#fr_831) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p9.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p10"></span> S. [Matt.
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p10.1"></span>,
quoted from [Psalm cx. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.xvi-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[142:833](2120194.htm#fr_832) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p13"></span> [Job xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[142:834](2120194.htm#fr_833) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p14"></span> *Germinis* preferred to the older
reading *generis* by the Ballerinii as agreeing better with [Isa.
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001), [Jer.
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[142:835](2120194.htm#fr_834) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p17"></span> These were called ‘Psilanthropists’
(upholders of the mere manhood):  of whom Cerinthus (the opponent of S.
John) was the earliest propounder.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[142:836](2120194.htm#fr_835) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p18"></span> These are heretics like Sabellius the
founder of the Patripassian impiety.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[142:837](2120194.htm#fr_836) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p19"></span> These are ‘Docetists,’ to whom Leo in
Sermon LXV., chap. 4, compares the Eutychians *isti phantasmatici
Christiani*.  Simon Magus was the earliest exponent of this view.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[142:838](2120194.htm#fr_837) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p19.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p20"></span> These are Arians who, as Bright (n. 29)
points out, in wishing to pacify the catholics by exalting the character
of Christ without acknowledging His equality with the Father, fell into
the error of setting up two Gods (an Uncreate and a Created).

<span id="fn_838"></span>[142:839](2120194.htm#fr_838) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p21"></span> This is the heresy alluded to in note 3
above.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[143:840](2120194.htm#fr_839) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p22"></span> *Ab elementis superioribus et
subtilioribus sumptum*, cf. Serm. XXX. chap. 2, *de sublimioris generis
prodiisse materia*.  This is the modification of “Docetism” adopted by
the Gnostic Valentinus (see Bright’s note 31).

<span id="fn_840"></span>[143:841](2120194.htm#fr_840) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p23"></span> This is the view of Apollinaris.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[143:842](2120194.htm#fr_841) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p26"></span> It is doubtful whether Eutyches did ever
actually say this, but it was the logical inference from his position: 
as Gore (p 57), says “Eutyches never formulated a heresy:  he was no
philosopher; but he refused to say that the human nature remained in
Christ after the Incarnation.  He shrank from calling Christ ‘of one
substance’ with us men:  in some sort of way he left us to suppose that
the human nature was absorbed into and lost in the Divinity.”

<span id="fn_842"></span>[143:843](2120194.htm#fr_842) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p27"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[143:844](2120194.htm#fr_843) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p30"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[143:845](2120194.htm#fr_844) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p31"></span> [Ps. cix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[143:846](2120194.htm#fr_845) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p32"></span> [Exod. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[143:847](2120194.htm#fr_846) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p33"></span> [Is. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[144:848](2120194.htm#fr_847) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p33.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p34"></span> Cf. Lett. XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 6.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[144:849](2120194.htm#fr_848) <span
id="ii.v.xvi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvi-p37"></span> [Col. ii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xvi-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXXI](2120195)
