[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120566)  [Next](2120568) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle X.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p2"></span>*To Sabinianus, Bishop of
Jadera* <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p4"></span>Gregory to Sabinianus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p5"></span>As to one who perseveres in a fault
punishment is rightly due, so pardon should be granted to those who
return to a better mind.  For, as in the former case anger against the
culprit is deservedly provoked, so in the latter good-will displayed is
wont to promote concord.  And so, inasmuch as a recollection of the
gravity of the priestly office has now withdrawn thy Fraternity from
fellowship and communion with Maximus, into which thoughtlessness had
before betrayed thee; and this to such an extent that thou couldest by
no means allow thyself to be content with mere separation from him
without also bewailing thy past transgression by betaking thyself to the
retirement of a monastery, therefore doubt not that thou art received
again into our favour and communion:  for, as much as thy fault had
before offended us, so much has thy penitence appeased us.  We exhort
thee, therefore, most beloved brother, that thou be instant in bestowing
pastoral solicitude on the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.vi-p5.1"></span>Lord’s</span> flock, and be diligently on
the watch to make profit of the sheep committed to thy charge; that so
the retribution of a copious reward may abound to thee in proportion as
thou shalt offer multiplied fruits of thy labour at the coming of the
eternal Judge.  Strive then to rescue those who have fallen into sin;
strive to shew the way of retracing their steps to those that go astray;
strive to recall salubriously to the grace of communion those who have
been deprived of communion.  Let the coming back of your Charity lay on
you the duty of rescuing others, and be an example of salvation; to the
end that, while your anxious care shall direct the wandering steps of
sheep to the folds of the chief shepherd, both they themselves may not
be left exposed to the teeth of wolves, and (what is above all things to
be desired) that the compensation of condign retribution may await thee
in the life eternal.

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p6"></span>As to the cause about which you wrote
to us, requesting us to guard against any clandestine proceedings
against you in the royal city, let not this matter disturb your mind. 
For we have with all possible care given orders to our *responsalis* to
shew himself solicitous and on his guard.  And we trust in the power of
our <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p6.1"></span>God</span>
that things are being so conducted that the opposition of no one shall
avail against reason, so as in any way to trouble you or to bear hard
upon you.

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p7"></span>Furthermore, the inhabitants of the
city of Epidaurus have most urgently requested us to restore to them
Florentius, whom they allege to be their bishop, asserting that he was
driven into exile invalidly by the mere will of the bishop Natalis <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) .  And so, if your Fraternity has
any knowledge of his case, please to inform us accurately by letter. 
But, if so far you have no knowledge of it, make enquiry, and report to
us, that we may be able, with the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.vi-p8.1"></span>Lord’s</span> help, to deliberate with
full knowledge before us as to what should be determined concerning
him.  In the month of February, first Indiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[234b:1734](2120567.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iii.v.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p3"></span> See VII. 17, and note on VI. 27.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[234b:1735](2120567.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iii.v.viii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.vi-p8"></span> See III. 8, and III. 9, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XIII](2120568)
