[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120084)  [Next](2120086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p2.1"></span>(To Anatolius, Bishop of
Constantinople.)</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Anatolius, the
bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p4"></span>I.  *He rejoices at Anatolius having
proved himself orthodox.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p5"></span>We rejoice in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> and glory in the gift of His
Grace, Who has shown you a follower of Gospel-teaching as we have found
from your letter, beloved, and our brothers’ account whom we sent to
Constantinople:  for now through the approved faith of the priest, we
are justifying in presuming that the whole church committed to him will
have no wrinkle nor spot of error, as says the Apostle, “for I have
espoused you to one husband to present you a pure virgin to Christ <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) .”  For that virgin is the Church, the
spouse of one husband Christ, who suffers herself to be corrupted by no
error, so that through the whole world we have one entire and pure
communion in which we now welcome you as a fellow, beloved, and give our
approval to the order of proceedings which we have received, ratified,
as was proper, with the necessary signatures.  In order, therefore, that
your spirit in turn, beloved, might be strengthened by words of ours, we
sent back after the Easter festival with our letters, our sons,
Casterius, the Presbyter, and Patricius and Asclepias, the Deacons, who
brought your writings to us, informing you, as we said above, that we
rejoice at the peace of the church of Constantinople, on which we have
ever spent such care that we wish it to be polluted by no heretical
deceit.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p7"></span>II.  *The penitents among the
backsliding bishops are to be received back into full communion upon
some plan to be settled by Anatolius and Leo’s delegates.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p8"></span>But concerning the brethren whom we
learn from your letters, and from our delegates’ account, to be desirous
of communion with us, on the ground of their sorrow that they did <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="ii.iv.lxxv-Page_66"></span>not
remain constant against violence and intimidation, but gave their assent
to another’s crime when terror had so bewildered them, that with hasty
acquiescence they ministered to the condemnation of the catholic and
guiltless bishop (Flavian), and to the acceptance of the detestable
heresy (of Eutyches), we approve of that which was determined upon in
the presence and with the co-operation of our delegates, viz., that they
should be content meanwhile with the communion of their own churches,
but we wish our delegates whom we have sent to consult with you, and
come to some arrangement whereby those who condemn their ill-doings with
full assurances of penitence, and choose rather to accuse than to defend
themselves, may be gladdened by being at peace and in communion with us;
on condition that what has been received against the catholic Faith is
first condemned with complete anathema.  For otherwise in the Church of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p8.1"></span>God</span>, which is
Christ’s Body, there are neither valid priesthoods nor true sacrifices,
unless in the reality of our nature the true High Priest makes atonement
for us, and the true Blood of the spotless Lamb makes us clean.  For
although He be set on the Father’s right hand, yet in the same flesh
which He took from the Virgin, he carries on the mystery of
propitiation, as says the Apostle, “Christ Jesus Who died, yea, Who also
rose, Who is on the right hand of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p8.2"></span>God</span>, Who also maketh intercession for
us <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) .”  For our kindness cannot
be blamed in any case where we receive those who give assurance of
penitence, and at whose deception we were grieved.  The boon of
communion with us, therefore, must neither harshly be withheld nor
rashly granted, because as it is fully consistent with our religion to
treat the oppressed with a Christlike charity, so it is fair to lay the
full blame upon the authors of the disturbance.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p10"></span>III.  *The Names of Dioscorus, Juvenal,
and Eustathius are not to be read aloud at the holy altar.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p11"></span>Concerning the reading out of the names
of Dioscorus, Juvenal, and Eustathius <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) at the holy altar, it beseems you,
beloved, to observe that which our friends who were there present said
ought to be done, and which is consistent with the honourable memory of
S. Flavian, and will not turn the minds of the laity away from you.  For
it is very wrong and unbecoming that those who have harassed innocent
catholics with their attacks, should be mingled indiscriminately with
the names of the saints, seeing that by not forsaking their condemned
heresy, they condemn themselves by their perversity:  such men should
either be chastised for their unfaithfulness; or strive hard after
forgiveness.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p13"></span>IV.  *One or two instructions about
individuals.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p14"></span>But our brother and fellow-bishop,
Julian, and the clergy who adhered to Flavian of holy memory, rendering
him faithful service, we wish to adhere to you also beloved, that they
may know him who we are sure lives by the merits of his faith with our
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p14.1"></span>God</span> to be
present with them in you.  We wish you to know this too, beloved, that
our brother and fellow-bishop Eusebius <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) , who for the Faith’s sake endured
many dangers and toils, is at present staying with us and continuing in
our communion; whose church we would that your care should protect, that
nothing may be destroyed in his absence, and no one may venture to
injure him in anything until he come to you bearing a letter from us. 
And that our or rather all Christian people’s affection for you may be
stirred up in greater measure, we wish this that we have written to you,
beloved, to come to all men’s knowledge, that they who serve our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p15.1"></span>God</span> may give thanks
for the consummation of the peace of the Apostolic See with you.  But on
other matters and persons you will be more fully instructed, beloved, by
the letter you will have received through our delegates.  Dated 13
April, in the consulship of the illustrious Adelfius (451).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_410"></span>[65:411](2120085.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p6"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[66:412](2120085.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p9"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[66:413](2120085.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p12"></span> Juvenal (Bishop of Jerusalem), and
Eustathius (Bishop of Berytus), had been two of the principal abettors
of Dioscorus in the *Latrocinium*.  The “reading out of their names at
the altar” alludes to the practice in the early Church of keeping
registers (called “diptychs”) of the members (alive and dead) of the
Church, from which one or two of the more prominent names (clerical and
lay) were read out at the celebration of the Holy mysteries:  cf. the
modern “Bidding” prayer, &c.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[66:414](2120085.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxv-p15"></span> This is the Bishop of Dorylæum in
Phrygia, Eutyches former friend, but more recently his relentless
accuser of heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Bishop Julian.](2120086)
