[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120552)  [Next](2120554) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p2"></span>To Mauricius Augustus.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p3"></span>Gregory to Mauricius Augustus.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p4"></span>The provident piety of my lords, lest
perchance any scandal might be engendered in the unity of Holy Church by
the dissension of priests, has once and again deigned to admonish me to
receive kindly the representatives of my brother and fellow-priest
Cyriacus, and to give them liberty to return soon.  And although, most
pious lord, all your injunctions are suitable and provident, yet I find
that by such an admonition I am reproved as being in your judgment
indiscreet.  But, even though my mind has been wounded in no slight
degree by a proud and profane title, could I possibly be guilty of so
great indiscretion as not to know what I owed to the unity of the faith
and to ecclesiastical concord, and to refuse to receive the
representatives and the synodical letter of my brother on account of
bitterness from whatever cause intervening?  Far be this from me.  Such
wisdom had been unwisdom.  For what is due from us for conserving unity
of faith is one thing; what is due for restraining elation is another. 
Times therefore were to be distinguished, lest the newness of my
aforesaid brother might in any point be disturbed <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) .  Whence also I received his
representatives with great affection.  Whatever charity I owed to them I
displayed, and honoured them more than it had been the ancient custom to
do, and caused them to celebrate the sacred solemnities of mass with me;
since, even as my deacon ought not to serve, for exhibition of the
sacred mysteries, him who has either committed the sin of elation or
corrects it not himself when committed by others, so it was right that
his ministers should attend, in the celebration of mass, on me, who,
under <span id="page_226b">p. 226b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-Page_226b"></span>the keeping of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p5.1"></span>God</span>, have not
fallen into the error of pride.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6"></span>I have however taken care to admonish
earnestly the same my brother and fellow-bishop that, if he desires to
have peace and concord with all, he must refrain from the appellation of
a foolish title.  As to this, the piety of my lords has charged me in
their orders, saying that offence ought not to be engendered among us
for the appellation of a frivolous name.  But I beseech your imperial
Piety to consider that some frivolous things are very harmless, and
others exceedingly harmful.  Is it not the case that, when Antichrist
comes and calls himself <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.1"></span>God</span>, it will be very frivolous,
and yet exceedingly pernicious?  If we regard the quantity of the
language used, there are but a few syllables; but if the weight of the
wrong, there is universal disaster.  Now I confidently say that
whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called, Universal Priest, is
in his elation the precursor of Antichrist, because he proudly puts
himself above all others.  Nor is it by dissimilar pride that he is led
into error; for, as that perverse one wishes to appear as above all men,
so whosoever this one is who covets being called sole priest, he extols
himself above all other priests.  But, since the Truth says, *Every one
that exalteth himself shall be humbled* ([Luke
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011), [Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.2"></span>), I know that every kind of elation is
the sooner burst as it is the more inflated.  Let then your Piety charge
those who have fallen into an example of pride not to generate any
offence by the appellation of a frivolous name.  For I, a sinner, who by
the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.3"></span>God</span> retain humility, need not to
be admonished to humility.  Now may Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.4"></span>God</span> long guard the life of our
most serene <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.5"></span>Lord</span> for the peace of holy Church
and the advantage of the Roman republic.  For we are sure, that if you
live who fear the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p6.6"></span>Lord</span> of heaven, you will allow no
proud doings to prevail against the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[225b:1716](2120553.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxi-p5"></span> So literally;—“Ne prædicti fratri
mei ex quolibet articulo novitas turbaretur.”  The meaning seems to be,
Lest Cyriacus should be troubled immediately on his accession.  He was
to be remonstrated with in due time; but rejection at once of his
synodical letter and of his emissaries would have been premature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulogius, Bishop.](2120554)
