[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120461)  [Next](2120463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of
Constantinople <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) .

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p5"></span>At the time when your Fraternity was
advanced to Sacerdotal dignity, you remember what peace and concord of
the churches you found.  But, with what daring or with what swelling of
pride I know not, you have attempted to seize upon a new name, whereby
the hearts of all your brethren might have come to take offence.  I
wonder exceedingly at this, since I remember how thou wouldest fain have
fled from the episcopal office rather than attain it.  And yet, now that
thou hast got it, thou desirest so to exercise it as if thou hadst run
to it with ambitious intent.  For, having confessed thyself unworthy to
be called a bishop, thou hast at length been brought to such a pass as,
despising thy brethren, to covet to be named the only bishop.  And
indeed with regard to this matter, weighty letters were addressed to
your Holiness by my predecessor Pelagius of holy memory; in which he
annulled the acts of the synod, which had been assembled among you in
the case of our once brother and fellow-bishop Gregory, because of that
execrable title of pride, and forbade the archdeacon whom he had sent
according to custom to the threshold of our lord, to celebrate the
solemnities of mass with you.  But after his death, when I, unworthy,
succeeded to the government of the Church, both through my other
representatives and also through our common son the deacon Sabinianus, I
have taken care to address your Fraternity, not indeed in writing, but
by word of mouth, desiring you to restrain yourself from such
presumption.  And, in case of your refusing to amend, I forbade his
celebrating the solemnities of mass with you; that so I might first
appeal to your Holiness through a certain sense of shame, to the end
that, if the execrable and profane assumption could not be corrected
through shame, strict canonical measures might be then resorted to. 
And, since sores that are to be cut away should first be stroked with a
gentle hand, I beg you, I beseech you, and with all the sweetness in my
power demand of you, that your Fraternity gainsay all who flatter you
and offer you this name of error, nor foolishly consent to be called by
the proud title.  For truly I say it weeping, and out of inmost sorrow
of heart attribute it to my sins, that this my brother, who has been
constituted in the grade of episcopacy for the very end of bringing back
the souls of others to humility, has up to the present time been
incapable of being brought back to humility; that he who teaches truth
to others has not consented to teach himself, even when I implore him.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p6"></span>Consider, I pray thee, that in this
rash presumption the peace of the whole Church is disturbed, and that it
is in contradiction to the grace that is poured out on all in common; in
which grace doubtless thou thyself wilt have power to grow so far as
thou determinest with thyself to do so.  And thou wilt become by so much
the greater as thou restrainest thyself from the usurpation of a proud
and foolish title:  and thou wilt make advance in proportion as thou art
not bent on arrogation by derogation of thy brethren.  Wherefore,
dearest brother, with all thy heart love humility, through which the
concord of all the brethren and the unity of the holy universal Church
may be preserved.  Certainly the apostle Paul, when he heard some say,
*I am of Paul, I of Apollos, but I of Christ* ([1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p6.1"></span>), regarded with the utmost horror such
dilaceration of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p6.2"></span>Lord’s</span> body, whereby they were
joining themselves, as it were, to other heads, and exclaimed, saying,
*Was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul*
([1 Cor. 1.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p6.3"></span>.)?  If then he shunned the subjecting of
the members of Christ partially to certain heads, as if beside Christ,
though this were to the apostles themselves, what wilt thou say to
Christ, who is the Head of the universal Church, in the scrutiny of the
last judgment, having attempted to put all his members under thyself by
the appellation of Universal?  Who, I ask, is proposed for imitation in
this wrongful title but he who, despising the legions of angels
constituted socially with himself, attempted to start up to an eminence
of singularity, that he might seem to be under none and to be alone
above all?  Who even said, *I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my
throne above the stars of heaven:  I will sit upon the mount of the
testament, in the sides of the North:  I will ascend above the heights
of the clouds; I will be like the most High* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p6.4"></span>).

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p7"></span>For what are all thy brethren, the
bishops of the universal Church, but stars of heaven, whose life and
discourse shine together amid the sins and errors of men, as if amid the
shades of night?  And when thou desirest to put thyself above them by
this proud title, and to tread down their name in comparison with thine,
what else dost thou say but *I will* <span id="page_167b">p. 167b</span>
<span id="iii.v.v.viii-Page_167b"></span>*ascend into heaven; I will
exalt my throne above the stars of heaven?*  Are not all the bishops
together clouds, who both rain in the words of preaching, and glitter in
the light of good works?  And when your Fraternity despises them, and
you would fain press them down under yourself, what else say you but
what is said by the ancient foe, *I will ascend above the heights of the
clouds?*  All these things when I behold with tears, and tremble at the
hidden judgments of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, my fears are increased, and my
heart cannot contain its groans, for that this most holy man the lord
John, of so great abstinence and humility, has, through the seduction of
familiar tongues, broken out into such a pitch of pride as to attempt,
in his coveting of that wrongful name, to be like him who, while proudly
wishing to be like <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p7.2"></span>God</span>, lost even the grace of the
likeness granted him, and because he sought false glory, thereby
forfeited true blessedness.  Certainly Peter, the first of the apostles,
himself a member of the holy and universal Church, Paul, Andrew,
John,—what were they but heads of particular communities?  And yet all
were members under one Head.  And (to bind all together in a short girth
of speech) the saints before the law, the saints under the law, the
saints under grace, all these making up the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p7.3"></span>Lord’s</span> Body, were constituted as
members of the Church, and not one of them has wished himself to be
called universal.  Now let your Holiness acknowledge to what extent you
swell within yourself in desiring to be called by that name by which no
one presumed to be called who was truly holy.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p8"></span>Was it not the case, as your
Fraternity knows, that the prelates of this Apostolic See which by the
providence of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p8.1"></span>God</span> I serve, had the honour offered
them of being called universal by the venerable Council of
Chalcedon <span id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) .  But yet not one
of them has ever wished to be called by such a title, or seized upon
this ill-advised name, lest if, in virtue of the rank of the
pontificate, he took to himself the glory of singularity, he might seem
to have denied it to all his brethren.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p10"></span>But I know that all arises from those
who serve your Holiness on terms of deceitful familiarity; against whom
I beseech your Fraternity to be prudently on your guard, and not to lay
yourself open to be deceived by their words.  For they are to be
accounted the greater enemies the more they flatter you with praises. 
Forsake such; and, if they must needs deceive, let them at any rate
deceive the hearts of worldly men, and not of priests.  *Let the dead
bury their dead* ([Luke ix. 60](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#060)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p10.1"></span>).  But say ye with the prophet, *Let
them be turned back and put to shame that say unto me, Aha, Aha* ([Ps.
lxix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p10.2"></span>).  And again, *But let not the oil of
the sinner lard my head* ([Ps. cxl.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p10.3"></span>).

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p11"></span>Whence also the wise man admonishes
well, *Be in peace with many:  but have but one counsellor of a
thousand* ([Ecclesiasticus 6.6](../../../bib/apo/sir006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p11.1"></span>).  For *Evil communications corrupt good
manners* ([1 Cor. xv. 33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p11.2"></span>).  For the ancient foe, when unable to
break into strong hearts, looks out for weak persons who are associated
with them, and, as it were, scales lofty walls by ladders set against
them.  So he deceived Adam through the woman who was associated with
him.  So, when he slew the sons of the blessed Job, he left the weak
woman, that, being unable of himself to penetrate his heart, he might at
any rate be able to do so through the woman’s words.  Whatever weak and
secular persons, then, are near you, let them be shattered in their own
persuasive words and flattery, since they procure to themselves the
eternal enmity of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p11.3"></span>God</span> from their very frowardness in
being seeming lovers.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p12"></span>Of a truth it was proclaimed of old
through the Apostle John, *Little children, it is the last hour* ([1
John ii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.1"></span>), according as the Truth foretold.  And
now pestilence and sword rage through the world, nations rise against
nations, the globe of the earth is shaken, the gaping earth with its
inhabitants is dissolved.  For all that was foretold is come to pass. 
The king of pride is near, and (awful to be said!) there is an army of
priests in course of preparation for him, inasmuch as they who had been
appointed to be leaders in humility enlist themselves under the neck of
pride.  But in this matter, even though our tongue protested not at all,
the power of Him who in His own person peculiarly opposes the vice of
pride is lifted up for vengeance against elation.  For hence it is
written, *<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.2"></span>God</span> resisteth the proud, but
giveth grace unto the humble* ([Jam. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.3"></span>).  Hence, again, it is said, *Whoso
exalteth his heart is unclean before <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.4"></span>God</span>* ([Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.5"></span>).  Hence, against the man that is proud
it is written, *Why is earth and ashes proud* ([Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.6"></span>)?  Hence the Truth in person says,
*Whosoever* <span id="page_168b">p. 168b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.viii-Page_168b"></span>*exalteth himself shall be abased*
([Luke xiv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.7"></span>).  And, that he might bring us back to
the way of life through humility, He deigned to exhibit in Himself what
He teaches us, saying, *Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart*
([Matth. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.8"></span>).  For to this end the only begotten Son
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.9"></span>God</span> took
upon Himself the form of our weakness; to this end the Invisible
appeared not only as visible but even as despised; to this end He
endured the mocks of contumely, the reproaches of derision, the torments
of suffering; that <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.10"></span>God</span> in His humility might teach
man not to be proud.  How great, then, is the virtue of humility for the
sake of teaching which alone He who is great beyond compare became
little even unto the suffering of death!  For, since the pride of the
devil was the origin of our perdition, the humility of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p12.11"></span>God</span> has been
found the means of our redemption.  That is to say, our enemy, having
been created among all things, desired to appear exalted above all
things; but our Redeemer remaining great above all things, deigned to
become little among all things.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p13"></span>What, then, can we bishops say for
ourselves, who have received a place of honour from the humility of our
Redeemer, and yet imitate the pride of the enemy himself?  Lo, we know
our Creator to have descended from the summit of His loftiness that He
might give glory to the human race, and we, created of the lowest, glory
in the lessening of our brethren.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p13.1"></span>God</span> humbled Himself even to our
dust; and human dust sets his face as high as heaven, and with his
tongue passes above the earth, and blushes not, neither is afraid to be
lifted up:  even man who is rottenness, and the son of man that is a
worm.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p14"></span>Let us recall to mind, most dear
brother, this which is said by the most wise Solomon.  *Before thunder
shall go lightning, and before ruin shall the heart be exalted*
([Ecclesiasticus 32.10](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.1"></span>); where, on the other hand it is
subjoined, *Before glory it shall be humbled.*  Let us then be humbled
in mind, if we are striving to attain to real loftiness.  By no means
let the eyes of our heart be darkened by the smoke of elation, which the
more it rises the more rapidly vanishes away.  Let us consider how we
are admonished by the precepts of our Redeemer, who says, *Blessed are
the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven* ([Matth. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.2"></span>).  Hence, also, he says by the prophet,
*On whom shall my Spirit rest, but on him that is humble, and quiet, and
that trembleth at my words* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.3"></span>)?  Of a truth, when the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.4"></span>Lord</span> would bring
back the hearts of His disciples, still beset with infirmity, to the way
of humility, He said, *Whosoever will be chief among you shall be least
of all* ([Matth. xx. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.5"></span>).  Whereby it is plainly seen how he is
truly exalted on high who in his thoughts is humbled.  Let us,
therefore, fear to be numbered among those who seek the first seats in
the synagogues, and greetings in the market, and to be called of men
Rabbi.  For, contrariwise, the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.6"></span>Lord</span> says to His disciples, *But
be not ye called Rabbi:  for one is your master; and all ye are
brethren.  And call no man your Father upon the earth, for one is your
Father* ([Matt. 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p14.7"></span>).

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p15"></span>What then, dearest brother, wilt thou
say in that terrible scrutiny of the coming judgment, if thou covetest
to be called in the world not only father, but even general father? 
Let, then, the bad suggestion of evil men be guarded against; let all
instigation to offence be fled from.  *It must needs be (indeed) that
offences come; nevertheless, woe to that man by whom the offence cometh*
([Matth. xviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.1"></span>).  Lo, by reason of this execrable title
of pride the Church is rent asunder, the hearts of all the brethren are
provoked to offence.  What!  Has it escaped your memory how the Truth
says, *Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me,
it were better for him that a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the sea* ([Matt.
17.6](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.2"></span>)?  But it is written, *Charity seeketh
not her own* ([1 Cor. xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.3"></span>).  Lo, your Fraternity arrogates to
itself even what is not its own.  Again it is written, *In honour
preferring one another* ([Rom. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.4"></span>).  And thou attemptest to take the
honour away from all which thou desirest unlawfully to usurp to thyself
singularly.  Where, dearest brother, is that which is written, *Have
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.5"></span>Lord</span>*
([Heb. xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.6"></span>)?  Where is that which is written,
*Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.7"></span>God</span>*
([Matth. v. 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p15.8"></span>)?

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p16"></span>It becomes you to consider, lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled.  But still, though we neglect to consider, supernal judgment
will be on the watch against the swelling of so great elation.  And we
indeed, against whom such and so great a fault is committed by this
nefarious attempt,—we, I say, are observing what the Truth enjoins when
it says, *If thy brother shall sin against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone.  If he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother.  But if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of one or two witnesses every word may be
established.  But if he will not hear them, tell it unto the Church. 
But if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen*
<span id="page_169b">p. 169b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.viii-Page_169b"></span>*man and a publican* ([Matth. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p16.1"></span>).  I therefore have once and again
through my representatives taken care to reprove in humble words this
sin against the whole Church; and now I write myself.  Whatever it was
my duty to do in the way of humility I have not omitted.  But, if I am
despised in my reproof, it remains that I must have recourse to the
Church.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p17"></span>Wherefore may Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p17.1"></span>God</span> show your
Fraternity how great love for you constrains me when I thus speak, and
how much I grieve in this case, not against you, but for you.  But the
case is such that in it I must prefer the precepts of the Gospel, the
ordinances of the Canons, and the welfare of the brethren to the person
even of him whom I greatly love.

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p18"></span>I have received the most sweet and
pleasant letter of your Holiness with respect to the case of the
presbyters John and Athanasius <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) , about which, the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p19.1"></span>Lord</span> helping me,
I will reply to you in another letter; for, being surrounded by the
swords of barbarians, I am now oppressed by such great tribulations that
it is not allowed me, I will not say to treat of many things, but hardly
even to breathe.  Given in the Kalends of January; Indiction 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[166b:1586](2120462.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p4"></span> On the same occasion of this letter
and subsequent correspondence on the same subject, see Prolegomena, pp.
xiv., xxii.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[167b:1587](2120462.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p9"></span> As to this assertion (repeated in V.
20, 43, and in VIII. 30), Giesler says, “Gregory was mistaken in
believing that at the Council of Chalcedon the name *Universalis
Episcopus* was given to the bishop of Rome.  He is styled <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v.v.viii-p9.1"></span>οἰκουμενικὸς
ἀρχιεπίσκοπος</span> (Mansi VI. 1006, 1012), as other patriarchs also. 
But in another place the title was surreptitiously introduced into the
Latin acts by the Romish legates.  In the sentence passed on Dioscurus,
actio iii (Mansi VI. 1048), the Council say, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p9.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p9.3"></span>ἁγιώτατος καὶ μακαριώτατος ἀρχιεπίσκοπος
τῆς μεγάλης καὶ πρεσβυτέρας ῾Ρώμης Λέων</span>:  on the contrary, in the
Latin acts which Leo sent to the Gallic bishops (Leonis, Ep. 103<span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p9.4"></span>, al. 82), we read; ‘Sanctus ac
beatissimus Papa, caput universalis Ecclesiæ, Leo.’  In the older
editions the beginning of Leo’s Epist. 97 (ap. Quesn. 134, Baller. 165),
runs thus:  ‘Leo Romæ et universalis catholicæque Ecclesiæ Episcopus
Leoni semper Augusto salutem.’  Quesnel and the Ballerini, however,
found in all the Codices only, ‘Leo Episcopus Leoni Augusto.’” 
(Giesler’s Eccl. Hist., 2nd Period, 1st Division, ch. iii. § 94, note
72).

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[169b:1588](2120462.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="iii.v.v.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.viii-p19"></span> Cf. III. 53, and *reff*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Sabinianus, Deacon.](2120463)
