[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120536)  [Next](2120538) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle VII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p2"></span>To Peter, Domitian, and Elpidius.

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p3"></span>Gregory to Peter, Domitian, and
Elpidius, Bishops <span id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p5"></span>I rejoice exceedingly that you welcomed
with great joy the ordination of the most holy Cyriacus, my brother and
fellow-priest.  And since we have learnt from the preaching of Paul the
apostle that *If one member rejoice, all the members rejoice with it*
([1 Cor. xii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p5.1"></span>), you must needs consider with how great
exultation I rejoice with you in this thing, wherein not one member, but
many members of Christ have rejoiced.  Nevertheless, so far as I have
been able to consider your Fraternity’s letters on a cursory perusal,
great joy has carried you away into immoderate praise of this my
brother.  For you say that he has appeared in the Church like the sun,
so that you all cried out, *This is the day which the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.v-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> hath made; let
us rejoice and be glad in it* ([Psa.
118.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p5.3"></span>) <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688) .  Yet surely this is a promise of
the life to come, seeing that it is said, *The righteous shall shine
forth as the sun* ([Matt. 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043), [Wis.
3:7](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#007)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.1"></span>).  For, in whatsoever virtue any one may
excel, how can he shine forth as the sun while still in the present
life, wherein *The corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the
earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things*
([Wisd. ix. 15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.2"></span>); wherein *We see another law in our
members warring against the law of our mind, and bringing us into
captivity by the law of sin which is in our members* ([Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.3"></span>); wherein *Even in ourselves we have the
answer of death, that we should not trust in ourselves* ([2 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.4"></span>);
wherein also the Prophet cries aloud, *Fear and trembling are come upon
me, and darkness hath covered me* ([Psa.
55.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.5"></span>) <span
id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) ?  For it is written also, A wise
man abideth as the sun; a fool changeth as the moon ([Ecclesiasticus
27.12](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#012)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p7.1"></span>); where the comparison of the sun is not
applied to the splendour of his brightness, but to perseverance in
well-doing.  But the good beginning of his ordination could not as yet
be praised by you with regard to perseverance.  And as to your saying
that you cried out, *This is the day which the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p7.2"></span>Lord</span> hath made*, you ought to have
considered of whom this is said.  For what comes before is this; *The
stone which the builders refused, the same is made the head-stone of the
corner.  This is the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p7.3"></span>Lord’s</span> doing, and it is marvellous
in our eyes* ([Psa. 118.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p7.4"></span>) <span
id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) .  And with regard to this same
stone it is forthwith added, *This is the day which the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.v-p8.1"></span>Lord</span> hath made*. 
For He who for strength of building is said to be a stone, for the grace
of illumination is called the Day, being also made, because He became
incarnate.  In Him we are enjoined to rejoice and be glad, because He
has overcome in us the darkness of our error by the light of His
excellence.  In praise of a creature, then, that expression ought not to
have been used which is suitable to the Creator alone.

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p9"></span>But why should I find fault with these
things, knowing as I do how joy carries away the mind?  For your charity
engendered in you great gladness, which gladness of heart the tongue
applauding followed.  This being so, the praise which charity found to
hand cannot now be called a fault.  But to me concerning my most holy
brother there should have been briefly said what I might accept with
satisfaction, seeing that I knew him to be one who has long given to me
especially this proof of his greatness; that, having been occupied in so
many affairs of ecclesiastical administration, he has kept a tranquil
heart in the midst of turbulent throngs, and always restrained himself
with a gentle bearing.  And this indeed is no small commendation of a
great and unshaken mind, not to have been perturbed among the
perturbations of business.

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p10"></span> <span id="page_215b">p. 215b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vii.v-Page_215b"></span>Furthermore, your Fraternity
should be instant in continual prayers, that Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.v-p10.1"></span>God</span> may guard in
our aforesaid brother and fellow-priest what has been well begun, and
ever lead him on to what is better still.  This should ever be the
prayer of you, most holy ones, and of the people subject to him.  For
the deserts of rulers and peoples are so connected with each other that
often the lives of subjects are made worse from the fault of those who
are over them, and often the lives of pastors fall off from the ill
desert of peoples.  For that the evil doings of one who is over others
does very great harm to those who are under him the Pharisees are
evidence, of whom it is written, *Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven
against men.  For ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in* ([Matth. xxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p10.2"></span>).  And that the fault of peoples does
much harm to the life of pastors we perceive in what David did ([2 Kings
ii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024)<span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p10.3"></span>).  For he, praised by the testimony of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.v-p10.4"></span>God</span>, he,
conscious of heavenly mysteries, being inflated by the tumour of hidden
elation, sinned in numbering the people; and yet the punishment fell
upon the people for David’s sin.  Why was this?  Because in truth
according to the desert of subject peoples are the hearts of rulers
disposed.  Now the righteous Judge rebuked the fault of the sinner by
visitation on those on account of whom he sinned.  But, because he
himself, waxing proud of his own will, was not free from fault, he
himself also received punishment of his fault.  For the fierce wrath,
which smote the people bodily, prostrated also the ruler of the people
with inmost sorrow of heart.  Consider therefore these things mutually;
and, even as he who is put over you and over the people should intercede
for all, so should all of you pray for his conversation and manners,
that before Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p10.5"></span>God</span> both you may profit by
imitation of him, and he may be aided by your deserts.  Further, let us
all with one accord pray continually with great weeping to the utmost of
our powers for our most serene lords and their pious offspring, that
protecting heavenly grace may guard their lives, and subdue the necks of
the nations to the Christian empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[214b:1688](2120537.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p4"></span> Who these bishops were, who had
assisted at the ordination of Cyriacus and sent a report of it to
Gregory, does not appear.  In the objection taken by the latter to the
language of laudation with which the new patriarch had been hailed at
Constantinople we may perhaps detect something of his habitual jealousy
of the assumptions of the Constantinopolitan See.  Of Cyriacus himself
he appears to have had a high opinion and to have welcomed his
accession, hoping at first that he would renounce the offensive title of
œcumenical bishop which had been assumed by John Jejunatur.  In this,
however, he was disappointed, and afterwards inveighed against the new
patriarch for proud presumption no less than against the old one.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[214b:1689](2120537.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p6"></span> cxviii. 24.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[214b:1690](2120537.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p7"></span> lv. 5.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[214b:1691](2120537.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="iii.v.vii.v-p7.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.v-p8"></span> cxviii. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XI](2120538)
