[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120321)  [Next](2120323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xx-p2"></span>To Anastasius, Archbishop of Corinth.

<span id="iii.v.i.xx-p3"></span>Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xx-p4"></span>In proportion as the judgments of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xx-p4.1"></span>God</span> are unsearchable
ought they to be an object of fear to human apprehension; so that mortal
reason, being unable to comprehend them, may of necessity bow under them
the neck of a humble heart, to the end that it may follow with the
mind’s obedient steps where the will of the Ruler may lead.  I, then,
considering that my infirmity cannot reach to the height of the
apostolic See, had rather have declined this burden, lest, having
pastoral rule, I should succumb in action through inadequate
administration.  But, since it is not for us to go against the will of
the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xx-p4.2"></span>Lord</span> who
disposes all, I obediently followed the way in which it pleased the
merciful hand of the Ruler to deal with me.  For it was necessary that
your Fraternity should be informed, even though the present opportunity
had not occurred, how the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xx-p4.3"></span>Lord</span> had vouchsafed that I, however
unworthy, should preside over the apostolic See.  Since, then, reason
required this to be done, and an opportunity having occurred through our
sending to you the bearer of these presents, that is, Boniface the
guardian (*defensorem*), we are careful not only to offer to your
Fraternity by letter the good wishes of charity, but also to inform you
of our ordination, as we believe you would wish us to do.  Wherefore let
your Charity, by a letter in reply, cause us to rejoice for the unity of
the Church and the acceptable news of your own welfare; to the end that
our bodily absence from each other, which distance of place causes us to
endure, may become as presence through interchange of letters.  We
exhort you, also, since we have despatched the above-mentioned <span
id="page_83b">p. 83b</span> <span id="iii.v.i.xx-Page_83b"></span>bearer
of these presents on certain necessary business to the feet of the most
clement prince, and since the mutability of the time is wont to generate
many hindrances on the way, that your priestly affection would bestow
upon him whatever may be necessary either in provision for his journey
by land or in procuring for him the means of navigation, that through
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xx-p4.4"></span>God’s</span> mercy,
he may be able the more quickly to accomplish his intended journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Sebastian, Bishop of Rhisinum \[in Dalmatia\].](2120323)
