[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120248)  [Next](2120250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>That the ruler should be always
chief in action.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>The ruler should always be chief in
action, that by his living he may point out the way of life to those
that are put under him, and that the flock, which follows the voice and
manners of the shepherd, may learn how to walk better through example
than through words.  For he who is required by the necessity of his
position to speak the highest things is compelled by the same necessity
to exhibit the highest things.  For that voice more readily penetrates
the hearer’s heart, which the speaker’s life commends, since what he
commands by speaking he helps the doing of by shewing.  Hence it is said
through the prophet, *Get thee up into the high mountain, thou that
bringest good tidings to Sion* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>):  which means that he who is engaged
in heavenly preaching should already have forsaken the low level of
earthly works, and appear as standing on the summit of things, and by so
much the more easily should draw those who are under him to better
things as by the merit of his life he cries aloud from heights above. 
Hence under the divine law the priest receives the shoulder for
sacrifice, and this the right one and separate ([Exod. xxix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>); to signify that his action should be
not only profitable, but even singular; and that he should not merely do
what is right among bad men, but transcend even the well-doers among
those that are under him in the virtue of his conduct, as he surpasses
them in the dignity of his order.  The breast also together with the
shoulder is assigned to him for eating, that he may learn to immolate to
the Giver of all that of himself which he is enjoined to take of the
Sacrifice; that he may not only in his breast entertain right thoughts,
but with the shoulder of work invite those who behold him to things on
high; that he may covet no prosperity of the present life, and fear no
adversity; that, having regard to the fear within him, he may despise
the charm of the world, but considering the charm of inward sweetness,
may despise its terrors.  Wherefore by command of the supernal voice
([Exod. xxix. 5](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.3"></span>) the priest is braced on each shoulder
with the robe of the ephod, that he may be always guarded against
prosperity and adversity by the ornament of virtues; so that walking, as
S. Paul says ([2 Cor. vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.4"></span>), *in the armour of righteousness on
the right hand and on the left*, while he strives only after *those
things which are before*, he may decline on neither side to low
delight.  Him let neither prosperity elate nor adversity perturb; let
neither smooth things coax him to the surrender of his will, nor rough
things press him down to despair; so that, while he humbles the bent of
his mind to no passions, he may shew with how great beauty of the ephod
he is covered on each shoulder.  Which ephod is also rightly ordered to
be made of gold, blue, purple, twice dyed scarlet, and flue twined linen
([Exod. xxviii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.5"></span>), that it may be shewn by how great
diversity of virtues the priest ought to be distinguished.  Thus in the
priest’s robe before all things gold glitters, to shew that he should
shine forth principally in the understanding of wisdom.  And with it
blue, which is resplendent with aerial colour, is <span id="page_11b">p.
11b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iii.iii-Page_11b"></span>conjoined, to shew
that through all that he penetrates with his understanding he should
rise above earthly favours to the love of celestial things; lest, while
caught unawares by his own praises, he be emptied of his very
understanding of the truth.  With gold and blue, purple also is
mingled:  which means, that the priest’s heart, while hoping for the
high things which he preaches, should repress in itself even the
suggestions of vice, and as it were in virtue of a royal power, rebut
them, in that he has regard ever to the nobility of inward regeneration,
and by his manners guards his right to the robe of the heavenly
kingdom.  For it is of this nobility of the spirit that it is said
through Peter, *Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood* ([1 Pet.
ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.6"></span>).  With respect also to this power,
whereby we subdue vices, we are fortified by the voice of John, who
says, *As many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.7"></span>God</span>*
([John i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.8"></span>).  This dignity of fortitude the
Psalmist has in view when he says, *But with me greatly honoured have
been Thy friends, O <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.9"></span>God</span>; greatly strengthened has
been their principality* ([Ps. cxxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.10"></span>).  For truly the mind of saints is
exalted to princely eminence while outwardly they are seen to suffer
abasement.  But with gold, blue, and purple, twice died scarlet is
conjoined, to show that all excellences of virtue should be adorned with
charity in the eyes of the judge within; and that whatever glitters
before men may be lighted up in sight of the hidden arbiter with the
flame of inward love.  And, further, this charity, since it consists in
love at once of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iii-p3.11"></span>God</span> and of our neighbour, has,
as it were, the lustre of a double dye.  He then who so pants after the
beauty of his Maker as to neglect the care of his neighbours, or so
attends to the care of his neighbours as to grow languid in divine love,
whichever of these two things it may be that he neglects, knows not what
it is to have twice dyed scarlet in the adornment of his ephod.  But,
while the mind is intent on the precepts of charity, it undoubtedly
remains that the flesh be macerated through abstinence.  Hence with
twice dyed scarlet fine twined linen is conjoined.  For fine linen
(*byssus*) springs from the earth with glittering show:  and what is
designated by fine linen but bodily chastity shining white in the
comeliness of purity?  And it is also twisted for being interwoven into
the beauty of the ephod, since the habit of chastity then attains to the
perfect whiteness of purity when the flesh is worn by abstinence.  And,
since the merit of affliction of the flesh profits among the other
virtues, fine twined linen shews white, as it were, in the diverse
beauty of the ephod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler should be discreet in keeping silence, profitable
in speech.](2120250)
