[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120271)  [Next](2120273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>How those who fear scourges and those
who contemn them are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 14.)  Differently to be
admonished are those who fear scourges, and on that account live
innocently, and those who have grown so hard in wickedness as not to be
corrected even by scourges.  For those who fear scourges are to be told
by no means to desire temporal goods as being of great account, seeing
that bad men also have them, and by no means to shun present evils as
intolerable, seeing they are not ignorant how for the most part good men
also are touched by them.  They are to be admonished that, if they
desire to be truly free from evils, they should dread eternal
punishments; nor yet continue in this fear of punishments, but grow up
by the nursing of charity to the grace of love.  For it is written,
*Perfect charity casteth out fear* ([1 Joh. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>).  And again it is written, *Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again in fear, but the spirit of adoption
of sons, wherein we cry, Abba, Father* ([Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.2"></span>).  Whence the same teacher says again,
*Where the Spirit of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.3"></span>Lord</span> is, there is liberty* ([2
Cor. iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.4"></span>).  If, then, the fear of punishment
still restrains from evil-doing, truly no liberty of spirit possesses
the soul of him that so fears.  For, were he not afraid of the
punishment, he would doubtless commit the sin.  The mind, therefore,
that is bound by the bondage of fear knows not the grace of liberty. 
For good should be loved for itself, not pursued because of the
compulsion of penalties.  For he that does what is good for this reason,
that he is afraid of the evil of torments, wishes that what he fears
were not, that so he might commit what is unlawful boldly.  Whence it
appears clearer than the light that innocence is thus lost before <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p3.5"></span>God</span>, in whose
eyes evil desire is sin.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, those whom
not even scourges restrain from iniquities are to be smitten with
sharper rebuke in proportion as they have grown hard with greater
insensibility.  For generally they are to be disdained without disdain,
and despaired of without despair, so, to wit, that the despair exhibited
may strike them with dread, and admonition following may bring them back
to hope.  Sternly, therefore, against them should the Divine judgments
be set forth, that they may be recalled by consideration of eternal
retribution to knowledge of themselves.  For let them hear that in them
is fulfilled that which is written, *If thou shouldest bray a fool in a
mortar, as if with a pestle pounding barley, his foolishness will not be
taken away from him* ([Prov. xxvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>).  Against these the prophet complains
to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>, saying, *Thou hast bruised
them, and they have refused to receive discipline* ([Jer. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.3"></span>).  Hence it is that the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.4"></span>Lord</span> says, *I
have slain and destroyed this people, and yet they have not returned
from their ways* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.5"></span>).  Hence He says again, *The people hath
not returned to Him that smiteth them* ([Jer. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.6"></span>).  Hence the prophet complains by the
voice of the scourgers, saying, *We have taken care for Babylon, and she
is not healed* ([Jer. li. 9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.7"></span>).  For Babylon is taken care for, yet
still not restored to health, when the mind, confused in evil-doing,
hears the words of rebuke, feels the scourges of rebuke, and yet scorns
to return to the straight paths of salvation.  Hence the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.8"></span>Lord</span> reproaches
the children of Israel, captive, but yet not converted from their
iniquity, saying, *The house of Israel is to Me become dross:  all they
are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace*
([Ezek. xxii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.9"></span>); as if to say plainly, I would have
purified them by the fire of tribulation, and I sought that they should
become silver or gold; but they have been turned before me in the
furnace into <span id="page_37b">p. 37b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-Page_37b"></span>brass, tin, iron, and lead, because
even in tribulation they have broken forth, not to virtue but to vices. 
For indeed brass, when it is struck, returns a sound more than all other
metals.  He, therefore, who, when subjected to strokes, breaks out into
a sound of murmuring is turned into brass in the midst of the furnace. 
But tin, when it is dressed with art, has a false show of silver.  He,
then, who is not free from the vice of pretence in the midst of
tribulation becomes tin in the furnace.  Moreover, he who plots against
the life of his neighbour uses iron.  Wherefore iron in the furnace is
he who in tribulation loses not the malice that would do hurt.  Lead,
also, is the heaviest of metals.  He, then, is found as lead in the
furnace who, even when placed in the midst of tribulation, is not raised
above earthly desires.  Hence, again, it is written, *She hath wearied
herself with much labour, and her exceeding rust went not out from her,
not even by fire* ([Ezek. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.10"></span>).  For He brings upon us the fire of
tribulation, that He may purge us from the rust of vices; but we lose
not our rust even by fire, when even amid scourges we lack not vice. 
Hence the Prophet says again, *The founder hath melted in vain; their
wickednesses are not consumed* ([Jer. vi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p4.11"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span>It is, however, to be known that
sometimes when they remain uncorrected amid the hardness of scourges,
they are to be soothed by sweet admonition.  For those who are not
corrected by torments are sometimes restrained from unrighteous deeds by
gentle blandishments.  For commonly the sick too, whom a strong potion
of medicine has not availed to cure, have been restored to their former
health by tepid water; and some sores which cannot be cured by incision
are healed by fomentations of oil; and hard adamant admits not at all of
incision by steel, but is softened by the mild blood of goats.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the silent and the talkative are to be admonished.](2120273)
