[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120238)  [Next](2120240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>Of those who are able to profit others
by virtuous example in supreme rule, but fly from it in pursuit of their
own ease.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>For there are some who are eminently
endowed with virtues, and for the training of others are exalted by
great gifts, who are pure in zeal for chastity, strong in the might of
abstinence, filled with the feasts of doctrine, humble in the
long-suffering of patience, erect in the fortitude of authority, tender
in the grace of loving-kindness, strict in the severity of justice. 
Truly such as these, if when called they refuse to undertake offices of
supreme rule, for the most part deprive themselves of the very gifts
which they received not for themselves alone, but for others also; and,
while they meditate their own and not another’s gain, they forfeit the
very benefits which they desire to keep to themselves.  For hence it was
that the Truth said to His disciples, *A city that is set on an hill
cannot be hid:  neither do they light a candle and put it under a
bushel, but on a candlestick, that it may give light to all that are in
the house* ([Matth. v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>).  Hence He says to Peter, *Simon, Son of
Jonas, lovest thou Me?* ([John 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>); and he, when he had at once answered
that he loved, was told, *If thou lovest Me, feed My sheep.*  If, then,
the care of feeding is the proof of loving, whosoever abounds in
virtues, and yet refuses to feed the flock of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.3"></span>God</span>, is convicted of not loving the
chief Shepherd.  Hence Paul says, *If Christ died for all, then all
died.  And if He died for all, it remaineth that they which live should
now no longer live unto themselves, but unto Him which died for them and
rose again* ([2 Cor. v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.4"></span>).  Hence Moses says ([Deut. xxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.5"></span>)
that a surviving brother shall take to him the wife of a brother who has
died without children, and beget children to the name of his brother;
and that, if he haply refuse to take her, the woman shall spit in his
face, and her kinsman shall loose the shoe from off one of his feet, and
call his habitation the house of him that hath his shoe loosed.  Now the
deceased brother is He who, after the glory of the resurrection, said,
*Go tell My brethren* ([Matth. xxviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.6"></span>).  For He died as it were without
children, in that He had not yet filled up the number of His elect.
 Then, it is ordered that the surviving brother shall have the wife
assigned to him, because it is surely fit that the care of holy Church
be imposed on him who is best able to rule it well.  But, should he be
unwilling, the woman spits in his face, because whosoever cares not to
benefit others out of the gifts which he has received, the holy Church
exprobrates even what he has of good, and, as it were, casts spittle on
his face; and from one foot the shoe is taken away, inasmuch as it is
written, *Your feet shod in preparation of the Gospel of Peace* ([Ephes.
vi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.vi-p3.7"></span>).  If, then, we have the care of our
neighbour as well as of ourselves upon us, we have each foot protected
by a shoe.  But he who, meditating his own advantage, neglects that of
his neighbours, loses with disgrace one <span id="page_5b">p. 5b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.ii.vi-Page_5b"></span>foot’s shoe.  And so there are
some, as we have said, enriched with great gifts, who, while they are
ardent for the studies of contemplation only, shrink from serving to
their neighbour’s benefit by preaching; they love a secret place of
quiet, they long for a retreat for speculation.  With respect to which
conduct, they are, if strictly judged, undoubtedly guilty in proportion
to the greatness of the gifts whereby they might have been publicly
useful.  For with what disposition of mind does one who might be
conspicuous in profiting his neighbours prefer his own privacy to the
advantage of others, when the Only-begotten of the supreme Father
Himself came forth from the bosom of the Father into the midst of us
all, that He might profit many?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That those who fly from the burden of rule through humility are
then truly humble when they resist not the divine decrees.](2120240)
