[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120416)  [Next](2120418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p2"></span>*To Italica, Patrician* <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p4"></span>Gregory to Italica, &c.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p5"></span>We have received your letter, which
is full <span id="page_140b">p. 140b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-Page_140b"></span>of sweetness, and rejoice to hear
that your Excellency is well.  Such is the sincerity of our own mind
with regard to it that paternal affection does not allow us to suspect
any latent ill-feeling concealed under its calmness.  But may Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>God</span> bring
it to pass, that, as we think what is good of you, so your mind may
respond with good towards us, and that you may exhibit in your deeds the
sweetness which you express in words.  For the most glorious health and
beauty on the surface of the body profit nothing if there is a hidden
sore within.  And that discord is the more to be guarded against to
which exterior peace affords a bodyguard.  But as to what your
Excellency in your aforesaid epistle takes pains to recall to our
recollection, remember that you have been told in writing that we would
not settle anything with you concerning the causes of the poor so as to
cause offence, or with public clamour.  We remember writing to you to
this effect, and also know, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p5.2"></span>God</span> helping us how to restrain
ourselves with ecclesiastical moderation from the wrangling of suits at
law, and, according to that apostolical sentence, to endure joyfully the
spoiling of our goods.  But this we suppose you to know; that our
silence and patience will not be to the prejudice of future pontiffs
after me in the affairs of the poor.  Wherefore we, in fulfilment of our
aforesaid promise, have already determined to keep silence on these
questions; nor do we desire to mix ourselves personally in these
transactions, wherein we feel that too little kindness is being shewn. 
But, lest you should hence imagine, glorious daughter, that we still
altogether renounce what pertains to concord, we have given directions
to our son, Cyprianus the deacon, who is going to Sicily, that, if you
arrange about these matters in a salutary way, and without sin to your
soul, he should settle them with you by our authority, and that we
should be no further vexed by the business which may thus be brought to
a conclusion amicably.  Now may Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p5.3"></span>God</span>, who well knows how to turn
to possibility things altogether impossible, may He inspire you both to
arrange your affairs with a view to peace, and, for the good of your
soul, to consult the benefit of the poor of this Church in matters which
concern them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[139b:1513](2120417.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxi-p3"></span> Possibly the same lady whom the
ex-monk Venantius married.  See I. 34, note 8, and IX. 123.  The
correspondence that took place at this time between her and Gregory
seems to have arisen from some question of legal right, in which she
appeared to the latter to be dealing harshly with some poor persons,
perhaps peasants (*rustici*) on an estate of the Church (*hujus Ecclesiæ
pauperibus*).  The passing tribute paid in this letter to the lady’s
personal charms is characteristic of Gregory’s complimentary style, and
(supposing her to have been the same Italica who became the bride of
Venantius) suggests one attraction which may have drawn the latter away
from his intended monastic life.  Further on the same supposition, we
may perhaps read with interest between the lines of this letter
something of the feeling subsisting at the time of writing between the
correspondents.  She, being a well-bred patrician lady, had evidently
written to him with gentle courtesy.  But he detected, or thought he
detected, something wanting in the tone of her letter.  Nor was she
likely to feel warmly towards him who now called her to account, if it
were he whom she knew to have done all he could to alienate Venantius
from her.  He, on the other hand while addressing her in return with all
the courtesy due to her rank and character, and evidently anxious to
avoid unpleasantness, shews signs of not being entirely satisfied as to
her feelings towards himself, or her readiness to follow his
admonitions.  It is interesting to observe that, judging from the tone
of subsequent Epistles, we may conclude very friendly relations to have
been afterwards maintained between Gregory and the wedded pair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXV](2120418)
