[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120422)  [Next](2120424) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Epistle II.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p2"></span>To Constantius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p3"></span>Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of
Mediolanum.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p4"></span>My most beloved son, the deacon
Boniface, has conveyed to me certain private information through thy
Fraternity’s letter; namely that three bishops, having sought out rather
than found an occasion, have separated themselves from the pious
communion of your Fraternity, saying that you have assented to the
condemnation of the Three Chapters <span
id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517) , and have given a security <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) .  And, indeed, whether there has
been any mention made of the Three Chapters in any word or writing
whatever thy Fraternity remembers well; although thy Fraternity’s
predecessor, Laurentius, did send forth a most strict security to the
Apostolic See, to which most noble men in legitimate number subscribed;
among whom I also, at that time holding the prætorship of the city,
likewise subscribed; since after such a schism had taken place about
nothing, it was right that the Apostolic See should take heed, with the
view of guarding in all respects the unity of the Universal Church in
the minds of priests.  But as to its being said that our daughter, Queen
Theodelinda, after hearing this news, has withdrawn herself from thy
communion, it is for all reasons evident that, though she has been
seduced to some little extent by the words of bad men, yet, on the
arrival of Hippolytus the notary, and John the abbot, she will seek in
all ways the communion of your Fraternity <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) .  To her also I have addressed a
letter <span id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) , which I beg your
Fraternity to transmit <span id="page_145b">p. 145b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-Page_145b"></span>to her without delay.  Further, with
regard to the bishops who appear to have separated themselves, I have
written another letter, which when you have caused to be shewn to them,
I doubt not that they will repent of the superstition of their pride
before thy Fraternity.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p9"></span>Furthermore, you have accurately and
briefly informed me of what has been done, whether by King Ago <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) or by the Kings of the Franks.  I
beg your Fraternity to make known to me in all ways what you have so far
ascertained.  But, if you should see that Ago, King of the Lombards, is
doing nothing with the Patrician <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) , promise him on our part that I am
prepared to give attention to his case, if he should be willing to
arrange anything with the republic advantageously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[144b:1518](2120423.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p5"></span> As to the schism from Rome in the
province of Istria consequent on the condemnation of “The Three
Chapters” by the fifth General Council, see I. 16, note 3.  It appears
that in the adjacent province of Liguria, of which Mediolanum (*Milan*)
was the metropolis, there was a like rejection of the fifth council on
the part at least of some bishops, who had consequently declined
communion with their newly-appointed Metropolitan Constantius, who was
believed to have agreed formally to the condemnation of The Three
Chapters.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[144b:1519](2120423.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p6"></span> *Cautionem fecisse*:  i.e. had pledged
himself to the pope by a formal document to uphold the fifth council in
its condemnation of the said Chapters.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[144b:1520](2120423.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p7"></span> Theodelinda, the Lombard queen, was a
catholic Christian, though her husband Agilulph was still an Arian. 
Ticinum (or Pavia), which was the residence of the Lombard Kings, was
under the Metropolitan jurisdiction of Milan; and it appears that, under
the influence of the dissentient bishops of the province, she too had
refused to communicate with the new Metropolitan.  Gregory’s
anticipation, expressed in what follows, that she would easily be
brought round, was premature:  for ten years later (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 603–4) we find
Gregory still taking pains to overcome her scruples with regard to the
fifth council.  See XIV. 12.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[144b:1521](2120423.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p8"></span> Viz. Epistle 4 below.  This letter,
however, was not delivered to the queen by the bishop Constantius, to
whom it had been sent, because of the allusion contained in it to the
fifth council, which she appears to have been resolute in rejecting. 
The new bishop thought she would be more likely to accept him as
orthodox, if it were only said that he adhered in all respects to the
faith of the four previous councils, including that of Chalcedon.  See
below, *Ep*. 39.  Accordingly another letter (*Ep*. 38), in which
allusion to the fifth council was omitted, was prepared and sent in
accordance with the advice of Constantius.  See further, note 8, under
Epistle 3.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[145b:1522](2120423.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p10"></span> I.e. Agilulph the Lombard King.  The
time (Indict. XII., i.e. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 593–4) was after he had
invested Rome and returned to Pavia, and when Gregory had in vain urged
Romanus Patricius, the Exarch at Ravenna, to come to terms with him. 
Gregory appears prepared to approach him now with a view to a separate
peace with himself, which he says afterwards (see V. 36, 40) he could
have made if he had been so minded.  Letters bearing on the subject are
V. 36, 40, 41, 42; VI. 30; IX. 4, 6, 42, 43, 98.  See also *Proleg*. p.
xxi.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[145b:1523](2120423.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ii-p11"></span> I.e. Romanus Patricius, the Exarch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Constantius, Bishop.](2120424)
