[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120316)  [Next](2120318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xv-p2"></span>*To Natalis, Bishop of Salona* <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) .

<span id="iii.v.i.xv-p4"></span>Gregory to Natalis, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xv-p5"></span>The acts of your synod which you have
transmitted to us, in which the Archdeacon Honoratus is condemned, we
perceive to be full of the seed of strifes, seeing that the same person
is at one and the same time advanced to the dignity of the priesthood
against his will, and removed from the office of the diaconate as though
unworthy of it.  And, as it is just that no one who is unwilling should
be advanced by compulsion, so I think we must be of opinion that no one
who is innocent should be deposed from the ministry of his order
unjustly.  Nevertheless, since discord hateful to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xv-p5.1"></span>God</span> excuses thy part in the
transaction, we admonish thee to restore his place and administration to
the Archdeacon Honoratus, and agree to supply him with attendance
sufficient for his divine ministry.  If cause of offence is still
fomented between you, let the aforesaid Archdeacon submit himself to our
audience and enquiry, when admonished to do so, and let thy love send to
us a person instructed in the case, that in the presence of both, the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> assisting
us, we may be able to decide what justice approves without respect of
persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[79b:1319](2120317.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="iii.v.i.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xv-p3"></span> Salona was the metropolis of the
province of Dalmatia in Western Illyricum.  The misdoings of its bishop,
Natalis, gave rise to a lengthy correspondence.  See, in addition to
this letter, I. 20; II. 18, 19, 20, 52; III. 8, 32.  He had, as appears
from this letter and others, desired to get rid of his archdeacon
Honoratus, having apparently some grudge against him, and with this a
few would have ordained him priest against his will, none but deacons
being then capable of holding the office of archdeacon.  He was accused
also of addiction to unbecoming conviviality, and of neglecting his
episcopal duties.  Eventually, after continued contumacy, he appears to
have satisfied Gregory in the matter of Honoratus, and also to have
reformed his own habits of life, after writing what appears from
Gregory’s reply to it to have been a racy letter in defence of
conviviality, which was taken in good part and replied to in a
good-humoured vein (II. 52).  Gregory subsequently said of him, “I was
at one time much distressed concerning our brother and fellow bishop
Natalis, having experienced proud behaviour from him.  But since he has
himself corrected his manners, he has overcome me, and comforted my
sadness” (II. 46).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Honoratus, Deacon of Salona.](2120318)
