[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120043)  [Next](2120045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>To Julian, Bishop of Cos.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Julian, the bishop,
his well-beloved brother.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span>I.  *Eutyches is now clearly seen to
have deviated from the Faith.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p5"></span>Your letter, beloved, which has just
reached me, shows with what spiritual love of the Catholic Faith you are
inspired:  and it makes me very glad that devout hearts all agree in the
same opinion, so that according to the teaching of the Holy Ghost there
may be fulfilled in us what the Apostle says:  “Now I beseech you,
brethren, through the name of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same things, and there be no divisions among you:  but that ye be
perfect in the same mind and in the same judgment <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) .”  But Eutyches has put himself quite
outside this unity, if he perseveres in his perversity, and still does
not understand the bonds with which the devil has bound him, and thinks
any one is to be reckoned among the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>Lord’s</span> priests, who is a party to
his ignorance and madness.  For some time we were uncertain in what he
was displeasing to catholics:  and when we received no letter from our
brother Flavian, and Eutyches himself complained in his letter <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) that the Nestorian heresy was being
revived, we could not fully learn the source or the motive of so crafty
an accusation.  But as soon as the minutes of the bishops’ proceedings
reached us, all those things which were hidden beneath <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-Page_48"></span>the veil
of his deceitful complaints were revealed in their abomination.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p8"></span>II.  *He announces the appointment of
legates a latere.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p9"></span>And because our most clement Emperor in
the loving-kindness and godliness of his mind wished a more careful
judgment to be passed about the position of one who hitherto has seemed
to be in high esteem, and for this purpose has thought fit to convene a
council of bishops, by the hands of our brothers Julius the bishop, and
Renatus the presbyter, and also my son Hilary, the deacon whom I have
sent *ex latere* <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) in my stead, I
have addressed a letter suited to the needs of the case to our brother
Flavian, from which you also, beloved, and the whole Church may know
about the ancient and unique Faith, which this unlearned opponent has
assailed, what we hold as handed down from <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>God</span> and what we preach without
alteration.  Yet, because we must not forget the duty of mercy, we have
considered it consonant with our moderation as priests, that, if the
condemned presbyter corrects himself unreservedly, the sentence by which
he is bound should be remitted:  if, however, he chooses to lie in the
mire of his foolishness, let the decree remain, and let him have his lot
with those whose error he has followed.  Dated 13th June in the
consulship of the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes (449) <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_338"></span>[47:339](2120044.htm#fr_338) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[47:340](2120044.htm#fr_339) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p7"></span> See Lett. XX., above.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[48:341](2120044.htm#fr_340) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p10"></span> See Lett. XXXII., n. 9, above.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[48:342](2120044.htm#fr_341) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p11"></span> This letter (XXXIV.) is written on
the same day and subject and to the same person as the next letter
(XXXV.):  the differences between them being (l) the greater length and
fuller treatment of the second; and (2) that the one is entrusted to
Leo’s legates, the other to Julius’ own messenger, Basil the deacon; and
(3) that the shorter has no Gk. version as the longer has.  I think the
Ballerinii are undoubtedly right in facing the difficulty boldly, the
evidence of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> being invariable, except that
XXXIV. is only found in a few collections:  and I would suggest that
XXXIV. is a formal, official communication, and XXXV. a private,
confidential one.  This will account for the difference of messengers,
and the identity of date, subject and person addressed, and is
justifiable as a piece of necessary diplomatic secrecy.  In XXX. and
XXXI. we have another instance of two letters to the same person on the
same day, one of these (XXXI.) being also without a Gk. version, this
time the longer one:  but here we have adopted the Ballerinii’s
suggestion that only the first was sent.  It should further be noticed
that out of the very large batch of letters that are dated the 13th of
June, which includes the Tome (8 in all. XXVIII.–XXXV.), it may well
have been convergent to delay one and send it by another hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Julian, Bishop of Cos.](2120045)
