[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120507)  [Next](2120509) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p2"></span>To Fortunatus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p3"></span>Gregory to Fortunatus, Bishop of
Neapolis (*Naples*).

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p4"></span>We have written before now to your
Fraternity that, if any \[slaves\] by the inspiration of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p4.1"></span>God</span>, desire to
come from Jewish superstition to the Christian faith, their masters have
no liberty to sell them, but that from the time of their declaring their
wish they have a full claim to freedom.  But since, so far as we have
learnt, they \[i.e. Jewish masters\], weighing with nice discrimination
neither our wish nor the ordinances of the law, think that they are not
bound by this condition in the case of pagan slaves, your Fraternity
ought to attend to such cases, and, if any one of their slaves, whether
he be a Jew or a pagan, should wish to become a Christian, after his
wish has been openly declared, let not any one of the Jews, under cover
of any device or argument whatever, have power to sell him; but let him
who desires to be converted to the Christian faith be in all ways
supported by you in his claim to freedom.  Lest, however, those who have
to lose slaves of this kind should consider that their interests are
unreasonably prejudiced, it is fitting that with careful consideration
you should observe this rule;—that if pagans when they have been brought
out of foreign parts for the sake of traffic should chance to flee to
the Church, and say that they wish to become Christians, or even outside
the Church should announce this wish, then, till the end of three months
during which a buyer to sell them to may be sought for, they \[the
Jewish owners\] may receive their price; that is to say, from a
Christian buyer.  But if after the aforesaid three months any one of
such slaves should declare his wish and desire to become a Christian,
let not either any one afterwards dare to buy him, or his master, under
colour of any occasion whatever, dare to sell him; but let him
unreservedly attain to the benefit of freedom; since he (i.e. the
master) is in such case understood to have acquired him not for sale but
for his own service.  Let, then, your Fraternity so vigilantly observe
all these things that neither the supplication of any nor respect of
persons may avail to inveigle you <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[199b:1656](2120508.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxii-p5"></span> As to ownership by Jews of converted
slaves, see *Prolegom*., p. xxi., and other Epistles there referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXIV](2120509)
