[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120162)  [Next](2120164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.cliii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p1.1"></span>Letter CLIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p2.1"></span>To Nicætas, Bishop of Aquileia.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p3"></span>(Leo, the bishop, to Nicætas, bishop of
Aquileia, greeting.)

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p4"></span>I.  *Prefatory*.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p5"></span>My son Adeodatus, deacon of our See, on
returning to us has delivered your request, beloved, to receive from us
the authority of the Apostolic See upon matters which seem indeed to be
hard to decide, but which we must make provision for with a view to the
necessities of the times that the wounds which have been inflicted by
the attacks of the enemy may be healed chiefly by the agency of
religion.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p6"></span>II.  *About the women who married again
when their husbands were taken prisoners.*

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p7"></span>As then you say that through the
disasters of war and through the grievous inroads of the enemy families
have in certain cases been so broken up that the husbands have been
carried off into captivity and their wives remain forsaken, and these
latter thinking their own husbands either dead or never likely to be
freed from their masters, have contracted another marriage under stress
of loneliness, and as, now that the state of things has im <span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-Page_103"></span>proved through the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cliii-p7.1"></span>Lord’s</span> help, some
of those who were thought to have perished have returned, you seem, dear
brother, naturally to be in doubt what ought to be settled by us about
women thus joined to other husbands.  But because we know it is written
that “a woman is joined to a man by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p7.2"></span>God <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590)
</span>,” and again, we are aware of the precept that “what <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cliii-p8.2"></span>God</span> hath joined,
man may not put asunder <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) ,” we
are bound to hold that the compact of the lawful marriage must be
renewed, and after the removal of the evils inflicted by the enemy, what
each lawfully had must be restored to him; and we must take every pains
that each should recover what is his own.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p10"></span>III.  *Whether he is blameable who has
taken the prisoner’s wife?*

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p11"></span>But notwithstanding let him not be
held blameable and treated as the invader of another’s right, who took
the place of the husband, who was thought no longer alive.  For thus
many things which belonged to those led into captivity happened to pass
into the possession of others, and yet it is altogether fair that on
their return their property should be restored.  And if this is duly
observed in the case of slaves or of lands, or even of houses and
personal goods, how much more ought it to be done in the restoration of
wives, that what has been disturbed by the necessities of war may be
restored by the remedy of peace?

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p12"></span>IV.  *The wife must be restored to her
first husband.*

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p13"></span>And, therefore, if husbands who have
returned after a long captivity still feel such affection for their
wives as to desire them to return to partnership <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) , that, which necessity brought about,
must be passed over and judged blameless and the demands of fidelity
satisfied.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p15"></span>V.  *Women must be excommunicated who
refuse to return*.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p16"></span>And if any women are so possessed by
love of their later husbands as to prefer to remain with them than to
return to their lawful partners, they are deservedly to be branded:  so
that they be even deprived of the Church’s communion; for in a
pardonable matter they have chosen to taint themselves with crime,
showing that they have sought their own pleasure in their incontinence,
when a rightful restitution could have obtained their forgiveness.  Let
them return then to their former state and make voluntary reparation,
nor let that which a condition of necessity extorted from them be by any
means turned into disgrace through evil desires; because, as those women
who refuse to return to their husbands are to be held unholy, so they
who return to an affection entered on with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p16.1"></span>God’s</span> sanction are deservedly to be
praised.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p17"></span>VI.  *About captives, who were
compelled to eat of sacrificial food.*

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p18"></span>Concerning those Christians who are
asserted to have been polluted with sacrificial food, while among those
by whom they were taken prisoners, we have thought it right to make this
reply to your enquiry, dear brother, that they be purged by a
satisfactory penitence which is to be measured not so much by the
duration of the process as by the intensity of the feeling.  And whether
their compliance was wrung from them by terror or hunger, there need be
no hesitation at acquitting them, since the food was taken from fear or
want, not from superstitious reverence.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p19"></span>VII.  *About those who in fear or by
mistake were re-baptized*.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p20"></span>But as to those about whom you
thought, beloved, we ought likewise to be consulted who were either
forced by fear or led by mistake to repeat their baptism, and now
understand that they acted contrary to the ordinances of the catholic
Faith, such moderation must be observed towards them that they be
received into full communion with us, but not without the healing of
penitence and the imposition of the bishop’s hands, the length of the
penance (with due regard to moderation) being left to your judgment, as
you shall perceive the minds of the penitents to be disposed:  in which
you must not forget to consider old age, illness, and other risks.  For
if a man be in so dangerous a case that his life is despaired of, while
he is still under penance, he should receive the gracious aid of
communion by the priest’s tender care.

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p21"></span>VIII.  *About baptism by heretics.*

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p22"></span>For they who have received baptism
from heretics, not having been previously baptized, are to be confirmed
by imposition of hands with only the invocation of the Holy Ghost,
because they have received the bare form of baptism without the power of
sanctification <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) .  And this
regulation, as you know, we <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-Page_104"></span>require to be kept in all the churches,
that the font once entered may not be defiled by repetition, as the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cliii-p23.1"></span>Lord</span> says,
“One <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cliii-p23.2"></span>Lord</span>,
one faith, one baptism.”  And that washing may not be polluted by
repetition, but, as we have said, only the sanctification of the Holy
Ghost invoked, that what no one can receive from heretics may be
obtained from catholic priests.  This letter of ours, which we have sent
in reply to the inquiries of the brotherhood you shall bring to the
knowledge of all your brethren and fellow-bishops of the province, that
our authority, now that it is given, may avail for the general
observance.  Dated 21st March, in the consulship of Majorian Augustus
(458).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_590"></span>[103:591](2120163.htm#fr_590) <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p8"></span> [Prov. xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p8.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_591"></span>[103:592](2120163.htm#fr_591) <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p9"></span> [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[103:593](2120163.htm#fr_592) <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p14"></span> There is little doubt, I think, that
the return of the wife was at the husband’s option in Leo’s opinion, and
could not be forced upon him.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[103:594](2120163.htm#fr_593) <span
id="ii.iv.cliii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cliii-p23"></span> Leo repeats this injunction in Letter
CLXVI. chap. 2. and Lett. CLXVII., inquiry 18.  Quesnel identifies this
ceremony with the right of Confirmation, but the Ballerinii are probably
right in thinking this a mistake, and in identifying it with the *manuum
impositio in pœnitentiam* mentioned by Cyprian and other fathers.  See
Lett. CLXVI. chap. 2, n. 5b.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: See Letter CLVIII.](2120164)
