[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120217)  [Next](2120219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xl"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p2.1"></span>(On Whitsuntide, III.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p3"></span>I.  *The Holy Ghost’s work did not begin at
Pentecost, but was continued because the Holy Trinity is One in action
and in will.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p4"></span>To-day’s festival, dearly-beloved, which is
held in reverence by the whole world, has been hallowed by that advent
of the Holy Ghost, which on the fiftieth day after the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Resurrection,
descended on the Apostles and the multitude of believers <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) , even as it was hoped.  And there
was this hope, because the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p5.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus had promised that He should
come, not then first to be the Indweller of the saints, but to kindle to
a greater heat, and to fill with larger abundance the hearts that were
dedicated to Him, increasing, not commencing His gifts, not fresh in
operation because richer in bounty.  For the Majesty of the Holy Ghost
is never separate from the Omnipotence of the Father and the Son, and
whatever the Divine government accomplishes in the ordering of <span
id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span id="ii.v.xl-Page_192"></span>all
things, proceeds from the Providence of the whole Trinity.  Therein
exists unity of mercy and loving-kindness, unity of judgment and
justice:  nor is there any division in action where there is no
divergence of will.  What, therefore, the Father enlightens, the Son
enlightens, and the Holy Ghost enlightens:  and while there is one
Person of the Sent, another of the Sender, and another of the Promiser,
both the Unity and the Trinity are at the same time revealed to us, so
that the Essence which possesses equality and does not admit of
solitariness is understood to belong to the same Substance but not the
same Person.

<span id="ii.v.xl-p6"></span>II.  *Each Person in the Trinity took part
in our Redemption.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p7"></span>The fact, therefore, that, with the
co-operation of the inseparable Godhead still perfect, certain things
are performed by the Father, certain by the Son, and certain by the Holy
Spirit, in particular belongs to the ordering of our Redemption and the
method of our salvation.  For if man, made after the image and likeness
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p7.1"></span>God</span>, had
retained the dignity of his own nature, and had not been deceived by the
devil’s wiles into transgressing through lust the law laid down for him,
the Creator of the world would not have become a Creature, the Eternal
would not have entered the sphere of time, nor <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p7.2"></span>God</span> the Son, Who is equal with <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p7.3"></span>God</span> the Father, have
assumed the form of a slave and the likeness of sinful flesh.  But
because “by the devil’s malice death entered into the world <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) ,” and captive humanity could not
otherwise be set free without His undertaking our cause, Who without
loss of His majesty should both become true Man, and alone have no taint
of sin, the mercy of the Trinity divided for Itself the work of our
restoration in such a way that the Father should be propitiated, the Son
should propitiate <span id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) , and the
Holy Ghost enkindle.  For it was necessary that those who are to be
saved should also do something on their part, and by the turning of
their hearts to the Redeemer should quit the dominion of the enemy, even
as the Apostle says, “<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p9.3"></span>God</span> sent the Spirit of His Son into our
hearts, crying Abba, Father <span id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151)
,” “And where the Spirit of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> is, there is liberty <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) ,” and “no one can call Jesus <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> except in the
Holy Spirit <span id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) .”

<span id="ii.v.xl-p13"></span>III.  *But this apportionment of functions
does not mar the Unity of the Trinity.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p14"></span>If, therefore, under guiding grace,
dearly-beloved, we faithfully and wisely understand what is the
particular work of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
what is common to the Three in our restoration, we shall without doubt
so accept what has been wrought for us by humiliation and in the body as
to think nothing unworthy about the One and Selfsame Glory of the
Trinity.  For although no mind is competent to think, no tongue to speak
about <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p14.1"></span>God</span>, yet
whatever that is which the human intellect apprehends about the essence
of the Father’s Godhead, unless one and the selfsame truth is held
concerning His Only-begotten or the Holy Spirit, our meditations are
disloyal, and beclouded by the intrusions of the flesh, and even that is
lost, which seemed a right conclusion concerning the Father, because the
whole Trinity is forsaken, if the Unity therein is not maintained; and
That Which is different by any inequality can in no true sense be One.

<span id="ii.v.xl-p15"></span>IV.  *In thinking upon <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p15.1"></span>God</span>, we must put aside
all material notions.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p16"></span>When, therefore, we fix our minds on
confessing the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, let us keep far
from our thoughts the forms of things visible, the ages of beings born
in time, and all material bodies and places.  Let that which is extended
in space, that which is enclosed by limit, and whatever is not always
everywhere and entire be banished from the heart.  The conception of the
Triune Godhead must put aside the idea of interval or of grade <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) , and if a man has attained any
worthy thought of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p17.1"></span>God</span>, let him not dare to withhold it
from any Person therein, as if to ascribe with more honour to the Father
that which he does not ascribe to the Son and Spirit.  It is not true
Godliness to put the Father before the Only-begotten:  insult to the Son
is insult to the Father:  what is detracted from the One is detracted
from Both.  For since Their Eternity and Godhead are alike common, the
Father is not accounted either Almighty and Unchangeable, if He begot
One less than Himself or gained by having One Whom before He had
not <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) .

<span id="ii.v.xl-p19"></span>V.  *Christ as Man is less than the
Father, as <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p19.1"></span>God</span>
co-equal.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p20"></span>The <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p20.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus does, indeed, say to His
disciples, as was read in the Gospel lection, “if ye loved Me, ye would
assuredly rejoice, because I go to the Father, because the Father is
greater than I <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) ;” but those
ears, <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="ii.v.xl-Page_193"></span>which have often heard the words, “I and
the Father are One <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) ,” and “He
that sees Me, sees the Father also <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) ,” accept the saying without
supposing a difference of Godhead or understanding it of that Essence
which they know to be co-eternal and of the same nature with the
Father.  Man’s uplifting, therefore, in the Incarnation of the Word, is
commended to the holy Apostles also, and they, who were distressed at
the announcement of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p23.2"></span>Lord’s</span> departure from them, are incited
to eternal joy over the increase in their dignity; “If ye loved Me,” He
says, “ye would assuredly rejoice, because I go to the Father:”  that
is, if, with complete knowledge ye saw what glory is bestowed on you by
the fact that, being begotten of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p23.3"></span>God</span> the Father, I have been born of a
human mother also, that being invisible I have made Myself visible, that
being eternal “in the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p23.4"></span>God</span>” I accepted the “form of a slave,”
“ye would rejoice because I go to the Father.”  For to you is offered
this ascension, and your humility is in Me raised to a place above all
heavens at the Father’s right hand.  But I, Who am with the Father that
which the Father is, abide undivided with My Father, and in coming from
Him to you I do not leave Him, even as in returning to Him from you I do
not forsake you.  Rejoice, therefore, “because I go to the Father,
because the Father is greater than I.”  For I have united you with
Myself, and am become Son of Man that you might have power to be sons of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p23.5"></span>God</span>.  And hence,
though I am One in both forms, yet in that whereby I am conformed to you
I am less than the Father, whereas in that whereby I am not divided from
the Father I am greater even than Myself.  And so let the Nature, which
is less than the Father, go <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159)
to the Father, that the Flesh may be where the Word always is, and that
the one Faith of the catholic Church may believe that He Whom as Man it
does not deny to be less, is equal as <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p24.1"></span>God</span> with the Father.

<span id="ii.v.xl-p25"></span>VI.  *And this equality which the Son has
with the Father, the Holy Ghost also has.*

<span id="ii.v.xl-p26"></span>Accordingly, dearly-beloved, let us
despise the vain and blind cunning of ungodly heretics, which flatters
itself over its crooked interpretation of this sentence, and when the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p26.1"></span>Lord</span> says, “All
things that the Father hath are Mine <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) ,” does not understand that it
takes away from the Father whatever it dares to deny to the Son, and is
so foolish in matters even which are human as to think, that what is His
Father’s has ceased to belong to His Only-begotten, because He has taken
on Him what is ours.  Mercy in the case of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p27.2"></span>God</span> does not lessen power, nor is the
reconciliation of the creature whom He loves a falling off of Eternal
glory.  What the Father has the Son also has, and what the Father and
the Son have, the Holy Ghost also has, because the whole Trinity
together is One <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xl-p27.3"></span>God</span>.  But this Faith is not the
discovery of earthly wisdom nor the conviction of man’s opinion:  the
Only-begotten Son has taught it Himself, and the Holy Ghost has
established it Himself, concerning Whom no other conception must be
formed than is formed concerning the Father and the Son.  Because albeit
He is not the Father nor the Son, yet He is not separable from the
Father and the Son:  and as He has His own personality in the Trinity,
so has He One substance in Godhead with the Father and the Son, filling
all things, containing all things, and with the Father and the Son
controlling all things, to Whom is the honour and glory for ever and
ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[191:1149](2120218.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p5"></span> Bright (n. 133) quotes Aug. (in Joan.
Evan. Tr. 92, c. 1 and Serm. 267, 1) for the opinion, which Leo here
seems to follow, that the “all” of [Acts ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xl-p5.1"></span>
includes the 120 (cf. [Acts i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v.xl-p5.2"></span>) as well as the Twelve.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[192:1150](2120218.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p8"></span> [Wisd. ii.
24](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xl-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[192:1151](2120218.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p9"></span> “The Atonement is a reconciling not merely
of man to <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p9.1"></span>God</span> but
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xl-p9.2"></span>God</span> to man,”
says Archbp. Trench, and that, as S. Thomas Aquinas explains, in regard
to our sins not in regard to our nature, in which regard He always loves
us (passages quoted by Bright, n. 54).

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[192:1152](2120218.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p10"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xl-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[192:1153](2120218.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p11"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xl-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[192:1154](2120218.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p12"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xl-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[192:1155](2120218.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p17"></span> See Serm. LXXV. chap. 3, n. 3.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[192:1156](2120218.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p18"></span> See Serm. XXIII. chap. 2.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[192:1157](2120218.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p21"></span> S. [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028), [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.xl-p21.1"></span>. 
In the English Church, the Gospel for Whitsunday is still the same as it
was in Leo’s time at Rome.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[193:1158](2120218.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p22"></span> S. [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028), [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.xl-p22.1"></span>. 
In the English Church, the Gospel for Whitsunday is still the same as it
was in Leo’s time at Rome.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[193:1159](2120218.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p23"></span> S. [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028), [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.xl-p23.1"></span>. 
In the English Church, the Gospel for Whitsunday is still the same as it
was in Leo’s time at Rome.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[193:1160](2120218.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p23.6"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p24"></span> *Vadat* (subj.); others read *vadit*
(indic.) = goes, in which case Christ is still imagined to be speaking. 
If we read *vadat*, His utterance ends with the last sentence.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[193:1161](2120218.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="ii.v.xl-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xl-p27"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xl-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXVIII](2120219)
