[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120240)  [Next](2120242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>That sometimes some laudably desire
the office of preaching, while others, as laudably, are drawn to it by
compulsion.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>Although sometimes some laudably
desire the office of preaching, yet others are as laudably drawn to it
by compulsion; as we plainly perceive, if we consider the conduct of two
prophets, one of whom offered himself of his own accord to be sent to
preach, yet the other in fear refused to go.  For Isaiah, when the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> asked whom
He should send, offered himself of his own accord, saying, *Here I am;
send me* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>).  But Jeremiah is sent, yet humbly
pleads that he should not be sent, saying, *Ah, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.3"></span>Lord</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.4"></span>God</span>! behold I cannot speak:  for
I am a child* ([Jer. i. 6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.5"></span>).  Lo, from these two men different
voices proceeded outwardly, but they flowed from the same fountain of
love.  For there are two precepts of charity; the love of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.6"></span>God</span> and of our
neighbour.  Wherefore Isaiah, eager to profit his neighbours through an
active life, desires the office of preaching; but Jeremiah, longing to
cleave sedulously to the love of his Creator through a contemplative
life, remonstrates against being sent to preach.  Thus what the one
laudably desired the other laudably shrunk from; the latter, lest by
speaking he should lose the gains of silent contemplation; the former,
lest by keeping silence he should suffer loss for lack of diligent
work.  But this in both cases is to be nicely observed, that he who
refused did not persist in his refusal, and he who wished to be sent saw
himself previously cleansed by a coal of the altar; lest any one who has
not been purged should dare to approach sacred ministries, or any whom
supernal grace has chosen should proudly gainsay it under a show of
humility.  Wherefore, since it is very difficult for any one to be sure
that he has been cleansed, it is safer to decline the office of
preaching, though (as we have said) it should not be declined
pertinaciously when the Supernal Will that it should be undertaken is
recognized.  Both requirements Moses marvellously fulfilled, who was
unwilling to be set over so great a multitude, and yet obeyed.  For
peradventure he were proud, were he to undertake without trepidation the
leadership of that innumerable people; and, again, proud he would
plainly be were he to refuse to obey his <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.7"></span>Lord’s</span> command.  Thus in both
ways humble, in both ways submissive, he was unwilling, as measuring
himself, to be set over the people; and yet, as presuming on the might
of Him who commanded him, he consented.  Hence, then, hence let all rash
ones infer how great guilt is theirs, if they fear not to be preferred
to others by their own seeking, when holy men, even when <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.8"></span>God</span> commanded,
feared to undertake the leadership of peoples.  Moses trembles though
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.viii-p3.9"></span>God</span>
persuades him; and yet every weak one pants to assume the burden of
dignity; and one who can hardly bear his own load without falling,
gladly puts his shoulders under the pressure of others not his own:  his
own deeds are too heavy for him to carry, and he augments his burden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of those who covet pre-eminence, and seize on the language of the
Apostle to serve the purpose of their own cupidity.](2120242)
