[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120292)  [Next](2120294) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
do not even begin good things, and those who do not finish them when
begun.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 35.)  Differently to
be admonished are they who do not even begin good things, and those who
in no wise complete such as they have begun.  For as to those who do not
even begin good things, for them the first need is, not to build up what
they may wholesomely love, but to demolish that wherein they are wrongly
occupied.  For they will not follow the untried things they hear of,
unless they first come to feel how pernicious are the things that they
have tried; since neither does one desire to be lifted up who knows not
the very fact that he has fallen; nor does one who feels not the pain of
a wound seek any healing remedy.  First, then, it is to be shewn to them
how vain are the things that they love, and then at length to be
carefully made known to them how profitable are the things that they let
slip.  Let them first see that what they love is to be shunned, and
afterwards perceive without difficulty that what they shun is to be
loved.  For they sooner accept the things which they have not tried, if
they recognize as true whatever discourse they may hear concerning the
things that they have tried.  So then they learn to seek true good with
fulness of desire, when they have learnt with certainty of judgment how
vainly they have held to what was false.  Let them be told, therefore,
both that present good things will soon pass away from enjoyment, and
also that the account to be given of them will nevertheless endure,
without passing away, for vengeance; since both what pleases them is
withdrawn from them now against their will, and what pains them is
reserved them, also against their will, for punishment.  Thus may they
be wholesomely filled with alarm by the same things in which they
harmfully take delight; so that when the stricken soul, in sight of the
deep ruin of its fall, perceives that it has reached a precipice, it may
retrace its steps backward, and, fearing what it had loved, may learn to
esteem highly what it once despised.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4"></span>For hence it is that it is said to
Jeremiah when sent to preach, *See, I have this day set thee over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to scatter, and to build, and to plant* ([Jer. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.1"></span>).  Because, unless he first destroyed
wrong things, he could not profitably build right things; unless he
plucked out of the hearts of his hearers the thorns of vain love, he
would certainly plant to no purpose the words <span id="page_67b">p.
67b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-Page_67b"></span>of holy preaching. 
Hence it is that Peter first overthrows, that he may afterwards build
up, when he in no wise admonished the Jews as to what they were now to
do, but reproved them for what they had done, saying, *Jesus of
Nazareth, a man approved of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.2"></span>God</span> among you by powers and
wonders and signs, which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.3"></span>God</span> did by Him in the midst of
you, as ye yourselves know; Him, being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.4"></span>God</span>, ye have by the hands of
wicked men crucified and slain; whom <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.5"></span>God</span> hath raised up, having loosed
the pains of hell* ([Acts ii.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.6"></span>); in order, to wit, that having been
thrown down by a recognition of their cruelty, they might hear the
building up of holy preaching by so much the more profitably as they
anxiously sought it.  Whence also they forthwith replied, *What then
shall we do, men and brethren?*  And it is presently said to them,
*Repent and be baptized, every one of you* ([Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.7"></span>).  Which words of building up they
would surely have despised, had they not first wholesomely become aware
of the ruin of their throwing down.  Hence it is that Saul, when the
light from heaven shone upon him, did not hear immediately what he was
to do aright, but what he had done wrong.  For, when, fallen to the
earth, he enquired, saying, *Who art Thou, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.8"></span>Lord</span>?* it was straightway
replied, *I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.*  And when he
forthwith replied, *<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.9"></span>Lord</span>, what wilt Thou have me to
do?* it is added at once, *Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be
told thee there what thou must do* ([Acts
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004), [Acts
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.10"></span>.).  Lo, the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p4.11"></span>Lord</span>, speaking from heaven,
reproved the deeds of His persecutor, and yet did not at once shew him
what he had to do.  Lo, the whole fabric of his elation had already been
thrown down and then, humble after his downfall, he sought to be built
up:  and when pride was thrown down, the words of building up were still
kept back; to wit, that the cruel persecutor might long lie overthrown,
and rise afterwards the more firmly built in good as he had fallen
utterly upset from his former error.  Those, then, who have not as yet
begun to do any good are first to be overthrown by the hand of
correction from the stiffness of their iniquity, that they may
afterwards be lifted up to the state of well-doing.  For this cause also
we cut down the lofty timber of the forest, that we may raise it up in
the roof of a building:  but yet it is not placed in the fabric
suddenly; in order, that is, that its vicious greenness may first be
dried out:  for the more the moisture thereof is exuded in the lowest,
by so much the more solidly is it elevated to the topmost places.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5"></span>But, on the other hand, those who in
no wise complete the good things they have begun are to be admonished to
consider with cautious circumspection how that, when they accomplish not
their purposes, they tear up with them even the things that had been
begun.  For, if that which is seen to be a thing to be done advances not
through assiduous application, even that which had been well done falls
back.  For the human soul in this world is, as it were, in the condition
of a ship ascending against the stream of a river:  it is never suffered
to stay in one place, since it will float back to the nethermost parts
unless it strive for the uppermost.  If then the strong hand of the
worker carry not on to perfection the good things begun, the very
slackness in working fights against what has been wrought.  For hence it
is that it is said through Solomon, *He that is feeble and slack in work
is brother to him that wasteth his works* ([Prov. xviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>).  For in truth he who does not
strenuously execute the good things he has begun imitates in the
slackness of his negligence the hand of the destroyer.  Hence it is said
by the Angel to the Church of Sardis, *Be watchful, and strengthen the
things which remain, that are ready to die; for I find not thy works
complete before my <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.2"></span>God</span>* ([Rev. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.3"></span>).  Thus, because the works had not been
found complete before his <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.4"></span>God</span>, he foretold that those which
remained, even such as had been done, were about to die.  For, if that
which is dead in us be not kindled into life, that which is retained as
though still alive is extinguished too.  They are to be admonished that
it might have been more tolerable for them not to have laid hold of the
right way than, having laid hold of it, to turn their backs upon it. 
For unless they looked back, they would not grow weak with any torpor
with regard to their undertaken purpose.  Let them hear, then, what is
written, *It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness than, after they have known it, to be turned backward* ([2
Pet. ii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.5"></span>).  Let them hear what is written; *I
would thou wert cold or hot:  but, because than art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will begin to spue thee out of my mouth* ([Rev.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-p5.6"></span>).  For he is hot who both takes up and
completes good purposes; but he is cold who does not even begin any to
be completed.  And as transition is made through lukewarmness from cold
to heat, so through lukewarmness there is a return from heat to cold. 
Whosoever, then, has lost the cold of unbelief so as to live, but in no
wise passes beyond lukewarmness so as to go on to burn, he doubtless,
despairing of heat, while he <span id="page_68b">p. 68b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxv-Page_68b"></span>lingers in pernicious lukewarmness,
is in the way to become cold.  But, as before lukewarmness there is hope
in cold, so after cold there is despair in lukewarmness.  For he who is
yet in his sins loses not his trust in conversion:  but he who after
conversion has become lukewarm has withdrawn the hope that there might
have been of the sinner.  It is required, then, that every one be either
hot or cold, lest, being lukewarm, he be spued out:  that is, that
either, being not yet converted, he still afford hope of his conversion,
or, being already converted, he be fervent in virtues; lest he be spued
out as lukewarm, in that he goes back in torpor from purposed heat to
pernicious cold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished who do bad things secretly and
good things openly, and those who do contrariwise.](2120294)
