[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120412)  [Next](2120414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of
Constantinople <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5"></span>Though consideration of the case
moves me, yet charity also impels me to write, since I have written once
and again to my most holy brother the lord John, but have received no
letter from him.  For some one else, a secular person, addressed me
under his name; seeing that, if those were really his letters, I have
not been vigilant, having believed of him something far different from
what I have found.  For I had written about the case of the most
reverend presbyter John, and about the questions of the monks of
Isauria, one of whom, being in priest’s orders, <span id="page_136b">p.
136b</span> <span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-Page_136b"></span>has been beaten
with clubs in your church; and thy most holy Fraternity (as appears from
the signature of the letter) has written back to me professing ignorance
of what I wrote about.  At this reply I was exceedingly astonished,
revolving within myself in silence, if he speaks the truth, what can be
worse than that such things should be done against the servants of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, and even
he who was close at hand should not know?  For what excuse can a
shepherd have if the wolf devours the sheep and the shepherd knows it
not?  But, if your Holiness knew both what I referred to in my letter
and what had been done, whether against John the presbyter or against
Athanasius, monk of Isauria and presbyter, and wrote to me, I know not;
what can I reply to this, since the Truth says through His Scripture,
*The mouth that lieth slayeth the soul* ([Wisd. i.
11](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#011)<span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.2"></span>)?  I demand of thee, most holy
brother; has that so great abstinence of thine come to this, that by
denial thou wouldest hide from thy brother what thou knewest to have
been done?  Had it not been better that flesh should go into that mouth
for food, than that falsehood should come out of it for deceiving a
neighbour; especially when the Truth says, *Not that which goeth into
the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this
defileth a man* ([Matth. xv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.3"></span>)?  But far be it from me to believe
anything of the kind of your most holy heart.  Those letters were headed
with your name, but I do not think they were yours.  I had written to
the most blessed lord John; but I believe that that familiar of yours
has replied,—that youngster, who as yet has learnt nothing about <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.4"></span>God</span>; who knows
not the bowels of charity; who in his wicked doings is accused by all;
who daily lays snares against the deaths of divers people by means of
concealed wills; who neither fears <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.5"></span>God</span> nor regards men.  Believe
me, most holy brother, you must first correct this man, that from the
example of those who are near to you those who are not near may be
better amended.  Do not give ear to his tongue:  he ought to be directed
after the counsel of your holiness; not your holiness swayed by his
words.  For, if you listen to him, I know that you cannot have peace
with your brethren.  For I, as my conscience bears me witness, wish to
quarrel with no man; and with all my power I avoid it.  And, though I
desire exceedingly to be at peace with all mankind, it is especially so
with you, whom I exceedingly love, if only you are yourself the person
whom I knew.  For, if you do not observe the canons, and wish to tear to
pieces the statutes of the Fathers, I know not who you are.  So act,
then, most holy and most dear brother, that we may mutually recognize
each other, lest, if the ancient foe should move us two to take offence,
he slay many through his most atrocious victory.  As for me, to shew
that I seek to do nothing in a haughty spirit, if that youngster of whom
I have before spoken did not hold the topmost place of evil doing with
thy Fraternity, I could meanwhile have passed over in silence what is
ready to my hand from the canons, and have sent back to thee with
confidence the persons who came to me at the first, knowing that your
Holiness would receive them with charity.  But even now I say; Either
receive these same persons, restoring them to their orders, and leaving
them in quiet; or, if perchance thou art unwilling to do this, observe
in their case the statutes of the Fathers and the definitions of the
canons, putting aside all altercation with me.  But, if thou shouldest
do neither, we indeed are unwilling to bring on a quarrel, but still do
not shun one if it comes from your side.  Moreover your Fraternity knows
well what the canons say about bishops who desire to inspire fear by
blows.  For we have been made shepherds, not persecutors.  And the
excellent preacher says, *Argue, beseech, rebuke, with all longsuffering
and doctrine* ([2 Tim. iv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p5.6"></span>).  But new and unheard of is this
preaching, which exacts faith by blows.  But I need not speak at length
by letter about these things, since I have sent my most beloved son, the
deacon Sabinianus, as my representative in ecclesiastical matters, to
the threshold of our lords; and he will speak with you about everything
more particularly.  Unless you are disposed to wrangle with us, you will
find him prepared for all that is just.  Him I commend to your
Blessedness, that he at least may find that lord John whom I knew in the
royal city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[135b:1503](2120413.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> John Jejunator (or the Faster), so
called from his ascetic habits.  Gregory had known and esteemed him
during his residence at Constantinople.  See above, III. 4.  The
occasion of the letter before us was as follows.  Two presbyters, John
of Chalcedon and Athanasius of Isauria (the latter being also a monk in
the monastery of St. Mile in Isauria), had been accused of heresy at
Constantinople, found guilty, and one of them beaten with cudgels in the
church.  They had gone to Rome to lay their grievances before the pope,
who had written to John Jejunator the Patriarch more than once to
protest against so uncanonical a punishment.  The Patriarch seems to
have replied that he knew nothing about the matter:  whereupon Gregory
sent him this stinging letter.  In the following year (593–4), it
appears from a letter to Narses, a patrician at Constantinople, that the
case was still pending.  Narses had reported the Patriarch as wishing to
act canonically; and Gregory, doubtfully hoping so, threatens strong
measures if it should be otherwise (IV. 32).  Afterwards (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 594–5) it
seems as if the Patriarch had written on the subject pleasantly:  for at
the end of a long letter to him protesting against his assumption of the
title of “Œcumenical Bishop,” Gregory alludes to his “scripta dulcissima
atque suavissima” in the matter of John and Athanasius, promising a
reply (V. 18).  In the following year (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 595–6) we find that the
charges of heresy against the two presbyters had been entertained before
Gregory in a Roman synod; and this apparently with the assent of the
Patriarch, who had transmitted a statement of the case.  John of
Chalcedon had been fully acquitted of heresy; but some doubt still
remained as to the orthodoxy of Athanasius.  Accordingly John was at
once sent back to Constantinople with a letter from Gregory to the
Patriarch, reversing the sentence against him which had been passed at
Constantinople and demanding that he should be received with favour and
reinstated.  As though doubtful of the Patriarch’s compliance, Gregory
addressed also the Emperor, and Theoctistus, a relation of the
Emperor’s, requesting them to protect the acquitted appellant (VI. 14,
15, 16, 17).  In the same year Athanasius, who had explained or
retracted what had been objected to in his writings, was also declared
orthodox, and sent back to Constantinople as acquitted.  But this was
after the death of John Jejunator; and accordingly the letter demanding
the reinstatement of Athanasius was addressed to his successor Cyriacus
(VI. 66; VII. 5).  How John Jejunator would have acted at this stage of
the proceedings, had he lived, we have no means of knowing; nor is there
record of the action of Cyriacus.  The only further reference to the
subject in the epistles is in one to the two Patriarchs of Alexandria
and Antioch (VII. 34), in writing to whom Gregory sets forth at some
length the doctrinal questions that had been treated in the trial of
Athanasius, as though desirous of having the assent of those apostolical
and patriarchal sees, which (as we have seen) he elsewhere acknowledges
as sharing with his own the authority of St. Peter, to the decision come
to at Rome.  The whole history of the case, which, as has been seen, was
protracted through several years, is of some importance as illustrating
Gregory’s claim to entertain appeals from Constantinople, and to reverse
at Rome what had been decided there, though it is not equally clear,
from what is before us in this particular case, how such claims were
viewed at Constantinople.  On the one hand we find no sign of the appeal
of the two presbyters to Rome having been objected to; while on the
other, Gregory evidently had his doubts as to whether the Roman decision
would be acted on at Constantinople; and whether it was so or not we do
not know.  The letters about it, above referred to, are III. 53; IV. 32;
V. 18; VI. 14, 15, 16, 17, 66; VII. 5, 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LVI](2120414)
