[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120295)  [Next](2120297) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii-p2"></span>Of the exhortation to be applied
to one person, who labours under contrary passions.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii-p3"></span>It is indeed a serious labour for
the preacher to keep an eye in his public preaching to the hidden
affections and motives of individuals, and, after the manner of the
palæstra, to turn himself with skill to either side:  yet he is worn
with much severer labour, when he is compelled to preach to one person
who is subject to contrary vices.  For it is commonly the case that some
one is of too joyous a constitution, and yet sadness suddenly arising
immoderately <span id="page_70b">p. 70b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxviii-Page_70b"></span>depresses him.  The preacher,
therefore, must give heed that the temporary sadness be so removed that
the constitutional joyousness be not increased; and that the
constitutional joyousness be so curbed that the temporary sadness be not
aggravated.  This man is burdened by a habit of immoderate precipitancy,
and yet sometimes the power of a suddenly-born fear impedes his doing
what ought to be done in haste.  That man is burdened by a habit of
immoderate fear, and yet sometimes is impelled in what he desires by the
rashness of immoderate precipitancy.  In the one, therefore, let the
fear that suddenly arises be so repressed that his long-nourished
precipitancy do not further grow.  In the other let the precipitancy
that suddenly arises be so repressed that yet the fear stamped on him by
constitution do not gather strength.  And, indeed, what is there strange
in the physicians of souls being on their guard in these things, when
those who heal not hearts but bodies govern themselves with so great
skill of discernment?  For it is often the case that extreme faintness
weighs down a weak body, which faintness ought to be met by strong
remedies; but yet the weak body cannot bear a strong remedy.  He,
therefore, who treats the case gives heed so to draw off the supervening
malady that the pre-existing weakness of the body be in no wise
increased, lest perchance the faintness should pass away with the life. 
He compounds, then, his remedy with such discernment as at one and the
same time to meet both the faintness and the weakness.  If, then,
medicine for the body administered without division can be of service in
a divided way, why should not medicine for the soul, applied in one and
the same preaching, be of power to meet moral diseases in diverse
directions:  which medicine is the more subtle in its operation in that
invisible things are dealt with?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That sometimes lighter vices are to be left alone, that more
grievous ones may be removed.](2120297)
