[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120464)  [Next](2120466) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p2"></span>*To Constantina Augusta* <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) .

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p4"></span>Gregory to Constantina, &c.

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p5"></span>Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p5.1"></span>God</span>, who holds in His right hand the
heart of your Piety, both protects us through you and prepares for you
rewards of eternal remuneration for temporal deeds.  For I have learnt
from the letters of the deacon Sabinianus my *responsalis* with what
justice your Serenity is interested in the cause of the blessed Prince
of the apostles Peter against certain persons who are proudly humble and
feignedly kind.  And I trust in the bounty of our Redeemer that for
these your good offices with the most serene lord and his most pious
sons you will receive retribution also in the heavenly country.  Nor is
there any doubt that you will receive eternal benefits, being loosed
from the chains of your sins, if in the cause of his Church you have
made him your debtor to whom the power of binding and of loosing has
been given.  Wherefore I still beg you to allow no man’s hypocrisy to
prevail against the truth, since there are some who, according to the
saying of the excellent preacher, by sweet words and fair speeches
seduce the hearts of the innocent,—men who are vile in raiment, but
puffed up in heart.  And they affect to despise all things in this
world, and yet seek to acquire for themselves all the things that are of
this world.  They confess themselves unworthy before all men, but cannot
be content with private titles, since they covet that whereby they may
seem to be more worthy than all.  Let therefore your Piety, whom
Almighty <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p5.2"></span>God</span>
has appointed with our most serene <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p5.3"></span>Lord</span> to be over the whole world,
through your favouring of justice render service to Him from whom you
have received your right to so great a dominion, that you may rule over
the world that is committed to you so much the more securely as you more
truly serve the Author of all things in the execution of truth.

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p6"></span>Furthermore, I inform you that I have
received a letter from the most pious lord desiring me to be pacific
towards my brother and fellow-priest John.  And indeed so it became the
religious lord to give injunctions to priests.  But, when this my
brother with new presumption and pride calls himself universal bishop,
having caused himself in the time of our predecessor of holy memory to
be designated in synod by this so proud a title, though all the acts of
that synod were abrogated, <span id="page_172b">p. 172b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xi-Page_172b"></span>being disallowed by the Apostolic
See,—the most serene lord gives me a somewhat distressing intimation, in
that he has not rebuked him who is acting proudly, but endeavours to
bend me from my purpose, who in this cause of defending the truth of the
Gospels and Canons, of humility and rectitude; whereas my aforesaid
brother and fellow-priest is acting against evangelical principles and
also against the blessed Apostle Peter, and against all the churches,
and against the ordinances of the Canons.  But the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p6.1"></span>Lord</span>, in whose hands
are all things, is almighty; of Him it is written, *There is no wisdom
nor prudence nor counsel against the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p6.2"></span>Lord</span>* ([Prov. xxi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#030)<span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p6.3"></span>).  And indeed my often before mentioned
most holy brother endeavours to persuade my most serene lord of many
things:  but well I know that all those prayers of his and all those
tears will not allow my lord to be in any thing cajoled by any one
against reason or his own soul.

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p7"></span>Still it is very distressing, and hard
to be borne with patience, that my aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop,
despising all others, should attempt to be called sole bishop.  But in
this pride of his what else is denoted than that the times of Antichrist
are already near at hand?  For in truth he is imitating him who,
scorning social joy with the legions of angels, attempted to start up to
a summit of singular eminence, saying, *I will exalt my throne above the
stars of heaven, I will sit upon the mount of the testament, in the
sides of the North, and will ascend above the heights of the clouds, and
I will be like the most High* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p7.1"></span>).  Wherefore I beseech you by Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p7.2"></span>God</span> not to
allow the times of your Piety to be polluted by the elation of one man,
nor in any way to give any assent to so perverse a title, and that in
this case your Piety may by no means despise me; since, though the sins
of Gregory are so great that he ought to suffer such things, yet there
are no sins of the Apostle Peter that he should deserve in your times to
suffer thus.  Wherefore again and again I beseech you by Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p7.3"></span>God</span> that, as the
princes your ancestors have sought the favour of the holy Apostle Peter,
so you also take heed both to seek it for yourselves and to keep it, and
that his honour among you be in no degree lessened on account of our
sins who unworthily serve him, seeing that he is able both to be your
helper now in all things and hereafter to remit your sins.

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p8"></span>Moreover, it is now even seven years
that we have been living in this city among the swords of the Lombards. 
How much is expended on them daily by this Church, that we may be able
to live among them, is not to be told.  But I briefly indicate that, as
in the regions of Ravenna the Piety of my Lords has for the first army
of Italy a treasurer (*sacellarium*) to defray the daily expenses for
recurring needs, so I also in this city am their treasurer for such
purposes.  And yet this Church, which at one and the same time
unceasingly expends so much on clergy, monasteries, the poor, the
people, and in addition on the Lombards, lo it is still pressed down by
the affliction of all the Churches, which groan much for this pride of
one man, though they do not presume to say anything.

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p9"></span>Further, a bishop of the city of Salona
has been ordained without the knowledge of me and my *responsalis*, and
a thing has been done which never happened under any former princes. 
When I heard of this, I at once sent word to that prevaricator, who had
been irregularly ordained, that he must not presume by any means to
celebrate the solemnities of mass, unless we should have first
ascertained from our most serene lords that they had ordered this to be
done; and this I commanded him under pain of excommunication.  And yet,
scorning and despising me, supported by the audacity of certain secular
persons, to whom he is said to give many bribes so as to impoverish his
Church, he presumes up to this time to celebrate mass, and has refused
to come to me according to the order of my lords.  Now I, obeying the
injunction of their Piety, have from my heart forgiven this same
Maximus, who had been ordained without my knowledge, his presumption in
passing over me and my *responsalis* in his ordination, even as though
he had been ordained with my authority.  But his other wrong doings—to
wit his bodily transgressions, which I have heard of, and his having
been elected through bribery, and his having presumed to celebrate mass
while excommunicated—these things, for the sake of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p9.1"></span>God</span>, I cannot pass
over without enquiry.  But I hope, and implore the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xi-p9.2"></span>Lord</span>, that no fault
may be found in him with respect to these things that are reported, and
that his case may be terminated without peril to my soul.  Nevertheless,
before this has been ascertained, my most serene lord, in the order that
has been despatched, has enjoined me to receive him with honour when he
comes.  And it is a very serious thing that a man of whom so many things
of such a nature are reported should be honoured before such things have
been enquired into and sifted, as they ought in the first place to be. 
And, if the causes of the bishops who are committed to me are settled
before my most pious lords under the patronage of others, what shall I
do, unhappy that I am, in this Church?  But that my bishops despise me,
and have recourse to secular Judges against me, I give thanks to <span
id="page_173b">p. 173b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xi-Page_173b"></span>Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p9.3"></span>God</span> that I attribute it to my sins. 
This however I briefly intimate, because I am waiting for a little
while; and, if he should long delay coming to me, I shall in no wise
hesitate to exercise strict canonical discipline in his case.  But I
trust in Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p9.4"></span>God</span>, that He will give long life to
our most pious Lords, and order things for us under your hand, not
according to our sins, but according to the gifts of His grace.  These
things, then, I suggest to my most tranquil lady, since I am not
ignorant with how great zeal for rectitude the most pure conscience of
her Serenity is moved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[171b:1593](2120465.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="iii.v.v.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xi-p3"></span> The main purport of this letter to the
Empress is to induce her to move the Emperor to disallow the title of
Universal Bishop assumed by the patriarch of Constantinople; but at the
end of the letter he takes occasion to solicit her good offices also in
the case of Maximus, bishop of Salona for an account of which, with
references to other letters on the subject, cf. III. 47, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXIII](2120466)
