[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120250)  [Next](2120252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p2"></span>That the ruler should be a near
neighbour to every one in compassion, and exalted above all in
contemplation.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3"></span>The ruler should be a near neighbour
to every one in sympathy, and exalted above all in contemplation, so
that through the bowels of loving-kindness he may transfer the
infirmities of others to himself, and by loftiness <span
id="page_13b">p. 13b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iii.v-Page_13b"></span>of
speculation transcend even himself in his aspiration after the
invisible; lest either in seeking high things he despise the weak things
of his neighbours, or in suiting himself to the weak things of his
neighbours he relinquish his aspiration after high things.  For hence it
is that Paul is caught up into Paradise ([2 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.1"></span>)
and explores the secrets of the third heaven, and, yet, though borne
aloft in that contemplation of things invisible, recalls the vision of
his mind to the bed of the carnal, and directs how they should have
intercourse with each other in their hidden privacy, saying, *But on
account of fornication let every man have his own wife, and let every
woman have her own husband.  Let the husband render unto the wife her
due, and likewise the wife unto the husband* ([1 Cor. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.2"></span>).  And a little after ([1 Cor.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.3"></span>), *Defraud ye not one the other, except
it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to prayer,
and come together again, that Satan tempt you not.*  Lo, he is already
initiated into heavenly secrets, and yet through the bowels of
condescension he searches into the bed of the carnal; and the same eye
of the heart which in his elevation he lifts to the invisible, he bends
in his compassion upon the secrets of those who are subject to
infirmity.  In contemplation he transcends heaven, and yet in his
anxious care deserts not the couch of the carnal; because, being joined
at once to the highest and to the lowest by the bond of charity, though
in himself mightily caught up in the power of the spirit into the
heights above, yet among others, in his loving-kindness, he is content
to become weak.  Hence, therefore, he says, *Who is weak, and I am not
weak?  Who is offended, and I burn not?*  ([2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.4"></span>).  Hence again he says, *Unto the Jews I
became as a Jew* ([1 Cor. ix. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.5"></span>).  Now he exhibited this behaviour not by
losing hold of his faith, but by extending his loving-kindness; so as,
by transferring in a figure the person of unbelievers to himself, to
learn from himself how they ought to have compassion shewn them; to the
end that he might bestow on them what he would have rightly wished to
have had bestowed upon himself, had he been as they.  Hence again he
says, *Whether we be beside ourselves, it is to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.6"></span>God</span>: or whether we be sober, it is
for you* ([2 Cor. v. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.7"></span>).  For he had known how both to transcend
himself in contemplation, and to accommodate himself to his hearers in
condescension.  Hence Jacob, the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.8"></span>Lord</span> looking down from above, and
oil being poured down on the stone, saw angels ascending and descending
([Gen. xxviii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.9"></span>); to signify, that true preachers not
only aspire in contemplation to the holy head of the Church, that is to
the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.10"></span>Lord</span>,
above, but also descend in commiseration downward to His members.  Hence
Moses goes frequently in and out of the tabernacle, and he who is
wrapped into contemplation within is busied outside with the affairs of
those who are subject to infirmity.  Within he considers the secret
things of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.11"></span>God</span>; without he carries the
burdens of the carnal.  And also concerning doubtful matters he always
recurs to the tabernacle, to consult the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.12"></span>Lord</span> before the ark of the
covenant; affording without doubt an example to rulers; that, when in
the outside world they are uncertain how to order things, they should
return to their own soul as though to the tabernacle, and, as before the
ark of the covenant, consult the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.13"></span>Lord</span>, if so, they may search
within themselves the pages of sacred utterance concerning that whereof
they doubt.  Hence the Truth itself, manifested to us through susception
of our humanity, continues in prayer on the mountain, but works miracles
in the cities ([Luke vi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.14"></span>), thus laying down the way to be
followed by good rulers; that, though already in contemplation aspiring
to the highest things, they should mingle in sympathy with the
necessities of the infirm; since charity then rises wonderfully to high
things when it is compassionately drawn to the low things of neighbours;
and the more kindly it descends to the weak things of this world, the
more vigorously it recurs to the things on high.  But those who are over
others should shew themselves to be such that their subjects may not
blush to disclose even their secrets to them; that the little ones,
vexed with the waves of temptation, may have recourse to their pastor’s
heart as to a mother’s breast, and wash away the defilement they foresee
to themselves from the filth of the sin that buffets them in the solace
of his exhortation and in the tears of prayer.  Hence also it is that
before the doors of the temple the brazen sea for washing the hands of
those who enter, that is the laver, is supported by twelve oxen ([1
Kings vii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.15"></span>, *seq*.), whose faces indeed stand out
to view, but whose hinder parts are hidden.  For what is signified by
the twelve oxen but the whole order of pastors, of whom the law says, as
explained by Paul, *Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treadeth out the corn* ([1 Cor. 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009),
[Deut. 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.16"></span>)?  Their open works indeed we see; but
what remains to them behind in the hidden retribution of the strict
judge we know not.  Yet, when they prepare the patience of their
condescension for cleansing the sins of their neighbours in confession,
they support, as it were, the laver before the doors of the temple; that
whosoever is striving to enter <span id="page_14b">p. 14b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.v-Page_14b"></span>the gate of eternity may shew his
temptations to his pastor’s heart, and, as it were, wash the hands of
his thought and of his deed in the laver of the oxen.  And for the most
part it comes to pass that, while the ruler’s mind becomes aware,
through condescension, of the trials of others, it is itself also
attacked by the temptations whereof it hears; since the same water of
the laver in which a multitude of people is cleansed is undoubtedly
itself defiled.  For, in receiving the pollutions of those who wash, it
loses, as it were, the calmness of its own purity.  But of this the
pastor ought by no means to be afraid, since, under <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.v-p3.17"></span>God</span>, who nicely
balances all things, he is the more easily rescued from his own
temptations as he is more compassionately distressed by those of others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler should be, through humility, a companion of good
livers, but, through the zeal of righteousness, rigid against the vices
of evildoers.](2120252)
