[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120212)  [Next](2120214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p2.1"></span>(On the Lord’s Resurrection, I.; delivered on
Holy Saturday in the Vigil of Easter <span
id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) .)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p4"></span>I.  *We must all be partakers in Christ’s
resurrection life.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p5"></span>In my last sermon <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) , dearly-beloved, not in <span
id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-Page_182"></span>appropriately, as I think, we explained
to you our participation in the cross of Christ, whereby the life of
believers contains in itself the mystery of Easter, and thus what is
honoured at the feast is celebrated by our practice.  And how useful
this is you yourselves have proved, and by your devotion have learnt,
how greatly benefited souls and bodies are by longer fasts, more
frequent prayers, and more liberal alms.  For there can be hardly any
one who has not profited by this exercise, and who has not stored up in
the recesses of his conscience something over which he may rightly
rejoice.  But these advantages must be retained with persistent care,
lest our efforts fall away into idleness, and the devil’s malice steal
what <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p6.1"></span>God’s</span>
grace gave.  Since, therefore, by our forty days’ observance <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) we have wished to bring about this
effect, that we should feel something of the Cross at the time of the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p7.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion,
we must strive to be found partakers also of Christ’s Resurrection, and
“pass from death unto life <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) ,”
while we are in this body.  For when a man is changed by some process
from one thing into another, not to be what he was is to him an ending,
and to be what he was not is a beginning.  But the question is, to what
a man either dies or lives:  because there is a death, which is the
cause of living, and there is a life, which is the cause of dying.  And
nowhere else but in this transitory world are both sought after, so that
upon the character of our temporal actions depend the differences of the
eternal retributions.  We must die, therefore, to the devil and live to
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p8.2"></span>God</span>:  we must
perish to iniquity that we may rise to righteousness.  Let the old sink,
that the new may rise; and since, as says the Truth, “no one can serve
two masters <span id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) ,” let not him be
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p9.2"></span>Lord</span> who has
caused the overthrow of those that stood, but Him Who has raised the
fallen to victory.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p10"></span>II.  *<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p10.1"></span>God</span> did not leave His soul in hell,
nor suffer His flesh to see corruption.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p11"></span>Accordingly, since the Apostle says,
“the first man is of the earth earthy, the second man is from heaven
heavenly.  As is the earthy, such also are they that are earthy; and as
is the heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly.  As we have borne
the image of the earthy, so let us also bear the image of Him Who is
from heaven <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) ,” we must
greatly rejoice over this change, whereby we are translated from earthly
degradation to heavenly dignity through His unspeakable mercy, Who
descended into our estate that He might promote us to His, by assuming
not only the substance but also the conditions of sinful nature, and by
allowing the impassibility of Godhead to be affected by all the miseries
which are the lot of mortal manhood.  And hence that the disturbed minds
of the disciples might not be racked by prolonged grief, He with such
wondrous speed shortened the three days’ delay which He had announced,
that by joining the last part of the first and the first part of the
third day to the whole of the second, He cut off a considerable portion
of the period, and yet did not lessen the number of days.  The Saviour’s
Resurrection therefore did not long keep His soul in Hades, nor His
flesh in the tomb; and so speedy was the quickening of His uncorrupted
flesh that it bore a closer resemblance to slumber than to death, seeing
that the Godhead, Which quitted not either part of the Human Nature
which He had assumed, reunited by Its power that which Its power had
separated <span id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) .

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p14"></span>III.  *Christ’s manifestation after the
Resurrection showed that His Person was essentially the same as before.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p15"></span>And then there followed many proofs,
whereon the authority of the Faith to be preached through the whole
world might be based.  And although the rolling away of the stone, the
empty tomb, the arrangement of the linen cloths, and the angels who
narrated the whole deed by themselves fully built up the truth of the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p15.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Resurrection, yet did He often appear plainly to the eyes both of the
women and of the Apostles <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) not
only talking with them, but also remaining and eating with them, and
allowing Himself to be handled by the eager and curious hands of those
whom doubt assailed.  For to this end He entered when the doors were
closed upon the disciples, and gave them the Holy Spirit by breathing on
them, and after giving them the light of understanding opened the
secrets <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-Page_183"></span>of the Holy Scriptures, and again Himself
showed them the wound in the side, the prints of the nails, and all the
marks of His most recent Passion, whereby it might be acknowledged that
in Him the properties of the Divine and Human Nature remained undivided,
and we might in such sort know that the Word was not what the flesh is,
as to confess <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p16.1"></span>God’s</span> only Son to be both Word and
Flesh.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p17"></span>IV.  *But though it is the same, it is
also glorified.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p18"></span>The Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul,
dearly-beloved, does not disagree with this belief, when he says, “even
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know Him so no
more <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099) .”  For the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p19.4"></span>Lord’s</span> Resurrection
was not the ending, but the changing of the flesh, and His substance was
not destroyed by His increase of power.  The quality altered, but the
nature did not cease to exist:  the body was made impassible, which it
had been possible to crucify:  it was made incorruptible, though it had
been possible to wound it.  And properly is Christ’s flesh said not to
be known in that state in which it had been known, because nothing
remained passible in it, nothing weak, so that it was both the same in
essence and not the same in glory.  But what wonder if S. Paul maintains
this about Christ’s body, when he says of all spiritual Christians
“wherefore henceforth we know no one after the flesh.”  Henceforth, he
says, we begin to experience the resurrection in Christ, since the time
when in Him, Who died for all, all our hopes were guaranteed to us.  We
do not hesitate in diffidence, we are not under the suspense of
uncertainty, but having received an earnest of the promise, we now with
the eye of faith see the things which will be, and rejoicing in the
uplifting of our nature, we already possess what we believe.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p20"></span>V.  *Being saved by hope, we must not
fulfil the lusts of the flesh.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p21"></span>Let us not then be taken up with the
appearances of temporal matters, neither let our contemplations be
diverted from heavenly to earthly things.  Things which as yet have for
the most part not come to pass must be reckoned as accomplished:  and
the mind intent on what is permanent must fix its desires there, where
what is offered is eternal.  For although “by hope we were saved <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) ,” and still bear about with us a
flesh that is corruptible and mortal, yet we are rightly said not to be
in the flesh, if the fleshly affections do not dominate us, and are
justified in ceasing to be named after that, the will of which we do not
follow.  And so, when the Apostle says, “make not provision for the
flesh in the lusts thereof <span id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101) ,”
we understand that those things are not forbidden us, which conduce to
health and which human weakness demands, but because we may not satisfy
all our desires nor indulge in all that the flesh lusts after, we
recognize that we are warned to exercise such self-restraint as not to
permit what is excessive nor refuse what is necessary to the flesh,
which is placed under the mind’s control <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) .  And hence the same Apostle says
in another place, “For no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth
and cherisheth it <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) ;” in so
far, of course, as it must be nourished and cherished not in vices and
luxury, but with a view to its proper functions, so that nature may
recover herself and maintain due order, the lower parts not prevailing
wrongfully and debasingly over the higher, nor the higher yielding to
the lower, lest if vices overpower the mind, slavery ensues where there
should be supremacy.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p26"></span>VI.  *Our godly resolutions must
continue all the year round, not be confined to Easter only.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p27"></span>Let <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p27.1"></span>God’s</span> people then recognize that they
are a new creation in Christ, and with all vigilance understand by Whom
they have been adopted and Whom they have adopted <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) .  Let not the things, which have
been made new, return to their ancient instability; and let not him who
has “put his hand to the plough <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) ” forsake his work, but rather
attend to that which he sows than look back to that which he has left
behind.  Let no one fall back into that from which he has risen, but,
even though from bodily weakness he still languishes under certain
maladies, let him urgently desire to be healed and raised up.  For this
is the path of health through imitation of the Resurrection begun in
Christ, whereby, notwithstanding the many accidents and falls to which
in this slippery life the traveller is liable, his feet may be guided
from the quagmire on to solid ground, for, as it is written, “the steps
of a man are directed by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p29.2"></span>Lord</span>, and He will delight in his
way.  When the just man falls he shall not be overthrown, because the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p29.3"></span>Lord</span> will
stretch out His <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-Page_184"></span>hand <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106) .”  These thoughts, dearly-beloved,
must be kept in mind not only for the Easter festival, but also for the
sanctification of the whole life, and to this our present exercise ought
to be directed, that what has delighted the souls of the faithful by the
experience of a short observance may pass into a habit and remain
unalterably, and if any fault creep in, it may be destroyed by speedy
repentance.  And because the cure of old-standing diseases is slow and
difficult, remedies should be applied early, when the wounds are fresh,
so that rising ever anew from all downfalls, we may deserve to attain to
the incorruptible Resurrection of our glorified flesh in Christ Jesus
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p30.2"></span>Lord</span>, Who
lives and reigns with the Father and the Holy Ghost for ever and ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[181:1092](2120213.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p3"></span> The time of delivery of this and the
next Sermons was first identified by Quesnel with Easter Eve:  for a
most instructive note on the ceremonies of that day in early times, see
Bright’s n. 102.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[181:1093](2120213.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p6"></span> Viz. Serm. LXX. in which (chap 6) he had
promised to continue the subject (*superest ut de resurrectionis
consortio disseramus:  quod ne continuato sermone et mihi et vobis fiat
onerosum, in diem sabbati promissa differemus*).

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[182:1094](2120213.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p7"></span> Acc. to Bright (n. 103), “As to the
duration of Lent, there was anciently much diversity.…Although it was
not until the time of Gregory II. (715–731) that it became strictly a
forty *days*’ fast, there is no doubt that in the fourth century if not
earlier a period was generally observed which might be called ‘forty
days.’”

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[182:1095](2120213.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p8"></span> Cf. [1 John iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[182:1096](2120213.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p9"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[182:1097](2120213.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47-49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p12.1"></span>.  Leo’s text agrees with the Vulgate in
inserting ‘heavenly’ after ‘from heaven’ and in translating <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p12.2"></span>φορεσωμεν</span> (let us
bear) not <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p12.3"></span>φορέσομεν</span> (we shall bear), but is
peculiar in its paraphrase at the end of the quotation (“the image of
him, &c.”).

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[182:1098](2120213.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p13"></span> Cf. Serm. LXX. chap. 3, *nisi enim
Verbum caro fieret, et tam solida consisteret unitas in utraque natura,
ut a suscipiente susceptam nec ipsum breve mortis tempus abiungeret,
nunquam valeret ad æternitatem redire mortalitas*.  Bright (n. 96)
quotes authorities ancient and more recent to show that this has always
been the Christian’s belief.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[182:1099](2120213.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p16"></span> From this point to the end of the
chapter the language is almost identical with a passage in Letter
XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 5.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[183:1100](2120213.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p19"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p19.1"></span>. 
It must be borne in mind that the application of the phrase after the
flesh (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxxv-p19.2"></span>κατὰ
σάρκα</span>) is mistaken:  S. Paul means “according to the ordinary
view of man,” as in [Rom. 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001), [2 Cor.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002)<span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p19.3"></span>.  See Bright’s note 107.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[183:1101](2120213.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p22"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[183:1102](2120213.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p23"></span> [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[183:1103](2120213.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p24"></span> Cf. Serm. XIX. chap. 1.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[183:1104](2120213.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p25"></span> [Eph. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[183:1105](2120213.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p28"></span> *Quo suscepta sit* (*sc. nova
creatura*) *quemve susceperit*, i.e. Christ has taken on Him human
nature, and we by virtue thereof are partakers of the Divine.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[183:1106](2120213.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p29"></span> S. [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[184:1107](2120213.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p29.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p30"></span> [Ps.
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXII](2120214)
