[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120439)  [Next](2120441) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of
Caralis (*Cagliari*).

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p4"></span>We have ascertained from the report of
our fellow-bishop Felix and the abbot Cyriacus that in the island of
Sardinia priests are oppressed by lay judges, and that thy ministers
despise thy Fraternity; and that, so far as appears, while you aim only
at simplicity, discipline is neglected.  Wherefore I exhort thee that,
putting aside all excuses, thou take pains to rule the Church of which
thou hast received the charge, to keep up discipline among the clergy,
and fear no one’s words.  But, as I hear, thou hast forbidden thy
Archdeacon to live with women, and up to this time art set at naught
with regard to this thy prohibition.  Unless he obey thy command, our
will is that he be deprived of his sacred order.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p5"></span>There is another thing also which is
much to be deplored; namely, that the negligence of your Fraternity has
allowed the peasants (*rusticos*) belonging to holy Church to remain up
to the present time in infidelity.  And what is the use of my
admonishing you to bring such as do not belong to you to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>God</span>, if you
neglect to recover your own from infidelity?  Hence you must needs be in
all ways vigilant for their conversion.  For, should I succeed in
finding a pagan peasant belonging to any <span id="page_153b">p.
153b</span> <span id="iii.v.iv.xix-Page_153b"></span>bishop whatever in
the island of Sardinia, I will visit it severely on that bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p6"></span>But now, if any peasant should be
found so perfidious and obstinate as to refuse to come to the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p6.2"></span>God</span>, he must be
weighted with so great a burden of payment as to be compelled by the
very pain of the exaction to hasten to the right way <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) .

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p8"></span>It has also come to our knowledge that
some in sacred orders who have lapsed, either after doing penance or
before, are recalled to the office of their ministry; which is a thing
that we have altogether forbidden and the most sacred canons also
declare against it.  Whoso, then, after having received any sacred
order, shall have lapsed into sin of the flesh, let him so forfeit his
sacred order as not to approach any more the ministry of the altar. 
But, lest those who have been ordained should ever perish, previous care
should be taken as to what kind of people are ordained, so that it be
first seen to whether they have been continent in life for many years,
and whether they have had a care for reading and a love of almsgiving. 
It should be enquired also whether a man has perchance been twice
married.  It should also be seen to that he be not illiterate, or under
liability to the state, so as to be compelled after assuming a sacred
order to return to public employment.  All these things therefore let
your Fraternity diligently enquire into, that, every one having been
ordained after diligent examination, none may be easily liable to be
deposed after ordination.  These things which we have written to your
Fraternity do you make known to all the bishops under you, since I
myself have been unwilling to write to them, lest I might seem to lessen
your dignity.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p9"></span>It has also come to our ears that some
have been offended by our having forbidden presbyters to touch with
chrism those who are to be baptized.  And we indeed acted according to
the ancient use of our Church:  but, if any are in fact hereby
distressed, we allow that, where there is a lack of bishops, presbyters
may touch with chrism, even on their foreheads, those who are to be
baptized <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[153b:1549](2120440.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p7"></span> The *rustici*, or *coloni*, who
cultivated the land, made their living out of it, having to pay dues in
money or in kind (see I. 44).  Gregory’s suggestion is that such dues
should be made so heavy in the case of natives who refused to be
converted as to starve them into compliance.  Elsewhere we find him
deprecating compulsion, or any kind of persecution, for the conversion
of Jews and heretics, on the ground that forced conversions were
unreal.  But he appears to have had no such compunctions in the case of
these illiterate pagans.  This is not the only instance of religious
zeal betraying him into a certain human inconsistency.  Cf. IX. 65.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[153b:1550](2120440.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xix-p10"></span> See above, IV. 9.  There is some
doubt as to what the practice was which Gregory had forbidden in his
former epistle but now allows.  In Ep. IX. he had said, “Episcopi
baptizatos infantes signare bis in fronte chrismate non præsumant; sed
presbyteri baptizandos ungant in pectore, ut episcopi postmodum ungere
debeant in fronte.”  There is obvious reference here to the two
unctions, before and after baptism.  The first, in preparation for
baptism, was with simple oil, on the breast and other parts of the body,
and was administered by presbyters both in the East and West:  the
second for confirmation after baptism, was with chrism (a mixture of oil
and balsam), on the forehead, and in the Eastern Churches might be, as
it still is, administered immediately after baptism by the baptizing
presbyter, but in the West was usually reserved for the bishop in
person.  It would seem that in Sardinia the Eastern usage had been
followed with regard to the presbyter signing the baptized child on the
forehead with chrism immediately after baptism, but that it had been
also customary for the bishop afterward to repeat the rite (“signare bis
in fronte chrismate”).  Such repetition Gregory, in Ep. IX., appears to
forbid in cases where the presbyter had already administered the rite;
but, in the second clause of the sentence, he directs that the Western
usage should thenceforth be observed:  the presbyter who baptized was to
anoint on the breast before the baptism; but the bishop, and he alone,
on the forehead with chrism afterwards.  Such being the most obvious
meaning of what is said in Ep. IX. the equally obvious meaning of the
concession in Ep. XXVI. would be allowance for presbyters in the absence
of bishops, to confirm with chrism after baptism, according to the
Eastern usage, but for the fact that the expression now used is not
*baptizatos*, but *baptizandos*.  Hence one opinion is that all that is
here allowed to presbyters is the anointing of the forehead with chrism,
as well as the breast with oil, *previously* to baptism; in which case
of course it would not be confirmation.  But it seems more likely that
the intention was to allow presbyters to administer confirmation in the
absence of bishops, the term *baptizandos* being used loosely to denote
candidates for baptism.  The fact that it is only where bishops could
not be had (*ubi desunt episcopi*) that the practice is allowed adds
probability to this view; and also his saying that in his previous
prohibition he had been following the ancient custom of the Roman
Church, which was to reserve the signing the forehead with chrism after
baptism, i.e. confirmation, to the bishop.  Innocent I. (*Ep*. i. *ad.
Decent*. c. iii.) lays down the rule thus; “Presbyteris, qui, seu extra
episcopum seu pæesente episcopo, baptizant, chrismate baptizatos ungere
licet, sed quod ab episcopo fuerit consecratum; non tamen frontem ex
eodem oleo signare, quod solis debetur episcopis, quum tradunt Spiritum
Sanctum Paracletum.”  Here, we observe, the usage of the Roman Church
allows the baptizing presbyter to anoint with chrism after baptism, only
not therewith to sign the forehead for actual confirmation; and this is
still the Roman usage.  It should be observed further that in all cases,
in the East as well in the West, confirmation was regarded as belonging
peculiarly to the Bishop’s office, the chrism used having always been
consecrated by him, though it might be applied by presbyters:  and thus
Gregory, in allowing presbyters to administer the rite in Sardinia,
would not regard any essential principle of Church order as being
infringed.  He only shews the same wise liberality as we find evidence
of in other cases, allowing varieties of usage in various churches,
where no important principle seemed to be involved.  Thus he approves of
single instead of triune immersion in baptism being practised in Spain
(I. 43), and bids Augustine in England adopt according to his discretion
the customs of other Churches (XI. 64).  With regard to the essential
*form* of confirmation recognized in the time of Gregory, it appears
evidently from these epistles to have been *unction*, and not mere
imposition of hands.  It is also evident that it was administered, as in
the East now, to infants; cf. XIII. 18, where the phrase is “ad
consignandos imantes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Januarius, Bishop.](2120441)
