[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120440)  [Next](2120442) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
(*Cagliari*).

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p4"></span>Thy Fraternity ought indeed to have
been so attentive to pious duties as to be in no need at all of our
admonitions to induce thee to fulfil them:  yet, as certain particulars
that require correction have come to our knowledge, there is nothing
incongruous in your having besides a letter addressed to you bearing our
authority.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p5"></span>Wherefore we apprize you that we have
been given to understand that it has been the custom for the
Guest-houses (*Xenodochia*) constituted in the parts about Caralis to
submit their accounts in detail from time to time to the bishop of the
city; that is, so as to be governed under his guardianship and care. 
<span id="page_154b">p. 154b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv.xx-Page_154b"></span>Now, as thy Charity is said to have so
far neglected this, we exhort, as has been said, that the inmates who
are or have been established in these Guest-houses submit their accounts
in detail from time to time.  And let such persons be ordained to
preside over them as may be found most worthy in life, manners and
industry, and at any rate *religiosi* <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) , whom judges may have no power of
annoying, lest, if they should be such as could be summoned to the
courts, occasion might be given for wasting the feeble resources which
they have:  concerning which resources we wish thee to take the greatest
care, so that they be given away to no one without thy knowledge, lest
the carelessness of thy Fraternity should go so far as to let them be
plundered.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p7"></span>Moreover, thou knowest that the bearer
of these presents, Epiphanius the presbyter, was criminally accused in
the letters of certain Sardinians.  We, then, having investigated his
case as it was our will to do, and finding no proof of what was charged
against him, have absolved him, so that he might be restored to his
place.  We therefore desire thee to search out the authors of the charge
against him:  and, unless he who sent those same letters be prepared to
support his charges by canonical and most strict proofs, let him on no
account approach the mystery of holy communion.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p8"></span>Further, as to Paul the cleric, who is
said to have been often detected in malpractices, and who had fled into
Africa, having returned to a lay state of life in despite of his cloth,
if it is so, we have seen to his being given up to penance after
previous corporal punishment, to the end that, according to the
apostolic sentence, by means of affliction of the flesh the spirit may
be saved, and also that he may be able to wash away with continual tears
the earthly filth of sin, which he is said to have contracted by wicked
works.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p9"></span>Moreover, in accordance with the
injunctions of the canons, let no religious person (*religiosus*)
associate with those who have been suspended from ecclesiastical
communion.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p10"></span>Further, for ordinations or marriages
of clerics, or from virgins who are veiled, let no one presume to
receive any fee, unless they should prefer to offer something of their
own accord.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p11"></span>As to what should be done in the case
of women who have left monasteries for a lay life, and have taken
husbands, we have conversed at length with thy Fraternity’s aforesaid
presbyter, from whose report your Holiness may be more fully informed.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p12"></span>Further, let religious clerics
(*religiosi clerici*) <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) avoid
resort to or the patronage of laymen; but let them be in all respects
subject to thy jurisdiction according to the canons, lest through the
remissness of thy Fraternity the discipline of the Church over which
thou presidest should be dissolved.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p14"></span>Lastly, as to the men who have sinned
with the aforesaid women who had left their monasteries, and are said to
be now suspended from communion, if thy Fraternity should observe them
to have repented worthily for such a wickedness, we will that thou
restore them to holy communion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[154b:1551](2120441.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p6"></span> For what was meant by *religiosi* and
*religiosæ*, see I. 61, note 7.  It appears from what is said here that
persons recognized as such were ordinarily exempt from certain claims
upon them by the state to which others might be liable.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[154b:1552](2120441.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xx-p13"></span> For the meaning of *religiosi*, see
I. 61, n. 7.  They were not of necessity *clerici*.  In X. 54, we find
*religioso laico*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXIX](2120442)
