[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120032)  [Next](2120034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter XXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p2.1"></span>To Flavian, Bishop of
Constantinople.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>To his well-beloved brother Flavian the
bishop, Leo the bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p4"></span>I.  *He complains that Flavian has not
sent him a full account of Eutyches’ case.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p5"></span>Seeing that our most Christian and
merciful Emperor, in his holy and praiseworthy faith and anxiety for the
peace of the Catholic Church, has sent us a letter <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) upon the matters which have roused the
din of disturbance among you, we wonder, brother, that you have been
able to keep silence to us upon the scandal that has been caused, and
that you did not rather take measures for our being at once informed by
your own report, that we might not have any doubt about the truth of the
case.  For we have received a document from the presbyter Eutyches <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) , who complains that on the accusation
of bishop Eusebius he has been wrongfully deprived of communion,
notwithstanding that he says he attended your summons and did not refuse
his presence:  and moreover asserts that he presented a deed of appeal
in the very court, which was however not accepted:  whereupon he was
forced to put forth letters of defence <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) in the city of Constantinople. 
Pending which matter we do not yet know with what justice he has been
separated from the communion of the Church.  But having regard to the
importance of the matter, we wish to know the reason of your action and
to have the whole thing brought to our knowledge:  for we, who desire
the judgments of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>Lord’s</span> priests to be deliberate,
cannot without information decide one way or another, until we have all
the proceedings accurately before us.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p9"></span>II.  *And now demands it.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p10"></span>And therefore, brother, signify to us
in a full account by the hand of the most fit and competent person, what
innovation has arisen against the ancient faith, which needed to be
corrected by so severe a sentence.  For both the moderation of the
Church and the devout faith of our most godly prince insist upon our
showing much anxiety for the peace of Christendom:  that dissensions may
be cleared away and the Catholic Faith kept unimpaired, and that those
whose faith has been proved may be fortified by our authority, when
those who <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-Page_36"></span>maintain what is wrong have been
recalled from their error.  And no difficulty can arise on this side,
since the said presbyter has professed himself by his own statement,
ready to be corrected if anything be found in him worthy of rebuke.  For
it beseems us in such matters to take every precaution that charity be
kept and the Truth defended without the din of strife.  And therefore
because you see, beloved, that we are anxious about so great a matter,
hasten to inform us of everything in as full and clear a manner as
possible (for this ought to have been done before), lest in the
cross-statements of both sides we be misled by some uncertainty, and the
dissension, which ought to be stifled in its infancy, be fostered:  for
our heart is impressed by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> inspiration with the need of
saving from violation by anyone’s misinterpretation those constitutions
of the venerable fathers which have received Divine ratification and
belong to the groundwork of the Faith.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p10.2"></span>God</span> keep thee safe, dear brother. 
Dated 18 February (449), in the consulship of the illustrious Asturius
and Protogenes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[35:231](2120033.htm#fr_230) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p6"></span> This letter from Theodosius II. came
soon after Eutyches, letter (XXI), and “apparently gave Leo the
impression, that Eutyches had been badly treated.”  Bright.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[35:232](2120033.htm#fr_231) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p7"></span> See Letter XXI., above.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[35:233](2120033.htm#fr_232) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiii-p8"></span> *Contestatorios libellos*.  See Lett.
XXI., chap. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodosius Augustus II.](2120034)
