[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120430)  [Next](2120432) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Epistle X.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p2"></span>To All the Bishops of Dalmatia.

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p3"></span>Gregory to all the bishops through
Dalmatia <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) .

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p5"></span>It behoved your Fraternity, having the
eyes of the flesh closed out of regard to Divine judgment, to have
omitted nothing that appertains to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.x-p5.1"></span>God</span> and to a right inclination of
mind, nor to have preferred the countenance of any man whatever to the
uprightness of justice.  But now that your manners have been so
perverted by secular concerns, that, forgetting the whole path of the
sacerdotal dignity that is yours, and all sense of heavenly fear, you
study to accomplish what may please yourselves and not <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.x-p5.2"></span>God</span>, we have held it
necessary to send you these specially strict written orders, whereby,
with the authority of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, we
enjoin that you presume not to lay hands on any one whatever in the city
of Salona, so far as regards ordination to episcopacy, without our
consent and permission; nor to ordain any one in the same city otherwise
than as we have said.

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p6"></span>But if, either of your own accord, or
under compulsion from any one whatever, you should presume or attempt to
do anything contrary to this injunction, we shall decree you to be
deprived of participation of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.x-p6.1"></span>Lord’s</span> body and blood, that so your
very handling of the business, or your very inclination to transgress
our order, may cut you off from the sacred mysteries, and no one may be
accounted a bishop whom you may ordain.  For we wish <span
id="page_149b">p. 149b</span> <span id="iii.v.iv.x-Page_149b"></span>no
one to be rashly ordained whose life can be found fault with.  And so,
if the deacon Honoratus is shewn to be unworthy, we desire that a report
may be sent us of the life and manners of him who may be elected, that
whatever is to be done in this matter we may allow to be carried out
salubriously with our consent.

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p7"></span>For we trust in Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.x-p7.1"></span>God</span> that, as far as
in us lies, we may never suffer to be done what may damage our soul;
never what may damage your Church.  But, if the voluntary consent of all
should so fix on one person that by the favour of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.x-p7.2"></span>God</span> he may be proved worthy, and
there should be no one to dissent from his being ordained, we wish him
to be consecrated by you in this same church of Salona under the license
granted in this present epistle; excepting notwithstanding the person of
Maximus, about whom many evil reports have reached us:  and, unless he
desists from coveting the higher order, it remains, as I think, that
after full enquiry, he should be deprived also of the very office which
he now holds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[148b:1533](2120431.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iii.v.iv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.x-p4"></span> On the occasion of this Epistle, see
III. 47, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Maximianus, Bishop.](2120432)
