[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120576)  [Next](2120578) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p2"></span>*To Sabinianus, Bishop of
Jadera* <span id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p4"></span>Gregory to Sabinianus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p5"></span>I am well delighted in thy
sincerity, dearest brother, knowing how, with the discrimination of a
careful judgment, it both obeys where obedience is due and resists where
resistance is due with priestly zeal.  For with what alacrity of
devotion thou hast submitted to what we enjoined for the fault of thy
past transgression is disclosed to us by the contents of the letters
which thou hast sent to us by the bearer of these presents.  For indeed
my beloved brother could not take it otherwise than as it was enjoined
by one who loves him.  Hence I trust in the compassion of Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p5.1"></span>God</span> that His
grace so protects thee that, having been thus absolved also from other
sins, thou mayest rejoice in having wholesomely obeyed.  But as to what
thy Charity has signified about being distressed by the jealousy of the
excommunicated prevaricator Maximus, thou oughtest not to be disturbed;
but it becomes thee by patiently enduring to bear up against the billows
that swell vainly to some small degree, and by the virtue of
perseverence to subdue <span id="page_239b">p. 239b</span> <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-Page_239b"></span>the foaming of the waves.  For
patience knows how to smooth what is rough, and constancy to overcome
fierceness.  Let not, then, adversity deject your spirits, but inflame
them.  Let priestly vigour shew thee in all things the more bold.  For
this is a true evidence of truth, for one to exhibit himself as all the
readier in hard circumstances, and all the braver in such as are
adverse.  Wherefore, that no blow may avail to upset the firmness of thy
rectitude from its good determination, plant, as thou hast begun to do,
the steps of thy soul on the solidity of that rock on which thou knowest
that our Redeemer has founded the Church throughout the world, that so
the right footsteps of a sincere heart may not stumble on a devious way.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p6"></span>As to the things about which thou
hast written, or which the bearer of these presents has explained in our
presence, do not suppose that we are neglecting them:  we are very
carefully considering them.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p7"></span>Further, we have already, both
before and now, given accurate information about everything to our most
beloved son the deacon Anatolius <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) ; exhorting him to lose no time,
with the aid of our Creator, in acting strictly and zealously in
whatever pertains to the advantage and quiet of your Charity and of your
sons.  And so let not sorrow affect your Fraternity, nor the enmity of
any one whatever afflict you.  For, with the assistance of Divine Grace,
we trust that it will not be long before the presumption of the
aforesaid excommunicated prevaricator will be more strictly repressed,
and your quiet, as you desire, arrive.  We have also by no means omitted
to write about his perverseness to our most excellent son the
Exarch <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) , who is anxious to
commend him to us.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p10"></span>As to the presbyter about whom thy
Fraternity has consulted us through the representation of the bearer of
these presents, know that after his lapse he cannot by any means remain
in, or be restored to, his sacred order.  Still be ought to be somewhat
mildly dealt with, inasmuch as he is said to have readily confessed his
fault.  Furthermore, this same bearer spoke at the same time of certain
privileges of your Church granted by our predecessors.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p11"></span>About the writings thus referred to
by your Charity we wish to be more accurately informed.  Or, if any of
them are lying in the registry of your Church, it is necessary that
copies of them be transmitted hither; that we may be able with willing
mind to renew whatever concerns reverence for your dignity or the genius
of the aforesaid Church.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p12"></span>If our common son, the glorious
lord Marcellus <span id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) , should be
minded to come hither, urgently persuade him to do so; for on all
accounts I desire to see him.  But, if he should choose to remain where
he is, do you so exhibit yourselves to him in beseeming charity that you
may be able to respond, as becomes you, to the affection which he has
towards you.  May Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p13.1"></span>God</span> keep and protect you with
the gift of His grace, and enflame your heart to do the things that are
well pleasing to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[238b:1747](2120577.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p3"></span> See VI. 27, VII. 17, VIII. 10, and
III. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[239b:1748](2120577.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p8"></span> At this time Gregory’s
*apocrisiarius* at Constantinople.  Cf. VII. 31, IX. 82.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[239b:1749](2120577.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p9"></span> Callinicus, who at this time was
Exarch of Italy at Ravenna.  See IX. 9, with note, and III. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[239b:1750](2120577.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvi-p13"></span> Proconsul of Dalmatia.  Cf. IX. 5,
and III. 47, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XIX](2120578)
