[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120480)  [Next](2120482) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p2"></span>To all the Bishops of the Kingdom of
Childebert.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p3"></span>Gregory to all the Bishops of Gaul
who are under the kingdom of Childebert <span
id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) .

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p5"></span>To this end has the provision of the
divine dispensation appointed that there should be diverse degrees and
distinct orders, that, while the inferiors shew reverence to the more
powerful and the more powerful bestow love on the inferiors, one
contexture of concord may ensue of diversity, and the administration of
all several offices may be properly borne.  Nor indeed could the whole
otherwise subsist; unless, that is, a great order of differences of this
kind kept it together.  Further, that creation cannot be governed, or
live, in a state of absolute equality we are taught by the example of
the heavenly hosts, since, there being angels and also archangels, it is
manifest that they are not equal; but in power and rank, as you know,
one differs from another.  If then among these who are without sin there
is evidently this distinction, who of men can refuse to submit himself
willingly to this order of things which he knows that even angels obey? 
For hence peace and charity embrace each other mutually, and the
sincerity of concord remains firm in the reciprocal love which is well
pleasing to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p6"></span>Since, then, each single duty is then
salubriously fulfilled when there is one president who may be referred
to, we have therefore perceived it to be opportune, in the Churches that
are under the dominion of our most excellent <span id="page_184b">p.
184b</span> <span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-Page_184b"></span>son king
Childebert, to give our vicariate jurisdiction, according to ancient
custom, to our brother Virgilius, bishop of the city of Arelate, to the
end that the integrity of the catholic faith, that is of the four holy
synods, may be preserved under the protection of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p6.1"></span>God</span> with attentive devotion, and
that, if any contention should by chance arise among our brethren and
fellow-priests, he may allay it by the rigour of his authority with
discreet moderation, as representing the Apostolic See.  We have also
charged him that, if such a dispute should arise in any cases as to
require the presence of others, he should assemble our brethren and
fellow-bishops in competent number, and discuss the matter salubriously
with due regard to equity, and decide it with canonical integrity.  But
if a contention (which may the Divine power avert) should happen to
arise on matters of faith, or any business come up about which there may
perchance be serious doubt, and he should be in need of the judgment of
the Apostolic See in place of his own greatness, we have directed him
that, having diligently enquired into the truth, he should take care to
bring the question under our cognizance by a report from himself, to the
end that it may be terminated by a suitable sentence so as to remove all
doubt.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p7"></span>And, since it is necessary that the
bishops should assemble at suitable times for conference before him to
whom we have granted our vicariate jurisdiction as often as he may think
it, we exhort that none of you presume to be disobedient to his orders,
or defer attending the general conclave, unless perchance bodily
infirmity should prevent any one, or a just excuse in any case should
allow his absence.  Yet let such as are unavoidably prevented from
attending the synod send a presbyter or a deacon in their stead, to the
end that the things that, with the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, may be decided by our vicar,
may come to the knowledge of him who is absent by a faithful report
through the person whom he had sent, and be observed with unshaken
steadfastness, and that there be no occasion of excuse for daring to
violate them.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p8"></span>About this also we take the
precaution of warning you, that none of you may attempt in any way to
depart to places at any great distance without the authority of our
aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop Virgilius, knowing that the orders
of our predecessors, who granted vicariate jurisdiction to his
predecessors, undoubtedly lay this down.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p9"></span>Furthermore, we exhort that each one
of you give careful attention to his own office, so that he who desires
to receive the reward promised for feeding the sheep may guard the flock
committed to him with carefulness and prayer, lest the prowling wolf
should invade and tear the sheep entrusted to him, and there should be
in the retribution punishment instead of reward.  We hope, therefore,
most dear brethren, and we entreat Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p9.1"></span>God</span> with all our prayers, that He
would make you to be fervent more and more in the constancy of His love,
and grant you especially to be retained in the peace of the Church, and
in agreement together.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p10"></span>It has been reported to us that some
are promoted to sacred orders through simoniacal heresy; and we have
ordered our above-written brother and fellow-bishop Virgilius that this
must be altogether prohibited; and, that your Fraternity may know and
studiously observe this, our letter to him is to be read in your
presence.  Given the 12th day of August, Indiction 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[183b:1620](2120481.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxvii-p4"></span> See preceding Epistle, note 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To King Childebert.](2120482)
