[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120266)  [Next](2120268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>How the forward and the faint-hearted
are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 9.)  Differently to be
admonished are the forward and the faint-hearted.  For the former,
presuming on themselves too much, disdain all others when reproved by
them; but the latter, while too conscious of their own infirmity, for
the most part fall into despondency.  Those count all they do to be
singularly eminent; these think what they do to be exceedingly despised,
and so are broken down to despondency.  Therefore the works of the
forward are to be finely sifted by the reprover, that wherein they
please themselves they may be shewn to displease <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p4"></span>For we then best correct the forward,
when what they believe themselves to have done well we shew to have been
ill done; that whence glory is believed to have been gained, thence
wholesome confusion may ensue.  But sometimes, when they are not at all
aware of being guilty of the vice of forwardness, they more speedily
come to correction if they are confounded by the infamy of some other
person’s more manifest guilt, sought out from a side quarter; that from
that which they cannot defend, they may be made conscious of wrongly
holding to what they do defend.  Whence, when Paul saw the Corinthians
to be forwardly puffed up one against another, so that one said he was
of Paul, another of Apollos, another of Cephas, and another of Christ
([1 Cor. 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012), [1 Cor.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>), he brought forward the crime of incest,
which had not only been perpetrated among them, but also remained
uncorrected, saying, *It is reported commonly that there is fornication
among you, and such fornication as is not even among the Gentiles, that
one should have his father’s wife.  And ye are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be taken away
from among you* ([1 Cor. 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p4.2"></span>).  As if to say plainly, Why say ye in
your forwardness that ye are of this one or of the other, while shewing
in the dissoluteness of your negligence, that ye are of none of them?

<span id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5"></span>But on the other hand we more fitly
bring back the faint-hearted to the way of well-doing, if we search
collaterally for some good points about them, so that, while some things
in them we attack with our reproof, others we may embrace with our
praise; to the end that the hearing of praise may nourish their
tenderness, which the rebuking of their fault chastises.  And for the
most part we make more way with them for their profit, if we also make
mention of their good deeds; and, in case of some wrong things having
been done by them, if we find not fault with them as though they were
already perpetrated, but, as it were, prohibit them as what ought not to
be perpetrated; that so both the favour shewn may increase the things
which we approve, and our modest exhortation avail more with the
faint-hearted against the things which we blame.  Whence the same Paul,
when he came to know that the Thessalonians, who stood fast in the
preaching which they had received, were troubled with a certain
faint-heartedness as though the end of the world were nigh at hand,
first praises that wherein he sees them to be strong, and afterwards,
with cautious admonition, strengthens what was weak.  For he says, *We
are bound to thank <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>God</span> always for you, brethren, as it
is meet, because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of
every one of you all toward each other aboundeth; so that we ourselves
too glory in you in the churches of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.2"></span>God</span> for your patience and faith*
([2 Thess. 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.3"></span>).  But, having premised these flattering
encomiums of their life, a little while after he subjoined, *Now we
beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, and our
gathering together unto Him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as sent by us,
as that the day of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.5"></span>Lord</span> is at hand* ([2 Thess.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.ix-p5.6"></span>).  For the true teacher so proceeded that
they should first hear, in being praised, what they might thankfully
acknowledge, and afterwards, in being exhorted, what they should follow;
to the end that the precedent praise should settle their mind, lest the
subjoined admonition should shake it; and, though he knew that they had
been disquieted by suspicion of the end being near, he did not yet
reprove them as having been so, but, as if ignorant of the past, forbade
them to be disquieted in future; so that, while they believed themselves
to be unknown to their preacher with respect even to the levity of their
disquietude, they might be as much afraid of being open to blame as they
were of being known by him to be so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the impatient and the patient are to be admonished.](2120268)
