[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120182)  [Next](2120184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.v-p1.1"></span>Sermon X.</span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.v-p2.1"></span>On the Collections, V.</span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p3"></span>I.  *Our goods are given us not as our own
possessions but for use in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p3.1"></span>God’s</span> service.*

<span id="ii.v.v-p4"></span>Observing the institutions of the Apostles’
tradition, dearly beloved, we exhort you, as watchful shepherds, to
celebrate with the devotion of religious practice that day which
they <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) purged from wicked
superstitions and consecrated to deeds of mercy, thus showing that the
authority of the Fathers still lives among us, and that we obediently
abide by their teaching.  Inasmuch as the sacred usefulness of such a
practice affects not only time past but also our own age, so that what
aided them in the destruction of vanities, might contribute with us to
the increase of virtues.  And what so suitable to faith, what so much in
harmony with godliness as to assist the poverty of the needy, to
undertake the care of the weak, to succour the needs of the brethren,
and to remember one’s own condition in the toils of others <span
id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) .  In which work He only who knows
what He has given to each, discerns aright how much a man can and how
much he cannot do.  For not only are spiritual riches and heavenly gifts
received from <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.v-p6.1"></span>God</span>,
but earthly and material possessions also proceed from His bounty, that
He may be justified in requiring an account of those things which He has
not so much put in our possession as committed to our stewardship. 
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.v-p6.2"></span>God’s</span> gifts,
therefore, we must use properly and wisely, lest the material for good
work should become an occasion of sin.  For wealth, after its kind and
regarded as a means, is good and is of the greatest advantage to human
society, when it is in the hands of the benevolent and open-handed, and
when the luxurious man does not squander nor the miser hoard it; for
whether ill-stored or unwisely spent it is equally lost.

<span id="ii.v.v-p7"></span>II.  *The liberal use of riches is worse
than vain, if it be for selfish ends alone.*

<span id="ii.v.v-p8"></span>And, however praiseworthy it be to flee from
intemperance, and to avoid the waste of base pleasures, and though many
in their magnificence disdain to conceal their wealth, and in the
abundance of their goods think scorn of mean and sordid parsimony, yet
such men’s liberality is not happy, nor their thriftiness to be
commended, if their riches are of benefit to themselves alone; if no
poor folks are helped by their goods, no sick persons nourished; if out
of the abundance of their great possessions the captive gets not ransom,
nor the stranger comfort, nor the exile relief.  Rich men of this kind
are needier than all the needy.  For they lose those returns which they
might have for ever, and while they gloat over the brief and not always
free enjoyment of what they possess, they are not fed upon the bread of
justice nor the sweets of mercy:  outwardly splendid, they have no light
within:  of things temporal they have abundance, but utter lack of
things eternal:  for they inflict starvation on their own souls, and
bring them to shame and nakedness by spending upon heavenly treasures
none of these things which they put into their earthly storehouses.

<span id="ii.v.v-p9"></span>III.  *The duty of mercy outweighs all other
virtues.*

<span id="ii.v.v-p10"></span>But, perhaps there are some rich people,
who, although they are not wont to help the Church’s poor by bounteous
gifts, yet keep other commands of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p10.1"></span>God</span>, and among their <span
id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="ii.v.v-Page_121"></span>many
meritorious acts of faith and uprightness think they will be pardoned
for the lack of this one virtue.  But this is so important that, though
the rest exist without it, they can be of no avail.  For although a man
be full of faith, and chaste, and sober, and adorned with other still
greater decorations, yet if he is not merciful, he cannot deserve
mercy:  for the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> says, “blessed are the merciful,
for <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.v-p10.3"></span>God</span> shall
have mercy upon them <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) .”  And
when the Son of Man comes in His Majesty and is seated on His glorious
throne, and all nations being gathered together, division is made
between the good and the bad, for what shall they be praised who stand
upon the fight except for works of benevolence and deeds of love which
Jesus Christ shall reckon as done to Himself?  For He who has made man’s
nature His own, has separated Himself in nothing from man’s humility. 
And what objection shall be made to those on the left except for their
neglect of love, their inhuman harshness, their refusal of mercy to the
poor? as if those on the right had no other virtues those on the left no
other faults.  But at the great and final day of judgment large-hearted
liberality and ungodly meanness will be counted of such importance as to
outweigh all other virtues and all other shortcomings, so that for the
one men shall gain entrance into the Kingdom, for the other they shall
be sent into eternal fire.

<span id="ii.v.v-p12"></span>IV.  *And its efficacy, as Scripture
proves, is incalculable*.

<span id="ii.v.v-p13"></span>Let no one therefore, dearly beloved,
flatter himself on any merits of a good life, if works of charity be
wanting in him, and let him not trust in the purity of his body, if he
be not cleansed by the purification of almsgiving.  For “almsgiving
wipes out sin <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) ,” kills death,
and extinguishes the punishment of perpetual fire.  But he who has not
been fruitful therein, shall have no indulgence from the great
Recompenser, as Solomon says, “He that closeth his ears lest he should
hear the weak, shall himself call upon the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p14.2"></span>Lord</span>, and there shall be none to hear
him <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680) .”  And hence Tobias also,
while instructing his son in the precepts of godliness, says, “Give alms
of thy substance, and turn not thy face from any poor man:  so shall it
come to pass that the face of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p15.2"></span>God</span> shall not be turned from thee <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) .”  This virtue makes all virtues
profitable; for by its presence it gives life to that very faith, by
which “the just lives <span id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) ,” and
which is said to be “dead without works <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) :”  because as the reason for works
consists in faith, so the strength of faith consists in works.  “While
we have time therefore,” as the Apostle says, “let us do that which is
good to all men, and especially to them that are of the household of
faith <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) .”  “But let us not be
weary in doing good; for in His own time we shall reap <span
id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) .”  And so the present life is the
time for sowing, and the day of retribution is the time of harvest, when
every one shall reap the fruit of his seed according to the amount of
his sowing.  And no one shall be disappointed in the produce of that
harvesting, because it is the heart’s intentions rather than the sums
expended that will be reckoned up.  And little sums from little means
shall produce as much as great sums from great means.  And therefore,
dearly beloved, let us carry out this Apostolic institution.  And as the
first collection will be next Sunday, let all prepare themselves to give
willingly, that every one according to his ability may join in this most
sacred offering.  Your very alms and those who shall be aided by your
gifts shall intercede for you, that you may be always ready for every
good work in Christ Jesus our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.v-p20.2"></span>Lord</span>, Who lives and reigns for ages
without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_676"></span>[120:677](2120183.htm#fr_676) <span
id="ii.v.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p5"></span> See Serm. IX. n. 6, and chap. iii. n. 8.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[120:678](2120183.htm#fr_677) <span
id="ii.v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p6"></span> i.e. apparently to do as you would be done
by.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[121:679](2120183.htm#fr_678) <span
id="ii.v.v-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p11"></span> S. [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="ii.v.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[121:680](2120183.htm#fr_679) <span
id="ii.v.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p14"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.v-p14.1"></span>. 
The purifying power of almsgiving is a favourite thought with Leo:  cf.
for instance Serm. XII. chap. 4, and XVIII. chap. 3, where he says,
*castigatio corporis et instantia orationis tunc veram obtinent
puritatem cum eleemosynarum sanctificatione nituntur*.  In several
places he compares its cleansing effect to the waters of baptism:  e.g.
Serm. XX. chap. 3, *in eleemosynis virtus quædam est instituta
baptismatis, qui sicut aqua extinguit ignem, si eleemosyna peccatum—ut
nemo diffidat regenerationis sibi nitorem etiam post multa peccata
restitui, qui eleemosynarum studuerit purificatione mundari*:  and again
in Serm. VII. he says, *unusquisque—in usus atque alimoniam pauperum de
vestris facultatibus conferatis scientes præter illud regenerationis
lavacrum, in quo universorum ablutæ sunt maculæ peccatorum, hoc remedium
infirmitati humanæ divinitus esse donatum ut si quod culparum in hac
terrena habitatione contrahitur, eleemosynis deleatur*.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[121:681](2120183.htm#fr_680) <span
id="ii.v.v-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p15"></span> [Prov. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#013)<span id="ii.v.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[121:682](2120183.htm#fr_681) <span
id="ii.v.v-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p16"></span> [Tob. iv.
7](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#007)<span id="ii.v.v-p16.1"></span> (one
of the offertory sentences it will be remembered in the English
Prayer-book).

<span id="fn_682"></span>[121:683](2120183.htm#fr_682) <span
id="ii.v.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p17"></span> [Hab.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[121:684](2120183.htm#fr_683) <span
id="ii.v.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p18"></span> [James ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[121:685](2120183.htm#fr_684) <span
id="ii.v.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p19"></span> [Gal.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.v-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[121:686](2120183.htm#fr_685) <span
id="ii.v.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.v-p20"></span> [Gal.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span id="ii.v.v-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XII](2120184)
