[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120110)  [Next](2120112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ci"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p1.1"></span>Letter CVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p2.1"></span>To Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople, in
rebuke of his self-seeking.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Anatolius, the bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p4"></span>I.  *He commends Anatolius for his
orthodoxy, but condemns him for his presumption*.

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p5"></span>Now that the light of Gospel Truth has
been manifested, as we wished, through <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> grace, and the night of most
pestilential error has been dispelled from the universal Church, we are
unspeakably glad in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, because the difficult charge
entrusted to us has been brought to the desired conclusion, even as the
text of your letter announces, so that, according to the Apostle’s
teaching, “we all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms
among us:  but that we be perfect in the same mind and in the same
knowledge <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) .”  In devotion to
which work we commend you, beloved, for taking part:  for thus you
benefited those who needed correction by your activity, and purged
yourself from all complicity with the transgressors.  For when your
predecessor Flavian, of happy memory, was deposed for his defence of
catholic Truth, not unjustly it was believed that your ordainers seemed
to have consecrated one like themselves, contrary to the provision of
the holy canons.  But <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p6.2"></span>God’s</span> mercy was present in this,
directing and confirming you, that you might make good use of bad
beginnings, and show that you were promoted not by men’s judgment, but
by <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.ci-p6.3"></span>God’s</span>
loving-kindness:  and this may be accepted as true, on condition that
you lose not the grace of this Divine gift by another cause of offence. 
For the catholic, and especially the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p6.4"></span>Lord’s</span> priest, must not only be
entangled in no error, but also be corrupted by no covetousness; for, as
says the Holy Scripture, <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ci-Page_78"></span>“Go not after thy lusts, and decline from
thy desire. <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) ”  Many enticements
of this world, many vanities must be resisted, that the perfection of
true self-discipline may be attained the first blemish of which is
pride, the beginning of transgression and the origin of sin.  For the
mind greedy of power knows not either how to abstain from things
forbidden nor to enjoy things permitted, so long as transgressions go
unpunished and run into undisciplined and wicked excesses, and wrong
doings are multiplied, which were only endured in our zeal for the
restoration of the Faith and love of harmony <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) .

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p9"></span>II.  *Nothing can cancel or modify the
Nicene canons.*

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p10"></span>And so after the not irreproachable
beginning of your ordination, after the consecration of the bishop of
Antioch, which you claimed for yourself contrary to the regulations of
the canons, I grieve, beloved, that you have fallen into this too, that
you should try to break down the most sacred constitutions of the Nicene
canons <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) :  as if this opportunity
had expressly offered itself to you for the See of Alexandria to lose
its privilege of second place, and the church of Antioch to forego its
right to being third in dignity, in order that when these places had
been subjected to your jurisdiction, all metropolitan bishops might be
deprived of their proper honour.  By which unheard of and never before
attempted excesses you went so far beyond yourself as to drag into an
occasion of self-seeking, and force connivance from that holy Synod
which the zeal of our most Christian prince had convened, solely to
extinguish heresy and to confirm the catholic Faith:  as if the unlawful
wishes of a multitude could not be rejected, and that state of things
which was truly ordained by the Holy Spirit in the canon of Nicæa could
in any part be overruled by any one.  Let no synodal councils flatter
themselves upon the size of their assemblies, and let not any number of
priests, however much larger, dare either to compare or to prefer
themselves to those 318 bishops, seeing that the Synod of Nicæa is
hallowed by <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.ci-p11.3"></span>God</span>
with such privilege, that whether by fewer or by more ecclesiastical
judgments are supported, whatever is opposed to their authority is
utterly destitute of all authority.

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p12"></span>III.  *The Synod of Chalcedon, which met
for one purpose, ought never to have been used for another.*

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p13"></span>Accordingly these things which are found
to be contrary to those most holy canons are exceedingly unprincipled
and misguided.  This haughty arrogance tends to the disturbance of the
whole Church, which has purposed so to misuse a synodal council, as by
wicked arguments to over-persuade, or by intimidation to compel, the
brethren to agree with it, when they had been summoned simply on a
matter of Faith, and had come to a decision on the subject which was to
engage their care.  For it was on this ground that our brothers sent by
the Apostolic see, who presided in our stead at the synod with
commendable firmness, withstood their illegal attempts, openly
protesting against the introduction of any reprehensible innovation
contrary to the enactments of the Council of Nicæa.  And there can be no
doubt about their opposition, seeing that you yourself in your epistle
complain of their wish to contravene your attempts.  And therein indeed
you greatly commend them to me by thus writing, whereas you accuse
yourself in refusing to obey them concerning your unlawful designs,
vainly seeking what cannot be granted, and craving what is bad for your
soul’s health, and can never win our consent.  For may I never be guilty
of assisting so wrong a desire, which ought rather to be subverted by my
aid, and that of all who think not high things, but agree with the
lowly.

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p14"></span>IV.  *The Nicene Canons are for universal
application and not to be wrested to private interpretations.*

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p15"></span>These holy and venerable fathers who in
the city of Nicæa, after condemning the blasphemous Arius with his
impiety, laid down a code of canons for the Church to last till the end
of the world, survive not only with us but with the whole of mankind in
their constitutions; and, if anywhere men venture upon what is contrary
to their decrees, it is *ipso facto* null and void; so that what is
universally laid down for our perpetual advantage can never be modified
by any change, nor can the things which were destined for the common
good be perverted to private interests; and thus so long as the limits
remain, which the Fathers fixed, no one may invade another’s right but
each must exercise himself within the proper and lawful bounds, to the
extent of his power, in the breadth of love; of which the bishop of
Constantinople may reap the fruits <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ci-Page_79"></span>richly enough, if he rather relies on the
virtue of humility than is puffed up with the spirit of self-seeking.

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p16"></span>V.  *The sanction alleged to have been
accorded 60 years ago to the supremacy of Constantinople over Alexandria
and Antioch is worthless.*

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p17"></span>“Be not highminded,” brother, “but
fear <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) ,” and cease to disquiet
with unwarrantable demands the pious ears of Christian princes, who I am
sure will be better pleased by your modesty than by your pride.  For
your purpose is in no way whatever supported by the written assent of
certain bishops given, as you allege, 60 years ago <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) , and never brought to the knowledge
of the Apostolic See by your predecessors; and this transaction, which
from its outset was doomed to fall through and has now long done so, you
now wish to bolster up by means that are too late and useless, viz., by
extracting from the brethren an appearance of consent which their
modesty from very weariness yielded to their own injury.  Remember what
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.ci-p19.1"></span>Lord</span>
threatens him with, who shall have caused one of the little ones to
stumble, and get wisdom to understand what a judgment of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.ci-p19.2"></span>God</span> he will have to
endure who has not feared to give occasion of stumbling to so many
churches and so many priests.  For I confess I am so fast bound by love
of the whole brotherhood that I will not agree with any one in demands
which are against his own interests, and thus you may clearly perceive
that my opposition to you, beloved, proceeds from the kindly intention
to restrain you from disturbing the universal Church by sounder
counsel.  The rights of provincial primates may not be overthrown nor
metropolitan bishops be defrauded of privileges based on antiquity.  The
See of Alexandria may not lose any of that dignity which it merited
through S. Mark, the evangelist and disciple of the blessed Peter, nor
may the splendour of so great a church be obscured by another’s clouds,
Dioscorus having fallen through his persistence in impiety.  The church
of Antioch too, in which first at the preaching of the blessed Apostle
Peter the Christian name arose <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) ,
must continue in the position assigned it by the Fathers, and being set
in the third place must never be lowered therefrom.  For the See is on a
different footing to the holders of it; and each individual’s chief
honour is his own integrity.  And since that does not lose its proper
worth in any place, how much more glorious must it be when placed in the
magnificence of the city of Constantinople, where many priests may find
both a defence of the Fathers’ canons and an example of uprightness in
observing you?

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p21"></span>VI.  *Christian love demands self-denial
not self-seeking.*

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p22"></span>In thus writing to you, brother, I exhort
and admonish you in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p22.1"></span>Lord</span>, laying aside all ambitious
desires to cherish rather a spirit of love and to adorn yourself to your
profit with the virtues of love, according to the Apostle’s teaching. 
For love “is patient and kind, and envies not, acts not iniquitously, is
not puffed up, is not ambitious, seeks not its own <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) .”  Hence if love seeks not its own,
how greatly does he sin who covets another’s?  From which I desire you
to keep yourself altogether, and to remember that sentence which says,
“Hold what thou hast, that no other take thy crown <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) .”  For if you seek what is not
permitted, you will deprive yourself by your own action and judgment of
the peace of the universal Church.  Our brother and fellow-bishop Lucian
and our son Basil the deacon, attended to your injunctions with all the
zeal they possessed, but justice refused to give effect to their
pleadings.  Dated the 22nd of May in the consulship of the illustrious
Herculanus (452).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_451"></span>[77:452](2120111.htm#fr_451) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[78:453](2120111.htm#fr_452) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p7"></span> [Ecclesiasticus xviii.
30](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#030)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p7.1"></span>. 
The application of the description “Holy Scripture” to an Apocryphal
book will not escape notice.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[78:454](2120111.htm#fr_453) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p8"></span> Cf. Letter CIV., chap. v.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[78:455](2120111.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p11"></span> The wording of Canon 6 is as follows: 
*mos antiquus perduret, in Ægypto vel Libya et Pentapoli, ut
Alexandrinus episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quoniam quidem et
episcopo Romano parilis mos est.  Similiter autem et apud Antiochiam
ceterasque provincias* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ci-p11.2"></span>παρχίας</span>) *honor suus unicuique
servetur ecclesiæ: * where, it will be noticed, no mention is made of
Constantinople at all, so that its position is not explicitly defined
either way.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[79:456](2120111.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p18"></span> [Rom. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[79:457](2120111.htm#fr_456) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p19"></span> Cf. Letter CV., chap. ii. (end).

<span id="fn_457"></span>[79:458](2120111.htm#fr_457) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p20"></span> [Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[79:459](2120111.htm#fr_458) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p23"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[79:460](2120111.htm#fr_459) <span
id="ii.iv.ci-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ci-p24"></span> [Revel. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.ci-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Julian, Bishop of Cos.](2120112)
