[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120516)  [Next](2120518) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle L.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p2"></span>To Queen Brunichild.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p3"></span>Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the
Franks.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p4"></span>The tenor of your letters, which
evinces a religious spirit and the earnestness of a pious mind, causes
us not only to commend the purpose of your request, but also to grant
willingly what you demand.  For indeed it would ill become us to refuse
what Christian devotion and the desire of an upright heart solicits,
especially as we know that you demand, and embrace with your whole
heart, what may both protect the faith of believers, and work no less
the salvation of souls.  Accordingly, greeting your Excellency with
befitting honour, we inform you that to Leuparic, the bearer of these
presents, through whom we received your communication, and whom you
described as a presbyter, we have handed over, according to your
Excellency’s request, with the reverence due to them, certain relics of
the blessed apostles Peter and Paul.  But, that laudable and religious
devotion may be more and more conspicuous among you, you must see that
these benefits of the saints be deposited with reverence and due honour,
and that those who serve in attendance on them be vexed with no burdens
or molestations, lest perchance, under the pressure of outward
necessity, they be rendered unprofitable and slow in the service of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>God</span>, and
(which <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p4.2"></span>God</span>
forbid) the benefits of the saints that have been bestowed sustain
injury and neglect.  Let, then, your Excellency see to their quiet, to
the end that, while they are guarded by your bounty from all
disquietude, they may render praises to our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxi-p4.3"></span>God</span> with minds undisturbed, and
that reward may also accrue to you in the life eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Brethren going to England (Angliam).](2120518)
