[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120447)  [Next](2120449) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>*To Victor and Columbus,
Bishops* <span id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) .

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Victor and Columbus,
Bishops of Africa.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p5"></span>After what manner a disease, if
neglected in its beginning, acquires strength we have proved from our
own necessities, whosoever of us have had our lot in this life.  If,
then, it were met by the foresight of skilful physicians at its birth,
we know that it would cease before doing very much harm from being
attended to too late.  On this consideration, then, reason ought to
impel us, when diseases of souls are beginning, to make haste to resist
them by all the means in our power, lest, while we neglect applying
wholesome medicines, they steal away from us the lives of many whom we
are striving to win for our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>God</span>.  Wherefore it behoves us so
with watchful carefulness to guard the folds of sheep which we see
ourselves to be put over as keepers that the prowling wolf may find
everywhere shepherds to resist him, and may have no way of entrance
thereinto.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p6"></span>For indeed we find that the stings
of the Donatists have in your parts so disturbed the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>Lord’s</span> flock, as
though it were guided by no shepherd’s control.  And there has been
reported to us what we cannot speak of without heavy sorrow, seeing that
very many have already been torn by their poisoned teeth.  Lastly, in
order with most wicked audacity to drive catholic priests from their
churches, they are said, in their most atrocious wickedness, even to
have slain many besides, on whom the water of regeneration had conferred
salvation, by rebaptizing them.  All this saddens our mind exceedingly,
for that, while you are placed there, it has been allowed to damned
presumption to perpetrate such wickedness.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p7"></span>In this matter we exhort your
Fraternity by this present writing, that, after discussion held and a
council assembled, you should eagerly and with all your power so oppose
this still nascent disease that neither may it acquire strength from
neglect nor scatter the woes of pestilence in the flock committed to
your charge.  For, if in any way whatever (as we do not believe will be
the case) you neglect to resist iniquity in its beginning, they will
wound very many with the sword of their error.  And it is in truth a
most serious thing to allow to be ensnared in the noose of diabolical
fraud those whom we are able to rescue beforehand from being entangled. 
Moreover it is better to prevent any one from being wounded than to
search out how one that is wounded may be healed.  Considering this,
therefore, hasten ye by sedulous prayer and all the means in your power,
to quell sacrilegious wickedness, so that subsequent news, through the
aid of the grace of Christ, may cause us more joy for the punishment of
those men than sadness for their excesses.

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p8"></span>Furthermore, take all possible pains
to send to us with all speed our brother and fellow-bishop Paul <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) , to the end that, on learning more
particularly from him the causes of so great a crime, we may be able by
the succour of our Creator to apply the medicine of fitting rebuke to
this most atrocious wickedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[158b:1559](2120448.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p3"></span> Victor was now primate of Numidia,
having succeeded Adeodatus (see III. 49).  As to the African custom with
respect to primates, see I. 74, note 9.  For notice of Columbus, see II.
48, note 7.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[158b:1560](2120448.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.xxvii-p9"></span> See Last Epistle, note 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leo, Bishop.](2120449)
