[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120243)  [Next](2120245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p2"></span>What manner of man ought to come to
rule.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p3"></span>That man, therefore, ought by all
means to be drawn with cords to be an example of good living who already
lives spiritually, dying to all passions of the flesh; who disregards
worldly prosperity; who is afraid of no adversity; who desires only
inward wealth; whose intention the body, in good accord with it, thwarts
not at all by its frailness, nor the spirit greatly by its disdain:  one
who is not led to covet the things of others, but gives freely of his
own; who through the bowels of compassion is quickly moved to pardon,
yet is never bent down from the fortress of rectitude by pardoning more
than is meet; who perpetrates no unlawful deeds, yet deplores those
perpetrated by others as though they were his own; who out of affection
of heart sympathizes with another’s infirmity, and so rejoices in the
good of his neighbour as though it were his own advantage; who so
insinuates himself as an example to others in all he does that among
them he has nothing, at any rate of his own past deeds, to blush for;
who studies so to live that he may be able to water even dry hearts with
the streams of doctrine; who has already learnt by the use and trial of
prayer that he can obtain what he has requested from the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>, having had
already said to him, as it were, through the voice of experience, *While
thou art yet speaking, I will say, Here am I* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>).  For if perchance any one should come
to us asking us to intercede for him with some great man, who was
incensed against him, but to us unknown, we should at once reply, We
cannot go to intercede for you, since we have no familiar acquaintance
with that man.  If, then, a man blushes to become an intercessor with
another man on whom he has no claim, with what idea can any one grasp
the post of intercession with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xi-p3.3"></span>God</span> for the people, who does not
know himself to be in favour with Him through the merit of his own
life?  And how can he ask of Him pardon for others while ignorant
whether towards himself He is appeased?  And in this matter there is yet
another thing to be more anxiously feared; namely, lest one who is
supposed to be competent to appease wrath should himself provoke it on
account of guilt of his own.  For we all know well that, when one who is
in disfavour is sent to intercede with an incensed person, the mind of
the latter is provoked to greater severity.  Wherefore let one who is
still tied and bound with earthly desires beware lest by more grievously
incensing the strict judge, while he delights himself in his place of
honour, he become the cause of ruin to his subordinates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What manner of man ought not to come to rule.](2120245)
