[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120274)  [Next](2120276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p2"></span>How the meek and the passionate are
to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 17.)  Differently to
be admonished are the meek and the passionate.  For sometimes the meek,
when they are in authority, suffer from the torpor of sloth, which is a
kindred disposition, and as it were placed hard by.  And for the most
part from the laxity of too great gentleness they soften the force of
strictness beyond need.  But on the other hand the passionate, in that
they are swept on into frenzy of mind by the impulse of anger, break up
the calm of quietness, and so throw into confusion the life of those
that are put under them.  For, when rage drives them headlong, they know
not what <span id="page_40b">p. 40b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-Page_40b"></span>they do in their anger, they know
not what in their anger they suffer from themselves.  But sometimes,
what is more serious, they think the goad of their anger to be the zeal
of righteousness.  And, when vice is believed to be virtue, guilt is
piled up without fear.  Often, then, the meek grow torpid in the
laziness of inactivity; often the passionate are deceived by the zeal of
uprightness.  Thus to the virtue of the former a vice is unawares
adjoined, but to the latter their vice appears as though it were fervent
virtue.  Those, therefore, are to be admonished to fly what is close
beside themselves, these to take heed to what is in themselves; those to
discern what they have not, these what they have.  Let the meek embrace
solicitude; let the passionate ban perturbation.  The meek are to be
admonished that they study to have also the zeal of righteousness:  the
passionate are to be admonished that to the zeal which they think they
have they add meekness.  For on this account the Holy Spirit has been
manifested to us in a dove and in fire; because, to wit, all whom He
fills He causes to shew themselves as meek with the simplicity of the
dove, and burning with the fire of zeal.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p4"></span>He then is in no wise full of the
Holy Spirit, who either in the calm of meekness forsakes the fervour of
zeal, or again in the ardour of zeal loses the virtue of meekness. 
Which thing we shall perhaps better shew, if we bring forward the
authority of Paul, who to two who were his disciples, and endowed with a
like charity, supplies nevertheless different aids for preaching.  For
in admonishing Timothy he says, *Reprove, entreat, rebuke, with all
long-suffering and doctrine* ([2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p4.1"></span>).  Titus also he admonishes, saying,
*These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority* ([Tit.
ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p4.2"></span>).  What is the reason that he dispenses
his teaching with so great art as, in exhibiting it, to recommend
authority to the one, and long-suffering to the other, except that he
saw Titus to be of a meeker spirit, and Timothy of one a little more
fervid?  The former he inflames with the earnestness of zeal; the latter
he moderates by the gentleness of long-suffering.  To the one he adds
what is wanting, from the other he subtracts what is overabundant.  The
one he endeavours to push on with a spur, the other to keep back with a
bridle.  For the great husbandman who has the Church in charge waters
some shoots that they may grow, but prunes others when he sees that they
grow too much; lest either by not growing they should bear no fruit, or
by growing over much they should lose the fruits they may put forth. 
But far different is the anger that creeps in under the guise of zeal
from that which confounds the perturbed heart without pretext of
righteousness.  For the former is extended inordinately in that wherein
it ought to be, but the latter is ever kindled in that wherein it ought
not to be.  It should indeed be known that in this the passionate differ
from the impatient, that the latter bear not with things brought upon
them by others, but the former themselves bring on things to be borne
with.  For the passionate often follow after those who shun them, stir
up occasion of strife, rejoice in the toil of contention; and yet such
we better correct, if in the midst of the commotion of their anger we do
shun them.  For, while they are perturbed, they do not know what we say
to them; but, when brought back to themselves, they receive words of
exhortation the more freely in proportion as they blush at having been
the more calmly borne with.  But to a mind that is drunk with fury every
right thing that is said appears wrong.  Whence to Nabal when he was
drunk Abigail laudably kept silence about his fault, but, when he had
digested his wine, as laudably told him of it ([1 Sam. xxv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p4.3"></span>).  For he could for this reason
perceive the evil he had done, that he did not hear of it when drunk.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p5"></span>But when the passionate so attack
others that they cannot be altogether shunned, they should be smitten,
not with open rebuke, but sparingly with a certain respectful
cautiousness.  And this we shall shew better if we bring forward what
was done by Abner.  For, when Asahel attacked him with the violence of
inconsiderate haste, it is written, *Abner spake unto Asahel, saying.
Turn thee aside from following me, lest I be driven to smite thee to the
ground.  Howbeit he scorned to listen, and refused to turn aside. 
Whereupon Abner smote him with the hinder end of the spear in the groin,
and thrust him through, and he died* ([2 Sam.
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>).  For of whom did Asahel present a
type but of those whom fury violently seizes and carries headlong?  And
such, in this same attack of fury, are to be shunned cautiously in
proportion as they are madly hurried on.  Whence also Abner, who in our
speech is called the lantern of the father, fled; because when the
tongue of teachers, which indicates the supernal light of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-p5.2"></span>God</span>, sees the
mind of any one borne along over the steeps of rage, and refrains from
casting back darts of words against the angry person, it is as though it
were unwilling to smite one that is pursuing.  But, when the passionate
will not pacify themselves by any consideration, and, like Asahel, cease
not to pursue and to be mad, it is necessary that those who endeavour
<span id="page_41b">p. 41b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xvii-Page_41b"></span>to repress these furious ones should
by no means lift themselves up in fury, but exhibit all possible
calmness; and yet adroitly bring something to bear whereby they may by a
side thrust prick the heart of the furious one.  Whence also Abner, when
he made a stand against his pursuer, pierced him, not with a direct
stroke, but with the hinder end of his spear.  For to strike with the
point is to oppose with an onset of open rebuke:  but to smite the
pursuer with the hinder end of the spear is calmly to touch the furious
one with certain hits, and, as it were, by sparing him overcome him. 
Asahel moreover straightway fell, because agitated minds, when they feel
themselves to be spared, and yet are touched inwardly by the answers
given in calmness, fall at once from the elevation to which they had
raised themselves.  Those, then, who rebound from the onset of their
heat under the stroke of gentleness die, as it were, without steel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the humble and the haughty are to be admonished.](2120276)
