[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120296)  [Next](2120298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix-p2"></span>That sometimes lighter vices are to
be left alone, that more grievous ones may be removed.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix-p3"></span>But since, when the sickness of two
vices attacks a man, one presses upon him more lightly, and the other
perchance more heavily, it is undoubtedly right to haste to the succour
of that through which there is the more rapid tendency to death.  And,
if the one cannot be restrained from causing the death which is imminent
unless the other which is contrary to it increase, the preacher must be
content by skilful management in his exhortation to suffer one to
increase, to the end that he may keep the other back from causing the
death which is imminent.  When he does this, he does not aggravate the
disease, but preserves the life of his sufferer to whom he administers
the medicine, that he may find a fitting time for searching out means of
recovery.  For there is often one who, while he puts no restraint on his
gluttony in food, is presently pressed hard by the stings of lechery,
which is on the point of overcoming him, and who, when, terrified by the
fear of this struggle, he strives to restrain himself through
abstinence, is harassed by the temptation of vain-glory:  in which case
certainly one vice is by no means extinguished unless the other be
fostered.  Which plague then should be the more ardently attacked but
that which presses on the man the more dangerously?  For it is to be
tolerated that through the virtue of abstinence arrogance should
meanwhile grow against one that is alive, lest through gluttony lechery
should cut him off from life entirely.  Hence it is that Paul, when he
considered that his weak hearer would either continue to do evil or
rejoice in the reward of human praise for well-doing, said, *Wilt thou
not be afraid of the power?  Do that which is good, and thou shalt have
praise of the same* ([Rom. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxix-p3.1"></span>).  For it is not that good things
should be done in order that no human power may be feared, or that the
glory of transitory praise may be thereby won; but, considering that the
weak soul could not rise to so great strength as to shun at the same
time both wickedness and praise, the excellent preacher in his
admonition offered something and took away something.  For by conceding
mild ailments he drew off keener ones; that, since the mind could not
rise all at once to the relinquishing of all its vices, it might, while
left in familiarity with some one of them, be taken off without
difficulty from another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That deep things ought not to be preached at all to weak
souls.](2120298)
