[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120165)  [Next](2120167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.clvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p2.1"></span>To Leo Augustus.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p3"></span>By the hand of Philoxenus *agens in
rebus* <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) .  Leo the Bishop to Leo
Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p5"></span>I.  *The decrees of Chalcedon and Nicæa
are identical and final.*

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p6"></span>With much joy my mind exults in the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clvi-p6.1"></span>Lord</span>, and
great is my cause for thankfulness, now that I perceive your clemency’s
most excellent faith to be in all things enlarged by the gifts of
heavenly grace, and I experience by increased diligence the devotion of
a priestly mind in you.  For in your Majesty’s communications it is
beyond doubt revealed what the Holy Spirit is working through you for
the good of the whole Church, and how greatly it is to be desired by the
prayers of all the faithful that your empire may be everywhere extended
with glory, seeing that besides your care for things temporal you so
perseveringly exercise a religious foresight in the service of what is
divine and eternal:  to wit that the catholic Faith, which alone gives
life to and alone hallows mankind, may abide in the one confession, and
the dissensions which spring from the variety of earthly opinions may be
driven away, most glorious Emperor, from that solid Rock, on which the
city of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clvi-p6.2"></span>God</span> is
built.  And these gifts of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p6.3"></span>God</span> will at last be granted us from
Him, if we be not found ungrateful for what has been vouchsafed, and as
though what we have gained were naught, we seek not rather the very
opposite.  For to seek what has been discovered, to reconsider what has
been completed, and to demolish what has been defined, what else is it
but to return no thanks for things gained and to indulge the unholy
longings of deadly lust on the food of the forbidden tree?  And hence by
deigning to show a more careful regard for the peace of the universal
Church, you manifestly recognize what is the design of the heretics’
mighty intrigues that a more careful discussion should take place
between the disciples of Eutyches and Dioscorus and the emissary of the
Apostolic See, as if nothing had already been defined, and that what
with the glad approval of the catholic priests of the whole world was
determined at the holy Synod of Chalcedon should be rendered invalid to
the detriment also of the most sacred Council of Nicæa.  For what in our
own days at Chalcedon was determined concerning our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clvi-p6.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ’s
Incarnation, was also so defined at Nicæa by that mystic number of
Fathers <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) , lest the confession of
catholics should believe that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p7.1"></span>God’s</span> Only-begotten Son was in aught
unequal to the Father, or that when He was made Son of man He had not
the true nature of our flesh and soul.

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p8"></span>II.  *The wicked designs of heretics
must be stedfastly resisted.*

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p9"></span>Therefore we must abhor and persistently
avoid what heretical deceit is striving to obtain, nor must what has
been well and fully defined be brought again under discussion, lest we
ourselves should seem at the will of condemned men to have doubts
concerning things which it is clear agree throughout with the authority
of Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles.  And hence, if there are any who
disagree with these heaven-inspired decisions, let them be left to their
own opinions and depart from the unity of the Church with that perverse
sect which they have chosen.  For it can in no wise be that men who dare
to speak against divine mysteries are associated in any communion with
us.  Let them pride themselves on the emptiness of their talk and boast
of the cleverness of their arguments against the Faith:  we <span
id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span id="ii.iv.clvi-Page_105"></span>are
pleased to obey the Apostle’s precepts, where he says, “See that no one
deceive you with philosophy and vain seductions of men <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) .”  For according to the same Apostle,
“if I build up those things which I destroyed, I prove myself a
transgressor <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) ,” and subject
myself to those conditions of punishment which not only the authority of
Prince Marcian of blessed memory, but I myself also by my consent have
accepted.  Because as you have justly and truthfully maintained
perfection admits of no increase nor fulness of addition.  And hence,
since I know you, venerable Prince, imbued as you are with the purest
light of truth, waver in no part of the Faith, but with just and perfect
judgment distinguish right from wrong, and separate what is to be
embraced from what is to be rejected, I beseech you not to think that my
humility is to be blamed for want of confidence, since my cautiousness
is not only in the interests of the universal Church but also for the
furtherance of your own glory, that under your reign the
unscrupulousness of heretics may not seem to be advanced and the
security of catholics disturbed.

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p12"></span>III.  *He promises to send envoys not
to discuss with the Eutychians, but to explain the Faith to the
Emperor.*

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p13"></span>Although, therefore, I am very
confident of the piety of your heart in all things, and perceive that
through the Spirit of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p13.1"></span>God</span> dwelling in you, you are
sufficiently instructed, nor can any error delude your faith, yet I will
endeavour to follow your bidding so far as to send certain of my
brothers to represent my person before you, and to set forth what the
Apostolic rule of Faith is, although, as I have said, it is well known
to you, in all things making it clear and certain that they are not in
any way to be reckoned among catholics, who do not accept the
definitions of the venerable Synod of Nicæa or the ordinances of the
holy Council of Chalcedon, inasmuch as it is evident the holy decrees of
both proceed from the Evangelical and Apostolical source, and whatever
is not of Christ’s watering is like a snake-poisoned draught <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) .  Your Majesty should understand
beforehand, most venerable Emperor, that those whom I undertake to send
will come from the Apostolic See, not to fight with the enemies of the
Faith nor to strive against any, because of matters already settled as
it has pleased <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p14.1"></span>God</span> both at Nicæa and at Chalcedon
we dare not enter upon any discussion, as if what so great an authority
has fixed by the Holy Spirit were doubtful or weak.

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p15"></span>IV.  *The heretics must be forced to
give up their usurpations and left to the judgment of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clvi-p15.1"></span>God</span>.*

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p16"></span>But we do not refuse the assistance of
our ministry for the instruction of our little ones, who after being fed
with milk desire to be satisfied with more solid food:  and as we do not
scorn the simple folk, so we will have no dealings with rebel heretics,
remembering the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p16.1"></span>Lord’s</span> command, who says, “Give not
that which is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before swine <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) .”  Surely it is altogether unworthy
and unjust to admit to freedom of discussion men whom the Holy Spirit
describes in the words of the prophet, “the sons of the stranger have
lied unto me <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) .”  For even though
they resist not the Gospel, yet they have shown themselves to be of
those of whom it is written “they profess that they know <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clvi-p18.2"></span>God</span> but by their
deeds they deny Him <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) ,” while the
blood of just Abel <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) still cries
against wicked Cain <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) , who being
rebuked by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p21.1"></span>Lord</span> did not set quietly about his
repentance but burst forth into murder.  Whose punishment we wish to be
reserved for the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p21.2"></span>Lord’s</span> judgment in such a way that,
unprincipled plunderer and blood-thirsty murderer as he is, he may be
thrown back upon himself and relinquish what is ours.  We pray you also
not to suffer the lamentable captivity of the holy church of Alexandria
to be any further prolonged, which by the help of your faith and Justice
ought to be restored to its liberty, that through all the cities of
Egypt the dignity of the Fathers and their priestly rights may be
restored.  Dated 21st of March in the consulship of Leo and Majorian
Augusti (458).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[104:595](2120166.htm#fr_594) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p4"></span> Cf. Lett. XCV. n. 6.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[104:596](2120166.htm#fr_595) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p7"></span> The number was 318:  cf. Lett. CVI. 2,
where the exact number is quoted and the explanation perhaps is given of
Leo’s epithet “mystic” here applied to it.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[105:597](2120166.htm#fr_596) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p10"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[105:598](2120166.htm#fr_597) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p11"></span> [Gal. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[105:599](2120166.htm#fr_598) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p14"></span> *Poculi esse viperei*.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[105:600](2120166.htm#fr_599) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p17"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[105:601](2120166.htm#fr_600) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p18"></span> [Ps. xviii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p18.1"></span>
(Vulg.).

<span id="fn_601"></span>[105:602](2120166.htm#fr_601) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p19"></span> [Tit. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[105:603](2120166.htm#fr_602) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p20"></span> Sc. in the persons of Proterius and
Timothy Ælurus.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[105:604](2120166.htm#fr_603) <span
id="ii.iv.clvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clvi-p21"></span> Sc. in the persons of Proterius and
Timothy Ælurus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople.  By Patritius the Deacon
the Deacon.](2120167)
