[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120510)  [Next](2120512) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p2"></span>To Columbus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p3"></span>Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of
Numidia. <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658)

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p5"></span>The letters of your Fraternity, full
of priestly sweetness, we have received at the hands of Rogatianus the
deacon, the bearer of these presents.  And their kind expressions
rejoiced us much, especially as we were informed through them of what we
long to hear of, your welfare.  But the devotion of your Holiness we
have both known of old; and as you now write, so we hold it to be.  For
of what kind the sincerity of your Fraternity towards us is we need
nothing to satisfy us, since we know it from the love of our own heart
which encircles you.  We have given to the above-named hearer, whom you
commended to us by letter, writings addressed to the Rector of the
patrimony of Sicily, bidding him urge the opposite party to do what is
just, to the end that, idle excuses being put aside, the whole case in
dispute may be speedily brought to an end.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p6"></span>We now inform your Holiness that a
certain man has come to us, Peter by name, who asserted that he was a
bishop, and requested from us a remedy of his complaint.  And at first
indeed he related things that might have been deserving of pity; but on
enquiry we found things to be very different from what he told us, and
his behaviour has exceedingly distressed us.  But, inasmuch as,
separated as we are by so great a distance, we could by no means learn
thoroughly the gist of his case, we have been unable to determine it,
being in doubt.  But now, seeing that the aforesaid deacon, who is
returning to you, has asked that this person should be allowed to go
with him, and he himself has requested to be sent to you, both of them
knowing that your Holiness has, as becomes you, zeal for the faith and a
love of justice, the proposal has been acceptable to us, and we have
granted what they asked.  Since, then, you being on the spot can
ascertain the merits of the case more thoroughly, we exhort you so to
observe what is just and canonical towards the same Peter that both the
requirements of rectitude may be fulfilled by you in all respects, and
his case may be seen to have been judged after the fear of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p6.1"></span>God</span> and the rules
of the Church.  But, if any one is said to have been privy to, or a
partaker in, the things which the aforesaid Peter is accused of,
accurate enquiry must be made, and, when the truth is known, judgment in
like manner pronounced canonically.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p7"></span>Furthermore, a thing altogether hard
to be borne, and hostile to the right faith, has come to our ears;
namely that catholics (which is awful to be told) and religious
persons <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) (which is worse)
consent to their children and their slaves, or others whom they have in
their <span id="page_201b">p. 201b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxv-Page_201b"></span>power, being baptized in the heresy
of the Donatists.  And so, if this is true, let your Fraternity study
with all your power to correct it, to the end that the purity of the
faith may through your solicitude stand inviolate, and innocent souls
who might be saved by catholic baptism perish not from the infection of
heretics.  Whosoever, then, of the persons above mentioned has suffered
any one belonging to him to be baptized among the Donatists, study with
all your power, and with all urgency, to recall such to the catholic
faith.  But, if any one of such persons should under any pretext endure
the doing of this thing in the case of such as are his in future, let
him be cut off entirely from the communion of the clergy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[200b:1659](2120511.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p4"></span> See II. 48, note 7.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[200b:1660](2120511.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxv-p8"></span> *Religiosi*.  See I. 61, note 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLIII](2120512)
