[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120216)  [Next](2120218) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p2.1"></span>(On Whitsuntide, I.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p3"></span>I.  *The giving of the Law by Moses
prepared the way for the outpouring of the Holy Ghost.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p4"></span>The hearts of all catholics, beloved,
realize that to-day’s solemnity is to be honoured as one of the chief
feasts, nor is there any doubt that great respect is due to this day,
which the Holy Spirit has hallowed by the miracle of His most excellent
gift.  For from the day on which the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> ascended up above all heavenly
heights to sit down at <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p4.2"></span>God</span> the <span id="page_190">p.
190</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxix-Page_190"></span>Father’s right hand,
this is the tenth which has shone, and the fiftieth from His
Resurrection, being the very day on which it began <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137) , and containing in itself great
revelations of mysteries both new and old, by which it is most
manifestly revealed that Grace was fore-announced through the Law and
the Law fulfilled through Grace.  For as of old, when the Hebrew nation
were released from the Egyptians, on the fiftieth day after the
sacrificing of the lamb the Law was given on Mount Sinai, so after the
suffering of Christ, wherein the true Lamb of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p5.1"></span>God</span> was slain, on the fiftieth day
from His Resurrection, the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles and
the multitude of believers, so that the earnest Christian may easily
perceive that the beginnings of the Old Testament were preparatory to
the beginnings of the Gospel, and that the second covenant was founded
by the same Spirit that had instituted the first.

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p6"></span>II.  *How marvellous was the gift of
“divers tongues.”*

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p7"></span>For as the Apostles’ story testifies: 
“while the days of Pentecost were fulfilled and all the disciples were
together in the same place, there occurred suddenly from heaven a sound
as of a violent wind coming, and filled the whole house where they were
sitting.  And there appeared to them divided tongues as of fire and it
sat upon each of them.  And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit,
and began to speak with other tongues, as the Holy Spirit gave them
utterance <span id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138) .”  Oh! how swift
are the words of wisdom, and where <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p8.2"></span>God</span> is the Master, how quickly is
what is taught, learnt.  No interpretation is required for
understanding, no practice for using, no time for studying, but the
Spirit of Truth blowing where He wills <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139) , the languages peculiar to each
nation become common property in the mouth of the Church.  And therefore
from that day the trumpet of the Gospel-preaching has sounded loud: 
from that day the showers of gracious gifts, the rivers of blessings,
have watered every desert and all the dry land, since to renew the face
of the earth the Spirit of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p9.2"></span>God</span> “moved over the waters <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140) ,” and to drive away the old
darkness flashes of new light shone forth, when by the blaze of those
busy tongues was kindled the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p10.2"></span>Lord’s</span> bright Word and fervent
eloquence, in which to arouse the understanding, and to consume sin
there lay both a capacity of enlightenment and a power of burning.

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p11"></span>III.  *The three Persons in the Trinity
are perfectly equal in all things*.

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p12"></span>But although, dearly-beloved, the
actual form of the thing done was exceeding wonderful, and undoubtedly
in that exultant chorus of all human languages the Majesty of the Holy
Spirit was present, yet no one must think that His Divine substance
appeared in what was seen with bodily eyes.  For His Nature, which is
invisible and shared in common with the Father and the Son, showed the
character of His gift and work by the outward sign that pleased Him, but
kept His essential property within His own Godhead:  because human sight
can no more perceive the Holy Ghost than it can the Father or the Son. 
For in the Divine Trinity nothing is unlike or unequal, and all that can
be thought concerning Its substance admits of no diversity either in
power or glory or eternity.  And while in the property of each Person
the Father is one, the Son is another, and the Holy Ghost is another,
yet the Godhead is not distinct and different; for whilst the Son is the
Only begotten of the Father, the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Father
and the Son, not in the way that every creature is the creature of the
Father and the Son, but as living and having power with Both, and
eternally subsisting of That Which is the Father and the Son <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141) .  And hence when the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxix-p13.1"></span>Lord</span> before the day
of His Passion promised the coming of the Holy Spirit to His disciples,
He said, “I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them
now.  But when He, the Spirit of Truth shall have come, He shall guide
you into all the Truth.  For He shall not speak from Himself, but
whatsoever He shall have heard, He shall speak and shall announce things
to come unto you.  All things that the Father hath are Mine:  therefore
said I that He shall take of Mine, and shall announce it to you <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142) .”  Accordingly, there are not some
things that are the Father’s, and other the Son’s, and other the Holy
Spirit’s:  but all things whatsoever the Father has, the Son also has,
and the Holy Spirit also has:  nor was there ever a time when this
communion did not exist, because with Them to have all things is to
always exist.  In them let no times, no grades, no differences be
imagined <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) , and, if no one can
explain that which is true concerning <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p15.1"></span>God</span>, let no one dare to assert what
is not true.  For it is more excusable not to make a full <span
id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-Page_191"></span>statement concerning His ineffable
Nature than to frame an actually wrong definition.  And so whatever
loyal hearts can conceive of the Father’s eternal and unchangeable
Glory, let them at the same time understand it of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost without any separation or difference.  For we confess this
blessed Trinity to be One <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p15.2"></span>God</span> for this reason, because in
these three Persons there is no diversity either of substance, or of
power, or of will, or of operation.

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p16"></span>IV.  *The Macedonian heresy is as
blasphemous as the Arian.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p17"></span>As therefore we abhor the Arians, who
maintain a difference between the Father and the Son, so also we abhor
the Macedonians <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) , who,
although they ascribe equality to the Father and the Son, yet think the
Holy Ghost to be of a lower nature, not considering that they thus fall
into that blasphemy, which is not to be forgiven either in the present
age or in the judgment to come, as the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p18.1"></span>Lord</span> says:  “whosoever shall have
spoken a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him, but he
that shall have spoken against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him either in this age or in the age to come <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) .”  And so to persist in this
impiety is unpardonable, because it cuts him off from Him, by Whom he
could confess:  nor will he ever attain to healing pardon, who has no
Advocate to plead for him.  For from Him comes the invocation of the
Father, from Him come the tears of penitents, from Him come the groans
of suppliants, and “no one can call Jesus the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p19.2"></span>Lord</span> save in the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) ,” Whose Omnipotence as equal and
Whose Godhead as one, with the Father and the Son, the Apostle most
clearly proclaims, saying, “there are divisions of graces but the same
Spirit; and the divisions of ministrations but the same <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxix-p20.2"></span>Lord</span>; and there are
divisions of operations but the same <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p20.3"></span>God</span>, Who worketh all things in
all <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p22"></span>V.  *The Spirit’s work is still
continued in the Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p23"></span>By these and other numberless proofs,
dearly-beloved, with which the authority of the Divine utterances is
ablaze, let us with one mind be incited to pay reverence to Whitsuntide,
exulting in honour of the Holy Ghost, through Whom the whole catholic
Church is sanctified, and every rational soul quickened; Who is the
Inspirer of the Faith, the Teacher of Knowledge, the Fount of Love, the
Seal of Chastity, and the Cause of all Power.  Let the minds of the
faithful rejoice, that throughout the world One <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p23.1"></span>God</span>, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
praised by the confession of all tongues, and that that sign of His
Presence, which appeared in the likeness of fire, is still perpetuated
in His work and gift.  For the Spirit of Truth Himself makes the house
of His glory shine with the brightness of His light, and will have
nothing dark nor lukewarm in His temple.  And it is through His aid and
teaching also that the purification of fasts and alms has been
established among us.  For this venerable day is followed by a most
wholesome practice, which all the saints have ever found most profitable
to them, and to the diligent observance of which we exhort you with a
shepherd’s care, to the end that if any blemish has been contracted in
the days just passed through heedless negligence, it may be atoned for
by the discipline of fasting and corrected by pious devotion.  On
Wednesday and Friday, therefore, let us fast, and on Saturday for this
very purpose keep vigil with accustomed devotion, through Jesus Christ
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxix-p23.2"></span>Lord</span>, Who
with the Father and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns for ever and ever. 
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[190:1138](2120217.htm#fr_1137) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p5"></span> *In eo* (Sc. *die*) *a quo cœpit* (Sc.
*festum*), apparently an obscure way of saying that the first Whitsunday
was the same day of the week (viz. the first) as the first Easter-day.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[190:1139](2120217.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p8"></span> [Acts ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[190:1140](2120217.htm#fr_1139) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p9"></span> Cf. [John
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008), [Gen.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[190:1141](2120217.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p10"></span> Cf. [John
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008), [Gen.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[190:1142](2120217.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p13"></span> For this statement of the doctrine of
the Trinity, esp. in regard to the Twofold Procession of the Holy Ghost,
cf. Lett. XV. chap. 2.  Bright quotes Swete’s *History of the Doctrine*,
p. 157.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[190:1143](2120217.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p14"></span> S. [John xvi.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[190:1144](2120217.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p15"></span> Cf. Serm. XXVIII. chap. 4, *cum gradus
in vera Divinitate esse non possit*, and Serm. LXXII. chap. 5, *nec
Unitatem gradibus dividat*, and Bright’s notes 29 and 116 on the
subject.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[191:1145](2120217.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p18"></span> “Arianism had spoken both of the Son
and the Holy Spirit as creatures.  The Macedonians, rising up out of
Semi-arianism, gradually reached the Church’s belief as to the uncreated
Majesty of the Son, even if they retained their objection to the
Homoousion.  But having, in their previously Semi-arian position,
refused to extend their own Homoi-ousion to the Holy Spirit, they
afterwards persisted in regarding Him ‘as external to the one
indivisible Godhead.’”  Newman’s *Arians*, p. 226.  Bright’s n. 129. 
Macodonius, from whom the sect was named, was bp. of Constantinople
alternately with his rival, the orthodox Paul, between 342 and 351, and
from that date he held the See in full possession till 360, when he was
finally deposed.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[191:1146](2120217.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p19"></span> S. [Matt. xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[191:1147](2120217.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p20"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[191:1148](2120217.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p20.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXVII](2120218)
