[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120191)  [Next](2120193) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p2.1"></span>On the Feast of the Nativity, VI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p3"></span>I.  *Christmas morning is the most
appropriate time for thoughts on the Nativity.*

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p4"></span>On all days and at all times, dearly
beloved, does the birth of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> and Saviour from the Virgin-mother
occur to the thoughts of the <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="ii.v.xiv-Page_137"></span>faithful, who meditate on divine things,
that the mind may be aroused to the acknowledgment of its Maker, and
whether it be occupied in the groans of supplication, or in the shouting
of praise, or in the offering of sacrifice, may employ its spiritual
insight on nothing more frequently and more trustingly than on the fact
that <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p4.2"></span>God</span> the Son
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p4.3"></span>God</span>, begotten
of the co-eternal Father, was also born by a human birth.  But this
Nativity which is to be adored in heaven and on earth is suggested to us
by no day more than this when, with the early light still shedding its
rays on nature <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) , there is borne
in upon our senses the brightness of this wondrous mystery.  For the
angel Gabriel’s converse with the astonished Mary and her conception by
the Holy Ghost as wondrously promised as believed, seem to recur not
only to the memory but to the very eyes.  For to-day the Maker of the
world was born of a Virgin’s womb, and He, who made all natures, became
Son of her, whom He created.  To-day the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p5.1"></span>God</span> appeared clothed in flesh, and That
which had never been visible to human eyes began to be tangible to our
hands as well.  Today the shepherds learnt from angels’ voices that the
Saviour was born in the substance of our flesh and soul; and to-day the
form of the Gospel message was pre-arranged by the leaders of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p5.2"></span>Lord’s</span> flocks <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) , so that we too may say with the army
of the heavenly host:  “Glory in the highest to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p6.2"></span>God</span>, and on earth peace to men of good
will.”

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p7"></span>II.  *Christians are essentially
participators in the nativity of Christ*.

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p8"></span>Although, therefore, that infancy, which
the majesty of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p8.1"></span>God’s</span> Son did not disdain, reached
mature manhood by the growth of years and, when the triumph of His
passion and resurrection was completed, all the actions of humility
which were undertaken for us ceased, yet to-day’s festival renews for us
the holy childhood of Jesus born of the Virgin Mary:  and in adoring the
birth of our Saviour, we find we are celebrating the commencement of our
own life.  For the birth of Christ is the source of life for Christian
folk, and the birthday of the Head is the birthday of the body. 
Although every individual that is called has his own order, and all the
sons of the Church are separated from one another by intervals of time,
yet as the entire body of the faithful being born in the font of baptism
is crucified with Christ in His passion, raised again in His
resurrection, and placed at the Father’s right hand in His ascension, so
with Him are they born in this nativity.  For any believer in whatever
part of the world that is re-born in Christ, quits the old paths of his
original nature <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) and passes into
a new man by being re-born; and no longer is he reckoned of his earthly
father’s stock but among the seed of the Saviour, Who became the Son of
man in order that we might have the power to be the sons of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p9.1"></span>God</span>.  For unless He
came down to us in this humiliation, no one would reach His presence by
any merits of his own.  Let not earthly wisdom shroud in darkness the
hearts of the called on this point, and let not the frailty of earthly
thoughts raise itself against the loftiness of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p9.2"></span>God’s</span> grace, for it will soon return to
the lowest dust.  At the end of the ages is fulfilled that which was
ordained from all eternity:  and in the presence of realities, when
signs and types have ceased, the Law and prophecy have become Truth: 
and so Abraham is found the father of all nations, and the promised
blessing is given to the world in his seed:  nor are they only
Israelites whom blood and flesh <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789)
begot, but the whole body of the adopted enter into possession of the
heritage prepared for the sons of Faith.  Be not disturbed by the cavils
of silly questionings, and let not the effects of the Divine word be
dissipated by human calculation; we with Abraham believe in <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p10.2"></span>God</span> and “waver not
through unbelief <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) ” but “know
most assuredly that what the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> promised, He is able to perform.”

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p12"></span>III.  *Peace with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p12.1"></span>God</span> is His best gift to man.*

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p13"></span>The Saviour then, dearly beloved, is born
not of fleshly seed but of the Holy Spirit, in such wise that the
condemnation of the first transgression did not touch Him.  And hence
the very greatness of the boon conferred demands of us reverence worthy
of its splendour.  For, as the blessed Apostle teaches, “we have
received not the spirit of this world but the Spirit which is of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p13.1"></span>God</span>, that we may know
the things which are given us by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p13.2"></span>God <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791)
</span>:”  and that Spirit can in no other way be rightly worshipped,
except by offering Him that which we received from Him.  But in the
<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="ii.v.xiv-Page_138"></span>treasures of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p14.2"></span>Lord’s</span> bounty what can we find so
suitable to the honour of the present feast as the peace, which at the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p14.3"></span>Lord’s</span> nativity
was first proclaimed by the angel-choir?  For that it is which brings
forth the sons of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p14.4"></span>God</span>, the nurse of love and the mother
of unity:  the rest of the blessed and our eternal home; whose proper
work and special office it is to join to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p14.5"></span>God</span> those whom it removes from the
world.  Whence the Apostle incites us to this good end, in saying,
“being justified therefore by faith let us have peace towards <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p14.6"></span>God <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) </span>.”  In which brief sentence are
summed up nearly all the commandments; for where true peace is, there
can be no lack of virtue.  But what is it, dearly beloved, to have peace
towards <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p15.2"></span>God</span>,
except to wish what He bids, and not to wish what He forbids?  For if
human friendships seek out equality of soul and similarity of desires,
and difference of habits can never attain to full harmony, how will he
be partaker of divine peace, who is pleased with what displeases <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p15.3"></span>God</span> and desires to
get delight from what he knows to be offensive to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p15.4"></span>God</span>?  That is not the spirit of the
sons of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p15.5"></span>God</span>;
such wisdom is not acceptable to the noble family of the adopted.  That
chosen and royal race must live up to the dignity of its regeneration,
must love what the Father loves, and in nought disagree with its Maker,
lest the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p15.6"></span>Lord</span>
should again say:  “I have begotten and raised up sons, but they have
scorned Me:  the ox knoweth his owner and the ass his master’s crib: 
but Israel hath not known Me and My people hath not acknowledged
Me <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) .”

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p17"></span>IV.  *We must be worthy of our calling as
sons and friends of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p17.1"></span>God</span>.*

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p18"></span>The mystery of this boon is great, dearly
beloved, and this gift exceeds all gifts that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p18.1"></span>God</span> should call man son, and man
should name <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p18.2"></span>God</span>
Father:  for by these terms we perceive and learn the love which reached
so great a height.  For if in natural progeny and earthly families those
who are born of noble parents are lowered by the faults of evil
intercourse, and unworthy offspring are put to shame by the very
brilliance of their ancestry; to what end will they come who through
love of the world do not fear to be outcast from the family of Christ? 
But if it gains the praise of men that the father’s glory should shine
again in their descendants, how much more glorious is it for those who
are born of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p18.3"></span>God</span>
to regain the brightness of their Maker’s likeness and display in
themselves Him Who begat them, as saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p18.4"></span>Lord</span>:  “Let your light so shine before
men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is
in heaven <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) ?”  We know indeed, as
the Apostle John says that “the whole world lieth in the evil one <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) ,” and that by the stratagems of the
Devil and his angels numberless attempts are made either to frighten man
in his struggle upwards by adversity or to spoil him by prosperity, but
“greater is He that is in us, than he that is against us <span
id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) ,” and they who have peace with <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p21.2"></span>God</span> and are always
saying to the Father with their whole hearts “thy will be done <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) ” can be overcome in no battles, can
be hurt by no assaults.  For accusing ourselves in our confessions and
refusing the spirit’s consent to our fleshly lusts, we stir up against
us the enmity of him who is the author of sin, but secure a peace with
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p22.2"></span>God</span> that
nothing can destroy, by accepting His gracious service, in order that we
may not only surrender ourselves in obedience to our King but also be
united to Him by our free-will.  For if we are like-minded, if we wish
what He wishes, and disapprove what He disapproves, He will finish all
our wars for us, He Who gave the will, will also give the power:  so
that we may be fellow-workers in His works, and with the exultation of
Faith may utter that prophetic song:  “the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p22.3"></span>Lord</span> is my light and my salvation: 
whom shall I fear? the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p22.4"></span>Lord</span> is the defender of my life:  of
whom shall I be afraid <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) ?”

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p24"></span>V.  *The birth of Christ is the birth of
peace to the Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p25"></span>They then who “are born not of blood nor
of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man but of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p25.1"></span>God <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) </span>,” must offer to the Father the
unanimity of peace-loving sons, and all the members of adoption must
meet in the First-begotten of the new creation, Who came to do not His
own Will but His that sent Him; inasmuch as the Father in His gracious
favour has adopted as His heirs not those that are discordant nor those
that are unlike Him, but those that are in feeling and affection one. 
They that are re-modelled after one pattern must have a spirit like the
model.  The birthday of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p26.2"></span>Lord</span> is the birthday of peace:  for
thus says the Apostle, “He is our peace, who made both one <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) ;” since whether we be Jew or Gentile,
“through Him we have access in one Spirit to the Father <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) .”  And it was this in particular that
He taught His disciples before the day of His passion which He had of
His own free-will fore-ordained, saying, “My peace I give unto you, My
peace I leave for you <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) ;” <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span id="ii.v.xiv-Page_139"></span>and lest
under the general term the character of His peace should escape notice,
He added, “not as the world give I unto you <span
id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) .”  The world, He says, has its
friendships, and brings many that are apart into loving harmony.  There
are also minds which are equal in vices., and similarity of desires
produces equality of affection.  And if any are perchance to be found
who are not pleased with what is mean and dishonourable, and who exclude
from the terms of their connexion unlawful compacts, yet even such if
they be either Jews, heretics or heathens <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) , belong not to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p31.1"></span>God’s</span> friendship but to this world’s
peace.  But the peace of the spiritual and of catholics coming down from
above and leading upwards refuses to hold communion with the lovers of
the world, resists all obstacles and flies from pernicious pleasures to
true joys, as the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xiv-p31.2"></span>Lord</span> says:  “Where thy treasure is,
there will thy heart be also <span id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) :” 
that is, if what you love is below you will descend to the lowest
depth:  if what you love is above, you will reach the topmost height: 
thither may the Spirit of peace lead and bring us, whose wishes and
feeling are at one, and who are of one mind in faith and hope and in
charity:  since “as many as are led by the Spirit of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p32.2"></span>God</span> these are sons of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xiv-p32.3"></span>God <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) </span>” Who reigneth with the Son and
Holy Spirit for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_786"></span>[137:787](2120192.htm#fr_786) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p5"></span> *Nova etiam in elementis luce radiante*,
the phrase seems to point to an early service as the time of delivering
this sermon (possibly the *missa in gallicantu*).

<span id="fn_787"></span>[137:788](2120192.htm#fr_787) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p6"></span> *Apud Dominicorum præsules gregum hodie
evangelizandi forma præcondita est*.  This clause has been taken to be
an allusion to the reciting of the angelic hymn *Gloria in Excelsis*, at
the Holy Eucharist, but as Bright (note 20, all of which should be read)
says, “the words do not necessarily mean more than that the original
Angelic hymn (S. [Luke ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.xiv-p6.1"></span>) was recited in the Christmas Day Service.”

<span id="fn_788"></span>[137:789](2120192.htm#fr_788) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p9"></span> *Interciso originalis tramite
vetustatis*.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[137:790](2120192.htm#fr_789) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p10"></span> *Sanguis et caro*:  it is noticeable
that the same order is observed in [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[137:791](2120192.htm#fr_790) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p11"></span> [Rom.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[137:792](2120192.htm#fr_791) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[138:793](2120192.htm#fr_792) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p14.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p15"></span> [Rom. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[138:794](2120192.htm#fr_793) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p15.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p16"></span> [Isa.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[138:795](2120192.htm#fr_794) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p18.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p19"></span> S. [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[138:796](2120192.htm#fr_795) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p20"></span> [1 John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[138:797](2120192.htm#fr_796) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p21"></span> Cf. [1 John
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004), [2 Kings
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[138:798](2120192.htm#fr_797) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p22"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[138:799](2120192.htm#fr_798) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p22.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p23"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[138:800](2120192.htm#fr_799) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p26"></span> S. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[138:801](2120192.htm#fr_800) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p27"></span> [Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[138:802](2120192.htm#fr_801) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p28"></span> [Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[138:803](2120192.htm#fr_802) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p29"></span> S. [John xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[139:804](2120192.htm#fr_803) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p30"></span> [John
14.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span
id="ii.v.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[139:805](2120192.htm#fr_804) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p31"></span> *Pagani* (lit. villagers or rustics): 
the later meaning arose from the fact that idolatry and superstition
tend to linger longer in out-of-the-way rural districts, than in the
more civilized towns:  cf. “heath” and “heathen.”  See Bright’s note 24,
and the references quoted by him.  Hooker, v. 80. 2 ; Trench, “on Study
of Words,” p. 69, &c.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[139:806](2120192.htm#fr_805) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p32"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[139:807](2120192.htm#fr_806) <span
id="ii.v.xiv-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xiv-p33"></span> [Rom. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xiv-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXVII](2120193)
