[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120386)  [Next](2120388) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_122b">p. 122b</span>
<span id="iii.v.iii.i-Page_122b"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Book III.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Epistle I.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p3"></span>To Peter, Subdeacon.

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p4"></span>Gregory to Peter, Subdeacon of
Campania.

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p5"></span>What a crime has been committed in the
Lucullan fort against our brother and fellow-bishop Paul <span
id="fr_1466"></span>[1467](#fn_1466) the account which has been sent to
us has made manifest.  And, inasmuch as the magnificent Scholasticus,
judge of Campania, happens at the present time to be with us here, we
have especially enjoined on him the duty of visiting the madness of so
great perversity with strict correction.  But, since the bearer of the
aforesaid account has requested us to send some one to represent
ourselves, we therefore send the subdeacon Epiphanius, who, together
with the aforesaid judge, may be able to investigate and ascertain by
whom the sedition was raised or investigated, and to visit it with
suitable punishment.  Let thy Experience then make haste to give aid in
this case with all thy power, to the end both that the truth may be
ascertained, and that vengeance may proceed against the guilty parties. 
Wherefore, since the slaves of the glorious Clementina are said to have
had to do with this same crime, and to have used language calculated to
stir up the sedition, do thou subject them strictly to immediate
punishment, nor let your severity be relaxed in consideration of her
person, since they ought to be smitten all the more as they have
transgressed out of mere pride as being the servants of a noble lady. 
But you ought also to make thorough enquiry whether the said lady was
privy to so atrocious a crime, and whether it was perpetrated with her
knowledge, that from our visitation of it all may learn how dangerous it
is not only to lay hands on a priest, but even to transgress in words
against one.  For, if anything should be done remissly or omitted in
this case, know that thou especially wilt have to bear the blame and the
risk; nor wilt thou find any plea for excuse with us.  For in proportion
as this business will commend thee to us if it be most strictly
investigated and corrected, know that our indignation will become sharp
against thee, if it be smoothed over.

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p7"></span>Moreover, for the rest, if any slaves
from the city should have taken refuge in the monastery of Saint
Severinus, or in any other church of this same fort, as soon as this has
come to thy knowledge, by no means allow them to remain there, but let
them be brought to the church within the city; and, if they should have
just cause of complaint against their masters, they must needs leave the
church with suitable arrangements made for them.  But, if they should
have committed any venial fault, let them be restored without delay to
their masters, the latter having taken oath to pardon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[122b:1467](2120387.htm#fr_1466) <span
id="iii.v.iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.i-p6"></span> The *Castellum*, or *Castrum,
Lucullanum* was a small island adjoining Naples.  Respecting Paul,
bishop of Nepe, who had been sent as visitor to the See of Naples during
a vacancy, and his difficulties there, cf. II. 9, 10, 15; III. 35.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Paulus, Bishop.](2120388)
