[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120214)  [Next](2120216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>(On the Lord’s Ascension, I.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p3"></span>I.  *The events recorded as happening
after the Resurrection were intended to convince us of its truth.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4"></span>Since the blessed and glorious
Resurrection of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, whereby the
Divine power in three days raised the true Temple of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4.2"></span>God</span>, which the
wickedness of the Jews had overthrown, the sacred forty days,
dearly-beloved, are to-day ended, which by most holy appointment were
devoted to our most profitable instruction, so that, during the period
that the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4.3"></span>Lord</span>
thus protracted the lingering of His bodily presence, our faith in the
Resurrection might be fortified by needful proofs.  For Christ’s Death
had much disturbed the disciples’ hearts, and a kind of torpor of
distrust had crept over their grief-laden minds at His torture on the
cross, at His giving up the ghost, at His lifeless body’s burial.  For,
when the holy women, as the Gospel-story has revealed, brought word of
the stone rolled away from the tomb, the sepulchre emptied of the body,
and the angels bearing witness to the living <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4.4"></span>Lord</span>, their words seemed like
ravings to the Apostles and other disciples.  Which doubtfulness, the
result of human weakness, the Spirit of Truth would most assuredly not
have permitted to exist in His own preacher’s breasts, had not their
trembling anxiety and careful hesitation laid the foundations of our
faith.  It was our <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-Page_187"></span>perplexities and our dangers that were
provided for in the Apostles:  it was ourselves who in these men were
taught how to meet the cavillings of the ungodly and the arguments of
earthly wisdom.  *We* are instructed by their lookings, *we* are taught
by their hearings, *we* are convinced by their handlings.  Let us give
thanks to the Divine management and the holy Fathers’ necessary slowness
of belief.  Others doubted, that we might not doubt.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p5"></span>II.  *And therefore they are in the
highest degree instructive*.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p6"></span>Those days, therefore, dearly-beloved,
which intervened between the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Resurrection and Ascension
did not pass by in uneventful leisure, but great mysteries <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126) were ratified in them, deep
truths <span id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) revealed.  In them the
fear of awful death was removed, and the immortality not only of the
soul but also of the flesh established.  In them, through the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>Lord’s</span> breathing
upon them, the Holy Ghost is poured upon all the Apostles, and to the
blessed Apostle Peter beyond the rest the care of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8.2"></span>Lord’s</span> flock is
entrusted, in addition to the keys of the kingdom.  Then it was that the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8.3"></span>Lord</span> joined
the two disciples as a companion on the way, and, to the sweeping away
of all the clouds of our uncertainty, upbraided them with the slowness
of their timorous hearts.  Their enlightened hearts catch the flame of
faith, and lukewarm as they have been, are made to burn while the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8.4"></span>Lord</span> unfolds the
Scriptures.  In the breaking of bread also their eyes are opened as they
eat with Him:  how far more blessed is the opening of their eyes, to
whom the glorification of their nature is revealed than that of our
first parents, on whom fell the disastrous consequences of their
transgression.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p9"></span>III.  *They prove the Resurrection of
the flesh.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p10"></span>And in the course of these and other
miracles, when the disciples were harassed by bewildering thoughts, and
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> had
appeared in their midst and said, “Peace be unto you <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128) ,” that what was passing through
their hearts might not be their fixed opinion (for they thought they saw
a spirit not flesh), He refutes their thoughts so discordant with the
Truth, offers to the doubters’ eyes the marks of the cross that remained
in His hands and feet, and invites them to handle Him with careful
scrutiny, because the traces of the nails and spear had been retained to
heal the wounds of unbelieving hearts, so that not with wavering faith,
but with most stedfast knowledge they might comprehend that the Nature
which had been lain in the sepulchre was to sit on <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11.2"></span>God</span> the Father’s
throne.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p12"></span>IV.  *Christ’s ascension has given us
greater privileges and joys than the devil had taken from us.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13"></span>Accordingly, dearly-beloved,
throughout this time which elapsed between the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Resurrection and Ascension,
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>God’s</span>
Providence had this in view, to teach and impress upon both the eyes and
hearts of His own people that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ might be
acknowledged to have as truly risen, as He was truly born, suffered, and
died.  And hence the most blessed Apostles and all the disciples, who
had been both bewildered at His death on the cross and backward in
believing His Resurrection, were so strengthened by the clearness of the
truth that when the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.4"></span>Lord</span> entered the heights of heaven,
not only were they affected with no sadness, but were even filled with
great joy.  And truly great and unspeakable was their cause for joy,
when in the sight of the holy multitude, above the dignity of all
heavenly creatures, the Nature of mankind went up, to pass above the
angels’ ranks and to rise beyond the archangels’ heights, and to have
Its uplifting limited by no elevation until, received to sit with the
Eternal Father, It should be associated on the throne with His glory, to
Whose Nature It was united in the Son.  Since then Christ’s Ascension is
our uplifting, and the hope of the Body is raised, whither the glory of
the Head has gone before, let us exult, dearly-beloved, with worthy joy
and delight in the loyal paying of thanks.  For to-day not only are we
confirmed as possessors of paradise, but have also in Christ penetrated
the heights of heaven, and have gained still greater things through
Christ’s unspeakable grace than we had lost through the devil’s malice. 
For us, whom our virulent enemy had driven out from the bliss of our
first abode, the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.5"></span>God</span> has made members of Himself and
placed at the right hand of the Father, with Whom He lives and reigns in
the unity of the Holy Spirit, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.6"></span>God</span> for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[187:1127](2120215.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p7"></span> *Sacramenta—mysteria*.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[187:1128](2120215.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8"></span> *Sacramenta—mysteria*.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[187:1129](2120215.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11"></span> [Luke
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036), [John
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXIV](2120216)
