[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120472)  [Next](2120474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XL.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p2"></span>To Mauricius Augustus.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p3"></span>Gregory to Mauricius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p4"></span>The Piety of my Lords in their most
serene commands, while set on refuting me on certain matters, in sparing
me has by no means spared me.  For by the use therein of the term
simplicity they politely call me silly.  It is true indeed that in Holy
Scripture, when simplicity is spoken of in a good sense, it is often
carefully associated with prudence and uprightness.  Hence it is written
of the blessed Job, *The man was simple and upright* ([Job i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p4.1"></span>).  And the blessed Apostle Paul admonishes
saying *Be ye simple in evil and prudent in good* ([Rom. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p4.2"></span>).  And the Truth in person admonishes
saying, *Be ye prudent as serpents, and simple as doves* ([Matth. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p4.3"></span>); thus shewing it to be very unprofitable
if either prudence should be wanting to simplicity, or simplicity to
prudence.  In order, then, to make His servants instructed for all
things He desired them to be both simple as doves, and prudent as
serpents, that so both the cunning of the serpent might sharpen in them
the simplicity of the dove, and the simplicity of the dove temper the
cunning of the serpent.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p5"></span>I therefore, who am denounced in the
most serene commands of my Lords as simple without the addition of
prudence, as having been deceived by the cunning of Ariulph, am plainly
and undoubtedly called silly; which I also myself acknowledge to be the
case.  For, though your Piety were silent, the facts <span
id="page_176b">p. 176b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xix-Page_176b"></span>cry out.  For, if I had not been
silly, I should by no means have come to endure what I suffer in this
place among the swords of the Lombards.  Moreover, in what I stated
about Ariulph, that he was prepared with all his heart to come to terms
with the republic, seeing that I am not believed, I am reproved also as
having lied.  But, although I am not a priest <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) , I know it to be a grave injury to
a priest that, being a servant of the truth, he should be believed to be
deceitful.  And I have been for some time aware that Nordulph is
believed before me, and Leo before me, and that now easy credence is
given to those who seem to be in your confidence more than to my
assertions.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p7"></span>And indeed if the captivity of my land
were not increasing day by day, I would gladly pass over in silence
contempt and ridicule of myself.  But this does afflict me exceedingly,
that from my bearing the charge of falsehood it ensues also that Italy
is daily led captive under the yoke of the Lombards.  And, while my
representations are in no wise believed, the strength of the enemy is
increasing hugely.  This however I suggest to my most pious lord, that
he would think anything that is bad of me, but, with regard to the
advantage of the republic and the cause of the rescue of Italy, not
easily lend his pious ears to any one, but believe facts rather than
words.  Moreover, let not our lord, in virtue of his earthly power, too
hastily disdain priests, but with excellent consideration, on account of
Him whose servants they are, so rule over them as also to pay the
reverence that is due to them.  For in Holy Writ priests are sometimes
called gods, and sometimes angels.  For even through Moses it is said of
him who is to be put upon his oath, *Bring him unto the gods* ([Exod.
xxii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p7.1"></span>); that is unto the priests.  And again it
is written, *Thou shalt not revile the gods* ([Exod.
22.28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p7.2"></span>), to wit, the priests.  And the prophet
says, *The priest’s lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the
law at his mouth; for he is the angel of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p7.3"></span>Lord</span> of hosts* ([Malach. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p7.4"></span>).  Why, then, should it be strange if your
Piety were to condescend to honour those to whom even <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p7.5"></span>God</span> Himself in His
word gives honour, calling them angels or gods?

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p8"></span>Ecclesiastical history also testifies
that, when accusations in writing against bishops had been offered to
the Prince Constantine of pious memory, he received indeed the bills of
accusation, but, calling together the bishops who had been accused, he
burnt before their eyes the bills which he had received, saying, *Ye are
gods, constituted by the true <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.1"></span>God</span>.  Go, and settle your causes
among you, for it is not fit that we should judge gods.*  Yet in this
sentence, my pious <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.2"></span>Lord</span>, he conferred more on himself
by his humility than on them by the reverence paid to them.  For before
him there were pagan princes in the republic, who knew not the true
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.3"></span>God</span>, but
worshipped gods of wood and stone; and yet they paid the greatest honour
to their priests.  What wonder then if a Christian emperor should
condescend to honour the priests of the true <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.4"></span>God</span>, when pagan princes, as we have
already said, knew how to bestow honour on priests who served gods of
wood and stone?  These things, then, I suggest to the piety of my Lords,
not in my own behalf, but in behalf of all priests.  For I am a man that
is a sinner.  And, since I offend against Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.5"></span>God</span> incessantly
every day, I surmise that it will be some amends for this at the
tremendous judgment, that I am smitten incessantly every day by blows. 
And I believe that you appease the same Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p8.6"></span>God</span> all the more as you more
severely afflict me who serve Him badly.  For I had already received
many blows, and when the commands of my Lords came in addition, I found
consolations that I was not hoping for.  For, if I can, I will briefly
enumerate these blows.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p9"></span>First, that the peace which without any
cost to the republic I had made with the Lombards who were in Tuscany
was withdrawn from me.  Then, the peace having been broken, the soldiers
were removed from the Roman city.  And some indeed were slain by the
enemy, but others were placed at Narnii and Perusium (*Perugia*); and
Rome was left, that Perusium might be held.  After this a still heavier
blow was the arrival of Agilulph, so that I saw with my own eyes Romans
tied by the neck with ropes like dogs, to be taken to France for sale. 
And, because we who were within the city under the protection of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p9.1"></span>God</span> escaped his
hands, a ground was thence sought for making us appear culpable; to wit,
because corn ran short, which cannot by any means be kept in large
quantities for long in this city; as I have shewn more fully in another
representation.  On my own account indeed I was in no wise disturbed,
since I declare, my conscience bearing me witness, that I was prepared
to suffer any adversity whatever, so long as I came out of all these
things with the safety of my soul.  But for the glorious men, Gregory
the præfect, and Castorius the military commander (*magistro militum*),
I have been distressed in no small degree, seeing that they in no way
neglected to do all that could be done, and endured most severe toil in
watching <span id="page_177b">p. 177b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xix-Page_177b"></span>and guarding the city during the
siege, and, after all this, were smitten by the heavy indignation of my
Lords.  As to them, I clearly understand that it is not their conduct,
but my person, that goes against them.  For, having with me alike
laboured in trouble, they are alike troubled after labour.

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p10"></span>Now as to the Piety of my Lords
holding out over me the formidable and terrible judgment of Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.1"></span>God</span>, I
beseech you by the same Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.2"></span>God</span> to do this no more.  For as yet
we know not how any of us will stand there.  And Paul, the excellent
preacher, says, *Judge nothing before the time, until the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.3"></span>Lord</span> come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts* ([1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.4"></span>).  Yet this I briefly say, that, unworthy
sinner as I am, I rely more on the mercy of Jesus when He comes than on
the justice of your Piety.  And there are many things that men are
ignorant of with regard to this judgment; for perhaps He will blame what
you praise, and praise what you blame.  Wherefore among all these
uncertainties I return to tears only, praying that the same Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.5"></span>God</span> may both
direct our most pious <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.6"></span>Lord</span> with His hand and in that
terrible judgment find him free from all defaults.  And may He make me
so to please men, if need be, as not to offend against His eternal
grace <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[176b:1606](2120473.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p6"></span> This may be an ironical allusion to
something the Emperor had said in his letter to Gregory.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[177b:1607](2120473.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="iii.v.v.xix-p10.7"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xix-p11"></span> For the circumstances referred to in
this epistle, see *Proleg*., p. xix.  It shews how outspoken Gregory
could be, when greatly moved, in addressing the Emperor, notwithstanding
his accustomed deference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Constantina Augusta.](2120474)
