[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120497)  [Next](2120499) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p2"></span>To Mauricius, Augustus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p3"></span>Gregory to Mauricius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p4"></span>Seeing that in you, most Christian of
princes, uncorrupt soundness of faith shines as a beam sent down from
heaven, and that it is known to all that your Serenity embraces
fervently and loves with entire devotion of heart the pure profession in
which by <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> favour you are powerful, we
have perceived it to be very necessary to make request for those whom
one and the same faith enlightens, to the end that the Piety of our
lords may protect them with its favour, and defend them from all
molestation.  When certain men scorn the confession of faith of such
persons they are shewn to contradict the true faith.  For, since the
Apostle declares that confession of the mouth is made unto salvation, he
who will not consent to believe a right profession accuses himself in
rejecting others ([Rom. x. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.vi.xii-p4.2"></span>).

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p5"></span>Now all the proceedings against John,
presbyter of the church of Chalcedon, having been read in council and
considered in order, we have found that he has suffered the greater
injustice in that, when he declared and shewed himself to be a Catholic,
it was not his guilt, but an uncertain accusation of long standing, that
crushed him; and this to such an extent that his accusers declared in
their open reply that they did not know the heresy of the Marcionists
which they referred to.  And, whereas they ought therefore to have been
rejected from the very beginning of the trial, they were allowed, vague
as they were, to remain in court for his accusation.  But, lest at any
rate alleged report might injure him, he produced a written confession
of his faith with the purpose of shewing evidently that he was a
professor and follower of the right faith.  But this the judges deputed
by the most holy John, our brother and fellow-bishop, unjustly and
unreasonably disregarded; and so, in doing all they could to put him
down, shewed themselves more to blame than he.  For no one doubts that
it is unfaithfulness not to have <span id="page_194b">p. 194b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-Page_194b"></span>faith in the faithful.  Seeing
then that, everything having been thoroughly enquired into and
considered, the decision of the holy Council with me, by the revealing
grace of Divine power, has declared the above-written John the presbyter
to be a Catholic, and that no spot of heretical pravity has been found
in him, I entreat that the pious protection of your Serenity may order
him to be kept unharmed from all annoyance, nor allow a professor of the
catholic faith to suffer any molestation.  For not to believe one who
professes truly is not to purge heresy, but to make it.  If this should
be allowed, occasion of infidelity will arise, and people will
themselves incur the guilt which they would correct unwarily.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xii-p6"></span>These things therefore let the most
Serene lord with pious precaution consider, and, as I have already
requested, with profuse entreaties I again implore, that he allow not an
innocent man to be afflicted anew as though he were guilty; to the end
that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>God</span>, who sees your Clemency love
and defend the purity of catholic rectitude, may cause you both to rule
over a pacified republic with your foes subdued, and to reign with His
saints in life eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theotistus.](2120499)
