[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120424)  [Next](2120426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle IV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p2"></span>To Queen Theodelinda.

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p3"></span>Gregory to Theodelinda, Queen of the
Lombards <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) .

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p5"></span>It has come to our knowledge by the
report of certain persons that your Glory has been led on by some
bishops even to such an offence against holy Church as to withdraw
yourself from the communion of Catholic unanimity.  Now the more we
sincerely love you, the more seriously are we distressed about you, that
you believe unskilled and foolish men, who not only do not know what
they talk about, but can hardly understand what they have heard.

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p6"></span>For they say that in the times of
Justinian of pious memory, some things were ordained contrary to the
council of Chalcedon; and, while they neither read themselves nor
believe those who do, they remain in the same error which they
themselves feigned to themselves concerning us.  For we, our conscience
bearing witness, declare that nothing was altered, nothing violated,
with respect to the faith of this same holy council of Chalcedon; but
that whatever was done in the times of the aforesaid Justinian was so
done that the faith of the council of Chalcedon should in no respect be
disturbed.  Further, if any one presumes to speak or think anything
contrary to the faith of the said synod, we detest his <span
id="page_146b">p. 146b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv.iv-Page_146b"></span>opinion, with interposition of
anathema.  Since then you know the integrity of our faith under the
attestation of our conscience, it remains that you should never separate
yourself from the communion of the Catholic Church, lest all those tears
of yours, and all those good works should come to nothing, if they are
found alien from the true faith.  It therefore becomes your Glory to
send a communication with all speed to my most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Constantius, of whose faith, as well as his life, I have
long been well assured, and to signify by your letters addressed to him
how kindly you have accepted his ordination, and that you are in no way
separated from the communion of his Church; although I think that what I
say on this subject is superfluous:  for, though there has been some
degree of doubtfulness in your mind, I think that it has been removed
from your heart on the arrival of my son John the abbot, and Hippolytus
the notary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[145b:1526](2120425.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="iii.v.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.iv-p4"></span> This letter was not delivered to
Theodelinda, Epistle XXXVIII. having been afterwards substituted for
it.  See note 4 under *Ep*. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Boniface, Bishop.](2120426)
