[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120378)  [Next](2120380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of
Ravenna <span id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p5"></span>That I have not replied to the many
letters of your Blessedness attribute not to sluggishness on my part,
but to weakness, seeing that, on account of my sins, when Ariulph,
coming to the Roman city, killed some and mutilated others, I was
affected with such great sadness as to fall into a colic sickness.  But
I wondered much why it was that that well-known care of your Holiness
for me was of no advantage to this city and to my needs.  When, however,
your letters reached me, I became aware that you are indeed taking pains
to act, but yet have no one on whom you can bring your action to bear. 
I therefore attribute it to my sins that this man <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444) with whom we are now concerned both
evades fighting against our enemies and also forbids our making peace;
though indeed at present, even if he wished us to make it, we are
utterly unable, since Ariulph, having the army of Authar and Nordulf,
desires their subsidies <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445) to be
given him ere he will deign to speak to us at all about peace.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>But, as to the case of the bishops of
Istria <span id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446) , I have learnt the
truth of all you had told me in your letters from the commands which
have come to me from the most pious princes, bidding me abstain for the
present from compelling them.  I indeed feel with you, and rejoice
greatly in your zeal and ardour, with regard to what you have written,
and acknowledge myself to have become in many ways your debtor.  Know
nevertheless that I shall not cease to write with the greatest zeal and
freedom on this same matter to the most serene lords.  Moreover the
animosity of the aforesaid most excellent Romanus Patricius ought not to
move you, since, as we are above him in place and rank, we ought so much
the more to tolerate with forbearance and dignity any light conduct on
his part.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p10"></span>If, however, there is any
opportunity of prevailing with him, let your Fraternity work upon him,
so that we may make peace with Ariulph, if to some small extent we may,
since the soldiery have been removed from the city of Rome, as he
himself knows.  But the Theodosiacs <span
id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447) , who have remained here, not
having received their pay, are with difficulty induced to guard the
walls; and how shall the city subsist, left destitute as it is by all,
if it has not peace?

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p12"></span> <span id="page_114b">p. 114b</span>
<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-Page_114b"></span>Furthermore, as to the gift
redeemed from captivity, about whom you have written to us asking us to
enquire into her origin, we would have your Holiness know that an
unknown person cannot easily be traced.  But as to what you say about
one who has been ordained being ordained again, it is exceedingly
ridiculous, and outside the consideration of one disposed as you are,
unless perchance some precedent is adduced which ought to be taken into
account in judging him who is alleged to have done any such thing.  But
far be it from your Fraternity to entertain such a view.  For, as one
who has been once baptized ought not to be baptized again, so one who
has been once consecrated cannot be consecrated again to the same
order.  But in case of any one’s attainment of the priesthood having
been accompanied by slight misdemeanour, he ought to be adjudged to
penance for the misdemeanour, and yet return his orders.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p13"></span>With regard to the city of
Naples <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448) , in view of the
urgent insistance of the most excellent Exarch, we give you to
understand that Arigis <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) , as
we have ascertained, has associated himself with Ariulph, and is
breaking his faith to the republic, and plotting much against this same
city; to which unless a duke be speedily sent, it may already be
reckoned among the lost.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p16"></span>As to what you say to the effect
that alms should be sent to the city of the schismatic Severus which has
been burnt <span id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) , your Fraternity
is of this opinion as being ignorant of the bribes that he sends to the
Court in opposition to us.  And, even though these were not sent, we
should have to consider that compassion is to be shewn first to the
faithful, and afterwards to the enemies of the Church.  For indeed there
is near at hand the city Fanum, in which many have been taken captive,
and to which I have already in the past year desired to send alms, but
did not venture to do so through the midst of the enemy.  It therefore
seems to me that you should send the Abbot Claudius thither with a
certain amount of money, in order to redeem the freemen whom he may find
there detained in slavery for ransom, or any who are still in
captivity.  But, as to the sum of money to be thus sent, be assured that
whatever you determine will please me.  If, moreover, you are treating
with the most excellent Romanus Patricius for allowing us to make peace
with Ariulph, I am prepared to send another person to you, with whom
questions of ransom may be better arranged.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p18"></span>Concerning our brother and
fellow-bishop Natalis <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451) I was
at one time greatly distressed, in that I had found him acting haughtily
in certain matters; but, since he has himself amended his manners, he
has overcome me and consoled my distress.  In connexion with this matter
admonish our brother and fellow-bishop Malchus <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452) that before he comes to us he
render his accounts, and then depart elsewhere if it is necessary.  And
if we find his conduct good, it will perhaps be necessary for us to
restore to him the patrimony which he had charge of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[113b:1444](2120379.htm#fr_1443) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> For elucidation of the circumstances
of this Epistle see above, Epistles 3, 29, 30.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[113b:1445](2120379.htm#fr_1444) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> Viz. Romanus Patricius, mentioned
below, the Exarch of Ravenna, and as such representing the Emperor in
Italy.  See I. 33, “Ad Romanum Patricium et Exarchum Italiæ.”

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[113b:1446](2120379.htm#fr_1445) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p7"></span> *Precaria*; apparently subsidies
demanded for the support of the invading army.  *Precarium* (or
*Precarim*), which has various applications, appears to be capable of
this sense.  See Du Cange.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[113b:1447](2120379.htm#fr_1446) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p9"></span> The Istrian bishops still held out
in refusing to accept the condemnation of “The Three Chapters” passed in
the fifth Œcumenical Council at the instance of the Emperor Justinian. 
Gregory, soon after his accession, had summoned Severus, Bishop of
Aquileia and Metropolitan, with his suffragans, to Rome; and this, as he
alleges, by command of the Emperor, though the latter had now, it
appears, forbidden further proceedings.  See I. 16, and note.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[113b:1448](2120379.htm#fr_1447) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p11"></span> I.e. the soldiers of the Theodosian
Legion.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[114b:1449](2120379.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p14"></span> With respect to Rome Gregory has
already complained that the Exarch would neither send forces for its
defence nor allow peace to be made with Ariulph.  So also with regard to
Naples, which Gregory understands to be now threatened by the Lombards. 
The Exarch, it appears, had been urgent in insisting that it should hold
out against the enemy (“excellentissimo exarcho instanter imminente”),
but without giving any help for the purpose.  What Gregory here says is
that without aid from the Exarch its defence was hopeless.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[114b:1450](2120379.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p15"></span> Aragis was the Lombard duke of
Beneventum.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[114b:1451](2120379.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p17"></span> Viz. Aquileia, of which Severus was
bishop and Metropolitan, called here *schismaticus* because of his
holding out against Rome in the matter of the Three Chapters.  The
bribes he is said below to have sent to Constantinople would be for
inducing the Emperor to take his part against Gregory.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[114b:1452](2120379.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p19"></span> See above, Ep. 20<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p19.1"></span>, in this Book, and I. 19, note 5, where
references to other Epistles are given.

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[114b:1453](2120379.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxiv-p20"></span> See II. 20, note 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Dominicus, Bishop.](2120380)
