[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120015)  [Next](2120017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Letter VI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>To Anastasius, Bishop of Thessalonica.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p3"></span>Leo to his beloved brother Anastasius.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p4"></span>I.  *He is pleased to have been consulted
by the bishops* <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) *of Illyricum on
important questions.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p6"></span>The brotherly love of our colleagues makes
us read with grateful mind the letters of all priests <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) ; for in them we embrace one another in
the spirit as if we were face to face, and by the intercourse of such
epistles we are associated in mutual converse <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) .  But in this present letter the
affection displayed seems to us greater than usual:  for it informs us
of the state of the churches <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) , and
urges us to a vigilant exercise of care by a consideration of our
office, so that being placed, as it were, on a watch-tower, according to
the will of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>, we should both lend our approval
to things when they run in accordance with our wishes, and correct, by
applying the remedies of compulsion, what we observe gone wrong through
any aggression:  hoping that abundant fruit will be the result of our
sowing the seed, if we do not allow those things to increase which have
begun to spring up to the spoiling of the harvest.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p10"></span>II.  *Following the examples of his
predecessors he nominates Anastasius Metropolitan of Illyricum.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p11"></span>Now therefore, dear brother, that your
request has been made known to us through our son Nicolaus the priest,
that you, too, like your predecessors, might receive from us in our turn
authority over Illyricum for the observance of the rules, we give our
consent and earnestly exhort that no concealment and no negligence may
be allowed in the management of the churches situated throughout
Illyricum, which we commit to you in our stead, following the precedent
of Siricius of blessed remembrance, who then, for the first time, acting
on a fixed method, entrusted them to your last predecessor but one <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) , Anysius of holy memory, who had at the
time well deserved of the Apostolic See, and was approved by after
events:  that he might render assistance to the churches situated in
that province whom he wished kept up to discipline.  Noble precedents
must be followed with eagerness that <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="ii.iv.vi-Page_5"></span>we may show ourselves in all things like
those whose privileges we wish to enjoy.  We wish you to imitate your
last predecessor <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) but one as well as
of your immediate predecessor who is known equally with the former to
have both deserved and employed this privilege:  so that we may rejoice
in the progress of the churches which we commit to you in our stead. 
For as the conduct of matters progresses creditably when committed to
one who acts well and carries out skilfully the duties of the priestly
position, so it is found to be only a burden to him who, when power is
entrusted to him, uses not the moderation that is due.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p14"></span>III.  *Ordinees must be carefully
selected with especial reference to the Canons of the church.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p15"></span>And so, dear brother, hold with vigilance
the helm entrusted to you, and direct your mind’s gaze around on all
which you see put in your charge, guarding what will conduce to your
reward and resisting those who strive to upset the discipline of the
canons.  The sanction of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p15.1"></span>God’s</span> law must be respected, and the
decrees of the canons should be more especially kept.  Throughout the
provinces committed to thee let such priests be consecrated to the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vi-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> as are commended
only by their deserving life and position among the clergy.  Permit no
licence to personal favour, nor to canvassing, nor to purchased votes. 
Let the cases of those who are to be ordained be investigated carefully
and let them be trained in the discipline of the Church through a
considerable period of their life.  But if all the requirements of the
holy Fathers are found in them, and if they have observed all that we
read the blessed Apostle Paul to have enjoined on such, viz., that he be
the husband of one wife, and that she was a virgin when he married her,
as the authority of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p15.3"></span>God’s</span> law requires, \[then ordain
them <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) \].  And this we are extremely
anxious should be observed, so as to do away with all place for excuses,
lest any one should believe himself able to attain to the priesthood who
has taken a wife before he obtained the grace of Christ, and on her
decease joined himself to another after baptism.  Seeing that the former
wife cannot be ignored, nor the previous marriage put out of the
reckoning, and that he is as much the father of the children whom he
begot by that wife before baptism as he is of those whom he is known to
have begotten by the second after baptism.  For as sins and things which
are known to be unlawful are washed away in the font of baptism, so what
are allowed or lawful are not done away.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p17"></span>IV.  *The Metropolitans must not ordain
hastily nor without consulting their Primate.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p18"></span>Let one be ordained a priest <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) throughout these churches
inconsiderately; for by this means ripe judgments will be formed about
those to be elected, if your scrutiny, brother, is dreaded.  But let any
bishop who, contrary to our command, is ordained by his metropolitan
without your knowledge, know that he has no assured position with us,
and that those who have taken on themselves so to do must render an
account of their presumption <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) .  But
as to each metropolitan is committed such power that he has the right of
ordaining in his province, so we wish those metropolitans to be
ordained, but not without ripe and well-considered judgment.  For
although it is seemly that all who are consecrated priests should be
approved and well-pleasing to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>God</span>, yet we wish those to have
peculiar excellence whom we know are going to preside over the
fellow-priests who are assigned to them.  And we admonish you, beloved,
to see to this the more diligently and carefully, that you may be proved
to keep that precept of the Apostles which runs, “lay hands suddenly on
no man <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) .”

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p22"></span>V.  *Points which cannot be settled at
the provincial synod are to be referred to Rome.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p23"></span>Any of the brethren who has been summoned
to a synod should attend and not deny himself to the holy congregation: 
for there especially he should know that what will conduce to the good
discipline of the Church must be settled.  For all faults will be better
avoided if more frequent conferences take place between the priests of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vi-p23.1"></span>Lord</span>, and
intimate association is the greatest help alike to improvement and to
brotherly love.  There, if any questions arise, under the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vi-p23.2"></span>Lord’s</span> guidance they
will be able to be determined, so that no bad feeling remains, and only
a firmer love exists among the brethren.  But if any more important
question spring up, such as cannot be settled there under your
presidency, brother, send your report and consult us, so that we may
write back under the revelation of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p23.3"></span>Lord</span>, of whose mercy it is that we can
do ought, because He has breathed favourably upon us <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) :  that by our decision we may vindicate
<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="ii.iv.vi-Page_6"></span>our
right of cognizance in accordance with old-established tradition and the
respect that is due to the Apostolic See:  for as we wish you to
exercise your authority in our stead, so we reserve to ourselves points
which cannot be decided on the spot and persons who have made appeal to
us.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p25"></span>VI.  *Priests and deacons may not be
ordained on weekdays any more than bishops.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p26"></span>You shall take order that this letter
reach the knowledge of all the brethren, so that no one hereafter find
an opportunity to excuse himself through ignorance in observing these
things which we command.  We have directed our letter of
admonition <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) to the metropolitans
themselves also of the several provinces, that they may know that they
must obey the Apostolic injunctions, and that they obey us in beginning
to obey you, brother, our delegate according to what we have written. 
We hear, indeed, and we cannot pass it over in silence, that only
bishops are ordained by certain brethren on Sundays only; but presbyters
and deacons, whose consecration should be equally solemn <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) , receive the dignity of the priestly
office indiscriminately on any day, which is a reprehensible practice
contrary to the canons and tradition of the Fathers <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) , since the custom ought by all means to
be kept by those who have received it with respect to all the sacred
orders:  so that after a proper lapse of time he who is to be ordained a
priest or deacon <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) may be advanced
through all the ranks of the clerical office, and thus a man may have
time to learn that of which he himself also is one day to be a teacher. 
Dated the 12th of January, in the consulship of Theodosius (18th time)
and Albinus (444).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[4:39](2120016.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p5"></span> The letter to the college of bishops was
written the same day, and forms No. 5 in the Leonine series (in Migne).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[4:40](2120016.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p7"></span> *Sacerdotum* here obviously =
*episcoporum*, see Letter I. note 5.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[4:41](2120016.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p8"></span> *quibus sermone epistolis mutuo
commeantibus sociamur*:  notice the interlaced order of the words in the
sentence which is not, I think, without design as quaintly expressing
his meaning.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[4:42](2120016.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p9"></span> Sc. in your province.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[4:43](2120016.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p12"></span> Siricius was Bishop of Rome 384–398. 
Damasus, 366–384, is said by Innocent I. to have been the first to do
this but not like Siricius, “acting on a fixed method,” *certa quadam
ratione*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[5:44](2120016.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p13"></span> *Prædecessoris tui*.  Anysius is said to
have lived on into the time of Innocent.  Anastasius’ immediate
predecessor, selected by Innocent (*decessoris tui* in the next line),
was named Rufus.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[5:45](2120016.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p16"></span> These words are not found in the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> apparently, but
are necessary to the sense.  For the requirement cf. Letter IV. chapter
iii.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[5:46](2120016.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p19"></span> Here the word is *antistes* and no doubt
it signifies “bishop,” as the next sentence clearly shows.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[5:47](2120016.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p20"></span> The organization of the province then
included (1) the bishops under (2) metropolitans of district under (3)
one supreme primate of the province, who was in his turn responsible to
the Bishop of Rome.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[5:48](2120016.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p21"></span> [1 Tim. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[5:49](2120016.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p23.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p24"></span> The word is as*piraverit* (the notion of
which is to favour), not in*spiraverit* (to inspire), as we might have
expected.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[6:50](2120016.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p27"></span> Viz., Letter V.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[6:51](2120016.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p28"></span> *Circa quos par consecratio fieri
debet*.  I take this as a valuable statement in the mouth of Leo, who so
seldom refers specifically to the lower orders of the ministry.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[6:52](2120016.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p29"></span> There seems to be no canon on the point
before Leo’s time:  but he alludes to the tradition again in Letter IX.
chap. 1 and CXI. chap. 2 (q.v.).

<span id="fn_52"></span>[6:53](2120016.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p30"></span> *Qui sacerdos* (? *secundi ordinis*
here) *vel levita* (= *diaconus*) *ordinandus est.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishops throughout Italy.](2120017)
