[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120418)  [Next](2120420) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p2"></span>To Theodorus, Physician.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Theodorus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p4"></span>What benefits I enjoy from
Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>God</span> and my most serene lord the
Emperor my tongue cannot fully express.  For these benefits what return
is it in me to make, but to love their footsteps sincerely?  But, on
account of my sins, by whose suggestion or counsel I know not, in the
past year he has promulged such a law in his republic that whoso loves
him sincerely must lament exceedingly.  I could not reply to this law at
the time, being sick.  But I have just now offered some suggestions to
my lord.  For he enjoins that it shall be lawful for no one to become a
monk who has been engaged in any public employment, for no one who is a
paymaster <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) , or who has been
marked in the hand, or enrolled among the soldiers, unless perchance his
military service has been completed.  This law, as those say who are
acquainted with old laws, Julian was the first to promulge, of whom we
all know how opposed he was to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>God</span>.  Now if our most serene
lord has done this thing because perhaps many soldiers were becoming
monks, and the army was decreasing, was it by the valour of soldiers
that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>God</span> subjugated to him the
empire of the Persians?  Was it not only that his tears were heard, and
that <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p5.3"></span>God</span>, by an order which he knew
not of, subdued to his empire the empire of the Persians?

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p6"></span>Now it seems to me exceedingly
hard that he should debar his soldiers from the service of Him who both
gave him all and granted him to rule not only over soldiers but even
over priests.  If his purpose is to save property <span
id="page_142b">p. 142b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-Page_142b"></span> from being lost, why might not
those same monasteries into which soldiers have been received pay their
debts, retaining the men only for monastic profession?  Since these
things grieve me much, I have represented the matter to my lord.  But
let your Glory take a favourable opportunity of offering him my
representation privately.  For I am unwilling that it should be given
publicly by my representative (*responsalis*), seeing that you who serve
him familiarly can speak more freely and openly of what is for the good
of his soul, since he is occupied with many things, and it is not easy
to find his mind free from greater cares.  Do thou, then, glorious son,
speak for Christ.  If thou art heard, it will be to the profit of the
soul of thy aforesaid lord and of thine own.  But if thou art not heard,
thou hast profited thine own soul only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[141b:1516](2120419.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxiii-p5"></span> *Nullus qui optio*.—“*Optiones*: 
Militaris annonæ eragatores:  distribiteurs des vivres aux soldats”
(Cod. Th.)  D’Arnis Lexicon Manuale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Domitian, Metropolitan.](2120420)
