[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120298)  [Next](2120300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xli"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XL.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xli-p2"></span>Of the work and the voice of
preaching.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xli-p3"></span>But in the midst of these things we
are brought back by the earnest desire of charity to what we have
already said above; that every preacher should give forth a sound more
by his deeds than by his words, and rather by good living imprint
footsteps for men to follow than by speaking shew them the way to walk
in.  For that cock, too, whom the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xli-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> in his manner of speech takes
to represent a good preacher, when he is now preparing to crow, first
shakes his wings, and by smiting himself makes himself more awake; since
it is surely necessary that those who give utterance to words of holy
preaching should first be well awake in earnestness of good living, lest
they rouse others with their voice while themselves torpid in
performance; that they should first shake themselves up by lofty deeds,
and then make others solicitous for good living; that they should first
smite themselves with the wings of their thoughts; that whatsoever in
themselves is unprofitably torpid they should discover by anxious
investigation, and correct by strict animadversion, and then at length
set in order the life of others by speaking; that they should take heed
to punish their own faults by bewailings, and then denounce what calls
for punishment in others; and that, before they give voice to words of
exhortation, they should proclaim in their deeds all that they are about
to speak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](2120300)
