[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120016)  [Next](2120018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Letter VII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>To the Bishops throughout Italy.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p3"></span>Leo to all the bishops set over the
provinces of Italy greeting.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p4"></span>I.  *Many Manichæans have been discovered
in Rome.*

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p5"></span>We call you to a share in our anxiety,
that with the diligence of shepherds you may take more careful heed to
your flocks entrusted to you that no craft of the devil’s be permitted: 
lest that plague, which by the revealing mercy of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> is driven off
from our flocks through our care, should spread among your churches
before you are forewarned, and are still ignorant of what is happening,
and should find means of stealthily burrowing into your midst, and thus
what we are checking in the City should take hidden root among you and
grow up.  Our search has discovered in the City a great many followers
and teachers of the Manichæan impiety, our watchfulness has proclaimed
them, and our authority and censure has checked them:  those whom we
could reform we have corrected and driven to condemn Manichæus with his
preachings and teachings by public confession in church, and by the
subscription of their own hand, and thus we have lifted those who have
acknowledged their fault from the pit of their iniquity by granting them
room for repentance <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) .  A good many,
however, who had so deeply involved themselves that no remedy could
assist them, have been subjected to the laws in accordance with the
constitutions of our Christian princes, and lest they should pollute the
holy flock by their contagion, have been banished into perpetual exile
by public judges.  And all the profane and disgraceful things which are
found as well in their writings as in their secret traditions, we have
disclosed and clearly proved to the eyes of the Christian laity <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) that the people might know what to shrink
from or avoid:  so that he that was called their bishop was himself
tried by us, and betrayed the criminal views which he held in his mystic
religion, as the record of our proceedings can show you.  For this, too,
we have sent you for instruction:  and after reading them you will be in
a position to understand all the discoveries we have made.

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p8"></span>II.  *The bishops of Italy must not allow
those Manichæans who have quitted the city to escape or lie concealed.*

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p9"></span>And because we know that a good many of
those who are involved here in too close an accusation for them to clear
themselves have escaped, we have sent this letter to you, beloved, by
our acolyth:  that your holiness, dear brothers, may be informed of
this, and see fit to act with diligence and caution, lest the men of the
Manichæan error be able to find opportunity of hurting your people and
of teaching their impious doctrines.  For we cannot otherwise rule those
entrusted to us unless <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="ii.iv.vii-Page_7"></span>we pursue with the zeal of faith in the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> those who
are destroyers and destroyed:  and with what severity we can bring to
bear, cut them off from intercourse with sound minds, lest this
pestilence spread much wider.  Wherefore I exhort you, beloved, I
beseech and warn you to use such watchful diligence as you ought and can
employ in tracking them out, lest they find opportunity of concealment
anywhere.  For as he will have a due recompense of reward from <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vii-p9.2"></span>God</span>, who carries out
what conduces to the health of the people committed to him; so before
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.vii-p9.3"></span>Lord’s</span>
judgment-seat no one will be able to excuse himself from a charge of
carelessness who has not been willing to guard his people against the
propagators of an impious misbelief.  Dated 30 January, in the
consulship of the illustrious Theodosius Augustus (18th time) and
Albinus (444).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[6:54](2120017.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.iv.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p6"></span> *Pœnitentiam concedendo*, i.e. we have
not finally excommunicated them, but, dealing leniently, we have given
them opportunity of reinstating themselves in the peace of the Church,
by going through a due course of penance (*satisfactio*).  It is
important to explain this clearly to those who in the present day, are
ignorant of the strict discipline of the early Church.  And are liable
to forget that penance was then a valuable means to repentance.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[6:55](2120017.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vii-p7"></span> *Plebei.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ordinance of Valentinian III. concerning the
Manichæans.](2120018)
