[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120382)  [Next](2120384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>To All Bishops.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p3"></span>Gregory to all bishops in the
matter of the Three Chapters <span id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457)
.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p5"></span>I have received your letters with
the utmost gratification:  but I shall have far abundant joy, if it
should be my lot to rejoice in your return from error.  Now the
forefront of your Epistle notifies that you suffer severe persecution. 
But persecution, if endured irrationally, is of no profit at all unto
salvation.  For it is impious in any one to expect a recompense of
reward for sin.  For you ought to know, as the blessed Cyprian says,
that it is not the suffering that makes the martyr, but the cause for
which he suffers.  This being so, it is exceedingly incongruous for you
to glory in the persecution whereof you speak, seeing that you are not
thereby at all advanced towards eternal rewards.  Let, then, purity of
faith bring your Charity back to your mother church who bare you; let no
bent of your mind dissociate you from the unity of concord; let no
persuasion deter you from seeking again the right way.  For in the synod
which dealt with the three chapters it is distinctly evident that
nothing pertaining to faith was subverted, or in the least degree
changed; but, as you know, the proceedings had reference only to certain
individuals; one of whom, whose writings evidently deviated from the
rectitude of the Catholic Faith, was not unjustly condemned <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p7"></span>Moreover, as to what you write
about Italy among other provinces having been especially scourged since
that time, you ought not to twist this into a reproach, since it is
written, *Whom the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>Lord</span> loveth he chasteneth, and
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth* ([Hebr. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p7.2"></span>).  If, then, it is as you say, Italy
has been since that time the more loved by <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p7.3"></span>God</span>, and in all ways approved,
having been counted worthy of enduring the scourge of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p7.4"></span>Lord</span>.  But,
since it is not as ye try to make out by way of insulting over her,
attend ye to reason.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p8"></span>After the Pope Vigilius of
illustrious memory, having been appointed in the royal city <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) , promulgated a sentence of
condemnation against Theodora, then empress, or against the
Acephali <span id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) , the city of Rome
was then attacked and captured by enemies.  Does it follow from this
that the Acephali had a good case, or that they were unjustly condemned,
because such things happened after their condemnation?  Away with the
thought!  For it is not fit that either any one of you, or any others
who have been instituted in the mysteries of the Catholic Faith, should
say or in any way acknowledge this.  This then being recognized, retire
ye even now at length from the determination you have come to. 
Wherefore, that full satisfaction may be infused into your minds, and
all doubt removed, with respect to the three chapters, I have judged it
of advantage to send you the book which my predecessor of holy memory,
Pope Pelagius, had written on this subject <span
id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461) .  Which book if you should be
willing to read again and again, putting aside the spirit of wilful
self-defence, I have confidence that you will follow it in all respects,
and, notwithstanding all, return to union with us.  But if henceforth,
after perusal of this book, you should decide to persist in your present
determination, you will doubtless shew that you gave yourselves up not
to reason but to obstinacy.  Wherefore once more, in a spirit of
compassion, I admonish your Charity, that, inasmuch as under <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>God</span> the <span
id="page_118b">p. 118b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-Page_118b"></span>purity of our faith has remained
inviolate in the matter of the Three Chapters, ye put away from you all
swelling of mind, and return to your mother the Church, who expects and
invites her sons; and this all the more speedily as you know that she
expects you daily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[117b:1458](2120383.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p4"></span> This letter, being in reply to one
from the bishops addressed who are spoken of as being at the time
schismatics, cannot have been meant for the universal episcopate.  They
were probably those of Istria or elsewhere, who were out of communion
with Rome because of their refusal to accept the condemnation of the
“Three Chapters” by the fifth Council.  See I. 16, note 3:  IV. 1, 2, 3,
4, 38, 39.

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[117b:1459](2120383.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p6"></span> I.e. Theodorus of Mopsuestia,
whose person, and not his writings only, was anathematized in the fifth
Council.  The sentence was; “Prædicta tria capitula anathematizamus, id
est, Theodorum Mopsuestenum cum nefandis ejus scriptis, et quæ impie
Theodoritus conscripsit, et impiam epistolam quæ dicitur Ibæ, et
defensores eorum.”

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[117b:1460](2120383.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p9"></span> Vigilius, having gone to
Constantinople with pope Agapetus, who died there, was selected by the
Empress Theodora as his successor, and sent back to Italy with an order
from her to Belisarius to bring about his election (Liberatus,
*Breviar*. c. 22).  Gregory seems to have been unaware of the fact
stated by Liberatus, namely that Vigilius had come to a secret
understanding with the Empress that he would support the Monophysite
party and disallow the Council of Chalcedon, as there is good evidence
that he did after his accession.  It is true that he afterwards declared
for orthodoxy, and condemned all abettors of the Eutychian heresy.  But
this appears to have been not till <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 540, in reply to a letter
received from the Emperor Justinian and therefore subsequent to the
occupation of Rome by the Gothic King Theodatus, which was in 536, and
to its siege by Vitiges, who retired in 538.  Thus what Gregory goes on
to say about Rome having been attacked and captured by enemies after the
condemnation of heresy by Vigilius must be due to serious ignorance of
the facts of the case.  Nor does he appear to have known—at any rate he
does not intimate—that the condemnation of the Three Chapters, pressed
upon the fifth Council by the Emperor Justinian, had been in spite of
the opposition of Vigilius, though it is true that this sorry pope did
afterwards assent to it.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[117b:1461](2120383.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p10"></span> The Monophysites—or some of
them—had come to be so called, as being without a head, after their
leader, Peter Mongus, had accepted the See of Alexandria on the
doctrinal basis of Zeno’s *Henoticon*.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[117b:1462](2120383.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxviii-p11"></span> Pelagius I., who succeeded
Vigilius, though he had formerly with him opposed the condemnation of
the Three Chapters, upheld it after his accession to the popedom.  The
“book” sent by Gregory to the bishops may have been the Epistle given as
Ep. VII., among those attributed to Pelagius, addressed to Helias and
the bishops of Istria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Natalis, Bishop.](2120384)
