[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120275)  [Next](2120277) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p2"></span>How the humble and the haughty are
to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 18.)  Differently to
be admonished are the humble and the haughty.  To the former it is to be
insinuated how true is that excellence which they hold in hoping for it;
to the latter it is to be intimated how that temporal glory is as
nothing which even when embracing it they hold not.  Let the humble hear
how eternal are the things that they long for, how transitory the things
which they despise; let the haughty hear how transitory are the things
they court, how eternal the things they lose.  Let the humble hear from
the authoritative voice of the Truth, *Every one that humbleth himself
shall be exalted* ([Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>).  Let the haughty hear, *Every one
that exalteth himself shall be humbled* ([Luke
18.14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.2"></span>.).  Let the humble hear, *Humility
goeth before glory;* let the haughty hear, *The spirit is exalted before
a fall* ([Prov. 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#033), [Prov.
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.3"></span>).  Let the humble hear, *Unto whom
shall I have respect, but to him that is humble and quiet, and that
trembleth at my words* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[Isa. 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.4"></span>)?  Let the haughty hear, *Why is earth
and ashes proud* ([Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.5"></span>)?  Let the humble hear, *<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.6"></span>God</span> hath
respect unto the things that are humble.*  Let the haughty hear, *And
lofty things He knoweth afar off* ([Psa.
138.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.7"></span> <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) ).  Let the humble hear, *That the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister* ([Matth. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>); let the haughty hear, that *The
beginning of all sin is pride* ([Ecclesiasticus
10.13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>).  Let the humble hear, that *Our
Redeemer humbled himself, being made obedient even unto death* ([Philip.
ii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4.3"></span>); let the haughty hear what is written
concerning their head, *He is king over all the sons of pride* ([Job
xli. 25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4.4"></span>).  The pride, therefore, of the devil
became the occasion of our perdition, and the humility of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4.5"></span>God</span> has been
found the argument for our redemption.  For our enemy, having been
created among all things, desired to appear exalted above all things;
but our Redeemer, remaining great above all things, deigned to become
little among all things.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p5"></span>Let the humble, then, be told that,
when they abase themselves, they ascend to the likeness of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>God</span>; let the
haughty be told that, when they exalt themselves, they fall into
imitation of the apostate angel.  What, then, is more debased than
haughtiness, which, while it stretches itself above itself, is
lengthened out beyond the stature of true loftiness?  And what is more
sublime than humility, which, while it depresses itself to the lowest,
conjoins itself to its Maker who remains above the highest?  There is,
however, another thing in these cases that ought to be carefully
considered; that some are often deceived by a false show of humility,
while some are beguiled by ignorance of their own haughtiness.  For
commonly some who think themselves humble have an admixture of fear,
such as is not due to men; while an assertion of free speech commonly
goes with the haughty.  And when any vices require to be rebuked, the
former hold their peace out of fear, and yet esteem themselves as being
silent out of humility; the latter speak in the impatience of
haughtiness, and yet believe themselves to be speaking in the freedom of
uprightness.  Those the fault of timidity under a show of humility keeps
back from rebuking what is wrong; these the unbridled impetuosity of
pride, under the image of freedom, impels to rebuke things they ought
not, or to rebuke them more than they ought.  Whence both the haughty
are to be admonished not to be free more than is becoming, and the
humble are to be admonished not to be more submissive than is right;
lest either the former turn the defence of righteousness into a display
of pride, or the latter, while they study more than needs to submit
themselves to men, be driven even to pay respect to their vices.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p6"></span>It is, however, to be considered
that for the most part we more profitably reprove the haughty, if with
our reproofs of them we mingle some balms of praise.  For some other
good things that are in them should be introduced into our reproofs, or
at all events some that might have been, though they are not; and then
at last the bad things that displease us <span id="page_42b">p.
42b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-Page_42b"></span>should be cut
away, when previous allowance of the good things that please us has made
their minds favourably disposed to listen.  For unbroken horses, too, we
first touch with a gentle hand, that we may afterwards subdue them to us
even with whips.  And the sweetness of honey is added to the bitter cup
of medicine, lest the bitterness which is to be of profit for health be
felt harsh in the act of tasting; but, while the taste is deceived by
sweetness, the deadly humour is expelled by bitterness.  In the case,
then, of the haughty the first beginnings of our rebuke should be
tempered with an admixture of praise, that, while they admit the
commendations which they love, they may accept also the reproofs which
they hate.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7"></span>Moreover, we shall in most cases
better persuade the haughty to their profit, if we speak of their
improvement as likely to profit us rather than them; if we request their
amendment to be bestowed upon us more than on themselves.  For
haughtiness is easily bent to good, if its bending be believed to be of
profit to others also.  Whence Moses, who journeyed through the desert
under the direction of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>God</span> and the leading of the
cloudy pillar, when he would draw Hobab his kinsman from converse with
the Gentile world, and subdue him to the dominion of Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.2"></span>God</span>, said, *We
are journeying unto the place of which the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.3"></span>Lord</span> said, I will give it to
you; Come with us, and we will do thee good; for the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.4"></span>Lord</span> hath
spoken good concerning Israel.  And when the other had replied to him, I
will not go with thee, but will return to my own land in which I was
born; he straightway added, Leave us not, I pray thee; for thou knowest
in what places we should encamp in the wilderness, and thou shalt be our
guide* ([Num. x. 29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.5"></span>, *seq.*).  And yet Moses was not
straitened in his own mind by ignorance of the way, seeing that
acquaintance with Deity had opened out within him the knowledge of
prophecy; and the pillar went before him outwardly, while inwardly
familiar speech in his sedulous converse with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p7.6"></span>God</span> instructed him concerning
all things.  But, in truth, as a man of foresight, talking to a haughty
hearer, he sought succour that he might give it; he requested a guide on
the way, that he might be able to be his guide unto life.  Thus he so
acted that the proud hearer should become all the more attentive to the
voice that persuaded him to better things from being supposed to be
necessary, and, in that he believed himself to be his exhorter’s guide,
he should bow himself to the words of exhortation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[41b:1275](2120276.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p3.8"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xviii-p4"></span> In *English Bible*, cxxxviii. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the obstinate and the fickle are to be admonished.](2120277)
