[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120283)  [Next](2120285) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
decline the office of preaching out of too great humility, and those who
seize on it with precipitate haste.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 26.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who, though able to <span id="page_53b">p.
53b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-Page_53b"></span>preach worthily,
are afraid by reason of excessive humility, and those whom imperfection
or age forbids to preach, and yet precipitancy impells.  For those who,
though able to preach with profit, still shrink back through excessive
humility are to be admonished to gather from consideration of a lesser
matter how faulty they are in a greater one.  For, if they were to hide
from their indigent neighbours money which they possessed themselves
they would undoubtedly shew themselves to be promoters of their
calamity.  Let them perceive, then, in what guilt those are implicated
who, in withholding the word of preaching from their sinning brethren,
hide away the remedies of life from dying souls.  Whence also a certain
wise man says well, *Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is unseen,
what profit is in them both* ([Ecclesiasticus
20.32](../../../bib/apo/sir020.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>)?  Were a famine wasting the people,
and they themselves kept hidden corn, undoubtedly they would be the
authors of death.  Let them consider therefore with what punishment they
must be visited who, when souls are perishing from famine of the word,
supply not the bread of grace which they have themselves received. 
Whence also it is well said through Solomon, *He that hideth corn shall
be cursed among the people* ([Prov. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p3.2"></span>).  For to hide corn is to retain with
one’s self the words of sacred preaching.  And every one that does so is
cursed among the people, because through his fault of silence only he is
condemned in the punishment of the many whom he might have corrected. 
If persons by no means ignorant of the medicinal art were to see a sore
that required lancing, and yet refused to lance it, certainly by their
mere inactivity they would be guilty of a brother’s death.  Let them
see, then, in how great guilt they are involved who, knowing the sores
of souls, neglect to cure them by the lancing of words.  Whence also it
is well said through the prophet, *Cursed is he who keepeth back his
sword from blood* ([Jer. xlviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p3.3"></span>).  For to keep back the sword from
blood is to hold back the word of preaching from the slaying of the
carnal life.  Of which sword it is said again, *And my sword shall
devour flesh* ([Deut. xxxii. 42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p3.4"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4"></span>Let these, therefore, when they keep
to themselves the word of preaching, hear with terror the divine
sentences against them, to the end that fear may expel fear from their
hearts.  Let them hear how he that would not lay out his talent lost it,
with a sentence of condemnation added ([Matth. xxv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>, &c.).  Let them hear how Paul believed
himself to be pure from the blood of his neighbours in this, that he
spared not their vices which required to be smitten, saying, *I take you
to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men:  for l
have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.2"></span>God</span>* ([Acts
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.3"></span>).  Let them hear how John is admonished
by the angelic voice, when it is said, *Let him that heareth say, Come*
([Rev. xxii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.4"></span>); in order doubtless that he into whose
heart the internal voice has found its way may by crying aloud draw
others whither he himself is carried; lest, even though called, he
should find the doors shut, if he approaches Him that calls him empty. 
Let them hear how Esaias, because he had held his peace in the ministry
of the word when illuminated by supernal light, blamed himself with a
loud cry of penitence, saying *Woe unto me that I have held my peace*
([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.5"></span>).  Let them hear how through Solomon
the knowledge of preaching is promised to be multiplied to him who is
not held back by the vice of torpor in that whereto he has already
attained.  For he says, *The soul which blesseth shall be made fat; and
he that inebriates shall be inebriated also himself* ([Prov. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.6"></span>).  For he that blesses outwardly by
preaching receives the fatness of inward enlargement; and, while he
ceases not to inebriate the minds of his hearers with the wine of
eloquence, he becomes increasingly inebriated with the drought of a
multiplied gift.  Let them hear how David offered this in the way of
gift to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.7"></span>God</span>, that he did not hide the
grace of preaching which he had received, saying, *Lo I will not refrain
my lips, O <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.8"></span>Lord</span>, thou knowest:  I have not
hid thy righteousness within my heart:  I have declared thy truth and
thy salvation* ([Ps. 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.9"></span> <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) ).  Let them hear what is said by
the bridegroom in his colloquy with the bride; *Thou that dwellest in
the gardens, thy friends hearken:  make me to hear thy voice* ([Song of
Sol. 8.13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.2"></span>).  For the Church dwelleth in the
gardens, in that she keeps in a state of inward greenness the cultivated
nurseries of virtues.  And that her friends hearken to her voice is,
that all the elect desire the word of her preaching; which voice also
the bridegroom desires to hear, because he pants for her preaching
through the souls of his elect.  Let them hear how Moses, when he saw
that <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.3"></span>God</span>
was angry with His people, and commanded swords to be taken for
executing vengeance, declared those to be on <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.4"></span>God’s</span> side who should smite the
crimes of the offenders without delay, saying, *If any man is the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.5"></span>Lord’s</span>, let him
join himself to me; put every man his sword upon his thigh; go in and
out from gate to gate through the midst of the camp, and slay every man
his* <span id="page_54b">p. 54b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-Page_54b"></span>*brother and friend and neighbour*
([Exod. xxxii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.6"></span>).  For to put sword upon thigh is to
set earnestness in preaching before the pleasures of the flesh; so that,
when any one is earnest to speak holy words, he must needs have a care
to subdue illicit suggestions.  But to go from gate to gate is to run to
and fro with rebuke from vice to vice, even to every one by which death
enters in unto the soul.  And to pass through the midst of the camp is
to live with such impartiality within the Church that one who reproves
the sins of offenders turns aside to shew favour to none.  Whence also
it is rightly added, *slay every man his brother and friend and
neighbour.*  He in truth slays brother and friend and neighbour who,
when he finds what is worthy of punishment, spares not even those whom
he loves on the score of relationship from the sword of his rebuke.  If,
then, he is said to be <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.7"></span>God’s</span> who is stirred up by the
zeal of divine love to smite vices, he surely denies himself to be <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.8"></span>God’s</span> who
refuses to rebuke the life of the carnal to the utmost of his power.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6"></span>But, on the other hand, those whom
imperfection or age debars from the office of preaching, and yet
precipitancy impells to it, are to be admonished lest, while rashly
arrogating to themselves the burden of so great an office, they cut off
from themselves the way of subsequent improvement; and, while seizing
out of season what they are not equal to, they lose even what they might
at some time in due season have fulfilled; and be shewn to have justly
forfeited their knowledge because of their attempt to display it
improperly.  They are to be admonished to consider that young birds, if
they try to fly before their wings are fully formed, are plunged low
down from the place whence they fain would have risen on high.  They are
to be admonished to consider that, if on new buildings not yet compacted
a weight of timbers be laid, there is built not a habitation, but a
ruin.  They are to be admonished to consider that, if women bring forth
their conceived offspring before it is fully formed, they by no means
fill houses, but tombs.  For hence it is that the Truth Himself, Who
could all at once have strengthened whom He would, in order to give an
example to His followers that they should not presume to preach while
imperfect, after He had fully instructed His disciples concerning the
power of preaching, forthwith added, *But tarry ye in the city until ye
be endued with power from on high* ([Luke xxiv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.1"></span>).  For indeed we tarry together in the
city, if we restrain ourselves within the enclosures of our souls from
wandering abroad in speech; so that, when we are perfectly endued with
divine power, we may then go out as it were from ourselves abroad,
instructing others also.  Hence through a certain wise man it is said,
*Young man, speak scarcely in thy cause; and if thou hast been twice
asked, let thy answer have a beginning* ([Ecclesiasticus
32.10](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.2"></span>).  Hence it is that the same our
Redeemer, though in heaven the Creator, and even a teacher of angels in
the manifestation of His power, would not become a master of men upon
earth before His thirtieth year, in order, to wit, that He might infuse
into the precipitate the force of a most wholesome fear, in that even He
Himself, Who could not slip, did not preach the grace of a perfect life
until He was of perfect age.  For it is written, *When he was twelve
years old, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem* ([Luke
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#043)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.3"></span>).  And a little afterwards it is
further said of Him, when He was sought by His parents, *They found him
in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, hearing them, and
asking them questions* ([Luke
5.46](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#046)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.4"></span>).  It is therefore to be weighed with
vigilant consideration that, when Jesus at twelve years of age is spoken
of as sitting in the midst of the doctors, He is found, not teaching,
but asking questions.  By which example it is plainly shewn that none
who is weak should venture to teach, if that child was willing to be
taught by asking questions, who by the power of His divinity supplied
the word of knowledge to His teachers themselves.  But, when it is said
by Paul to his disciple, *These things command and teach:  let no man
despise thy adolescence* ([1 Tim.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.5"></span>), we must understand that in the
language of Holy Writ youth is sometimes called adolescence <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) .  Which thing is the sooner
evident, if we adduce the words of Solomon, who says, Rejoice O young
man in thy adolescence ([Eccles. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p7.2"></span>).  For unless he meant the same by both
words, he would not call him a young man whom he was admonishing in his
adolescence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[53b:1283](2120284.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p4.10"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5"></span> In *English Bible*, [Ps.
xl.](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[54b:1284](2120284.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p7"></span> The word *adolescentia*, used in
the Vulgate, implies properly the age of immaturity, while growth is
still going on.  “<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>Adolescentia</span>, prima hominis ætas
post pueritiam, et ante juventutem.”  *Facciolati*.  St. Gregory’s
intention is to preclude the idea of Timothy having been called to
“command and teach” at so immature an age as the word might seem to
imply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished with whom everything succeeds
according to their wish, and those with whom nothing does.](2120285)
