[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120268)  [Next](2120270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_32b">p. 32b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-Page_32b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p2"></span>How the kindly-disposed and the
envious are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 11.)  Differently to be
admonished are the kindly-disposed and the envious.  For the
kindly-disposed are to be admonished so to rejoice in what is good in
others as to desire to have the like as their own; so to praise with
affection the deeds of their neighbours as also to multiply them by
imitation, lest in this stadium of the present life they assist at the
contest of others as eager backers, but inert spectators, and remain
without a prize after the contest, in that they toiled not in the
contest, and should then regard with sorrow the palms of those in the
midst of whose toils they stood idle.  For indeed we sin greatly if we
love not the good deeds of others:  but we win no reward if we imitate
not so far as we can the things which we love.  Wherefore the
kindly-disposed should be told that if they make no haste to imitate the
good which they applaud, the holiness of virtue pleases them in like
manner as the vanity of scenic exhibitions of skill pleases foolish
spectators:  for these extol with applauses the performances of
charioteers and players, and yet do not long to be such as they see
those whom they praise to be.  They admire them for having done pleasing
things, and yet they shun pleasing in like manner.  The kindly-disposed
are to be told that when they behold the deeds of their neighbours they
should return to their own heart, and presume not on actions which are
not their own, nor praise what is good while they refuse to do it.  More
heavily, indeed, must those be smitten by final vengeance who have been
pleased by that which they would not imitate.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4"></span>The envious are to be admonished how
great is their blindness who fail by other men’s advancement, and pine
away at other men’s rejoicing; how great is their unhappiness who are
made worse by the bettering of their neighbour, and in beholding the
increase of another’s prosperity are uneasily vexed within themselves,
and die of the plague of their own heart.  What can be more unhappy than
these, who, when touched by the sight of happiness, are made more wicked
by the pain of seeing it?  But, moreover, the good things of others
which they cannot have they might, if they loved them, make their own. 
For indeed all are constituted together in faith as are many members in
one body; which are indeed diverse as to their office, but in mutually
agreeing with each other are made one.  Whence it comes to pass that the
foot sees by the eye, and the eyes walk by the feet; that the hearing of
the ears serves the mouth, and the tongue of the mouth concurs with the
ears for their benefit; that the belly supports the hands, and the hands
work for the belly.  In the very arrangement of the body, therefore, we
learn what we should observe in our conduct.  It is, then, too shameful
not to act up to what we are.  Those things, in fact, are ours which we
love in others, even though we cannot follow them; and what things are
loved in us become theirs that love them.  Hence, then, let the envious
consider of how great power is charity, which makes ours without labour
works of labour not our own.  The envious are therefore to be told that,
when they fail to keep themselves from spite, they are being sunk into
the old wickedness of the wily foe.  For of him it is written, *But by
envy of the devil death entered into the world* ([Wisd. ii.
24](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>).  For, because he had himself lost
heaven, he envied it to created man, and, being himself ruined, by
ruining others he heaped up his own damnation.  The envious are to be
admonished, that they may learn to how great slips of ruin growing under
them they are liable; since, while they cast not forth spite out of
their heart, they are slipping down to open wickedness of deeds.  For,
unless Cain had envied the accepted sacrifice of his brother, he would
never have come to taking away his life.  Whence it is written, *And the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>Lord</span> had
respect unto Abel and to his offering, but unto Cain and to his offering
He had not respect.  And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell*
([Gen. iv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4.3"></span>).  Thus spite on account of the sacrifice
was the seed-plot of fratricide.  For him whose being better than
himself vexed him he cut off from being at all.  The envious are to be
told that, while they consume themselves with this inward plague, they
destroy whatever good they seem to have within them.  Whence it is
written, *Soundness of heart is the life of the flesh, but envy the
rottenness of the bones* ([Prov. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4.4"></span>).  For what is signified by the flesh but
certain weak and tender actions, and what by the bones but brave ones? 
And for the most part it comes to pass that some, with innocence of
heart, in some of their actions seem weak; but others, though performing
some stout deeds before human eyes, still pine away inwardly with the
pestilence of envy towards what is good in others.  Wherefore it is well
said, *Soundness of heart is the life of the flesh;* because, if
innocence of mind is kept, even such things as are weak outwardly are in
time strengthened.  And rightly it is there added, *Envy is the
rottenness of the bones;* because through the vice of spite what seems
strong to human eyes perishes in the eyes of <span id="page_33b">p.
33b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-Page_33b"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xi-p4.5"></span>God</span>.  For the
rotting of the bones through envy means that certain even strong things
utterly perish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the simple and the crafty are to be admonished.](2120270)
