[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120358)  [Next](2120360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle IX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p2"></span>To the Neapolitans.

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p3"></span>Gregory to the gentry and commonalty
(*ordini et plebi*) residing at Naples.

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p4"></span>The communication you have addressed to
us has made manifest what your opinion is of our brother and
fellow-bishop Paulus <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) :  and
we congratulate you in that your experience of him for a few days has
been such that you desire to have him as your cardinal bishop <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) .  But, since in matters of supreme
importance there ought to be no hasty decision, so we, Christ helping
us, will arrange after mature deliberation what is to be done hereafter,
his character meanwhile, in course of time, having become better known
to you.

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p7"></span>Wherefore, most beloved sons, obey ye
the aforesaid man, if you truly love him, and with devoted minds meet
his wishes in peaceful concurrence, to the end that the affection of
your mutual charity may so bind you to each other, that the enemy who
flies about you raging may find no way through any of you for creeping
in to break up your unanimity.  Further, when we shall have perceived
the aforesaid bishop offering to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>God</span> the fruit of souls which we long
for, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p7.2"></span>God</span>
Himself also approving, we will do afterwards whatever divine
inspiration may suggest to our heart, with regard to his person and to
your desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[102b:1400](2120359.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iii.v.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p5"></span> He was bishop of Nepe, which as well
as Naples, was in the urbicarian province of Rome.  The filling up of
the See of Naples appears to have been a cause of great anxiety to
Gregory, probably because of the party feeling prevailing in the city. 
In his first letter to the Neapolitans (*supra*, [Ep.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>),
he had contemplated the speedy election of a new bishop in the usual
way; but it appears from this Epistle that he had seen reason to defer
such election, sending meanwhile Paulus of Nepe to administer the See. 
Some at least in Naples appear to have wished this Paulus to be elected
soon after his arrival among them; but this Gregory would not allow till
he could see better how things were going.  Such provisional arrangement
continued, it seems, for more than a year, another bishop having been
commissioned to supply Paul’s place in his own Church of Nepe against
the Easter festival (II. 26).  That Gregory’s fear of opposition to Paul
were justified appears from the subsequent mention of a violent attack
made on him by a party opposed to him at Naples (III. 1).  He meanwhile,
not liking his position, had already been anxious to return to his own
see (II. 15), but had not been allowed.  When he went at last, it seems
that an election had taken place, but had proved futile from the person
chosen having refused to be ordained (III. 15).  Eventually the election
had taken place, by Gregory’s direction, not at Naples, but at Rome
(III. 35), one Fortunatus being chosen (III. 61).  The whole history of
the case illustrates the troubles incident to popular election of
bishops at that time, especially in great cities.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[102b:1401](2120359.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="iii.v.ii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.iv-p6"></span> See I. 79, note 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Paulus, Bishop of Naples.](2120360)
