[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120303)  [Next](2120305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.ii-p1.1"></span>Epistle II.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p2"></span>To Justinus, Prætor of Sicily.

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p3"></span>Gregory to Justinus, Prætor of Sicily.

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p4"></span>What my tongue speaks my conscience
approves; since even before you had become engaged in the employments of
any office of dignity, I have greatly loved and greatly respected you. 
For the very modesty of your deportment made certain incipient claims on
affection even from one who had been loth.  And, when I heard that you
had come to administer the prætorship of Sicily, I greatly rejoiced. 
But, since I have discovered that a certain ill-feeling is creeping in
between you and the ecclesiastics, I have been exceedingly distressed. 
But now that you are occupied with the charge of civil administration,
and I with the care of this ecclesiastical government, we can properly
love one another in particular so far as we do no harm to the general
community.  Wherefore I beseech you by Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.ii-p4.1"></span>God</span>, before Whose tremendous judgment
we must give account of our deeds, that your Glory have always the fear
of Him before your eyes, and never allow anything to come in whereby
even slight dissension may arise between us.  Let no gains draw you
aside to injustice; let not either the threats or the favours of any one
cause you <span id="page_74b">p. 74b</span> <span
id="iii.v.i.ii-Page_74b"></span>to deviate from the path of rectitude. 
See how short life is:  think, ye that exercise judicial authority,
before what judge ye must at some time go.  It is therefore to be
diligently considered that we shall leave all gains behind us here, and
that of harmful gains we shall carry with us to the judgment the pleas
only that are against us for them.  Those advantages, then, are to be
sought by us which death may in no wise take away, but which the end of
the present life may shew to be such as will endure for ever.

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p5"></span>As to what you write concerning the
corn, the magnificent Citonatus asserts very differently that no more
has been transmitted than what was supplied for replenishing the public
granary in satisfaction of what was due for the past indiction.  Give
attention to this matter, since, if what is transmitted be at all
defective, it will be the death not of any one single person only, but
of the whole people together <span id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297)
.

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p7"></span>Now for the management of the patrimony
of Sicily I have sent, as I think under the guidance of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.ii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, such a man as
you will be in entire accord with, if you are a lover of what is right,
as I have found you to be.  Moreover, as to your desire that I should
remember you kindly, I confess the truth when I say that, unless any
injustice should creep in from the snares of the ancient foe, I have
learnt thy Glory’s modesty to be such that I shah not blush to be thy
friend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[74b:1298](2120304.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="iii.v.i.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.ii-p6"></span> The population of Rome had long been
greatly dependent on Sicily for the supply of corn, which it was the
duty of the prætor to purchase and transmit to Rome.  Famine might
result from failure of this supply.  Hence what is said further on the
subject in this Epistle.  Cf. “Neminem vestrum præterit, judices omnem
utilitatem opportunitatemque provinciæ Siciliæ quæ ad commoda populi
Romani adjuncta sit consistere in re frumentaria maxime.  Nam cæteris
rebus adjuvamur ex illa provincia, hac vero alimur et sustinemur.” 
(Cicero in Verrem, Act II. lib. 3, c. 5.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Paul, Scholasticus.](2120305)
