[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120169)  [Next](2120171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.clx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.clx-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.clx-p2.1"></span>To Neo, Bishop of Ravenna.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Neo, bishop of
Ravenna, greeting.

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p4"></span>I.  *Those, who being taken captives in
infancy cannot remember or bring witnesses of their baptism, must not be
denied this sacrament.*

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p5"></span>We have indeed frequently, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clx-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> Spirit
instructing us, steadied the brethren’s hearts, when they were tottering
on the slippery places of doubtful questions, by formulating an answer
either out of the teaching of the Holy Scriptures or from the rules of
the Fathers:  but lately in Synod a new and hitherto unheard-of subject
of debate has arisen.  For at the instance of certain brethren we have
discovered that some of the prisoners of war, on their free return to
their own homes, such to wit as went into captivity at an age when they
could have no sure knowledge of anything, crave the healing waters of
baptism, but in the ignorance of infancy cannot remember whether they
have received the mystery and rites of baptism, and that therefore in
this uncertainty of defective recollection their souls are brought into
jeopardy, so long as under a show of caution they are denied a grace,
which is withheld, because it is thought to have been bestowed.  And so,
since certain brethren in a not unjustifiable fear have hesitated to
perform the rites of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clx-p5.2"></span>Lord’s</span> mystery, at a synodal meeting,
as we have said, we have received a formal request for advice on this
matter, and in carefully discussing it, we have desired to weigh each
members opinion, and to handle it in so cautious a manner as to arrive
with certainty at the truth by making use of the knowledge of many. 
Consequently the same things, which have come into our mind by the
Divine inspiration, have received the assent and confirmation of a large
number of the brethren.  And so we are bound before all things to take
heed lest, while we hold fast to a certain show of caution, we incur a
loss of souls who are to be regenerated.  For who is so given over to
suspicions as to decide that to be true which without any evidence he
suspects by mere guesswork?  And so wherever the man himself who is
anxious for the new birth does not recollect his baptism, and no one can
bear witness about him being unaware of his consecration to <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clx-p5.3"></span>God</span>, there is no
possibility for sin to creep in, seeing that, so far as their knowledge
goes, neither the bestower or receiver of the consecration is guilty. 
We know indeed that an unpardonable offence is committed, whenever in
accordance with the institutions of heretics which the holy Fathers have
condemned, any one is forced twice to enter the font, which is but once
available for those who are to be reborn, in opposition to the Apostle’s
teaching <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) , which speaks to us of
One Godhead in Trinity, one confession in Faith, one sacrament in
Baptism.  But in this nothing similar is to be apprehended, since, what
is not known to have been done at all, cannot come under the charge of
repetition.  And so, whenever such a case occurs, first sift it by
careful investigation, and spend a considerable time, unless his last
end is near, in inquiring whether there be absolutely no one who by his
testimony can assist the other’s ignorance.  And when it is established
that the man who requires the sacrament of baptism is prevented by a
mere baseless suspicion, let him come boldly to obtain the grace, of
which he is conscious of no trace in himself.  Nor need we fear thus to
open the door of salvation which has not been shown to have been entered
before.

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p7"></span>II.  *Baptism by heretics must not be
invalidated by second baptism.*

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p8"></span>But if it is established that a man has
been baptized by heretics, on him the mystery of regeneration must in no
wise be repeated, but only that conferred which was wanting before, so
that he may obtain the power of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the
Bishop’s hands <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) .  This decision,
beloved brother, we wish to be brought to the knowledge of you all
generally, to the end that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clx-p9.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy may not be refused to
those who desire to be saved through undue timidity.  Dated the 24th of
Oct., in the consulship of Majorian Augustus (458).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_611"></span>[108:612](2120170.htm#fr_611) <span
id="ii.iv.clx-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p6"></span> Viz. [Eph. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.clx-p6.1"></span>. 
It will be remembered that the practice of rebaptism was very definitely
condemned in the times of S. Cyprian (3rd cent.), who himself went wrong
in advocating it in the case of heretics.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[108:613](2120170.htm#fr_612) <span
id="ii.iv.clx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clx-p9"></span> See n. 2 to Lett. CLIX. chap. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Rusticus, Bishop of Gallia Narbonensis, with the replies to
his Questions on various points.](2120171)
