[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120397)  [Next](2120399) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p2"></span>To Antoninus, Subdeacon.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p3"></span>Gregory to Antoninus, Subdeacon,
Rector of the patrimony in Dalmatia.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p4"></span>It is commonly reported in these
parts that our brother and fellow-bishop, Natalis of the Church of
Salona, is dead.  If this is true, let thy Experience with all speed and
all care hasten to admonish the clergy and people of that city that with
one consent they elect a priest for ordination; and, when the nomination
of the person who may be elected has been made, thou wilt take care to
transmit it to us, that he may be ordained with our consent, as has been
the case from ancient times.  And this above all things thou must look
to, that in this election neither any bribery in any way whatever come
in, nor the patronage of any persons whatever prevail.  For if one is
elected through the patronage of certain persons, he is obliged out of
deference to them to comply with their wishes after his ordination, and
so it comes to pass that the possessions of that church are lessened,
and ecclesiastical order is not maintained.  They must, therefore, under
thy superintendence, elect such a person as will not be unsuitably
subservient to the will of any one, but one who in the adornment of his
life and conversation may be found worthy of such a high degree.  But of
the possessions or ornaments of the same church cause an inventory to be
faithfully written out in thy presence.  And, lest any of the
possessions themselves should be lost, admonish Respectus the deacon and
Stephanus the chief notary (*primicerium notariarum*) to take sole
charge of these possessions, warning them that they will have to make
good out of their own substance any diminution of them that may have
arisen from their negligence.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p5"></span>Moreover, strictly charge
Malchus <span id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) , our brother and
fellow-bishop, that he refrain entirely from intermeddling in this
matter.  For, should we learn that anything has been done or attempted
by him against our will, let him know that he will incur no slight guilt
and danger.  But of this also take care to warn him, that he must be
careful to set down and complete the accounts of our patrimony which he
has had in charge; for doing which let him make haste, laying aside all
excuses, to come to us from the Sicilian parts.  Let him, then, in no
wise presume to meddle with the affairs of the Church of Salona, lest he
should be under further liability to it, and possibly found culpable. 
For he is said to have many things belonging to the aforesaid church;
and report goes that he was well-nigh the prime mover in the sale of its
possessions, and in other unlawful doings.  And, should this be found in
manifest truth to be as it is said to be, he may be certain that it will
by no means remain unavenged.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p7"></span>Let any necessary expenses be
defrayed by the steward who was in office at the time of the aforesaid
bishop’s death, that so he may explain his accounts to the future bishop
as he knows them to be.  All the things that we have enjoined on thee to
be done it is certainly necessary that thou shouldest do with the advice
of our son, the magnificent and most eloquent Marcellus <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) , to the end that thou mayest be
able to carry out carefully and effectively all that is contained in
this paper of directions, and that no blame for negligence may belong to
thee

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[128b:1483](2120398.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p6"></span> For an account of this Malchus and
his doings, see II. 20, note 5.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[128b:1484](2120398.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xii-p8"></span> Proconsul of Dalmatia:  see IX. 5. 
For subsequent proceedings in connexion with the election of a successor
to Natalis at Salona, see III. 47.  It appears that the co-operation of
the proconsul Marcellus, anticipated in this Epistle, was not in fact
obtained, but that he acted independently, and in opposition to
Gregory.  Cf. IX. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXIX](2120399)
