[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120021)  [Next](2120023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Letter XII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p2"></span>Leo, bishop of the city of Rome, to all
the bishops of Mauritania Cæsariensis in Africa, greeting the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>Lord</span>.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p3"></span>I.  *The disorderly appointments of
bishops which have been made in the province are reprehensible.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p4"></span>Inasmuch as the frequent accounts of
those who visited us made mention of certain unlawful practices among
you with regard to the ordination of priests, the demands of religion
required that we should strive to arrive at the exact state of the case
in accordance with that solicitude which by the Divine command we bestow
on the whole Church:  and so we delegated the charge of this to our
brother and fellow-priest, Potentius, who was setting out from us:  and
who, according to what we wrote and addressed to you by him, was to make
inquiry as to the facts about the bishops whose election was said to be
faulty, and to report everything faithfully to us.  Wherefore, because
the same Potentius has most fully disclosed all to our knowledge, and
has by his truthful account made clear to us, under what and what manner
of governors some of Christ’s congregations are placed in certain parts
of the province of (Mauritania) Cæsariensis, we have found it necessary
to open out the grief wherewith our hearts are vexed for the dangers of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
flocks, by sending this letter also to you beloved:  for we are
surprised that either the over-bearing conduct of intriguers or the
rioting of the people had so much weight with you in a time of disorder,
that the chief pastorate and governance of the Church was handed over to
the unworthiest persons, and such as were farthest removed from the
priestly standard.  This is not to consult but harm the peoples’
interests:  and not to enforce discipline but to increase differences. 
For the integrity of the rulers is the safeguard of those who are under
them:  and where there is complete obedience, there the form of doctrine
is sound.  But an appointment which has either been made by sedition or
seized by intrigue, even though it offend not in morals or in practice,
is nevertheless pernicious from the mere example of its beginning:  and
it is hard for <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xii-Page_13"></span>things to be carried to a good issue which
were started with a bad beginning.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p5"></span>II.  *In no case ought bishops to be
ordained hastily.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p6"></span>But if in every grade of the Church great
forethought and knowledge has to be employed, lest there be any thing
disorderly or out of place <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) in the
house of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>Lord</span>:  how much more carefully must we
strive to prevent mistakes in the election of him who is set over all
the grades?  For the peace and order of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p7.2"></span>Lord’s</span> whole household will be shaken,
if what is required in the body be not found in the head.  Where is that
precept of the blessed Apostle Paul uttered through the Spirit of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p7.3"></span>God</span>, whereby in the
person of Timothy the whole number of Christ’s priests are instructed,
and to each one of us is said:  “Lay hands hastily on no one, and do not
share in other men’s sins <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) ?”  What
is to lay on hands hastily but to confer the priestly dignity on
unproved men before the proper age <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
, before there has been time to test them, before they have deserved it
by their obedience, before they have been tried by discipline?  And what
is to share in other men’s sins but for the ordainer to become such as
is he who ought not to have been ordained by him?  For just as a man
stores up for himself the fruit of his good work, if he maintains a
right judgment in choosing a priest:  so one who receives an unworthy
priest into the number of his colleagues, inflicts grievous loss upon
himself.  We must not then pass over in the case of any one that which
is laid down in the general ordinances:  nor is that advancement to be
reckoned lawful which has been made contrary to the precepts of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p9.2"></span>God’s</span> law.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p10"></span>III.  *The Apostolic precept about the
marriage of the clergy based upon the marriage of Christ with the Church
of which it is a figure.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p11"></span>For as the Apostle says that among other
rules for election he shall be ordained bishop who is known to have been
or to be “the husband of one wife,” this command was always held so
sacred that the same condition was understood as necessary to be
observed even in the wife <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) of the
priest-elect:  lest she should happen to have been married to another
man before she entered into wedlock with him, even though he himself had
had no other wife.  Who then would dare to allow this injury to be
perpetrated upon so great a sacrament <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) , seeing that this great and venerable
mystery is not without the support of the statutes of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p13.1"></span>God’s</span> law as well,
whereby it is clearly laid down that a priest is to marry a virgin, and
that she who is to be the wife of a priest <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) is not to know another husband?  For
even then in the priests was prefigured the Spiritual marriage of Christ
and His Church:  so that since “the man is the head of the woman <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) ,” the spouse of the Word may learn to
know no other man but Christ, who did rightly choose her only, loves her
only, and takes none but her into His alliance.  If then even in the Old
Testament this kind of marriage among priests is adhered to, how much
more ought we who are placed under the grace of the Gospel to conform to
the Apostle’s precepts:  so that though a man be found endowed with good
character, and furnished with holy works, he may nevertheless in no wise
ascend either to the grade of deacon, or the dignity of the presbytery,
or to the highest rank of the bishopric, if it has been spread abroad
either that he himself is not the husband of one wife, or that his wife
is not the wife of one husband.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p16"></span>IV.  *Premature promotions are to be
avoided.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p17"></span>But when the Apostle warns and says: 
“and let these also first be proved, and so let them minister <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) ,” what else do we think must be
understood but that in these promotions we should consider not only the
chastity of their marriages, but also the deserts of their labours, lest
the pastoral office be entrusted to men who are either fresh from
baptism, or suddenly diverted from worldly pursuits? for through all the
ranks of the Christian army in the matter of promotions it ought to be
considered whether a man can manage a greater charge.  Rightly did the
venerable opinions of the blessed Fathers in speaking of the election of
priests reckon those men fit for the administration of sacred things who
had been slowly advanced through the various grades of office, and had
given such good proof of themselves therein that in each one of them the
character of their practices bore witness to their lives <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) .  For <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
<span id="ii.iv.xii-Page_14"></span>if it is improper to attain to the
world’s dignities without the help of time and without the merit of
having toiled, and if the seeking of office is branded unless it be
supported by proofs of uprightness, how diligently and how carefully
ought the dispensing of divine duties and heavenly dignities to be
carried out, lest in aught the apostolic and canonical decrees be
violated, and the ruling of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p19.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Church be committed to men who
being ignorant of the lawful constitutions and devoid of all humility
wish not to rise from the lowest grade, but to begin with the highest: 
for it is extremely unfair and preposterous that the inexpert should be
preferred to the expert, the young to the old, the raw recruits to those
who have seen much service.  In a great house, indeed, as the Apostle
explains <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) , there must needs be
divers vessels, some of gold and of silver, and some of wood and of
earth:  but their purpose varies with the quality of their material, and
the use of the precious and of the cheap kinds is not the same.  For
everything will be in disorder if the earthen ware be preferred to the
golden, or the wooden to the silver.  And as the wooden or earthen
vessels are a figure of those men who are hitherto conspicuous for no
virtues; so in the golden or silver vessels they no doubt are
represented who, having passed through the fire of long experience, and
through the furnace of protracted toil have deserved to be tried gold
and pure silver.  And if such men get no reward for their devotion, all
the discipline of the Church is loosened, all order is disturbed, while
men who have undergone no service obtain undeserved preferment by the
wrongful choice of the electing body.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p21"></span>V.  *He distinguishes between laymen who
have been raised to the bishoprics and digamous clerks, forgiving the
former and not the latter.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p22"></span>Since then either the eager wishes of
the people or the intrigues of the ambitious have had so much weight
among you that we understand not only laymen, but even husbands of
second wives or widows have been promoted to the pastoral office, are
there not the clearest reasons for requiring that the churches in which
such things have been done should be cleansed by a severer judgment than
usual, and that not only the rulers themselves, but also those who
ordained them should receive condign punishment?  But there stand on our
one hand the gentleness of mercy, on our other the strictness of
justice.  And because “all the paths of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p22.1"></span>Lord</span> are loving-kindness and
truth <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) ,” we are forced according
to our loyalty to the Apostolic See so to moderate our opinion as to
weigh men’s misdeeds in the balance (for of course they are not all of
one measure), and to reckon some as to a certain extent <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) pardonable, but others as altogether
to be repressed.  For they who have either entered into second marriages
or joined themselves in wedlock with widows are not allowed to hold the
priesthood, either by the apostolic or legal authority:  and much more
is this the case with him who, as it was reported to us, is the husband
of two wives at once, or him who being divorced by his wife is said to
have married another, that is, supposing these charges are in your
judgment proved.  But the rest, whose preferment only so far incurs
blame that they have been chosen to the episcopal function from among
the laity, and are not culpable in the matter of their wives, we allow
to retain the priesthood upon which they have entered, without prejudice
to the statutes of the Apostolic See, and without breaking the rules of
the blessed Fathers, whose wholesome ordinance it is that no layman,
whatever amount of support he may receive, shall ascend to the first,
second, or third rank in the Church until he reach that position by the
legitimate steps <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) .  For what we
now suffer to be to a certain extent <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) venial, cannot hereafter pass
unpunished, if any one perpetrates what we altogether forbid:  because
the forgiveness of a sin does not grant a licence to do wrong, nor will
it be right to repeat an offence with impunity which has partly <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) been condoned.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p28"></span>VI.  *Donatus, a converted Novatian, and
Maximus, an ex-Donatist, are retained in their episcopal office.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p29"></span>Donatus of Salacia, who, as we learn,
has been converted from the Novatians <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) with his people, we wish to preside
over the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p30.1"></span>Lord’s</span> flock, on condition that he
remembers he must send a certificate of his faith to us, in which <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="ii.iv.xii-Page_15"></span>he not
only condemns the error of the Novatian dogma, but also unreservedly
confesses the catholic truth.  Maximus, also, although he was culpably
ordained when a layman, yet if he is now no longer a Donatist, and has
abjured the spirit of schismatic depravity, we do not depose from his
episcopal dignity, which he has obtained irregularly, on condition that
he declare himself a catholic by drawing up a certificate for us.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p31"></span>VII.  *The case of Aggarus and
Tyberianus (ordained with tumult) is referred to the bishops.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p32"></span>But concerning Aggarus and Tyberianus,
whose case is different from the others who were ordained from among the
laity, in this that their ordination is reported to have been
accompanied by fierce riots and savage disturbances, we have entrusted
the whole matter to your judgment, that relying upon your investigation
of the case, we may know what to decide about them.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p33"></span>VIII.  *Maidens who have suffered
violence are not to compare themselves with others.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p34"></span>Those handmaids of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p34.1"></span>God</span> who have lost
their chastity by the violence of barbarians, will be more praiseworthy
in their humility and shame-fastness, if they do not venture to compare
themselves to undefiled virgins.  For although every sin springs from
the desire, and the will may have remained unconquered and unpolluted by
the fall of the flesh, still this will be less to their detriment, if
they grieve over losing even in the body what they did not lose in
spirit.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p35"></span>IX.  *These injunctions to be carried
out without contentiousness.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p36"></span>And so now that you see yourselves,
beloved, fully instructed through David, our brother and fellow-bishop,
who is approved to us both by his personal character and his priestly
worth, on \[nearly\] <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) all the
points which our brother Potentius’ account contained, it remains,
brothers, that you receive our healthful exhortations harmoniously, and
that doing nothing in rivalry, but acting unanimously with entire
devotion and zeal, you obey the constitution of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p37.1"></span>God</span> and His Apostles, and in nothing
suffer the well-considered decrees of the canons to be violated.  For
what we from the consideration of certain reasons have now relaxed must
henceforward be guarded by the ancient rules, lest, what we have on this
occasion with merciful lenity conceded, we may hereafter have to visit
with condign punishment <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) , acting
with special and direct vigour against those who in ordaining bishops
have neglected the statutes of the holy fathers, and have consecrated
men whom they ought to have rejected.  Wherefore if any bishops have
consecrated such an one priest as ought not to be, even though in some
measure they have escaped any loss of their personal dignity, yet they
shall have no further right of ordination, nor shall ever be present at
that sacrament which, neglecting the judgment of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p38.1"></span>God</span>, they have improperly conferred.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p39"></span>X.  *The appointment of bishops over too
small places is inexpedient and must be discontinued.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p40"></span>That of course which pertains to the
priestly dignity we wish to be observed in common with all the statutes
of the canons, viz., that bishops be not consecrated in any place nor in
any hamlet <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) , nor where they have
not been consecrated before; for where the flocks are small and the
congregations small, the care of the presbyters may suffice, whereas the
episcopal authority ought to preside only over larger flocks and more
crowded cities, lest contrary to the divinely-inspired decrees of the
holy Fathers the priestly office be assigned over villages and rural
estates <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) or obscure and
thinly-populated townships, and the position of honour, to which only
the more important charges should be given, be held cheap from the very
number of these that hold it.  And this bishop Restitutus has reported
to have been done in his own diocese, and he has with good reason
requested that when the bishops of those places where they ought not to
have been ordained die in the natural course, the places themselves
should revert to the jurisdiction of the same prelate to whom they
formerly belonged and were attached.  It is indeed useless for the
priestly dignity to be diminished by the superfluous multiplications of
the office through the inconsiderate complaisance of the ordainer.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p43"></span>XI.  *Virgins violated against their
will are to be treated as somewhat different to the others, but not to
be denied Communion.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p44"></span>Now concerning those who, having made a
holy vow of virginity \[as we said above, chap. viii.\], have suffered
the violence of barbarians, and have lost their spotless purity not in
spirit but in body, we consider such mode <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="ii.iv.xii-Page_16"></span>ration ought to be
observed that they should be neither degraded to the rank of
widows <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) nor yet reckoned in the
number of holy and undefiled virgins:  yet, if they persevere in the
virgin life, and in heart and mind guard the reality of chastity,
participation in the sacraments is not to be denied them, because it is
unfair that they should be accused or branded for what their wishes did
not surrender, but was stolen by the violence of foes.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p46"></span>XII.  *The care of Lupicinus is in part
dealt with and in part referred to them.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p47"></span>The case also of bishop Lupicinus <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) we order to be heard there, but at his
urgent and frequent entreaties we have restored him to communion for
this reason, that, as he had appealed to our judgment, we saw that while
the matter was pending he had been undeservedly suspended from
communion.  Moreover there is this also in addition, that it was clearly
rash to ordain one over his head who ought not to have been ordained
until Lupicinus, having been placed before you or convicted, or having
at least confessed, had opportunity to submit to a just sentence, so
that, according to the requirements of ecclesiastical discipline, he who
was consecrated might receive his vacant place.

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p49"></span>XIII.  *All disputes to be dealt with on
the spot first and then referred to the Apostolic See.*

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p50"></span>But whenever other cases arise which
concern the state of the Church and the harmony of priests, we wish them
to be first sifted by yourselves in the fear of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xii-p50.1"></span>Lord</span>, and a full
account of all matters settled or needing settlement sent to us, that
those things which have been properly and reasonably decided, according
to the usage of the Church, may receive our corroborative sanction
also.  Dated 10th August.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[13:95](2120022.htm#fr_94) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p7"></span> *Nihil sit inordinatum nihilque
præposterum*:  the two words are well chosen (as usual), and bearing a
distinct meaning:  the former expressing “disorder” in the sense of want
of the divine commission, the latter “disorder” in the sense of choosing
the younger over the old, the inferior over the superior, &c.; the same
two epithets occur in Lett. XIX., chap. i.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[13:96](2120022.htm#fr_95) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p8"></span> [1 Tim. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[13:97](2120022.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p9"></span> *Ante ætatem maturitatis*.  The Council
of Carthage (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 397), c. 4, fixed the downward
limit for deacons at 25, and for priests at 30:  and we may presume that
that was the general rule in Leo’s time, for we find the same ages
ordained afterwards in the *Novellæ* of Justinian (535–565) and
elsewhere.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[13:98](2120022.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p12"></span> Cf. Letter IV., chap ii., and
elsewhere.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[13:99](2120022.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p13"></span> No one will by this time be surprised
to find Leo calling Sacred Orders either a *sacramentum*, as here, or
*mysterium*, as in the next sentence:  the two terms are indeed in his
usage almost equivalents.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[13:100](2120022.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p14"></span> [Lev. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[13:101](2120022.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p15"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[13:102](2120022.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p18"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[13:103](2120022.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p19"></span> The shorter edition of this letter,
which is extent, gives this sentence in a very different form:  the
qualifications are much more exactly defined, e.g., bishops are to have
spent their lives in orders *a puerilibus exordiis usque ad provectiores
annos*.  I think Quesnel is right in considering this a later version
and alteration the better to inculcate the usage of the Church.  For
although no doubt people were often mere boys \[Readers (*lectores*) for
instance:  see Bright’s note 46\] when they entered minor orders, yet
the fact that one was an adult layman before taking orders could not
*ipso facto* have precluded a man from becoming bishop, however
desirable the rule and general principle might be:  in fact Cyprian at
least is evidence to the contrary.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[14:104](2120022.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p20"></span> Sc. [2 Tim. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[14:105](2120022.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p23"></span> [Ps. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.xii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[14:106](2120022.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p24"></span> *Utcumque*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[14:107](2120022.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p25"></span> *Per legitama augmenta*, cf. n. 7
above.  This passage makes it clear what is there required is not the
*puerilia exordia* of the shorter edition of this letter, but the
*multum tempus* of this longer edition.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[14:108](2120022.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p26"></span> *Utcumque* again.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[14:109](2120022.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p27"></span> *Aliqua ratione*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[14:110](2120022.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p30"></span> In the case of these two noted African
schisms it is hardly necessary to do more than refer the reader to
Smith’s or any other standard dictionary.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[15:111](2120022.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p37"></span> *Fere* here added probably to account
for the long tail of extraneous or repeated matter tacked on to the
letter.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[15:112](2120022.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p38"></span> Here the shorter edition of the letter
breaks off, and there are certainly difficulties in considering that the
long coda or repetitions and fresh matter here attached formed part of
the original draft of the letter.  Is it possible that two letters (the
one later than the other) have been welded into one?

<span id="fn_112"></span>[15:113](2120022.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p41"></span> *Castellis*.  Cf. Liv. xxi. chaps. 33,
34, where the word is used of the Alpine villages.  In the Vulgate it
represents the Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xii-p41.1"></span>κώμη</span> (e.g. [Mark
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#006), [Luke
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.xii-p41.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_113"></span>[15:114](2120022.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p42"></span> *Possessionibus.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[16:115](2120022.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p45"></span> Cyprian (*de hab. Virg*.) speaks of
women who have lost their virginity by their own fault as *viduæ
antequam nuptæ*, and S. Jerome, using the same expression (Lett. to
Eustochius on the preservation of Virginity), implies that they very
often dressed like widows (*plerasque viduas antequam nuptas infelicem
conscientiam mentita tantum veste protegere*):  this will account for
Leo’s here providing that these unhappy women are not *deiici in
viduarum gradum*.  Ball.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[16:116](2120022.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.iv.xii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xii-p48"></span> The case of Lupicinus seems somewhat
similar to that of Projectus in Lett. X., chap. iv, and was similarly
referred to local experts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Metropolitan Bishops in the Provinces of
Illyricum.](2120023)
