[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120527)  [Next](2120529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p2"></span>*To Castorius, Notary* <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p4"></span>Gregory to Castorius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p5"></span>The magnificent lord Andreas presses
me continually about restoring the use of the pallium in the Church of
Ravenna according to ancient custom.  And thou knowest that the bishop
John wrote to me that it had been the custom for the bishops of the said
Church to use the pallium in solemn litanies <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) .  Adeodatus, deacon of that
church, when he besought me earnestly on the same subject, satisfied me
by oath that the bishops of the said place were accustomed to use the
pallium in litanies four times in the year.  But the aforesaid lord
Andreas says in his letters that the bishop of Ravenna was in the habit
of using the pallium in litanies at all times except in Lent.  And these
litanies, which he does not blush to say were daily, he asserts to be
solemn ones.  Whence I have been altogether astonished.  But let thy
Experience regard no man’s person, no man’s words; keep the fear of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p6.1"></span>God</span> and
rectitude only before thine eyes, and enquire of senior persons, and of
the Archdeacon of that same Church, who would not, I think, perjure
himself for the honour of another, and of others of older standing who
had been in sacred orders before the times of bishop John, or if there
are any others of riper age not in holy orders; and let them come before
the body of Saint Apollinaris, and touching his sepulchre swear what had
been the custom before the times of bishop John; since, as thou knowest,
he was a man who presumed greatly and endeavoured in his pride to
arrogate many things to himself.  And whatever may be sworn to by
faithful and grave men, according to the subjoined form, we desire to be
retained in the same Church.  But see that thou act not negligently, and
that no one corrupt thy faithfulness and devotion in this matter; for
thy zeal I know.  Act assiduously, yet so that the aforesaid Church be
not lowered in a way contrary to justice, but that it retain the usage
that existed before the times of bishop John.  Moreover, for satisfying
thyself, do not enquire of two or three persons, but of as many as thou
canst find of old standing and grave character, that so we may neither
deny to that Church what has been of ancient custom, nor concede to it
what has been coveted and attempted newly.  But do all kindly and
sweetly, so that both thy action may be strict and thy tongue gentle. 
The sword <span id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) which has been left
at Ravenna, as we have already written, bring hither with thee; and
carefully attend to what our son Boniface the deacon and the magnificent
Maurentius the *chartularius* have written to thee about.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p8"></span>I swear by the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, the inseparable Trinity of Divine Power, and by this body of the
blessed martyr Apollinaris, that out of favour to no person, and without
any advantage to myself intervening, I give my testimony.  But this I
know, and am personally cognizant of, that, before the times of the late
bishop John, the Bishop of Ravenna, in the presence of this or that
*apocrisiarius* of the Apostolic See, on such and such days, had the
custom of using the pallium, and I am not aware that he had herein
usurped latently, or in the absence of the *apocrisiarius.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[207b:1677](2120528.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p3"></span> On the subject of this Epistle, cf.
above, Ep. XXXIV., with references in note.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[207b:1678](2120528.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p6"></span> Cf. V. 11; VI. 34.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[207b:1679](2120528.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlii-p7"></span> *Spatam*, a word usually signifying
a kind of sword.  Cf. VI. 24, where this same *spata* is referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXIII](2120529)
