[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120064)  [Next](2120066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lv-p1.1"></span>Letters LV. to LVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p2"></span>A series of Letters.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p3"></span>(1)  From Valentinian the Emperor to
Theodosius Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p4"></span>(2)  From Galla Placidia Augusta to
Theodosius Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p5"></span>(3)  From Licinia Eudoxia Augusta to
Theodosius Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p6"></span>(4)  From Galla Placidia Augusta to
Pulcheria Augusta, all graphically describing how Leo had appealed to
them in public to press his suit with Theodosius.  Of these, LVI. is
subjoined as perhaps the most interesting specimen.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p7"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lv-p7.1"></span>Letter LVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p8"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lv-p8.1"></span>(From Galla Placidia Augusta to
Theodosius).</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p9"></span>To the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lv-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> Theodosius, Conqueror and <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="ii.iv.lv-Page_58"></span>Emperor,
her ever august son, Galla Placidia, most pious and prosperous,
perpetual Augusta and mother.

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p10"></span>When on our very arrival in the ancient
city, we were engaged in paying our devotion to the most blessed Apostle
Peter, at the martyr’s very altar, the most reverend Bishop Leo waiting
behind awhile after the service uttered laments over the catholic Faith
to us, and taking to witness the chief of the Apostles himself likewise,
whom we had just approached, and surrounded by a number of bishops whom
he had brought together from numerous cities in Italy by the authority
and dignity of his position, adding also tears to his words, called upon
us to join our moans to his own.  For no slight harm has arisen from
those occurrences, whereby the standard of the catholic Faith so long
guarded since the days of our most Divine father Constantine, who was
the first in the palace to stand out as a Christian, has been recently
disturbed by the assumption of one man, who in the synod held at Ephesus
is alleged to have rather stirred up hatred and contention, intimidating
by the presence of soldiers, Flavianus, the bishop of Constantinople,
because he had sent an appeal to the Apostolic See, and to all the
bishops of these parts by the hands of those who had been deputed to
attend the Synod by the most reverend Bishop of Rome, who have been
always wont so to attend, most sacred <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lv-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> and Son and adored King, in
accordance with the provisions of the Nicene Synod <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) .  For this cause we pray your
clemency to oppose such disturbances with the Truth, and to order the
Faith of the catholic religion to be preserved without spot, in order
that according to the standard and decision of the Apostolic See, which
we likewise revere as pre-eminent, Flavianus may remain altogether
uninjured in his priestly office, and the matter be referred to the
Synod of the Apostolic See, wherein assuredly he first adorned the
primacy, who was deemed worthy to receive the keys of heaven:  for it
becomes us in all things to maintain the respect due to this great city,
which is the mistress of all the earth; and this too we must most
carefully provide that what in former times our house guarded seem not
in our day to be infringed, and that by the present example schisms be
not advanced either between the bishops or the most holy churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_382"></span>[58:383](2120065.htm#fr_382) <span
id="ii.iv.lv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lv-p11"></span> See no. 9a to Lett. XLIV., 3, where it
is shown that this is a mistake, willful or otherwise, on Leo’s part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LIX](2120066)
