[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120282)  [Next](2120284) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p2"></span>How the rude in sacred learning, and
those who are learned but not humble, are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 25.)  Differently to be
admonished are those who do not understand aright the words of the
sacred Law, and those who understand them indeed aright, but speak them
not humbly.  For those who understand not aright the words of sacred Law
are to be admonished to consider that they turn for themselves a most
wholesome drought of wine into a cup of poison, and with a medicinal
knife inflict on themselves a mortal wound, when they destroy in
themselves what was sound by that whereby they ought, to their health,
to have cut away what was diseased.  They are to be admonished to
consider that Holy Scripture is set as a kind of lantern for us in the
night of the present life, the words whereof when they understand not
aright, from light they get darkness.  But in truth a perverse bent of
mind would not hurry them to understand it wrong, did not pride first
puff them up.  For, while they think themselves wise beyond all others,
they scorn to follow others to things better understood:  and, in order
to extort for themselves from the unskilful multitude a name for
knowledge, they strive mightily both to upset the right views of others
and to confirm their own perverse views.  Hence it is well said by the
prophet, *They have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they
might enlarge their border* ([Amos i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.1"></span>).  For Gilead is by interpretation a
heap of witness ([Gen. 31:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#048)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.2"></span>).  And, since the whole congregation of
the Church together serves by its confession for a witness to the truth,
not unfitly by Gilead is expressed the Church, which witnesses by the
mouth of all the faithful whatever is true concerning <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.3"></span>God</span>.  Moreover,
souls are called with child, when of divine love they conceive an
understanding of the Word, so that, if they come to their full time,
they may bring forth their conceived intelligence in the shewing forth
of work.  Further, to enlarge their border is to extend abroad the fame
of their reputation.  They have therefore ripped up the women with child
of Gilead that they might enlarge their border, because heretics
assuredly slay by their perverse preaching the souls of the faithful who
had already conceived something of the understanding of the truth, and
extend for themselves a name for knowledge.  The hearts of little ones,
already big with conception of the word, they cleave with the sword of
error, and, as it were, make for themselves a reputation as teachers. 
When, therefore, we endeavour to instruct these not to think perversely,
it is necessary that we first admonish them to shun vain glory.  For, if
the root of elation is cut off, the branches of wrong assertion are
consequently dried up.  They are also to be admonished to take heed,
lest, by gendering errors and discords, they turn into a sacrifice to
Satan the very same law of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.4"></span>God</span> which has been given for
hindering sacrifices to Satan.  Whence the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.5"></span>Lord</span> complains through the
prophet, saying, *I gave them corn, wine, and oil, and I multiplied to
them silver and gold, which they sacrificed to Baal* ([Hos. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.6"></span>).  For indeed we receive corn from the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.7"></span>Lord</span>, when,
in the more obscure sayings, the husk of the letter being drawn off, we
perceive in the marrow of the <span id="page_52b">p. 52b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-Page_52b"></span>Spirit the inward meaning of the
Law.  The <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.8"></span>Lord</span> proffers us His wine, when He
inebriates us with the lofty preaching of His Scripture.  His oil also
He gives us, when, by plainer precepts, He orders our life gently and
smoothly.  He multiplies silver, when He supplies to us eloquent
utterances, full of the light of truth.  With gold also He enriches us,
when He irradiates our heart with an understanding of the supreme
splendour.  All which things heretics offer to Baal, because they
pervert them in the hearts of their hearers by a corrupt understanding
of them all.  And of the corn of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.9"></span>God</span>, of His wine and oil, and
likewise of His silver and gold, they offer a sacrifice to Satan,
because they turn aside the words of peace to promote the error of
discord.  Wherefore they are to be admonished to consider that, when of
their perverse mind they make discord out of the precepts of peace, they
themselves, in the just judgment of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p3.10"></span>God</span>, die from the words of life.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
understand indeed aright the words of the Law, but speak them not
humbly, are to be admonished that, in divine discourses, before they put
them forth to others, they should examine themselves; lest, in following
up the deeds of others, they leave themselves behind; and lest, while
thinking rightly of all the rest of Holy Scripture, this only thing they
attend not to, what is said in it against the proud.  For he is indeed a
poor and unskilful physician, who would fain heal another’s disease
while ignorant of that from which he himself is suffering.  Those, then,
who speak not the words of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.1"></span>God</span> humbly should certainly be
admonished, that, when they apply medicines to the sick, they see to the
poison of their own infection, lest in healing others they die
themselves.  They ought to be admonished to take heed, lest their manner
of saying things be at variance with the excellence of what is said, and
lest they preach one thing in their speaking and another in their
outward bearing.  Let them hear, therefore, what is written, *If any man
speak let him speak as the oracles of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.2"></span>God</span>* ([1 Pet. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.3"></span>).  If then the words they utter are not
of the things that are their own, why are they puffed up on account of
them as though they were their own?  Let them hear what is written, *As
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.4"></span>God</span>, in
the sight of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.5"></span>God</span>, speak we in Christ* ([2 Cor.
ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.6"></span>).  For he speaks of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.7"></span>God</span> in the sight
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.8"></span>God</span>, who
both understands that he has received the word of preaching from <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.9"></span>God</span>, and also
seeks through it to please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.10"></span>God</span>, not men.  Let them hear what
is written, *Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.11"></span>Lord</span>*
([Prov. xvi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.12"></span>).  For, surely, when in the Word of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.13"></span>God</span> he
seeks his own glory, he invades the right of the giver; and he fears not
at all to postpone to his own praise Him from whom he has received the
very thing that is praised.  Let them hear what is said to the preacher
through Solomon, *Drink water out of thine own cistern, and running
waters of thine own well.  Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and
divide thy waters in the streets.  Have them to thyself alone, and let
not strangers be partakers with thee* ([Prov. v.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.14"></span>).  For indeed the preacher drinks out
of his own cistern, when, returning to his own heart, he first listens
himself to what he has to say.  He drinks the running waters of his own
well, if he is watered by his own word.  And in the same place it is
well added, *Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and divide thy
waters in the streets.*  For indeed it is right that he should himself
drink first, and then flow upon others in preaching.  For to disperse
fountains abroad is to pour outwardly on others the power of preaching. 
Moreover, to divide waters in the streets is to dispense divine
utterances among a great multitude of hearers according to the quality
of each.  And, because for the most part the desire of vain glory creeps
in when the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.15"></span>God</span> has free course unto the
knowledge of many, after it has been said, *Divide thy waters in the
streets,* it is rightly added, *Have them to thyself alone, and let not
strangers be partakers with thee.*  He here calls malignant spirits
strangers, concerning whom it is said through the prophet in the words
of one that is tempted, *Strangers are risen up against me, and strong
ones have sought after my soul* ([Psa.
54.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.16"></span> <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) ).  He says therefore, *Both divide
thy waters in the streets, and yet have them to thyself alone;* as if he
had said more plainly, It is necessary for thee so to serve outwardly in
preaching as not to join thyself through elation to unclean spirits,
lest in the ministry of the divine word thou admit thine enemies to be
partakers with thee.  Thus we divide our waters in the streets, and yet
alone possess them, when we both pour out preaching outwardly far and
wide, and yet in no wise court human praises through it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[52b:1282](2120283.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p4.17"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxv-p5"></span> In *English Bible*, liv. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished who decline the office of
preaching out of too great humility, and those who seize on it with
precipitate haste.](2120284)
