[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120293)  [Next](2120295) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
do bad things secretly and good things openly, and those who do
contrariwise.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 36.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who do bad things in secret and good things
publicly, and those who hide the good things they do, and yet in some
things done publicly allow ill to be thought of them.  For those who do
bad things in secret and good things publicly are to be admonished to
consider with what swiftness human judgments flee away, but with what
immobility divine judgments endure.  They are to be admonished to fix
the eyes of their mind on the end of things; since, while the
attestation of human praise passes away, the heavenly sentence, which
penetrates even hidden things, grows strong unto lasting retribution. 
When, therefore, they set their hidden wrong things before the divine
judgment, and their right things before human eyes, both without a
witness is the good which they do publicly, and not without an eternal
witness is their latent transgression.  So by concealing their faults
from men, and displaying their virtues, they both discover while they
hide what they deserve to be punished for, and hide while they discover
what they might have been rewarded for.  Such persons the Truth calls
whited sepulchres, beautiful outward, but full of dead men’s bones
([Matth. xxiii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>); because they cover up the evil of
vices within, but by the exhibition of certain works flatter human eyes
with the mere outward colour of righteousness.  They are therefore to be
admonished not to despise the right things they do, but to believe them
to be of better desert.  For those greatly misjudge their own good
things who think human favour sufficient for their reward.  For when
transitory praise is sought in return for right doing, a thing worthy of
eternal reward is sold for a mean price.  As to which price being
received, indeed, the Truth says, *Verily I say unto you, they have
received their reward* ([Matt. 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>).  They are to be admonished to
consider that, when they prove themselves bad in hidden things, but yet
offer themselves as examples publicly in good works, they shew that what
they shun is to be followed; they cry aloud that what they hate is to be
loved:  in fine, they live to others, and die to themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
do good things in secret, and yet in some things done publicly allow
evil to be thought of them, are to be admonished that, while what is
good in them quickens themselves in the virtue of well-doing, they
themselves slay not others through the example of a bad repute; that
they love not their neighbours less than themselves, nor, while
themselves imbibing a wholesome drought of wine, pour out a pestiferous
cup of poison to minds intent on observing them.  These assuredly in one
way little help the life of their neighbour, and in the other greatly
burden it, while they both study to do what is right unseen, and also,
in some things in which they set an example, sow from themselves the
seeds of evil.  For whosoever is already competent to tread under foot
the lust of praise commits a fraud on edification, if he conceals the
good things he does; and he steals away, as it were, the roots of
germination after having cast the seed, who shews not forth the work
that is to be imitated.  For hence in the Gospel the Truth says, *That
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven* ([Matth. v. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>).  But then there comes also this
sentence, which has the appearance of enjoining something very
different, namely, *Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before
men, to be seen of them* ([Matth. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5"></span>What means then its being enjoined
both that our work is so to be done as not to be seen, and yet that it
should be seen, but that the things we do are to be hidden, lest we
ourselves should be praised, and yet to be shewn, that we may increase
the praise of our heavenly Father?  For, when the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> forbade us to do our
righteousness before men, He straightway added, *To be seen of them.* 
And again, when He enjoined that our good works were to be seen of men,
He forthwith subjoined, *That they may glorify your Father which is in
heaven* ([Matth. v. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>).  In what manner, then, they are to
be seen, and in what manner they are not to be seen, He shewed in the
end of His injunctions, to the effect that the mind of the worker should
not <span id="page_69b">p. 69b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-Page_69b"></span>seek for his work to be seen on his
own account, and yet that on account of the glory of the heavenly Father
he should not conceal it.  Whence it commonly comes to pass that a good
work is both in secret when it is done publicly, and again in public
when it is done secretly.  For he that in a public good work seeks not
his own, but the heavenly Father’s glory, hides what he has done, in
that he has had Him only for a witness whom he has desired to please. 
And he who in his secret good work covets being observed and praised has
done this before men, even though no one has seen what he has done;
because he has adduced so many witnesses to his good work as he has
sought human praises in his heart.  But when bad repute, so far as it
prevails without sin committed, is not obliterated from the minds of
lookers on, the cup of guilt is offered, in the way of example, to all
who think evil.  Whence also it generally comes to pass, that those who
carelessly allow evil to be thought of them do not indeed commit
wickedness in their own persons, but still, through those who may have
taken example from them, offend in a more manifold way.  Hence it is
that Paul says to those who ate certain unclean things without
pollution, but in this their eating put a stumbling-block of temptation
in the way of the imperfect, *Take heed, lest by any means this liberty
of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak* ([1 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.3"></span>); and again, *And by thy conscience
shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died.  But when ye so sin
against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against
Christ* ([1 Cor. 2.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.4"></span>).  Hence it is that Moses, when he
said, *Thou shalt not curse the deaf*, at once added, *Nor put a
stumblingblock before the blind* ([Lev. xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvi-p5.5"></span>).  For to curse the deaf is to
disparage one who is absent and does not hear; but to put a
stumbling-block before the blind is to act indeed with discernment, but
yet to give cause of offence to him who has not the light of
discernment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the exhortation to be addressed many at once, that It
may so aid the virtues of each among them that vices contrary to such
virtues may not grow up through it.](2120295)
