[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120258)  [Next](2120260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Part III.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>How the Ruler, While Living Well, Ought to
Teach and Admonish Those that are Put Under Him.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Prologue.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.i-p4"></span>Since, then, we have shewn what manner
of man the pastor ought to be, let us now set forth after what manner he
should teach.  For, as long before us Gregory Nazianzen of reverend
memory has taught, one and the same exhortation does not suit all,
inasmuch as neither are all bound together by similarity of character. 
For the things that profit some often hurt others; seeing that also for
the most part herbs which nourish some animals are fatal to others; and
the gentle hissing that quiets horses incites whelps; and the medicine
which abates one disease aggravates another; and the bread which
invigorates the life of the strong kills little children.  Therefore
according to the quality of the hearers ought the discourse of teachers
to be fashioned, so as to suit all and each for their several needs, and
yet never deviate from the art of common edification.  For what are the
intent minds of hearers but, so to speak, a kind of tight tensions of
strings in a harp, which the skilful player, that he may produce a tune
not at variance with itself, strikes variously?  And for this reason the
strings render back a consonant modulation, that they are struck indeed
with one quill, but not with one kind of stroke.  Whence every teacher
also, that he may edify all in the one virtue of charity, ought to touch
the hearts of his hearers out of one doctrine, but not with one and the
same exhortation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2120260)
