[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120366)  [Next](2120368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_106b">p. 106b</span>
<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-Page_106b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of Prima
Justiniana in Illyricum.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4"></span>It is clearly a manifest evidence of
goodness that the consent of all should concur in the election of one
person.  Since, then, the account which we have received from our
brethren and fellow-bishops declared that you are summoned to the
position of priesthood by the unanimous consent of the whole council and
the will of the most serene Prince, we have rendered thanks with great
exultation to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>God</span> our Creator, who has made your
life and actions so commendable in the past as to bring about (what is
exceedingly to your credit) your approving yourself to the judgment of
all.  With them we also fully agree with regard to the person of your
Fraternity.  And we implore Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.2"></span>God</span> that, as His Grace has chosen
your Charity, so He would keep you in all respects under His
protection.  We have sent you the pallium according to custom, and,
renewing our commission, we appoint you to act as vicar of the Apostolic
See, admonishing you that you so shew yourself gentle to your subjects
that they may be provoked to love you rather than to fear you.  And, if
perchance any fault of theirs should require notice, you will be careful
so to correct their transgressions as by no means to discard paternal
affection from your mind.  Be watchful and assiduous in the care of the
flock committed to you, and strict in the zeal of discipline, so that
the wolf lying in wait may not prevail to disturb the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.3"></span>Lord’s</span> sheepfold,
or have opportunity for deceit, so as to hurt the sheep.  Make haste
with full purpose of heart to win souls to our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.4"></span>God</span>; and know that we have received
the name of shepherd not for repose, but for labour.  Let us, then, shew
forth in our work what our name denotes.  If we weigh with right
consideration the prerogative of the priesthood, it will be to those who
are diligent and do their duty well for honour, but to those who are
negligent assuredly for a burden.  For, as this name, in the sight of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.5"></span>God</span>,
conducts those who labour and are assiduous for the salvation of souls
to eternal glory, so in the case of the idle and sluggish it tends to
punishment.  Through our tongue let the people committed to us learn
that there is another life.  Let the teaching of your Fraternity be to
them an acceptable spur to urge them on, and your life an example for
imitation.  For your Fraternity’s preaching should disclose to them what
to love and what to fear, and your efficiency in this way should reap
the fruit of eternal retribution.  But let your deliberate care
especially constrain you never to attempt to make any unlawful
ordinations; but, whenever any are promoted to the clerical order, or,
it may be, to some higher rank, let them be ordained, not for bribes or
entreaties, but for merit.  In no ordination let any consideration, in
any way whatever, surreptitiously reach your Fraternity, lest you should
be entangled (which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.6"></span>God</span> forbid) in the snares of
simoniacal heresy.  *For what shall it profit a man*, as the Truth says,
*if he shall gain the whole word, and lose his own soul* ([Mark viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#036)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.7"></span>)?  Hence it is necessary for us to look
to <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.8"></span>God</span> in
all we do, to despise temporal and perishable things, and to direct the
desire of our heart to the good things of eternity.  Your Holiness’s
present <span id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) I was altogether
unwilling to accept, since it were very unseemly for us to seem to have
received gifts from our plundered and afflicted brethren.  But your
messengers got the better of me by another argument, proffering it to
one from whom your Fraternity’s offerings may not be withheld <span
id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411) .  For this you ought before all
things to study:  how you may provide imperishable gifts to be offered
to the coming judge of souls, to the end that He may have respect both
to you for your profitable labour, and to us likewise for our
exhortation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[106b:1411](2120367.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p4.9"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p5"></span> *Xenia*.  The term denotes, among
other kinds of presents, such as were voluntarily offered to superiors,
as by the people of a province to proconsuls.  Those here referred to
were such as it was the custom for bishops to send to the Pope after
their ordination or from time to time.  We find other instances of
Gregory deprecating such presents.  “The temporal *Xenia* which you have
sent us, though we are in no need of such, we have nevertheless accepted
with due charity.”  (VI. 64, *Ad Dominicam episcopum Carthaginensem*.) 
The word is used also for presents of all kinds.  Cf. e.g. the letter to
Ethelbert (XI. 66).

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[106b:1412](2120367.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xii-p6"></span> Meaning St. Peter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVI](2120368)
