[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120260)  [Next](2120262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>How the poor and the rich should be
admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 3.)  Differently to be
admonished are the poor and the rich:  for to the former we ought to
offer the solace of comfort against tribulation, but in the latter to
induce fear as against elation.  For to the poor one it is said by the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>
through the prophet, *Fear not, for thou shalt not be confounded* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.2"></span>).  And not long after, soothing her, He
says, *O thou poor little one, tossed with tempest* ([Isa.
54.11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.3"></span>).  And again He comforts her, saying, *I
have chosen thee in the furnace of poverty* ([Isa.
48.10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.4"></span>).  But, on the other hand, Paul says to
his disciple concerning the rich, *Charge the rich of this world, that
they be not high-minded nor trust in the uncertainty of their riches*
([1 Tim. vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.5"></span>); where it is to be particularly noted
that the teacher of humility in making mention of the rich, says not
*Entreat*, but *Charge;* because, though pity is to be bestowed on
infirmity, yet to elation no honour is due.  To such, therefore, the
right thing that is said is the more rightly commanded, according as
they are puffed up with loftiness of thought in transitory things.  Of
them the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.6"></span>Lord</span> says in the Gospel, *Woe unto
you that are rich, which have your consolation* ([Luke vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p3.7"></span>).  For, since they know not what eternal
joys are, they are consoled out of the abundance of the present life. 
Therefore consolation is to be offered to those who are tried in the
furnace of poverty; and fear is to be induced in those whom the
consolation of temporal glory lifts up; that both those may learn that
they possess riches which they see not, and these become aware that they
can by no means keep the riches that they see.  Yet for the most part
the character of persons changes the order in which they stand; so that
the rich man may be humble and the poor man proud.  Hence the tongue of
the preacher ought soon to be adapted to the life of the hearer, so as
to smite elation in a poor man all the more sharply as not even the
poverty that has come upon him brings it down, and to cheer all the more
gently the humility of the rich as even the abundance which elevates
them does not elate them.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p4"></span>Sometimes, however, even a proud rich
man is to be propitiated by blandishment in exhortation, since hard
sores also are usually softened by soothing fomentations, and the rage
of the insane is often restored to health by the bland words of the
physician, and, when they are pleasantly humoured, the disease of their
insanity is mitigated.  For neither is this to be lightly regarded,
that, when an adverse spirit entered into Saul, David took his harp and
assuaged his madness ([1 Sam. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>).  For what is intimated by Saul but the
elation of men in power, and what by David but the humble life of the
holy?  When, then, Saul is seized by the unclean spirit, his madness is
appeased by David’s singing; since, when the senses of men in power are
turned to frenzy by elation, it is meet that they should be recalled to
a healthy state by the calmness of our speech, as by the sweetness of a
harp.  But sometimes, when the powerful of this world are taken to task,
they are first to be searched by certain similitudes, as on a matter not
concerning them; and, when they have pronounced a right sentence as
against another man, then in fitting ways they are to be smitten with
regard to their own guilt; so that the mind puffed up with temporal
power may in no wise lift itself up against the reprover, having by its
own judgment trodden on the neck of pride, and may not try to defend
itself, being bound by the sentence of its own mouth.  For hence it was
that Nathan the prophet, having come to take the king to task, asked his
judgment as if concerning the cause of a poor man against a rich one ([2
Sam. 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-p4.2"></span>, *seq.*), that the king might first
pronounce sentence, and afterwards hear of his own guilt, to the end
that he might by no means contradict the righteous doom that he had
uttered against <span id="page_26b">p. 26b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.iii-Page_26b"></span>himself.  Thus the holy man,
considering both the sinner and the king, studied in a wonderful order
first to bind the daring culprit by confession, and afterwards to cut
him to the heart by rebuke.  He concealed for a while whom he aimed at,
but smote him suddenly when he had him.  For the blow would perchance
have fallen with less force had he purposed to smite the sin openly from
the beginning of his discourse; but by first introducing the similitude
he sharpened the rebuke which he concealed.  He had come as a physician
to a sick man; he saw that the sore must be cut; but he doubted of the
sick man’s patience.  Therefore he hid the medicinal steel under his
robe, which he suddenly drew out and plunged into the sore, that the
patient might feel the cutting blade before he saw it, lest, seeing it
first, he should refuse to feel it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the joyful and the sad are to be admonished.](2120262)
