[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120383)  [Next](2120385) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p2"></span>*To Natalis, Bishop* <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p4"></span>Gregory to Natalis, Bishop of Salona.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p5"></span>As though forgetting the tenour of
former letters, I had determined to say nothing to your Blessedness but
what should savour of sweetness:  but, now that in your epistle you have
recurred in the way of argumentation to preceding letters, I am once
more compelled to say perhaps some things that I had rather not have
said.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p6"></span>For in defence of feasts your
Fraternity mentions the feast of Abraham, in which by the testimony of
Holy Scripture he is said to have entertained three angels ([Gen.
xviii](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#000)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p6.1"></span>.).  In view of this example, neither
will we blame your Blessedness for feasting, if we come to know that you
entertain angels.  Again you say that Isaac gave a blessing to his son
when satiated ([Gen. xxvii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p6.2"></span>).  Now as to both these things in the
Old Testament—since they were so done in the way of history as still to
have a meaning in the way of allegory—would that we could so read
through the accounts of the things done as to perceive and take thought
for the things to be done.  For indeed the one, in saluting one only of
the three angels, declared the Persons of the Trinity to be of one
Substance; the other blessed his son when satiated, because one who is
filled with divine banquets has his senses extended into the power of
prophecy.  But the words of Holy Writ are divine banquets.  If, then,
you read diligently—if, drawing example from what is outward, you
penetrate what is inward—you will be satiated, as it were, from hunting
in the field, and fill the stomach of the soul, so as to be able to
announce things to come to your son placed before you, to wit to the
people you have taken in charge.  But one who prophesies anything of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p6.3"></span>God</span> is
already in the dark as to this world; for it is assuredly right and fit
that he whose senses are bright inwardly through intelligence should see
less through concupiscence here below.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p7"></span>Take, therefore, these things to
yourselves; and, if you know yourselves to be such as I have said, you
need not at all doubt of our esteem.  I also find your Blessedness
rejoicing if you bear the name of “a gluttonous man” along with the
world’s Creator.  As to this I briefly comment thus; that, if you are
called so falsely, you do truly bear this name along with the world’s
Creator; but, if it is true of you, who can doubt that it was false of
Him?  A like name does not avail to acquit you, if the cause for it is
unlike.  For even the thief who was condemned to die endured the cross
with Him; but a like crucifixion did not acquit him whom his own guilt
bound.  But now I beseech <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p7.1"></span>God</span> with all the prayers I can
offer that not the name only, but the cause for it, may join your most
holy Fraternity to our Creator.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p8"></span>Further, your Holiness in your
letters rightly praises feasts which are made with the intention of
bestowing charity.  But yet you should know that they then truly proceed
from charity, when at them the lives of the absent are not backbitten,
no one is censured in derision, and no idle tales about secular affairs,
but the words of sacred reading, are heard; when the body is not
pampered more than is needful, but only its weakness refreshed, that it
may be kept in health for the practice of virtue.  If, then, you thus
conduct yourselves in your feasts, I own that you are masters of
abstinence.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p9"></span>As to your alleging to me the
testimony of the apostle Paul, where he says, *Let not him that eateth
not judge him that eateth* ([Rom. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p9.1"></span>), I think that this was altogether out
of place, seeing both that I am not one that eateth not, and also that
Paul did not here mean to say that the members of Christ, who are
mutually bound to each other in His body, that is to say in his Church,
with the bond of charity, should have no care whatever for each other. 
If, indeed, I had nothing to do with thee, nor thou with me, I should
rightly be compelled to hold my peace, lest I should blame one whom I
could not mend.  This precept, then, was given only with reference to
persons who go about to judge those who have not been committed to their
care.  But now that we, by the ordering of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p9.2"></span>God</span>, are one, we should be much in
fault were we to pass over in silence what calls for our correction. 
Lo, thy Fraternity has taken it amiss to have been blamed by me about
feasts, while I, who surpass thee in my position, though not in my life,
am ready to be found fault with by all, and by all to be amended.  And
him only do I esteem to be a friend to me, through whose tongue I wipe
off the stains of my soul before the appearance of the strict judge.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p10"></span>But as to what you say, most sweet
brother, about your being unable to read because of the pressure of
tribulations upon you, I think this avails little for your excuse, since
Paul <span id="page_119b">p. 119b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-Page_119b"></span>says, *Whatsoever things are written
are written for our instruction, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope* ([Rom. xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p10.1"></span>).  If, then, holy Scripture has been
prepared for our comfort, we ought by so much the more to read it as we
find ourselves the more wearied under the burden of tribulations.  But
if we are to rely only on that sentence which you quote in your letter,
wherein the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> says, *When they deliver you
up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given
you in that hour what ye shall speak; for it is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you* ([Matth. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p10.3"></span>), I say that Holy Scriptures have been
given us in vain, if, being filled with the Spirit, we have no need of
external words.  But, dearest brother, trusting in <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p10.4"></span>God</span> without
doubt, when we are straightened in a time of persecution, is one thing;
what we ought to do when the Church is at peace is another.  For it is
our duty, through this same Spirit, to learn by reading now what we may
be able to shew forth also in suffering, should cause arise.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p11"></span>Now, I rejoice exceedingly that you
declare in your letter that you are giving attention to exhortation. 
For thus I know that you are wisely fulfilling the duties of your
position, if you take pains to draw others also to your Maker.  But your
saying in the same sentence that you are not like me saddens me at once,
after I had begun to rejoice, since I think that it is in derision that
you give me praises which in truth I do not recognize as due.  However,
I give thanks to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p11.1"></span>God</span> that through you heretics are
being recalled to holy Church.  But it is needful for you to have a care
that those also who are contained in the bosom of holy Church live so
that they be not her adversaries through their evil lives.  For, if they
give themselves not to heavenly desires, but to earthly lusts and
pleasures, sons of strangers are being nourished in her bosom.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p12"></span>Now as to your declaring that you
cannot possibly be ignorant of the degrees of ecclesiastical rank, I too
fully know them with regard to you; and I am therefore much distressed
that, if you knew the order of things, you have failed, to your greater
blame, in knowing it with regard to me.  For, after letters had been
addressed to your Blessedness by my predecessor and myself in the cause
of the archdeacon Honoratus, then, the sentence of both of us being set
at nought, the said Honoratus was deprived of the rank belonging to
him.  Which thing if any one of the four patriarchs had done, such great
contumacy could by no means have been allowed to pass without the most
grievous offence.  Nevertheless, now that your Fraternity has returned
to your proper position, I do not bear in mind the wrong done either to
myself or to my predecessor.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p13"></span>But as to your saying that what has
been handed down and guarded by my predecessors ought to be observed in
our times also, far be it from me to infringe in any church the statutes
of our ancestors with regard to my fellow priests, since I do myself an
injury if I disturb the rights of my brethren.  But when your accredited
messengers arrive, I shall know the rights of the case between you and
the aforesaid archdeacon Honoratus; and my own personal examination of
it will shew you that, if you have the support of justice on your side,
you will sustain no injury from me; as indeed you never have done.  But
in case justice supports the plea of the often-before-named Honoratus, I
will shew by my acquittal of him that in judgment I have no knowledge
even of persons whom I knew.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p14"></span>Concerning the article of
excommunication which, if I may say so, was of necessity added to our
letters (though even the second and the third time with a condition
interposed), your Blessedness complains unreasonably, since the apostle
Paul says, *Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience* ([2 Cor.
x. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p14.1"></span>).  But let these things pass:  let us
return to what concerns us now.  For, if the lord Natalis acts as he
should do, I cannot but be friends with him, knowing how much I am a
debtor to his affection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[118b:1463](2120384.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxix-p3"></span> See I. 19, note 5, with *reff*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LIV](2120385)
