[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120458)  [Next](2120460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle XI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.v-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.v.v-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="iii.v.v.v-p4"></span>I find that your Fraternity is greatly
distressed on account of being forbidden by the censure of reason to
wear the pallium in litanies.  But through the most excellent Patrician,
and through the most eminent Prefect, and through other noble men of
your city, you have urgently requested to have this allowed you.  Now
we, having made careful enquiry of Adeodatus, some time thy Fraternity’s
deacon, have ascertained that it was never the custom of thy
predecessors to use the pallium during litanies, except at the
solemnities of the blessed John the Baptist, the blessed Apostle Peter,
and the blessed martyr Apollinaris.  But we were by no means bound to
believe him, since many of our delegates have often been at your
Fraternity’s city, who declare that they never saw anything of the
kind.  And in this matter credence is rather to be given to many than to
one, who is attesting something in behalf of his own Church.  But, since
we do not wish your Fraternity to be distressed, or the petition of our
sons to be of no avail with us, we concede the use of the pallium, until
we shall gain some more accurate knowledge, on the days of the Nativity
of the Blessed John the Baptist, of the blessed Apostle Peter, and the
blessed martyr Apollinaris, and on the day of the celebration of your
ordination.  But in the sacristy, according to former custom, after the
sons of the Church have been received and dismissed, your Fraternity may
put on the pallium, and so proceed to the solemnization of mass,
arrogating to yourself nothing more in the daring of rash presumption;
lest, while something is snatched at out of order in exterior
habiliment, what might have been done in due order be neglected.  Given
in the month of October; Indiction 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XV](2120460)
