[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120534)  [Next](2120536) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle V.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p2"></span>To Cyriacus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p4"></span>When in time past I represented the
Apostolic See in the royal city, I became acquainted with the good
qualities of your Holiness.  And I greatly rejoice that the care of
souls has been committed to you.  And though unworthy, I beseech
Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>God</span> with all the prayers in my
power that He would even increase His grace in you, and cause you to
gather gain of souls for the eternal country.  But, whereas you say that
you are weak for this work that has been put upon you, we know that the
first virtue is acknowledgment of infirmity; and from this we gather
that you can fulfil well the ministry you have undertaken, that we see
how, out of humility, you acknowledge your own infirmity.  For we are
all infirm; but he is more infirm who has not strength to consider his
infirmity.  But you, most blessed brethren, are for this reason strong,
that, distrusting your own strength, you trust in the power of Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p4.2"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p5"></span>I cannot, however, express by the
words of a letter how much my heart is bound to your Charity.  But I
pray that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>God</span> may by the gift of His grace
multiply the same charity that is between us, and may take away all
occasion of offence, lest the holy Church, united by the profession of
the true faith, and compacted by conjunction of the hearts of the
faithful, should suffer any damage from priests disputing with each
other, which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p5.2"></span>God</span> forbid.  I at any rate, in all
that I speak, in all that I say, against the proud conduct of certain
persons, still, through the bounty of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p5.3"></span>God</span>, never relinquish custody of
inward charity; but so execute outwardly what belongs to justice as by
no means to disregard inwardly what belongs to love and kindness.  And
do you also ever return my love, and guard what belongs to peace and
kindness; that, remaining of one mind, so as to allow no dissension to
come in between us, we may be better able from the very unity of our
hearts to obtain what we seek from the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.iii-p5.4"></span>Lord</span>.

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p6"></span>Furthermore, I commend to your
Holiness John, presbyter of Chalcedon, and Athanasius of Isauria, that
no one may set you against them by underhand misrepresentations; for I
have thoroughly examined their faith, and have found them sound in their
confessions, which have also been given in writing.

<span id="iii.v.vii.iii-p7"></span>Now may the Holy Trinity protect you
with His hand, and render you always vigilant and careful in the custody
of souls, to the end that in the eternal retribution you may be counted
worthy to be crowned, not only for your own work, but also for the
amelioration of your subjects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Mauricius Augustus.](2120536)
