[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120280)  [Next](2120282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>How those that are at variance and
those that are at peace are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 23.)  Differently to
be admonished are those that are at variance and those that are at
peace.  For those that are at variance are to be admonished to know most
certainly that, in whatever virtues they may abound, they can by no
means become spiritual if they neglect becoming united to their
neighbours by concord.  For it is written, *But the fruit of the Spirit
is love, joy, peace* ([Gal. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>).  He then that has no care to keep
peace refuses to bear the fruit of the Spirit.  Hence Paul says,
*Whereas there is among you envying and strife, are ye not carnal* ([1
Cor. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.2"></span>)?  Hence again he says also, *Follow
peace with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.3"></span>Lord</span>*
([Heb. xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.4"></span>).  Hence again he admonishes, saying,
*Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: 
there is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your calling* ([Eph. 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.5"></span>).  The one hope of our calling,
therefore, is never reached, if we run not to it with a mind at one with
our neighbours.  But it is often the case that some, by being proud of
some gifts that they especially partake of, lose the greater gift of
concord; as it may be if one who subdues the flesh more than others by
bridling of his appetite should scorn to be in concord with those whom
he surpasses in abstinence.  But whoso separates abstinence from
concord, let him consider the admonition of the Psalmist, *Praise him
with timbrel and chorus* ([Ps. cl.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.6"></span>).  For in the timbrel a dry and beaten
skin resounds, but in the chorus voices are associated in concord. 
Whosoever then afflicts his body, but forsakes concord, praises <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.7"></span>God</span> indeed with
timbrel, but praises Him not with chorus.  Often, however, when superior
knowledge lifts up some, it disjoins them from the society of other men;
and it is as though the more wise they are, the less wise are they as to
the virtue of concord.  Let these therefore hear what the Truth in
person says, *Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another*
([Mark ix. 50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.8"></span>).  For indeed salt without peace is
not a gift of virtue, but an argument for condemnation.  For the better
any man is in wisdom, the worse is his delinquency, and he will deserve
punishment inexcusably for this very reason, that, if he had been so
minded, he might in his prudence have avoided sin.  To such it is
rightly said through James, *But if ye have bitter envying and strife in
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.  This wisdom
descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.  But the
wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable* ([Jas.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.9"></span>).  Pure, that is to say, because its
ideas are chaste; and also peaceable, because it in no wise through
elation disjoins itself from the society of neighbours.  Those who are
at variance are to be admonished to take note that they offer to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.10"></span>God</span> no
sacrifice of good work so long as they are not in charity with their
neighbours.  For it is written, *If thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way first to be reconciled
to thy brother, and then thou shalt come and offer thy gift* ([Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.11"></span>).  Now by this precept we are led to
consider how intolerable the guilt of men is shewn to be when their
<span id="page_49b">p. 49b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-Page_49b"></span>sacrifice is rejected.  For,
whereas all evils are washed away when followed by what is good, let us
consider how great must be the evils of discord, seeing that, unless
they are utterly extinguished, they allow no good to follow.  Those who
are at variance are to be admonished that, if they incline not their
ears to heavenly commands, they should open the eyes of the mind to
consider the ways of creatures of the lowest order; how that often birds
of one and the same kind desert not one another in their social flight,
and that brute beasts feed in herds together.  Thus, if we observe
wisely, irrational nature shews by agreeing together how great evil
rational nature commits by disagreement; when the latter has lost by the
exercise of reason what the former by natural instinct keeps.  But, on
the other hand, those that are at peace are to be admonished to take
heed lest, while they love more than they need do the peace which they
enjoy, they have no longing to reach that which is perpetual.  For
commonly tranquil circumstances more sorely try the bent of minds, so
that, in proportion as the things which occupy them are not troublesome,
the things which invite them come to appear less lovely, and the more
present things delight, eternal things are the less sought after. 
Whence also the Truth speaking in person, when He would distinguish
earthly from supernal peace, and provoke His disciples from that which
now is to that which is to come, said, *Peace I leave with you, My peace
I give unto you* ([Joh. xiv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.12"></span>).  That is, I leave a transitory, I
give a lasting peace.  If then the heart is fixed on that which is left,
that which is to be given is never reached.  Present peace, therefore,
is to be held as something to be both loved and thought little of, lest,
if it is loved immoderately, the mind of him that loves be taken in a
fault.  Whence also those who are at peace should be admonished lest,
while too desirous of human peace, they fail entirely to reprove men’s
evil ways, and, in consenting to the froward, disjoin themselves from
the peace of their Maker; lest, while they dread human quarrels without,
they be smitten by breach of their inward covenant.  For what is
transitory peace but a certain footprint of peace eternal?  What, then,
can be more mad than to love footprints impressed on dust, but not to
love him by whom they have been impressed?  Hence David, when he would
bind himself entirely to the covenants of inward peace, testifies that
he held no agreement with the wicked, saying, *Did not I hate them, O
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.13"></span>God</span>,
that hate thee, and waste away on account of thine enemies?  I hated
them with perfect hatred, they became enemies to me* ([Ps.
139:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.14"></span> <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) ).  For to hate <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.2"></span>God’s</span> enemies
with perfect hatred is both to love what they were made, and to chide
what they do, to be severe on the manners of the wicked, and to profit
their life.  It is therefore to be well weighed, when there is rest from
chiding, how culpably peace is kept with the worst of men, if so great a
prophet offered this as a sacrifice to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.3"></span>God</span>, that he excited the
enmities of the wicked against himself for the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.4"></span>Lord</span>.  Hence it is that the
tribe of Levi, when they took their swords and passed through the midst
of the camp because they would not spare the sinners who were to be
smitten, are said to have consecrated their hands to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.5"></span>God</span> ([Exod.
xxxii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.6"></span>, *seq*.).  Hence Phinehas, spurning
the favour of his fellow-countrymen when they sinned, smote those who
came together with the Midianites, and in his wrath appeased the wrath
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.7"></span>God</span>
([Num. xxv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.8"></span>).  Hence in person the Truth says,
*Think not that I am come to send peace on earth:  I came not to send
peace, but a sword* ([Matth. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.9"></span>).  For, when we are unwarily joined in
friendship with the wicked, we are bound in their sins.  Whence
Jehoshaphat, who is extolled by so many praises of his previous life, is
rebuked for his friendship with King Ahab as though nigh unto
destruction, when it is said to him through the prophet, *Thou givest
help to the ungodly, and art joined in friendship with them that hate
the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.10"></span>Lord</span>; and therefore thou didst
deserve indeed the wrath of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.11"></span>Lord</span>:  nevertheless there are
good works found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the graves out of
the land of Judah* ([2 Chr. 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.12"></span>).  For our life is already at
variance with Him who is supremely righteous by the very fact of
agreement in the friendships of the froward.  Those who are at peace are
to be admonished not to be afraid of disturbing their temporal peace, if
they break forth into words of rebuke.  And again they are to be
admonished to keep inwardly with undiminished love the same peace which
in their external relations they disturb by their reproving voice.  Both
which things David declares that he had prudently observed, saying,
*With them that hate peace I was peaceable; when I spake unto them, they
fought against me without a cause* ([Psa.
120.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.13"></span> <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) ).  Lo, when he spoke, he was
fought against; and yet, when fought against, he was peaceable, because
he neither ceased to reprove those that were mad against him, nor forgot
to love those who were reproved.  Hence also Paul says, *If it be
possible, as much as lieth in you, have peace with all men* ([Rom. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p5.2"></span>).  <span id="page_50b">p. 50b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-Page_50b"></span>For, being about to exhort
his disciples to have peace with all, he said first, *If it be
possible,* and added, *As much as lieth in you.*  For indeed it was
difficult for them, if they rebuked evil deeds, to be able to have peace
with all.  But, when temporal peace is disturbed in the hearts of bad
men through our rebuke, it is necessary that it should be kept inviolate
in our own heart.  Rightly, therefore, says he, *As much as lieth in
you.*  It is indeed as though he said, Since peace stands in the consent
of two parties, if it is driven out by those who are reproved, let it
nevertheless be retained undiminished in the mind of you who reprove. 
Whence the same apostle again admonishes his disciples, saying, *If any
man obey not our word, note that man by this epistle; and have no
company with him, that he may be confounded* ([2 Thess. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p5.3"></span>).  And straightway he added, *Yet
count him not as an enemy, but reprove him as a brother* ([2 Thess.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p5.4"></span>).  As if to say, Break ye outward
peace with him, but guard in your heart’s core internal peace concerning
him; that your discord with him may so smite the mind of the sinner that
peace depart not from your hearts even though denied to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[49b:1278](2120281.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p3.15"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4"></span> In *English Bible*, [Ps.
cxxxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[49b:1279](2120281.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p4.14"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p5"></span> Ibid., [Ps.
cxx.](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How sowers of strifes and peacemakers are to be
admonished.](2120282)
