[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120546)  [Next](2120548) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p2"></span>*To Theoctista, Patrician* <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703)

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p4"></span>Gregory to Theoctista, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p5"></span>That your Excellency, though placed in
so <span id="page_220b">p. 220b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-Page_220b"></span>great a tumult of affairs, is full of
the fruitfulness of the sacred word, and incessantly pants after eternal
joys, for this I give great thanks to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>God</span>, in that in you I see fulfilled
what is written of the elect fathers, *But the children of Israel walked
on dry land through the midst of the sea* ([Exod. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p5.2"></span>).  But on the other hand, *I am come into
the depth of the sea, and the storm hath overwhelmed me* ([Psa.
69.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p5.3"></span>) <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) .  But you, as I see, walk with dry
feet through the waves of secular affairs to the country of promise. 
Let us give thanks, then, to that Spirit who lifts up the hearts which
He fills; who amid the tumults of men makes a solitude in the soul; and
in whose presence there is no place, wherein a soul moved by compunction
can be, which is not a secret one.  For you inhale the odour of eternal
sweetness, and so ardently love the bridegroom of your soul as to be
able to say with the heavenly bride, *Draw me after thee; we run in the
odour of thine ointments* ([Song of Sol.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p6.2"></span>).  But in the letters of your Excellency
I find this deficiency; that you have been unwilling to tell me about
your most serene mistress, how studiously she reads, or how she is moved
by compunction in her reading.  For your presence ought to be of great
advantage to her, that amid the billows of affairs under which she
continually suffers and by which, whether she will or no, she is drawn
abroad, she may be recalled inwardly to the love of the heavenly
country.  And this also you ought to investigate, as often as tears are
given her for her soul, whether her compunction arises still from fear,
or whether now from love <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p8"></span>For there are two kinds of
compunction, as you know:  one that is afraid of eternal pains, the
other that sighs for heavenly rewards; since the soul that is athirst
for <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p8.1"></span>God</span> is
first moved to compunction by fear, and afterwards by love.  For in the
first place it is affected to tears because, while recollecting its evil
doings, it fears to suffer for them eternal punishments.  But, when fear
has died away in the anxiety of a long sorrow, a certain security has
birth from a sense of pardon; and the mind is enflamed with love of
heavenly joys.  And one who previously wept for fear of punishment
begins afterwards to weep most bitterly for being kept back from the
kingdom.  For the soul contemplates what are those choirs of angels,
what is the very society of blessed spirits, what the vision of the
inward brightness of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p8.2"></span>God</span>; and laments more for the lack
of unending good than it wept before when it feared eternal evil; and
thus it comes to pass that the compunction of fear, when perfected,
draws the mind to the compunction of love.  All this is well described
in the sacred and true history, understood figuratively, which says,
*Axa the daughter of Caleph sighed sitting on an ass.  And her father
said to her, What wouldest thou?  Who answered, Give me a blessing, Thou
hast given me a South and dry land; give me also a watered land.  And
her father gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs* ([Josh.
xv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p8.3"></span>) <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) .  For indeed Axa sits on an ass,
when the soul presides over the irrational motions of the flesh.  And
sighing she seeks a watered land from her father, because the grace of
tears is to be sought with great longing from our Creator.  For there
are some who have already freely received the gift of speaking in behalf
of justice, of protecting the oppressed, of giving of their own to the
needy, of having ardour of faith, but have not yet the grace of tears. 
These, that is to say, have a South and dry land, but still need springs
of water; because, while they are occupied in good works, wherein they
are great and fervent, they have still sore need (either from fear of
punishment, or from love of the heavenly kingdom) to lament the sins
which they cannot be without while they live.  But since, as I have
said, there are two kinds of compunction, her father gave her the upper
springs and the nether springs.  For the soul receives the upper
springs, when she afflicts herself in tears for desire of the heavenly
kingdom; but she receives the nether springs, when she shudders with
weeping at the punishments of hell.  And indeed the nether springs are
given first, and the upper springs afterwards.  But, because the
compunction of love is far above the other indignity, there was need for
the upper springs to be mentioned first, and the nether springs
afterwards.  You then, who through the operation of the Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p9.2"></span>Lord</span> know by
experience both kinds of compunction, ought anxiously to try to discover
day by day how much you are profiting your most serene mistress by your
words.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p10"></span>Further, I beg you to take especial
care to instruct in good morals the little lords whom you are bringing
up, and to admonish the glorious eunuchs who are appointed to attend
them that they should speak to them such things as may move their minds
to mutual <span id="page_221b">p. 221b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-Page_221b"></span>charity between themselves and to
gentleness towards subjects; lest, if they should conceive now any
grudge against each other, it should break out openly hereafter.  For in
truth the words of those who bring up children will be either milk, if
they are good, or poison if they are evil.  Let them therefore so speak
now to the little ones that the latter may shew hereafter what good
words they had sucked from the mouths of those who nursed them.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p11"></span>Furthermore, my beloved son,
Sabinianus the deacon, has brought thirty pounds of gold, sent by your
Excellency to be given for the redemption of captives and for
distribution to the poor; with regard to which I rejoice, but tremble
for myself, seeing that I shall have to render an account before the
tremendous Judge, not only of the substance of Saint Peter, Prince of
the apostles, but also of your possessions.  But to you may Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p11.1"></span>God</span> return
heavenly things for earthly, and eternal for temporal.  I have now to
inform you that from the city of Crotona, which, lying on the Adriatic
Sea in the land of Italy, was taken last year by the Lombards, many
noble men and many noble women were led away captive, and children were
parted from their parents, parents from their children, husbands from
their wives, and wives from their husbands; of whom some have already
been redeemed.  But, because of the heavy prices put upon them, many
have remained so far in the hands of those most abominable Lombards. 
But I sent at once for their redemption a moiety of the money sent by
you.  Out of the other moiety I have arranged for the purchase of
bed-clothes for the handmaidens of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p11.2"></span>God</span> whom you in Greek language
call *monastriæ;* seeing that they suffer from grievous bareness in
their beds during the very severe cold of this winter; there being many
of them in this city.  For, according to the official list of them, they
are found to be three thousand in number.  They do indeed receive
fourscore pounds a year from the possessions of Saint Peter, Prince of
the apostles.  But what is this for so great a multitude, especially in
this city, where everything is so dear?  Their life, moreover, is such,
and strict to such a degree in tears and abstinence, that we believe
that, but for them, not one of us could have subsisted for so many years
in this place among the swords of the Lombards.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p12"></span>Furthermore, I send you, as a
blessing from Saint Peter the apostle, a key from his most sacred body;
with respect to which key the miracle has been wrought which I now
relate.  A certain Lombard, having found it on his entrance into a city
in the parts beyond the Po, and, paying no regard to it as Saint Peter’s
key, but wishing to make something of it for himself in that he saw it
to be of gold, took out a knife to cut it.  But presently seized by a
spirit, he plunged the knife wherewith he had thought to cut it into his
own throat, and in the same hour fell down dead.  And when Autharith,
king of the Lombards <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) , and
many others belonging to him came to the place, and he who had stabbed
himself was lying apart in one place dead, and this key on the ground in
another, exceeding fear came upon all, so that no one ventured to lift
this same key from the ground.  Then a certain Lombard who was a
Catholic, and known to be given to prayer and almsgiving, Minulf by
name, was called, and himself lifted it from the ground.  But Autharith,
in consideration of this miracle, made another golden key, and sent it
along with this to my predecessor of holy memory, declaring what kind of
miracle had through it occurred.  I have taken thought, then, to send
your Excellence this key, through which Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p13.1"></span>God</span> cut off a proud and faithless
man, that through it you who fear and love Him may be enabled to have
both present and eternal welfare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[219b:1704](2120547.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p3"></span> This patrician lady was sister of the
Emperor Mauricius (see I. 5), and appears from what is said in this
letter to have been governess of the imperial children, and in close
attendance on the Empress Constantina.  The letter is in many respects
interesting and characteristic.  In it may be noted Gregory’s way of
retaining influence over devout ladies in high circles, and through them
hoping to influence others; his favourite method of allegorizing the Old
Testament Scriptures; his tendency to regard remarkable incidents as
miraculous; and his allusion to the very large number of females at that
time leading a monastic life in Rome.  Cf. XI. 45, addressed to the same
lady.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[220b:1705](2120547.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p6"></span> [Ps. lxix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[220b:1706](2120547.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p7"></span> The whole passage which follows about
two kinds of compunction, with the allegorical interpretation of the
story of Achsah, is found, word for word, in the Dialogues Lib. III.
cap. 34.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[220b:1707](2120547.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p9"></span> In [Joshua xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p9.1"></span>, instead of “and she lighted off her
ass,” as in the English Version, the Vulgate has “suspiravitque ut
sedebat in asino.”

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[221b:1708](2120547.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xv-p13"></span> See I. 17, note 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anastasius, Bishop.](2120548)
