[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120363)  [Next](2120365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p2"></span>To all the Bishops of Dalmatia.

<span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p3"></span>Gregory to all the bishops constituted
throughout Dalmatia.

<span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p4"></span>Though desiring to visit your
Fraternity frequently through the intercourse of letters, yet, when some
special case demands our attention, we wish to take the opportunity of
fulfilling two duties at once, so as both to refresh our brotherly souls
in the way of visitation and to explain accurately matters that come up
for notice, lest ignorance of them should leave the mind confused.  Now
when our brother Natalis, bishop of the city of Salona, wished to
advance the archdeacon Honoratus to the order of the priesthood, who
thereupon declined being advanced to a higher order, the latter demanded
my predecessor of holy memory, in a petition that he sent, that he
should not be so advanced against his will.  For he alleged that the
thing was attempted, not for the sake of promoting him, but in
consequence of displeasure against him.  Thereupon our predecessor of
holy memory addressed letters to Natalis, our brother and fellow-bishop,
interdicting him from promoting the archdeacon Honoratus against his
will, or retaining in his heart the soreness of the displeasure which he
had conceived against him.  And when we too had laid the same
interdiction on the said Natalis, he, not only disregarding the commands
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>God</span>, but
also setting at naught our letters, attempted, it is said, craftily to
degrade the aforesaid archdeacon, in a way contrary to custom, under
colour of promoting him to a higher dignity.  Thus it was contrived
that, having removed him from the archdeaconry, he might call in another
person to minister in the place of the deposed archdeacon.  Now we think
that this Honoratus may have fallen under the displeasure of his bishop
on account of having prevented him from giving sacred vessels to his
relations:  and both my predecessor of holy memory formerly and I now
have wished to investigate the case accurately; but he, conscious of
what he had done, has put off sending a representative with a view to
its trial, lest the truth with respect to his doings might appear.  We
therefore, now that he has been already so often admonished by letter,
and has so far been pertinaciously obstinate, have taken order for his
being admonished once more in letters sent to him through the bearer of
these presents, to the end that he may, immediately on the arrival of
the bearer of these presents, receive the archdeacon Honoratus into his
former place.  And if, with heart still hardened, he should
contumaciously defer restoring him to the said position, we order that
for his contumacy so many times exhibited he be deprived of the use of
the pallium granted to him by this See.  But if, even after loss of the
pallium, he should persevere in the same pertinacity, we order him to be
debarred from participation in the body and blood of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.ix-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>.  For it is
right that he should find those severe in justice whom he set at naught
when they approached him in charity.  Wherefore neither do we now
deviate from the path of justice, which the aforesaid bishop has
despised; but, when he whose guilt has by no means been made apparent to
us has been restored to his place, we enjoin the bishop Natalis to send
to us a person with instructions, who may be able by his allegations to
prove to us the right intentions of the said bishop.  For we have caused
also the said archdeacon to come to us, that, having heard the
assertions of both parties, we may <span id="page_105b">p. 105b</span>
<span id="iii.v.ii.ix-Page_105b"></span>decide whatever may be just,
whatever may be well pleasing to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.ix-p4.3"></span>God</span>.  For we defend no one on the
ground of personal love, but, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.ix-p4.4"></span>God</span> helping us, keep the rule of
justice without respect to any man’s person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Antoninus, Subdeacon.](2120365)
