[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120551)  [Next](2120553) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p2"></span>*To Anastasius, Presbyter* <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p4"></span>Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5"></span>That a good man out of the good
treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things ([Matt.
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035), [Luke
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#045)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5.1"></span>), this thy Charity has shewn, both in thy
habitual life and lately also in thy epistle; wherein I find two persons
at issue with regard to virtues; that is to say, thyself contending for
charity, and another for fear and humility.  And, though occupied with
many things, though ignorant of the Greek language, I have nevertheless
sat as judge of your contention.  But, in very truth, thou hast, in my
judgment, thyself conquered thy opponent by the apostolical sentence,
which I proffered to you during your contention, *That there is no fear
in charity,, but perfect charity casteth out fear; because fear hath
torment.  He that feareth is not made perfect in charity*.  I know then
how much thy Fraternity is made perfect in charity.  And, since thou
lovest Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5.2"></span>God</span> much, thou oughtest to presume
on thy neighbour much.  For it is not places or ranks that make us
neighbours to our Creator; but either our good deserts join us to Him,
or our bad deserts separate us from <span id="page_225b">p. 225b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-Page_225b"></span>Him.  Since, then, it is still
uncertain what any one is inwardly, how was it that thou wast afraid to
write, ignorant as thou art as to which of us two is the superior?  And
indeed that thou livest well I know, but I am conscious myself of being
burdened by many sins.  And though thou art thyself a sinner, still thou
art much better than I, since thou bearest thine own sins only, but I
those also of the persons committed to me.  In this, then, I look upon
thee as lofty, in this I look upon thee as great, that in a great place
and lofty before human eyes thou hast not felt thyself advanced at all. 
For therein, while honour is paid thee by men outwardly, thy mind is
sunk into depths, because burdened by distracting cares.  But to thee
Almighty <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5.3"></span>God</span>
has done as it is written; *He hath laid down ascents in the heart, in
the valley of tears* ([Psa. 84.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5.4"></span>).  To me, however, thou mightest have
appeared far loftier, far more sublime, hadst thou never undertaken the
leadership of the monastery which is called Neas, seeing that in that
monastery, as I hear, there is indeed an appearance of monks kept up,
but many secular things are done under the garb of sanctity.  But even
to this I shall think that heavenly grace has brought thee, if what in
that place displeases Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p5.5"></span>God</span> should be corrected under thy
guidance.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6"></span>But, since there have been wont to be
quarrels between the father of this same monastery and the pastor of the
Church of Jerusalem, I believe that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6.1"></span>God</span> has willed that thy Love and my
most holy brother and fellow-priest Amos should be at the same time at
Jerusalem for this end, that the quarrels which I have spoken of should
be put an end to.  Shew, then, now how much you loved before.  For I
know that both of you are abstinent, both learned, both humble; whence
the glory of our Saviour must needs be praised, according to the
language of the Psalm, in timbrel and chorus ([Ps. cl.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6.2"></span>).  For in a timbrel the sound from the
skin is dry, but in a chorus there is a concord of voices.  What
therefore is denoted by a timbrel but abstinence, and what by a chorus
but unanimity?  Since then by abstinence ye praise the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6.3"></span>Lord</span> in timbrel, I
beg that by unanimity ye praise Him in chorus.  The Truth also in person
says, *Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another* ([Mark
ix. 50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6.4"></span>).  What is denoted by salt but wisdom, as
Paul attests, who says, *Let your speech be alway in grace, seasoned
with salt* ([Col. iv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p6.5"></span>)?  Since, then, we know that you have
salt through the teaching of the heavenly word, it remains that through
the grace of charity you keep with all your hearts peace between
yourselves.  All this I say, dearest brother, because I love you both
exceedingly, and am much afraid lest the sacrifices of your prayers
should be stained by any dissension between you.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p7"></span>The blessing which you sent, first by
Exhilaratus the *Secundicerius* <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) , and afterwards by Sabinianus the
deacon, I received with thanksgiving, since from a holy place it became
you to send holy things, and to shew by your very gift whom you serve
continually.  May Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p8.1"></span>God</span> protect you with His right
hand, and preserve you scatheless from all evils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[224b:1714](2120552.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p3"></span> This epistle appears to have been in
reply to one from a presbyter.  Anastasius (*al*. Athanasius), of
Jerusalem announcing his promotion to the abbacy of a monastery there. 
There had been, it seems, a standing feud between the abbots of this
monastery and the bishops of Jerusalem, the continuance of which Gregory
gracefully deprecates in the course of his letter.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[225b:1715](2120552.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xx-p8"></span> See III. 56, note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Mauricius Augustus.](2120553)
