[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toc00)  [Next](toc02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IVUDJW/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Trial of Christ*, by David K. Breed, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

### FOREWORD

By Reverend Clarence Edward Macartney  
Pastor, First Presbyterian Church  
Pittsburgh, Pa.

The great fact, and the Eternal Fact, in the life of Jesus was his death
for our sins upon the Cross. This was the fact which St. Paul declared
he preached to the Corinthians "first of all"; not that they were the
first to hear it; not that it merely came first in the enumeration of
the great truths of the Gospel; but that it was first in importance, the
Eternal Fact of Redemption. The steps, therefore, by which Jesus was
brought to the Cross, although ever of the greatest interest, are
secondary in importance to the death of Christ on the Cross.

Christian lawyers have always found the records of the trial of Jesus of
great interest. This interest has led the author of this book to make a
careful study from a lawyer's standpoint of the trial of Jesus. He
brings out the fact that Jesus was tried six times in twelve hours;
before Annas, before Caiaphas,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, before Herod, before Pilate again.
Of course, the real judicial trial was that before the Sanhedrin.
According to the author there were seventeen errors in these trials
which might be classified as "reversible;" that is, such errors as today
would warrant a superior court in reversing the judgment of the lower
court. Among these errors he notes the following: No process could take
place on one of the feast days; no process could be started at night.
Caiaphas publicly declared before the trial that Christ deserved death.
Jesus had no counsel to defend him. Pilate declared Jesus not guilty,
and yet accepted the verdict of the mob and sent him to crucifixion. It
was illegal for the Sanhedrin to convict a man on the same day as the
trial.

This is a carefully done book, and those who wish to follow out the
experiences of our Lord on that same night in which he was betrayed will
find much of interest and instruction in it.

Unlike some others who have written about the trial of Jesus, this
author has a true and scriptural understanding of what the trial of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesus led to; that
is, his sacrificial and atoning death for sin upon the Cross; for he
says,

"Christianity is not a religion; it is a revelation. The word 'religion'
comes from a Greek root meaning the act of man searching out for God,
pagan man trying to find God. But when Very God became flesh and dwelt
among us, revealed Himself in the person of Christ, and died to save us
from our sin, religion ceased for all believers in Jesus."

Those who read this book may be interested to know that the author, a
St. Louis lawyer, comes naturally by an interest in theological and
scriptural questions, for he is a direct descendant of America's
greatest thinker and theologian, Jonathan Edwards.

<span class="smallcaps">Clarence Edward Macartney</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acknowledgement](toc02.md)
