[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toc04)  [Next](toc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IVUDJW/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Trial of Christ*, by David K. Breed, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### CHAPTER II

### LEGAL BACKGROUND AND SOURCES OF THE RECORD

To a Christian Lawyer, the Trial of Christ has a deep significance
because we know that the legalistic errors in that trial, condemnable
though they be, nevertheless fulfilled prophecy and thereby served a
purpose. Theological writers have many works that show how the Old
Testament Prophecies were fulfilled in what did take place; indeed, many
passages of the Gospel Record are quoted from the Prophets. A further
word on this point will be found in our Epilogue, but we limit
ourselves, for the present, to the legal phases of the Trial of Christ.

In using the word "trial" in its legalistic sense, the author is not
unmindful of the fact that Christ was thrice "tried", or, more properly
speaking, tempted by the Devil. However, any study of the trial in the
spiritual sense is left to homiletical writings, such as Dr. Clarence
Edward Macartney's recent

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

book, *Trials of Great Men of the Bible*, in which Chapters XI and XV
deal with the temptations of Christ.

Christian and Jewish people alike in every generation are taught
considerable from the Old Testament Scriptures dealing with the Mosaic
Law. Those who are not themselves attorneys perhaps little realize that
many of the basic principles of modern law go back to ancient roots. At
least one modern writer has attempted to prove, for example, that the
idea of due process of law expressed in the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution of The United States was not an invention of reformers of
our Civil War era but rather a recognition in modern law that it is
illegal to punish one who has not been duly convicted of crime upon a
trial conducted with due deference to the law of evidence. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

In modern times, Sir William Blackstone, a great British statesman and
jurist, wrote that "When civil society is once formed, government at the
same time results, of

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

course, as necessary to preserve and to keep that society in order.
Unless some superior be constituted, whose commands and decisions all
the members are bound to obey, they would still remain as in a state of
nature, without any judge upon earth to define their several rights and
redress their several wrongs." <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) In
other words, the function of Government is to give all people security
from the encroachment of one another, upon what has been called in our
basic American law, "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."

To make our point very clear, before proceeding to a further chapter
where we will deal in detail with "Reversible Errors," it seems well to
emphasize that in modern legal parlance a mistake made by a trial judge
is deemed Reversible Error, if the mistake is so serious as to be
grounds for a new trial. Glaring examples would be to let a man's
partner sit on a jury at his trial; for a Judge to hear a case in which
lie is an interested party, or has already formed an opinion; or

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

to permit a witness to testify to hearsay instead of facts. These are
some of the "Reversible Errors" on which a new trial can be had and are
often spoken of by misinformed business men as "technicalities," as when
they say a certain gangster "got off on a technicality" or "got a new
trial on a technicality."

Before leaving our discussion of legal principles, it seems well to
point out that after a Court Reporter has taken down the testimony of a
trial in the first instance, upon appeal being taken to a higher court
by either party, the higher Court does not again hear the witnesses but
passes upon the case upon the typewritten or printed transcription of
the notes taken by the Court Reporter. Such notes together with the
various formal documents filed by lawyers in the lower court are (as we
have written) referred to collectively as "the record on appeal."
Although the Court erred in the Trial of Christ by not keeping any
records (so far as we know) when at that time court reporters were known
to Roman and Hebrew law and custom, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)
the record in the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

synoptic Gospels is, however, sufficient to enable us to pass
intelligent review, were we an Appellate Court, upon the illegalities of
the Trial of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[13:2](toc05.htm#fr_1.md) Cf., Numbers 35:30: "Whoso
killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of
witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause
him to die." See also, White, *The Law in the Scriptures*, p. 122.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[14:3](toc05.htm#fr_2.md) *Commentaries on the Laws
of England*, (1765) Cooley's 2nd ed., (1876) page 47 (\*49) . All
editions of Bl. *Comm*. are star-paged to the original.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[15:4](toc05.htm#fr_3.md) Writing, of course, was
common in the first century, A. D., and there have been researches
tending <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> to show that there were quite
detailed court records in those days which have been discovered by
Christian Archaeologists; Cf., Rev. Harry Rimmer, *Voices from the
Silent Centuries*, pp. 60, 61, 81, inter alia. St. Paul did a good deal
of writing. Cf., on writing in ancient times, William Albright, *From
the Stone Age to Christianity*, pp. 192, 257. On ancient procedure
generally, Wigmore, *A Panorama of the World's Legal Systems*,
(Washington Law Book Co.,) 3 vols. 1928, 1 vol. reprint 1936, Chap. III
Hebrew Law, and Chap. VII, Roman Law. Edersheim, *The Life and Times of
Jesus the Messiah*, 27th impression, vol. II, p. 555 states that the
Sanhedrin customarily had short-hand court-reporters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Record of the Trials](toc06.md)
