[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr05)  [Next](arr07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

# CHAPTER III

### THE STORY OF NICHOLAS FLAMEL

In the whole history of alchemy surely one of the most interesting
stories is that of Nicholas Flamel (1330-1418), the most successful and
most celebrated of France's adepts, and I am accordingly giving in his
own words the account of the discovery which proved be the turning point
in his life:

'I, Nicholas Flamel, Scrivener, living in Paris in the year of our Lord
1399 in the Notary Street, near St. James of the Boucherie, though I
learned not much Latin, because of the poverty of my parents who,
notwithstanding, were even by those who envy me most, accounted honest
and good people: yet by the blessing of God I have not wanted an
understanding of the books of the philosophers, but learned them and
attained to a certain kind of knowledge, even of their hidden secrets.
For which cause's sake, there shall not any moment of my life pass
wherein, remembering this so vast good, I will not render thanks to this
my good and gracious God. After the death of my parents, I Nicholas
Flamel, got my living by the art of writing, ingrossing and the like,
and in the course of time there fell into my hands a gilded book, very
old and large, which cost me only two florins. It was not made of paper
or parchment as other books are, but of admirable rinds, as it seemed to
me, of young trees; the cover

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of it was brass, well bound, and graven all over with a strange sort of
letters, which I took to be Greek characters, or some such like. This I
know, that I could not read them; but as to the matter that was written
within, it was engraven, as I suppose, with an iron pencil, or graven
upon the said bark leaves; done admirably well, and in fair neat Latin
letters, and curiously coloured.

'The book contained thrice seven leaves, so numbered at the top of each
folio, every seventh leaf having painted images and figures instead of
writing. On the first of these seven leaves there was depicted a virgin
who was being swallowed by serpents; on the second a Cross upon which a
serpent was crucified; on the last a wilderness watered by many fair
fountains, out of which came a number of serpents, running here and
there. On the first written leaf the following words were inscribed in
great characters of gold "Abraham the Jew, Prince, Priest, Levite,
Astrologer and Philosopher, unto the Jewish nation scattered through
France by the wrath of God, wishing health in the name of the God of
Israel."

'Thereafter followed great execrations and maledictions, with the word
Maranatha repeated over and over, poured forth against anyone who should
glance within, unless he were priest or scribe.

'The person who sold me this book must have known its value as much and
as little as I who bought it. My suspicion is that it was either stolen
from the miserable Jews or found hidden somewhere in the old place of
their abode. On the second leaf the said Abraham consoled his people,
praying them to avoid vices and idolatry more than all and await with
patience the Messiah to come, who would vanquish all kings of the earth
and thereafter reign, with those who were his own, in eternal glory.
Without doubt this

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Abraham was a man of great understanding. On the
third and rest of the written leaves he taught them the transmutation of
metals in plain words, to help his captive nation in paying tribute to
Roman Emperors and for other objects which I shall not disclose. He
painted the vessels on the margin, discovered the colours, with all the
rest of the work, but concerning the Prime Agent he uttered no word,
advising them only that he had figured and emblazoned it with great care
in the fourth and fifth leaves. But all his skill notwithstanding, no
one could interpret the designs unless he was far advanced in Jewish
kabalah and well studied in the book of the Philosophers. It follows
that the fourth and fifth leaves were also without writing but full of
illuminated figures exquisitely designed. On the obverse of the fourth
leaf there was shewn a young man with winged feet having in his hand a
caducean rod, encompassed by two serpents, and with this he stroke upon
a helmet which covered his head. I took him to represent the Greek God
Mercury. Unto him came running and flying with open wings a very old
man, having an hour glass set upon his head and a scythe in his hands,
like the figure of death, with which scythe he would have struck off the
feet of Mercury. On the reverse of the fourth leaf a fair flower was
depicted on the summit of a very high mountain, round which the North
wind blustered. The plant had a blue stem, white and red flowers, leaves
shining like fine gold, while about it the dragons and griffins of the
North made their nests and their dwellings. On the obverse side of the
fifth leaf there was a rose bush in flowers, in the midst of a fair
garden, and growing hard by a hollow oak tree. At the foot bubbled forth
a spring of very white water, which ran headlong into the depths below,
passing first through the hands of a great concourse of people who were

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

digging up the ground in search of it, save one person only, who paid
attention to its weight. On the reverse side appeared a king carrying a
great faulchion who caused his soldiers to destroy in his presence a
multitude of little children, the mothers weeping at the feet of the
murderers. The streams of blood were gathered by other soldiers into a
great vessel, wherein the sun and moon bathe. Now, seeing that the
history appeared to depict the slaughter of the innocents by Herod, and
that I learned the main part of the Art in this book, it came about that
I placed in their cemetery these hieroglyphic symbols of the Sacred
Science.

'I have now described the content of the first five leaves, but I shall
say nothing of all that was written in fair and intelligible Latin on
the other pages, lest God should visit me for a greater wickedness than
that of him who wished that all mankind had but one head so that he
could cut it oft at a blow. The precious book being in my possession I
did little but study it night and day till I attained a fair
understanding of all its processes, knowing nothing, however, respecting
the matter of the work. I could therefore make no beginning and the
result was that I became very sad and depressed. My wife Peronelle, whom
I had married recently and loved as much as myself, was astonished and
concerned greatly, endeavouring to comfort me and desiring earnestly to
know whether she could not help me in my distress. I was never one who
could hold his tongue and not only told her everything but showed her
the book itself, for which she conceived the same affection as my own,
taking great delight in the beautiful cover, the pictures and
inscriptions, all of which she understood as little as I did. There was
no small consolation, however, in talking with her about them and in
wondering what could be done to discover their meaning. At length I
caused

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the figures on the fourth and fifth leaves to be painted as well as I
could and had them put up in my workroom, where I shewed them to many
scholars in Paris; but these also could throw no light upon them. I went
so far as to tell them that they had been found in a book about the
Philosophers' Stone, but most of them made a mock of it and also of me.
An exception however was one named Anselm, a licentiate of medicine and
a deep student of the Art. He desired earnestly to see my book and would
have done anything to have his way in the matter, but I persisted in
saying that it was not in my possession, though I gave him a full
account of the process described therein.

'He declared that the first figures represented time, which devours all
things, while the six written leaves shewed that a space of six years
was required to perfect the Stone, after which there must be no further
coction. When I pointed out that according to the book the figures were
designed to teach the First Matter he answered that the six years
coction was like a second agent; that as regards the first it was
certainly shewn forth as a white and heavy water, which was doubtless
quicksilver. The feet of this substance could not be cut off, meaning
that it could not be fixed and so deprived of volatility except by such
long decoction in the pure blood of young children. The quicksilver
uniting with gold and silver in this blood would change with them,
firstly into a herb like that of the fair flower on the reverse of the
fourth leaf, secondly by corruption into serpents, which serpents, being
dried and digested by fire, would become Powder of Gold, and of such in
truth is the Stone.

'This explanation sent me astray through a labyrinth of innumerable
false processes for a period of one and twenty years, it being always
understood that I made

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

no experiments with the blood of children, for that I accounted
villainous. Moreover, I found in my book that what the philosophers
called blood is the mineral spirit in metals, more especially in gold,
silver and quicksilver to the admixture of which I tended always. The
licentiate's interpretation being more subtle than true, my processes
never exhibited the proper signs at the times given in the book, so I
was ever to begin again. At last, however, having lost all hope of
understanding the figures, I made a vow to God and St. James that I
would seek their key of some Jewish priest belonging to one of the
Spanish synagogues. Thereupon, with the consent of Peronelle and
carrying a copy of the figures, I assumed a pilgrim's weeds and staff,
in the same manner as you see me depicted outside the said arch in the
said churchyard where I put up the hieroglyphic figures, as also a
procession representing on both sides of the wall and successive colours
of the Stone which arise and pass off in the work, and the following
inscription in French: "A procession is pleasing to God when it is done
in devotion." These are the first words, or their equivalent, of a tract
on the colours of the Stone by the King Hercules, entitled Iris, which
opens thus "Operis Processio Multum Naturae Placet." I quote them for
the benefit of scholars, who will understand the allusion. Having donned
my pilgrim's weeds, I began to fare on the road, reaching Mountjoy and
finally my destination at St. James, where I fulfilled my vow with great
devotion. On the return journey I met with a merchant of Boulogne in
Leon, and to him I was indebted for acquaintance with Master Candies, a
doctor of great learning who was Jewish by nation but now a Christian.
When I shewed him my copy of the figures he was ravished with wonder and
joy, and asked with great earnestness whether I could give him news of
the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

book from which they were taken. He spoke in Latin and I answered in the
same language that if anyone could decipher the enigma there was good
hope of learning its whereabouts. He began at once to decipher the
beginning.

'To shorten this part of the story he had heard much talk of the work
but as of a thing that was utterly lost. I resumed my journey in his
company, proceeding from Leon to Ovideo and thence to Sareson, at which
port we set sail for France and arrived in due time, after a prosperous
voyage. On our way to Paris my companion most truly interpreted the
major or part of my figures, in which he found great mysteries, even to
the points and pricks. But unhappily when we reached Orleans this
learned man fell sick and was afflicted with extreme vomitings, a
recurrence of those from which he had suffered at sea. He was
continually in fear of my leaving him, and though I was ever at his side
he would still be calling me. To my great sorrow he died on the seventh
day, and to the best of my ability I saw that he was buried in the
Church of Holy Cross at Orleans. There he still lies, and may God keep
his soul, seeing that he made a good Christian end.

'He who would see the manner of my arrival home and the satisfaction of
Peronelle may look on us both as we are painted on the door of. the
Chapel of St. James of the Boucherie hard by my house. We are shewn on
our knees, myself at the feet of St. James of Spain and she at those of
St. John, to whom she prayed so often. By the grace of God and the
intercession of the Holy and Blessed Virgin, as also of the Saints just
mentioned, I had gained that which I desired, being a knowledge of the
First Matter, but not as yet of its initial preparation, a thing of all
else most difficult in the world. In the end, however, I attained this
also, after errors innumerable through the space of some

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

three years, during which I did nothing but study and work as you will
see me depicted outside the arch at the Chapel of St. James and St.
John, ever praying to God rosary in hand, engrossed in a book, pondering
the words of the philosophers and proving various operations suggested
by their study. The fact of my success was revealed to me by the strong
odour, and thereafter I accomplished the mastery with ease indeed I
could scarcely miss the work had I wished, given a knowledge of the
prime agents, their preparation and following my book to the letter. On
the first occasion projection was made upon Mercury, of which I
transmuted a half pound or thereabouts into pure silver, better than
that of the mine, as I and others proved by assaying several times. This
was done on a certain Monday, the seventeenth day of January 1392,
Peronelle only being present. Thereafter, still following--word for
word--the directions of my book, about five o'clock in the evening of
the twenty-fifth day of the following April I made projection of the Red
stone on the same amount of Mercury, still at my own house, Peronelle
and no other with me, and it was duly transmuted into the same quantity
of pure gold, much better than that of the ordinary metal, softer and
more pliable. I speak in all truth. I have made it three times, with the
aid of Peronelle, for she helped me in all my operations and understood
the subject as well as myself. She could have done it alone without
doubt, had she desired, and would have brought it to the same term. The
first occasion gave me all that I needed, but I took great delight in
contemplating the wonderful works of Nature within the vessels, and to
signify that I made three transmutations you have only to look at the
arch and the three furnaces depicted thereupon, answering to those which
served in our operations.

'For a considerable time I was in no little anxiety

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

lest Peronelle should prove unable to conceal her happiness and should
let fall some words among her kinsfolk concerning our great treasure. I
judged of her joy by my own, and great joy, like great sorrow is apt to
diminish caution. But the most high God in His Goodness had not only
granted me the blessing of the Stone, He had given me a chaste and
prudent wife, herself endowed with reason, qualified to act reasonably,
and more discreet and secret than other women are for the most part.
Above all she was very devout and having no expectations of children,
for we were now advanced in years, she began--like myself-- to think of
God and to occupy herself with works of mercy. Before I wrote this
commentary, which was towards the end of the year 1413, after the
passing of my faithful companion, whom I shall lament all the days of my
life, she and I had already founded and endowed fourteen hospitals, had
built three Chapels and provided seven Churches with substantial gifts
and revenues, as well as restoring their cemeteries.'

Nicholas Flamel died eventually in 1415 at the age of one hundred and
sixteen years. Some evidence of his house, dating from 1407, is still to
be seen in the building of 51, rue de Montmorency in Paris, and in the
Musée de Cluny there is an inscribed tablet from his tomb in the old
Church of St. Jaques-la-Boucherie, now demolished. This tablet, which is
quite unique, had an interesting and somewhat chequered career. Lost for
many years, after the demolition of St. Jacques-laBoucherie in 1717, it
was eventually found in a shop in the rue des Arias, where the owner, a
greengrocer and herbalist, had been using the smooth marble back as a
chopping block for his herbs.

The tablet itself measures 58 x 45 centimetres, and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

is four centimetres thick. At the top is a carved representation of
Christ, St. Peter, and St. Paul, and the inscription records that
Nicholas Flamel, formerly a scrivener, left certain moneys and
properties for religious and charitable purposes, including gifts to
churches and hospitals in Paris.

I have retailed this account of Flamel's experiences in full as it seems
to me to be of no mean interest, despite the fact that certain
authorities have doubted its veracity. My own feeling about it is that
the history is a true one; that the book of Abraham the Jew to which
Flamel refers is evidently an allegorical writing of the whole process,
and that the corresponding pictures are, to anyone versed in alchemical
language, representative of the different phases of the work. Some
writers and critics, certainly, have held these allegories up to
ridicule as the outpourings of religious visionaries, but here I think
they demonstrate their ignorance of the whole process. One of the
greatest proofs of the truth of this history is, in my opinion, the
point at which Flamel refers to the attainment of the First Matter. Of
this he says 'The fact of my success was revealed to me by the strong
odour,' and this fact I myself have demonstrated in the laboratory; the
odour is unmistakable, and the gas of such a volatile nature that it
pervades the whole house. In the theoretical and practical sections I
shall refer to this more fully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Basil Valentine](arr07.md)
