[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr02)  [Next](arr04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# FOREWORD

### BY SIR DUDLEY BORRON MYERS, O.B.E.

Having been intimately associated with Archibald Cockren during the past
ten years, and having long since learnt to place implicit confidence in
his efficiency and reliability in all matters to which he has devoted
his many remarkable gifts and talents, it affords me real pleasure to
write a few words by way of introduction to 'Alchemy Rediscovered and
Restored.'

In this book he tells of the sensational work which he has accomplished
in once more bringing to light, and to the service of humanity, secrets
which baffled the majority of scientists of all ages, and which, for
several centuries, have been buried in a grave of doubt and sceptical
tradition. That this grave should at last have been opened, and that the
real, albeit hidden secrets which it contained should now stand revealed
and proclaimed, must undoubtedly be regarded as an epoch-making event.

I do not myself claim to have any scientific knowledge whatever, but
seeing is believing, and I have been privileged to keep in close touch
with the author's experiments from the very beginning. Not only have I
seen the results achieved, but I, among many others, have been able to
test and pay grateful tribute to the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

efficacy of the Elixirs produced by the alchemical process. These, one
may venture to assert, cannot fail as they become better known to prove
a very valuable addition to the remedies at present available to
mankind.

There is no question of the claims which are put forward in this book
being taken on trust. On the contrary they are open to the fullest
examination. The proofs are there and they can safely be left to speak
for themselves, in the light of the outcome of any investigations to
which they may be subjected.

Seeing the far-reaching importance of the author's researches and
discoveries it is necessary that some account should be given of his
career, and of those qualifications in the wide field of physiology
which entitle him to consideration in questions of the treatment of
human ailments.

After the necessary period of training he was, in 1904, certificated at
the National Hospital for Paralysis and Epilepsy as fully qualified for
all purposes of massage, remedial exercises, and electrical treatment.
From this hospital he passed on to the staff of the Great Northern
Central Hospital, where he remained for several years. From 1908
onwards, however, he was able to devote part of his time to the private
practice in which he then for the first time established himself in the
West End of London. This practice had necessarily to be given up during
the War.

The years 1915 and 1916 found him in complete charge of all electrical,
massage, manipulative, and remedial exercises at the Russian Hospital
for British Officers in South Audley Street, London. This hospital,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

it may be stated, was opened by the Russian nobility resident in London,
and was wholly maintained by Russian money. From there he passed on in a
similar capacity (1917--18) to the Prisoners of War Hospital. He was at
the same time attached to the Millbank Military Hospital. In 1918, he
was transferred to the Australian Army, and was on the Peace Conference
Staff of the Australian Prime Minister in 1919. Since then, that is to
say for the past twenty years, he has been in permanent private practice
in the West End of London.

For over twenty years he has been a keen student of the sciences of
metallurgy, No-chemistry, and bacteriology, and it will thus be seen
that in the claims he now advances in this book he writes with that
measure of authority which a life devoted to the alleviation of
suffering, and to the effective treatment of human ailments, undoubtedly
confers on him.

It is given to few men to make such momentous discoveries as have
rewarded his persistent work and patience. His work has, indeed, to my
knowledge, often been pursued under conditions of great difficulty and
disappointment. May what he has accomplished in the interests of science
and of the human race bring him the reward which he deserves--the reward
of general recognition and appreciation of the results achieved.

DUDLEY B. MYERS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Beginnings of Alchemy](arr04.md)
