[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr10)  [Next](arr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

### THE COMTE DE ST. GERMAIN

It is rather remarkable that in the history of alchemy the Comte de St.
Germain has not been mentioned. There is no doubt that he was an expert
in the art, but of the many stories related about this remarkable man,
his achievements in this particular sphere seem to play no part.

St. Germain was a baffling personality. As far as can be ascertained he
was the son of Prince Racozy of Transylvania, but, in any case, there
can be no doubt that he was of noble birth, a man of great culture and
refinement. His history as far as it is known is well worth reading, but
does not come within the scope of this book, which is solely concerned
with his interest in the alchemic art. To those of my readers interested
in dietetics, it may be a point of interest that most of his biographers
have noted his habits with regard to food. It was diet, he declared,
combined with his marvellous elixir, which constituted the true secret
of his longevity, for it may be remembered that records of St. Germain's
various appearances in Europe extend over a period of 110 years, during
which time his appearance never altered. Always he appeared as a
well-preserved man of middle age. Madame la Comtesse

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

d'Adhemar, for example, in 'Souvenirs de Marie Antoinette,' gives an
excellent description of the Comte, whom Frederick the Great referred to
as 'the man who does not die,' and Mrs. Cooper Oakley in her monograph,
'The Comte de St. Germain, the Secret of Kings,' traces him under his
various names between the years 1710 and 1822.

The Italian adventurer, Jacques de Casanova de Seingalt, grudgingly
admits that the Comte was an adept of the magical arts and a skilled
chemist. Upon his telling St. Germain that he was suffering from an
acute disease, the Comte invited Casanova to remain for treatment,
saying that he would prepare fifteen pills which in three days would
restore him to perfect health.

Of St. Germain's athoeter Casanova writes:

'Then he showed me his magistrum, which he called Athoeter. It was a
white liquid contained in a well stopped phial. He told me that this
liquid was the universal spirit of Nature and that if the wax of the
stopper was pricked ever so slightly, the whole contents would
disappear. I begged him to make the experiment. He thereupon gave me the
phial and the pin and I myself pricked the wax, when, lo, the phial was
empty.'

Casanova further records an incident in which St. Germain changed a
twelve sous piece into a pure gold coin. There is other evidence that
the celebrated Count possessed the alchemical powder by which it is
possible to transmute base metals into gold. He actually performed this
feat on at least two occasions as stated by the writings of
contemporaries. The

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Marquis de Valbelle, visiting St. Germain in his
laboratory, found the alchemist busy with his furnaces. He asked the
Marquis for a silver six-franc piece, and covering it with a black
substance, exposed it to the heat of a small flame or furnace. M. de
Valbelle saw the coin change colour until it became a bright red. Some
minutes after, when it had cooled a little, the adept took it out of the
cooling vessel and returned it to the Marquis. The piece was no longer
silver but of the purest gold. Transmutation had been complete. The
Comtesse d'Adhemar had possession of this coin until 1766, when it was
stolen from her secretary.

One author tells us that St. Germain always attributed his knowledge of
occult chemistry to his sojourn in Asia. In 1755 he went to the East for
the second time, and writing to Count von Lamberg he said: 'I am
indebted for my knowledge of melting jewels to my second journey to
India.'

There are too many authentic cases of metallic transmutations to condemn
St. Germain as a charlatan for such a feat. The Leopold Hoffman medal,
still in the possession of that family, is the most outstanding example
of the transmutation of metals ever recorded. Two-thirds of this medal
was transformed into gold by the monk *Wenzel-Seiler,* leaving the
balance silver, which was its original state. In the circumstances fraud
was impossible as there was but one copy of the medal extant.

For these notes on incidents in St. Germain's life I am indebted to Mr.
Manly Hall's introductory material and commentary to the 'Most Holy
Trinosophia' (Comte de St. Germain).

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

The 'Most Holy Trinosophia,' or 'The Most Holy Threefold Wisdom,' is
composed of twelve sections. It is at the same time a picture of the
process of Initiation and an Alchemical treatise, a fact which careful
perusal will establish. Let me quote from Section XII:

'The hall into which I had just entered was perfectly round it resembled
the interior of a globe composed of hard transparent matter, as
crystals, so that the light entered from all sides. Its lower part
rested upon a vast basin filled with red sand. A gentle and equable
warmth reigned in this circular enclosure. With astonishment I gazed
around this crystal globe when a new phenomenon excited my admiration.
From the floor of the hall ascended a gentle vapour, moist and saffron
yellow. It enveloped me, raised me gently and within thirty-six days it
bore me up to the upper part of the globe. Thereafter the vapour
thinned. Little by little I descended and finally found myself again on
the floor. My robe had changed its colour. It had been green when I
entered the hail, but now changed to a brilliant red.'

Here is a picture of the pelican in its sand bath, the process of the
sublimation of the contents, and the change of colour which takes place
in one of the laboratory processes in the preparation of the
Philosophers' Stone. That this preparation is a physical process carried
out in a laboratory with water, retorts, sand-bath, and furnaces, there
is no doubt. That alchemy is purely a psychic and spiritual science has
no basis in fact. A science to be a science must be capable of
manifestation on every plane of consciousness; in other words it must be
capable of demonstrating the axiom 'as above, so below.' Alchemy can
withstand

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

this test, for it is, physically, spiritually, and psychically, a
science manifesting throughout all form and all life.

The various foregoing records should in some measure bear testimony to
the claim of alchemy to be a physical science based on an inner
knowledge of the properties of metals. Casanova's description of St.
Germain alone is evidence that as recently as the latter part of the
eighteenth century, at any rate, a method of preparing a physical
'Stone,' capable of transmuting metals and curing disease was in
practice.

Modern science knows of no substance that can change lead or quicksilver
into the likeness of solid gold by the mere addition of a grain of red
powder, and may therefore choose to scoff at the alchemists' assertions
as products of a too-fertile imagination, at their writings as
'gibberish.' But the fact must be borne in mind that the 'assertions'
were corroborated by impartial observers, and that the 'gibberish' of
the Hermetic tracts is scarcely less intelligible to the layman than is
modern chemical phraseology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Seed of Metals](arr12)
