[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr13)  [Next](arr15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

# CHAPTER III

### THE QUINTESSENCE (I)

Space, whether inter-planetary, inter-material, or inter-organic, is
filled with a subtle fluid or gas, which we call, as did the ancients,
Aith-in-Solintaire Aether. This fluid or gas, unchangeable in
composition, indestructible, invisible, pervades everything and all
matter. Metal, mineral, tree, plant, animal, man; each is charged with
the Ether in varying degrees. All life on the planet is charged in like
manner; a world is built up in this fluid, and moves through a sea of
it.

Ether, which the occultist terms astral light, determines the
constitution of bodies. Hardness and softness, solidity and liquidity,
all depend on the relative proportion of ethereal and ponderable matter
of which they are composed.

The arbitrary division and classification of physical science, the whole
range of physical phenomena, proceeds from the Primary Aether, for
Science has reduced matter as we know it to Ether, which, although not
solid matter, is still matter. When most of us speak of matter, of
course, we usually visualize solid substance, but it has been proved by
Science that matter is not actually solid, but merely a stress, a strain
in the Ether. The atoms, and finer still, the electrons and protons of
which it is composed, all move

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

in a sea of Ether, so that in accordance with this theory, the very air
we breathe, the very bodies we inhabit, all must likewise be moving in
this sea of Ether, the parent element from which all manifestation has
come.

This principle that all things proceed from one is demonstrable in the
physical; in the principles of Biology, the multicellular organisms,
complex as they may be in their structure, nevertheless arise from a
single cell. Science postulates that all matter is composed of atoms:
the atoms, however, are composed of protons and electrons, and the
electrons in their turn are evidently composed of Ether. This Ether is a
universal connecting medium filling all Space to the furthest limits,
penetrating the interstices of the atoms without a break in its
continuity, and so completely does it fill Space that it is sometimes
identified with Space, and has, in fact, been spoken of as Absolute
Space.

'The Ether of Space,' according to Sir Oliver Lodge, 'is a theme of
unknown and apparently infinite magnitude, and of a reality beyond the
present conception of man. It is that of which everyday material
consists, a link between the worlds, a consummate substance of
overpowering grandeur. By a kind of instinct one feels it to be the home
of spiritual existence, the realm of the awe-inspiring and supernal. It
is co-extensive with the physical universe, and is absent from no part
of space. Beyond the furthest star it extends, in the heart of the atom
it has its being. It permeates and controls and dominates all. It eludes
the human senses and can only be envisaged by the powers of the mind.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

'Yet the Ether is a physical thing; it is not a physical entity, it has
definite properties. It is not matter any more than hydrogen and oxygen
are water, but it is the vehicle of both matter and spirit. . . '

Now the occultist has divided matter, seen and unseen, into seven
principles or planes, and of these the fifth principle, or Quintessence,
corresponds to Science's Ether of Space. If we are willing to admit that
there is truth in this statement, then we may begin to see that alchemy
is based on absolute Law. All the forces of our scientists have
originated in the Vital Principle, that one Collective Life of our Solar
System, which life is a part of, or rather one of the aspects of, the
One Universal Life.

During life there is present in man a finely diffused form of matter, a
vapour filling not merely every part of his physical body, but actually
stored in some parts; a matter constantly renewed by the vital
chemistry, a matter as easily disposed of as the breath, once the breath
has served its purpose. Of this matter Paracelsus wrote

'The Archaeus is an essence that is equally distributed in all parts of
the human body. . . . The Spiritus Vitae takes its origin from the
Spiritus Mundi. Being an emanation of the latter, it contains the
elements of all cosmic influences, and is therefore the cause by which
the action of the cosmic forces act upon the body of man.'

This Archaeus is of a magnetic nature and is not enclosed in a body but
radiates within and around it like a luminous sphere. Alchemy and
alchemy alone,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

within historical period, and in so-called civilised countries, has
succeeded in obtaining a real element, or a particle of homogeneous
matter, the Mysterium Magnum of Paracelsus. By his age-old science the
alchemist may set free this Vital Principle in his laboratory, destroy
the body of the metal on which he is working, purify its salt, and bring
its principles together in a higher form. This process, which is after
all but a miniature reproduction of a superior process in operation
around us all the time, undoubtedly proceeds from Master Intelligences
who have lived at some time or another on this Earth.

It is a pity that Science must always reject old ideas and cast them
away as useless before rediscovering them as something new to be
incorporated in its current theories. To discard the alchemist's
theories is as intelligent as to dismiss as rubbish Einstein's Theory of
Relativity merely because one does not happen to understand his
language. Some of our scientific men have realized this, for F. Hoefer
in 'Histoire de la Chimie' (Paris 1866) remarks: 'The systems which
confront the intelligence remain basically unchanged through the ages,
although they assume different forms. Thus, through mistaking form for
basis, one conceives an unfavourable opinion of the sequence. We must
remember that there is nothing so disastrous in Science as the arrogant
dogmatism which despises the past and admires nothing but the present.'

If Science would but try to understand the conception of the Universe as
taught by occultism throughout the ages, taking as its starting-point
the teaching

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

of the One Life in Manifestation, its seven planes of consciousness, its
infinite forces, and as the basis of its philosophy the Hermetic axiom
'as above, so below,' it would found a system based on eternal Truth
instead of on a quicksand of theories. Science will never really
understand the truth about life until it reaches this realization, which
cannot be attained through its instruments and appliances, but only
through the inner powers of the mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Quintessence. (II)](arr15.md)
