[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr17)  [Next](arr19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

# CHAPTER II

### PRACTICAL

In writing this section on the practical work I wish my readers to
realize that I am writing purely from the alchemist's, not the chemist's
viewpoint. I fully realized when commencing this work that my only hope
of success was to put on one side for the time being any knowledge of
chemistry that I might possess and to study alchemystical writings in a
sincere attempt to understand the alchemist's language and reasoning,
and then, by following out his instructions faithfully step by step, to
prove the practicability of this science.

The chemist who may read this book must therefore appreciate this point,
and understand that at the moment I am not trying to reconcile my
findings with the precepts of orthodox chemistry, but merely placing on
record my work as an alchemist.

.      .      .      .      .      .

The practice of alchemy in the laboratory has been a far from easy task,
as those who have at any time studied literature on the subject will
fully appreciate. It is only by continuous experiment and constant
comparison with alchemystic writings that the present

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

results have eventually been attained, and looking back on the years of
persistence in the face of the countless difficulties and failures which
ever confront the would-be alchemist, one can well question the wisdom
of pursuing such a course. At last, however, it does seem that these
labours may not have been entirely in vain, for from these experiments
has gradually emerged the vision of the benefit this art could be to man
who, in his present state of imperfection, with its accompanying
suffering of mind and body, would seem to require some assistance on his
way through life.

As I have said, I believe that in this art lies man's salvation from
sickness and disease, and the secret of his ultimate perfection, but
needless to say in order to utilize to the full the physical benefits of
alchemistic research, man must undertake the transmutation of certain
baser elements in his emotional and mental make-up. With this process of
psychological transmutation I do not propose to deal for the moment, but
I am convinced that in this present age of chaos, when new ideas, new
values, and, as I believe, new understanding are coming into being, it
may be possible that some of these more unorthodox conceptions will meet
with less opposition and more sympathy than previously. Since the
complete destruction of all those conditions which in the nineteenth
century seemed so permanent and immovable, man has been far less
inclined to reject out of hand any new idea which may be put before him.
For this reason I write down my findings of an age-old truth in the
belief that it is a task destiny has set me, and whether my words be

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

accepted or no lies not with me but with those to whom they are
addressed.

.      .      .      .      .      .

Come with me, therefore, to my little laboratory with its array of
alembics, crucibles, and sandbaths, and hear something of the struggles
of the would-be alchemist and of the mysteries he seeks to unravel.

After a careful study of Basil Valentine's 'Triumphal Chariot of
Antimony,' I decided to make my first experiments with antimony. I soon
found, however, that on arriving at a crucial point, the key had almost
invariably been deliberately withheld, and a dissertation on theology
inserted in its place. Gradually, however, I came to realize that the
theological discourse was not without object, but actually the means of
veiling a valuable clue of some kind. After much labour, a fragrant
golden liquid was finally obtained from the antimony, although this was
merely a beginning. The alkahest of the alchemist, the First Matter,
still remained a mystery.

Then followed processes with iron and copper. After purification of the
salts or vitriol of these metals, of calcination, and the obtaining of a
salt from the calcined metal by a special process, followed by careful
distillation and re-distillation in rectified spirits of wine, the oil
of these metals was obtained, a few drops of which used singly, or in
conjunction, proved very efficacious in eases of anemia and debility
which the ordinary iron medicine failed to touch.

The conjunction of iron and copper proved to be an elixir of a very
stimulating and regenerating character,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

the action being such as to clear the body from toxins, and I well
remember on taking a few drops one evening that the prospect of a spell
of fairly strenuous mental work, even after a really laborious day,
seemed to hold no terrors for me!

But still the alkahest remained an enigma, and so further experiments
were made with silver and mercury. For those with silver, fine silver
was reduced with nitric acid to the salts of the metal, carefully washed
in distilled water, sublimated by special process, finally yielding up a
white oil which had a very soothing effect on highly nervous cases.

In the case of mercury, the metal on being reduced to its oil, produced
a clear crystalline liquid with great curative properties, but unlike
common mercury, no poisonous qualities.

After this I decided to work upon fine gold--gold, that is, without any
alloy. This was dissolved in Aqua Regia and reduced to the salts of
gold; these were washed in distilled water, which in its turn was
evaporated in order to remove its very caustic properties. It was at
this point that a very real difficulty arose, for when these salts of
gold lose their acidity, they slowly but surely tend to return to their
metallic form again. Nevertheless, an elixir was finally produced from
them by distillation, although even then a residue of fine metallic gold
remained behind in the retort.

Having got so far I realized that without the alkahest of the
philosophers the real oil of gold could not be obtained, and so again I
went back and forth in the alchemists' writings to obtain the clue. The
experiments

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

which I had already made considerably lightened my task, and one day
while sitting quietly in deep concentration the solution to the problem
was revealed to me in a flash, and at the same time many of the
enigmatical utterances of the alchemists were made clear.

.      .      .      .      .      .

Here, then, I entered upon a new course of experiment, with a metal for
experimental purposes with which I had had no previous experience. This
metal, after being reduced to its salts and undergoing special
preparation and distillation, delivered up the Mercury of the
Philosophers, the Aqua Benedicta, the Aqua Celestis, the Water of
Paradise. The first intimation I had of this triumph was a violent
hissing, jets of vapour pouring from the retort and into the receiver
like sharp bursts from a machine-gun, and then a violent explosion,
whilst a very potent and subtle odour filled the laboratory and its
surroundings. A friend has described this odour as resembling the dewy
earth on a June morning, with the hint of growing flowers in the air,
the breath of the wind over heather and hill, and the sweet smell of the
rain on the parched earth.

Nicholas Flamel, after searching and experimenting from the age of
twenty, wrote when he was eighty years old:

'Finally I found that which I desired, which I also soon knew by the
strong scent and odour thereof.'

Does this not coincide, this voice from the fourteenth century, with my
own description of the peculiar

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

subtle odour? Cremer, also writing in the early fourteenth century, says

'When this happy event takes place, the whole house will be filled with
a most wonderful sweet fragrance, and then will be the day of the
nativity of this most blessed preparation.'

Having arrived at this point my next difficulty was to find a way of
storing this subtle gas without danger to property. This I accomplished
by coils of glass piping in water joined up with my receiver, together
with a perfect government of heat, the result being that the gas
gradually condensed into a clear golden-coloured water, very inflammable
and very volatile. This water had then to be separated by distillation,
the outcome being the white mercurial water described by the Comte St.
Germain as his athoeter or primary water of all the metals. I will again
quote from Manly Hall's introduction to 'The Most Holy Trinosophia,' the
passage in which Casanova describes the athoeter:

'Then he showed me his rnagistrum which he called *Athoeter.* lit was a
white liquid contained in a well stopped phial. He told me that this
liquid was the universal spirit of Nature and that if the wax of the
stopper was pricked ever so slightly, the whole of the contents would
disappear. I begged him to make the experiment. He thereupon gave me the
phial and the pin and I myself pricked the wax, when, lo, the phial was
empty.'

This passage aptly describes this water which is so volatile that it
rapidly evaporates if left unstoppered, boils at a very low temperature,
and does not so much

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

as wet the fingers. This mercurial water, this athoeter of St. Germain,
is absolutely necessary to obtain the oil of gold, which is obtained by
its addition to the salts of gold after those salts have been washed
with distilled water several times to remove the strong acidity of the
Aqua Regia used to reduce the metal to that state. When the Mercurial
Water is added to these salts of gold, there is a slight hissing, an
increase in heat, and the gold becomes a deep red liquid, from which is
obtained, by means of distillation, the oil of gold, a deep amber liquid
of an oily consistency. This oil, which is the potable gold of the
alchemist, never returns to the metallic form of gold. I can understand
now, I think, how it is that some of the patients to whom Salts of Gold
injections have been administered have succumbed to gold poisoning. So
long as the salts are in an acid solution, they remain soluble, but
directly the dissolving medium loses its acidity and becomes neutral or
alkaline, the salts tend to form again into metallic gold. This is
probably what happens in the case of the injection of gold salts into
the alkaline intercellular fluids, which in some cases leads to fatal
results.

Do not imagine that chemists know all about metals! They do not, as the
following quotation from the report of Professor Charles Gibson's
presidential address on 'Recent Investigations in the Chemistry of Gold'
would seem to show:

'The address was of a highly technical nature. One of the chief points
brought forward was that current text-book views of the constitution of
salts of gold are incorrect. These are never of the same nature as

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

normal metallic salts with simple formulae such as AuCl or
AuBr<sub>3</sub>, but always of a complex constitution. . ."

From the golden water I have described can be obtained this white water,
and a deep red tincture which deepens in colour the longer it is kept;
these two are the mercury and the sulphur described by the alchemists,
Sol the Father and Lune the Mother, the Male and the Female Principles,
the White and Red Mercuries, which two conjoined again form a deep amber
liquid. This is the *Philosophic Gold,* which is *not* made from
metallic gold, but from another metal, and is a *far more Potent* Elixir
than the oil of gold. This deep amber liquid literally shines and
reflects and intensifies rays of light to an extraordinary degree. It
has been described by many alchemists, which fact again corroborates my
work in the laboratory. Indeed, every step which I have taken in the
laboratory I have found in the work of the various followers of the
Spagyric Art.

.      .      .      .      .      .

And now to the final goal, the Philosophers' Stone. Having found my two
principles, the Mercury and the Sulphur, my next step was to purify the
dead body of the metal, that is, the black dregs of the metal left after
the extraction of the golden water. This was calcined to a redness and
carefully separated and treated until it became a white salt. The three
principles were then conjoined in certain exact quantities in a
hermetically sealed flask in a fixed heat neither too hot nor too cold,
care as to the exact

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

degree of heat being essential, as any carelessness in its regulation
would completely spoil the mixture.

On conjunction the mixture takes on the appearance of a leaden mud,
which rises slowly like dough until it throws up a crystalline formation
rather like a coral plant in growth. The 'flowers' of this plant are
composed of petals of crystal which are continually changing in colour.
As the heat is raised, this formation melts into an amber-coloured
liquid which gradually becomes thicker and thicker until it sinks into a
black earth on the bottom of the glass. At this point (the Sign of the
Crow in alchemical literature) more of the ferment or mercury is added.
In this process, which is one of continual sublimation, a long-necked,
hermetically sealed flask is used, and one can watch the vapour rising
up the neck of the flask and condensing down the sides. This process
continues until the state of 'dry blackness' is attained. When more of
the mercury is added, the black powder is dissolved, and from this
conjunction it seems that a new substance is born, or, as the early
alchemists would have expressed it, a Son is born. As the black colour
abates, colour after colour comes and goes until the mixture becomes
white and shining; the White Elixir. The heat is gradually raised yet
more, and from white the colour changes to citrine and finally to
red--the Elixir Vitae, the Philosophers' Stone, the medicine of men and
metals. From their writings, it appears that many alchemists found it
unnecessary to take the Elixir to this very last stage, the citrine
coloured solution being adequate for their purpose.

It is of interest to note that an entirely different

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

manifestation comes into being after the separation of the three
elements and their re-conjunction under the sealed vase of Hermes. By
the deliberate separation and unification of the Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt, the three elements appear as a more perfect manifestation than in
the first place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](arr19.md)
