[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr16)  [Next](arr18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

# PART III

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# CHAPTER I

### THE MEDICINE FROM METALS

In our treatment of the human body we have to remember that in
composition it is not an inanimate object capable of sustaining the kind
of treatment accorded to a sack of sand, but a delicate organism
possessed of the capacity of feeling, consciously and unconsciously, and
must be handled accordingly. The cell life of the body is selective in
the finest sense, the cells rejecting any substance unfit for their use,
and consequently it is as reasonable to expect to run a modern aeroplane
engine on inferior fuel as to ingest into the human body for its
maintenance a drug of a gross nature, or a food devoid of its natural
vital principle.

We all have constant proof of the fact that at a certain stage in his
life man's body apparently begins to deteriorate, the reason given for
this deterioration being the slowing down of the cell activity with the
result that the body's wasting process proceeds more rapidly than does
the repairing process. This explanation is correct, for as man gets
older, the vital energy does not flow through to the cells of his body
so efficiently as in his youth, and the cells of the body, when unable
to obtain their requisite elements, become sluggish in their action and
ultimately diseased.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

In this connection our ideas on so-called diseased bacteria have to be
very much revised; the so-called bacteria is the medium through which
the vital energy is transferred to the cell life. This is its work, the
purpose for which it was created, and if for some reason the flow of
that energy is impeded in its passage, then the bacteria takes its
energy from the cell, and at once becomes pathological. For this reason
it has been regarded by the medical faculty as the *cause* of the
disease; but any bacteriologist will realize how nearly he has
approached to the truth of this statement when he in his turn states,
for example, that certain types of bacteria are oxygen-eating, that is,
in the event of their being unable to obtain their oxygen from such a
substance as sugar, they take it from the human body and so debilitate
and disease that body. For this reason, if we really desire to become an
A 1 race, we must find and understand the preparation of those elements
which the human body's cell-life requires to assist its correct
functioning, for when the cell-life of the body fails, then the body
itself fails also.

Alchemy, as demonstrated by two of its most prominent exponents, Basil
Valentine and Paracelsus, is concerned not only with the attainment of
the Philosopher's Stone, but with the preparation of medicines, by which
is meant the separation of the ethereal from the gross, the true secret
of the Spagyric Art.

At the present day we have two definite systems of medicine, the one
termed allopathy, the other homeopathy. Both these systems have
countless remedies, but neither is by any means perfect, for where the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

allopath gains his cures, the homeopathist has to admit defeat, and
where the homeopathist succeeds, the allopath may fail. The allopath,
whose methods are the more widely practised at the moment, maintains
that the homeopathist gains his successes through the imagination of his
patients, but the homeopathist believes his methods to be the more
scientific, since he deals with a more finely divided and spiritualized
medium; for while the allopath uses his drugs without trituration, the
homeopathist triturates his drugs from the first decimal to the higher
potencies even up to the two-hundredth decimal. Even so, although his
method is the more perfect of the two, it is still far from the ideal

The homeopathists, of course, teach that the founder of their system was
Hahneman, but in actual fact this is inaccurate. Hahneman merely
rediscovered in part a system which had been taught in alchemy for
hundreds of years. I say in part because the alchemist's interpretation
of the system was very much more perfect than is the modern
homeopathist's.

In regard to the question of potencies, I will repeat once again the
definition of the Quintessence: 'Nothing of true value is located in the
body of a substance but in the virtue thereof. And this is the principle
of the quintessence, which reduces, say, twenty pounds to a single
ounce, but that ounce far exceeds in potency the entire twenty pounds.'
Thus to find the Quintessence of Iron, for example, the metal is changed
into its vitriol or salts, which in turn are purified by several
washings in distilled water, and after each washing re-crystallised. The
salt is then calcined to redness

 

and its spirit drawn off in a special manner and also in its turn
carefully distilled several times, the result being a red oil of iron
which is its *true* essence, a few drops constituting a dose.

The first essential of a really effective healing agent is that it
should contain the Quintessence or vital principle of the herb or metal
used, and it is the homeopathist's failure to provide this element in
his preparations which entails the loss of the real value of his
medicaments.

The allopath's failures lie in the fact that his remedies are always
administered in too crude a form. In the administration of a metal, for
instance, it must be understood that the body of a metal is worthless,
as a medicine, it cannot heal: it is the *essence alone* that is
curative. Only too often the body is poisonous, and until that gross
part of the metal be broken up, its administration is definitely
*harmful.* Probably one of the most common forms of metallic poisoning
is that of mercury, but remove the harmful parts of the metal and the
healing essence is free to do its work thoroughly. Nitrate of silver is
a caustic poison, but remove the gross part of the metal and the essence
of the silver is a cure for diseases of the brain. Lead salts are
poisonous, it is true, and in many cases their administration has
resulted in death from lead poisoning, but remove that poisonous matter
and the remaining essence, which is clear, sweet-smelling, and aromatic
in taste, forms a cure for all diseases of the spleen. Copper, when the
gross body of the metal is removed and the essence unlocked, is
invaluable for the nervous system and the kidneys; likewise, tin for the
liver,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

iron for all inflammatory diseases, and the bile, and gold for the heart
and general circulation. But gold, too, is only suitable for a medicine
when the salts of gold are reduced into the oil of gold and distilled
into a golden liquid; then and only then is gold tolerated and utilized
by the human body. The salts of gold used at the present day can never
be assimilated, for by their present method of preparation they can
never be properly distilled and purified.

From the foregoing paragraphs it will be seen that the whole principle
of cure rests on the proper separation of this Quintessence to which
alchemy, and alchemy alone, provides the key. The whole principle of the
system is that the body of the metal impedes the action of the essence,
and those metals which have hitherto been regarded as poisonous
(mercury, antimony, lead, arsenic) are all non-poisonous and capable of
greater curative potency when this process has been faithfully carried
out.

A third system of medicine which I have not mentioned, and which is not
much practised in this country, has recently come into being. I refer to
the colloidal system. Although even here the methods of preparation have
not been pushed quite far enough, the results of some of its experiments
would seem to indicate that this particular branch of research work is
being conducted on the right lines, and is paving the way to a more
efficient system of medicine.

The Rockefeller Institute, in the course of its research work, has
demonstrated that iron taken in this form is much more easily absorbed
by the body than in its cruder state, whilst copper administered as a
colloidal

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

preparation is a powerful agent in the reduction of neuralgic and
nervous conditions. In their laboratory experiments too, it has been
found that flowers rescued from the rubbish heap and placed in a bowl of
colloidal copper regain their freshness.

A further proof of the efficacy of the system was provided during a bad
outbreak of goitre in one of the American states. The epidemic was
almost entirely eliminated by the addition of a colloidal preparation of
iodine to the supply of drinking-water in those districts where the
goitre was most prevalent.

For a medicament to be brought to its highest grade of action, the
preparation is of inestimable importance, but so long as the physician
is content with the preparation of the chemist, I fail to see how any
vital improvement in the quality and efficacy of our healing mediums can
be expected. The physician is no chemist, the chemist has no clinical
experience, and so the medicinal art must fail repeatedly not because
its students themselves are incompetent, but because the system under
which they work is so inadequate. We contribute enormous sums of money
to the maintenance of our hospitals and at the same time drive into them
the victims of our foolish system of drugging and feeding. I repeat, it
is not the body of men that I condemn, but merely our absurd system of
contradictions. Paracelsus has said:

'If, then, it be of such vast importance that Alchemy shall be
thoroughly understood in Medicine, the reason of this importance arises
from the great latent virtue which resides in natural things, which also
can lie open to none, save insofar as they are revealed by

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Alchemy. Otherwise it is just as if one should
see a tree in winter and not recognize it, or be ignorant what was in it
until summer puts forth, one after another, now branches, now flowers,
now fruits, and whatever appertains to it. So in these matters there is
a latent virtue which is occult to men in general. And unless a man
learns and makes proof of these things, which can only be done by an
alchemist, just as by the summer, it is not possible that he can
investigate the subject in any other way.'

Again he says:

'Who will deny that even in the very best things a poison may be hid?
All must acknowledge this. And if this be true, I would now ask you
whether it is not right that the poison should be separated from what is
good and useful, that the good should be taken and the evil left. Such
should certainly be the case. If so, tell me how it is separated in your
surgeries. With you all these elements remain mixed. See your own
simplicity, then, if you are forced to confess that a poison lies hid,
and are asked how it is to be got rid of. Then you bring forth I know
not how many correctives, which shall drive out and take away the
poison. Does not the poison remain afterwards as before? And yet you
boast that you have so corrected it that the poison no longer harms.
Whither has it gone? Exceed the proper dose, and you will soon see where
the poison is.

'The elimination of a poison can only be done by separation; if this is
not brought about you cannot be sure of your work. If a sure foundation
be necessary for the extraction of the poison, this is afforded by
alchemy. But when the bodies are contrary, it is absolutely necessary
that one of them should be taken away and removed, so that in this way
all contrariety

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

should be separated from the good. It is necessary that everything which
is to benefit man shall have passed by fire to a second birth. Should
not this then be deemed the right fundamental principle by every
physician?'

I put forward these ideas because I believe that in the medicine of
metals there is a perfect curative system; that in the seven metals,
gold, silver, iron, copper, tin, mercury, and lead can be found elements
to cure all discords in the human body, and that when this system is
properly understood and practised, the multitude of remedies may be
discarded. Be it understood that this is not my system, but one which is
as old as man himself. Truly it has been said that there is nothing new
under the sun, for knowledge is revealed and is submerged again, even as
a nation rises and falls. Here is a system, tested throughout the ages,
but lost again and again by ignorance or prejudice, in the same way that
great nations have risen and fallen and been lost to history beneath the
desert sands and in the ocean depths.

To what end do we study history if not to learn from it? To profit by
the example of those who have gone before, to learn from their mistakes,
if needs be? Our civilization of today might be a far greater
civilization if it would but borrow from the past, for knowledge there
has always been, and wise men there have always been, who despite the
persecution and opposition of their fellow men, have yet laboured to
preserve these secrets for posterity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Practical](arr18)
