[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr20)  [Next](arr22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION II

"My son, before all things I admonish thee to fear God, in whom is the
strength of thy undertaking, and the bond of whatsoever thou meditatest
to unloose; whatsoever thou hearest, consider it rationally. For I hold
thee not to be a fool. Lay hold, therefore, of

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

my instructions and meditate upon them, and so let thy heart be fitted
also to conceive, as if thou was thyself the author of that which I now
teach. If thou appliest cold to any nature that is hot, it will not hurt
it; in like manner, he who is rational shuts himself within from the
threshold of ignorance, lest supinely he should be deceived.

"Take the flying bird and drown it flying, and divide and separate it
from its pollutions, which yet hold it in death; draw it forth and repel
it from itself, that it may live and answer thee, not by flying away
into the regions above but by truly forbearing to fly. For if thou shalt
deliver it out of its prison, after this thou shalt govern it according
to Reason, and according to the days that I shall teach thee: then will
it become a companion unto thee, and by it thou wilt become to be an
honoured lord.

"Extract from the ray its shadow, and from the light its obscurity, by
which the clouds hang over it and keep away the light: by means of its
construction, also, and fiery redness, it is burned.

"Take, my Son, this redness, corrupted with water, which is as a live
coal holding fire, which if thou shalt withdraw so often until the
redness is made pure, then it will associate with thee, by whom it was
cherished, and in whom it rests.

"Return, then, O my Son, the coal being extinct in life, upon the water
for thirty days, as I shall note to thee, and henceforth thou art a
crowned king, resting over the fountain, and drawing from thence
Auripigment dry without moisture. And now I have made the heart of the
hearers, hoping in thee, to rejoice, even in

 

their eyes, beholding thee in anticipation of that which thou
possessest.

"Observe, then, that the water was first in the air, then in the earth;
restore thou it also to the superiors by its proper windings and not
foolishly altering it; then to the former spirit, gathered in its
redness, let it be carefully conjoined.

"Know, my Son, that the fatness of our earth is sulphur, the auripigment
sirety, and colcothar which are also sulphur, of which auripigments
sulphur, and such like, some are more vile than others, in which there
is a diversity, of which kind also is the fat of gluey matters, such as
are hair, nails, hoofs, and sulphur itself, and of the brain, which too
is auripigment, of the like kind also are the lions' and cats' claws,
which is sirety the fat of white bodies, and the fat of the two oriental
quicksilvers, which sulphurs are hunted and retained by the bodies.

"I say, moreover, that this sulphur doth tinge and fix, and is held by
the conjunction of the tinctures; oils also tinge, but fly away, which
in the body are contained, which is a conjunction of fugitives only with
sulphurs and albuminous bodies, which hold also and detain the fugitive
ens.

"The disposition sought after by the philosophers, O Son, is but one in
our egg, but this in the hen's egg is much less to be found. But lest so
much of the Divine Wisdom as is a hen's egg should not be distinguished,
our composition is, as that is, from the four elements adapted and
composed. Know, therefore, that in the hen's egg is the greatest help
with respect to the proximity and relationship of the matter in nature

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

for in it there is a spirituality and conjunction of elements, and an
earth which is golden in its tincture."

But the Son, inquiring of Hermes, saith:

"The sulphurs which are fit for our work, whether they are celestial or
terrestrial?"

To whom the Father replies:

"Certain of them are heavenly and some are of the earth."

Then the Son saith:

"Father, I imagine the heart in the superiors to be heaven, and in the
inferiors, earth."

But saith Hermes:

"It is not so; the masculine is truly the heaven of the feminine, and
the feminine is the earth of the masculine."

The Son then asks:

"Father, which of these is more worthy than the other, whether is it the
heaven or the earth?"

Hermes replies:

"Both need the help one of the other, for the precepts demand a medium."

But saith the Son:

"If thou shalt say that a wise man governs all mankind?"

"But ordinary men," replies Hermes, "are better for them, because every
nature delights in society of its own kind, and so we find it to be in
the life of Wisdom where equals are conjoined."

"But what," rejoins the Son, "is the mean betwixt them?"

To whom Hermes replies:

"In everything in nature there are three

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

from two; the beginning, the middle, and the end. First the needful
water, then the oily tincture, and lastly, the faeces, or earth, which
remains below.

"But the Dragon inhabits in all these, and his houses are the darkness
and blackness that is in them, and by them he ascends into the air, from
his rising, which is their heaven. But whilst the fume remains in them,
they are not immortal. Take away, therefore, the vapour from the water,
and the blackness from the oily tincture, and death from the faeces, and
by dissolution thou shalt possess a triumphant reward, even that in and
by which the possessors live.

"Know then, my Son, that the temperate unguent, which is fire, is the
medium between the faeces and the water, and is the Perscrutinator of
the water. For the unguents are called sulphurs, because between fire
and oil and this sulphur there is such a close proximity, that even as
fire burns so does the sulphur also.

"All the sciences of the world, O Son, are comprehended in this my
hidden Wisdom, and this, and the learning of the Art, consists in these
wonderful hidden elements which it doth discover and complete. It
behoves him, therefore, who would be introduced to this hidden Wisdom,
to free himself from the hidden usurpations of vice, and to be just and
good and of a sound reason, ready at hand to help mankind, of a serene
countenance, diligent to save, and be himself a patient guardian of the
arcane secrets of philosophy.

"And this know, that except thou understandest how to mortify and induce
generation, to vivify the Spirit and introduce Light, until they fight
each other

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and grow white and freed from their defilements, rising as it were from
blackness and darkness, thou knowest nothing nor canst perform anything.
But if thou knowest this, thou wilt be of a great dignity so that even
kings themselves shall reverence thee. These secrets, Son, it behoves
thee to conceal from the vulgar and profane world.

"Understand, also, that our Stone is from many things and of various
colours, and composed from four elements which we ought to divide and
dissever in pieces, and segregate, in the veins, and partly mortifying
the same by its proper nature, which is also in it, to preserve the
water and fire dwelling therein, which is from the four elements and
their waters, which contain its water; this, however, is not water in
its true form, but fire, containing in a pure vessel the ascending
waters, lest the spirits should fly away from the bodies; for by this
means they are made tingeing and fixed.

"O, blessed watery form, that dissolvest the elements! Now it behoves
us, with this watery soul, to possess ourselves of a sulphurous form,
and to mingle the same with our Acetum. For when, by the power of water,
the composition is dissolved, it is the key of the restoration; then
darkness and death will fly away from them and Wisdom proceeds onwards
to the fulfilment of her Law."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section III](arr22.md)
