[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

#### THE BOOK OF

# THE REVELATION OF HERMES

##### INTERPRETED BY THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS

##### CONCERNING THE SUPREME SECRET OF THE WORLD

Hermes, Plato, Aristotle, and the other philosophers, flourishing at
different times, who have introduced the Arts, and more especially have
explored the secrets of inferior creation, all these have eagerly sought
a means whereby man's body might be preserved from decay and become
endued with immortality. To them it was answered that there is nothing
which might deliver the mortal body from death; but that there is One
Thing which may postpone decay, renew youth, and prolong short human
life (as with the Patriarchs). For death was laid as a punishment upon
our first parents, Adam and Eve, and will never depart from all their
descendants. Therefore, the above philosophers, and many others, have
sought this One Thing with great labour, and have found that which
preserves the human body from corruption, and prolongs life, conducts
itself, with respect to other elements, as it were like the Heavens from
which they understood that the Heavens are a substance above the Four
Elements. And just as

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

\[paragraph continues\] the Heavens, with respect to the other elements
are held to be the fifth substance (for they are indestructible, stable,
and suffer no foreign admixture), so also this One Thing (compared to
the forces of our body) is an indestructible essence, drying up all the
superfluities of our bodies, and has been philosophically called by the
above-mentioned name. It is neither hot and dry like fire, nor cold and
moist like water, nor warm and moist like air, nor dry and cold like
earth. But it is a skilful, perfect equation of all the Elements, a
right commingling of natural forces, a most particular union of
spiritual virtues, an indissoluble uniting of body and soul. It is the
purest and noblest substance of an indestructible body, which cannot be
destroyed nor harmed by the Elements, and is produced by Art. With this
Aristotle prepared an apple prolonging life by its scent, when he,
fifteen days before his death, could neither eat nor drink on account of
old age. This spiritual Essence, or One Thing, was revealed from above
to Adam, and was greatly desired by the Holy Fathers, this also Hermes
and Aristotle call the Truth without Lies, the most sure of all things
certain, the Secret of all Secrets. It is the Last and the Highest Thing
to be sought under the Heavens, a wondrous closing and finish of
philosophical work, by which are discovered the dews of Heaven and the
fastnesses of Earth. What the mouth of man cannot utter is all found in
this Spirit. As Morienus says: 'He who has this has all things, and
wants no other aid. For in it are all temporal happiness, bodily health,
and earthly fortune. It is the spirit of the fifth substance, a Fount of
all Joys (beneath the rays of the moon), the Supporter

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

of Heaven and Earth, the Mover of Sea and Wind, the Outpourer of Rain,
upholding the strength of all things, an excellent spirit above Heavenly
and other spirits, giving Health, Joy, Peace, Love: driving away Hatred
and Sorrow, bringing in Joy, expelling all Evil, quickly healing all
Diseases, destroying Poverty and Misery, leading to all good things,
preventing all evil words and thoughts, giving man his heart's desire,
bringing to the pious earthly honour and long life, but to the wicked
who misuse it, Eternal Punishment.'

This is the Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot comprehend without
the interposition of the Holy Ghost, or without the instruction of those
who know it. The same is of a mysterious nature, wondrous strength,
boundless power. The Saints, from the beginning of the world, have
desired to behold its face. By Avicenna this Spirit is named the Soul of
the World. For as the Soul moves all the limbs of the Body, so also does
this Spirit move all bodies. And as the Soul is in all the limbs of the
Body, so also is this Spirit in all elementary created things. It is
sought by many and found by few. It is beheld from afar and found near;
for it exists in every thing, in every place, and at all times. It has
the powers of all creatures; its action is found in all elements, and
the qualities of all things are therein, even in the highest perfection.
By virtue of this essence did Adam and the Patriarchs preserve their
health and live to an extreme age, some of them also flourishing in
great riches.

When the philosophers had discovered it, with great diligence and
labour, they straightway concealed

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

it under a strange tongue, and in parables, lest the same should become
known to the unworthy, and the pearls be cast before swine. For if
everyone knew it, all work and industry would cease; man would desire
nothing but this one thing, people would live wickedly, and the world be
ruined, seeing that they would provoke God by reason of their avarice
and superfluity. For eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath the
heart of man understood what Heaven hath naturally incorporated with
this Spirit. Therefore have I briefly enumerated some of the qualities
of this Spirit, to the Honour of God, that the pious may reverently
praise Him in His gifts (which gift of God shall afterwards come to
them), and I will herewith shew what powers and virtues it possesses in
each thing, also its outward appearance, that it may be more readily
recognized.

In its first state, it appears as an impure earthly body, full of
imperfections. It then has an earthly nature, healing all sickness and
wounds in the bowels of man, producing good and consuming proud flesh,
expelling all stench, and healing generally, inwardly and outwardly.

In its second nature, it appears as a watery body, somewhat more
beautiful than before, because (although still having its corruptions)
its Virtue is greater. It is much nearer the Truth, and more effective
in works. In this form it cures cold and hot fevers, and is a specific
against poisons, which it drives from heart and lungs, healing the same
when injured or wounded, purifying the blood, and, taken three times a
day, is of great comfort in all diseases.

But in its third nature it appears as an aerial body of

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

an oily nature, almost freed from all imperfections, in which form it
does many wondrous works, producing beauty and strength of body, and (a
small quantity being taken in the food) preventing melancholy and
heating of the gall, increasing the quantity of blood and seed. It
expands the blood vessels, cures withered limbs, restores strength to
the sight, in growing persons removes what is superfluous and makes good
defects in the limbs.

In its fourth nature it appears in a fiery form (not quite freed from
all imperfections, still somewhat watery and not dried enough), wherein
it has many virtues making the old young and reviving those at the point
of death. For if to such an one there be given, in wine, a barleycorn's
weight of this fire, so that it reach the stomach, it goes to his heart,
renewing him at once, driving away all previous moisture and poison, and
restoring the natural heat of the liver. Given in small doses to old
people, it removes the diseases of age, giving the old young hearts and
bodies. Hence it is called the Elixir of Life.

In its fifth and last nature, it appears in a glorified and illuminated
form, without defects, shining like gold and silver, wherein it
possesses all previous powers and virtues in a higher and more wondrous
degree. Here its natural works are taken for miracles. When applied to
the roots of dead trees they revive, bringing forth leaves and fruit. A
lamp, the oil of which is mingled with this spirit, continues to burn
for ever without diminution. It converts crystals into the most precious
stones of all colours, equal to those from the mines, and does many
other

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

incredible wonders which may not be revealed to the unworthy.

For it heals all dead and living bodies without other medicine. Here
Christ is my witness that I lie not, for all heavenly influences are
united and combined therein.

This essence also reveals all treasures in earth and sea, converts all
metallic bodies into gold, and there is nothing like unto it under
Heaven.

This spirit is the secret, hidden from the beginning yet granted by God
to a few holy men for the revealing of these riches to His
Glory--dwelling in fiery form in the air, and leading earth with itself
to Heaven, while from its body there flow whole rivers of living water.
This spirit flies through the midst of the Heavens like a morning mist,
leads its burning fire into the water, and has its shining realm in the
Heavens.

And although these writings may be regarded as false by the reader, yet
to the initiated they are true and possible, when the hidden sense is
properly understood. For God is wonderful in His works, and His wisdom
is without end.

This spirit in its fiery form is called a Sandaraca, in the aerial a
Kybrick, in the watery an Azoth, in the earthly Alcohoph and Aliocosoph.
Hence they are deceived by these names, who, seeking without
instruction, think to find this Spirit of Life in things foreign to our
Art. For although this Spirit which we seek, on account of its
qualities, is called by these names, yet the same is not in these bodies
and cannot be in them. For a refined spirit cannot appear except in a
body suitable to its nature. And, by however many names

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

it be called, let no one imagine there be different spirits, for, say
what one will, there is but one spirit working everywhere and in all
things.

That is the spirit which, when rising, illumines the Heavens, when
setting incorporates the purity of Earth, and when brooding has embraced
the Waters. This spirit is named Raphael, the Angel of God, the
subtlest. and purest, whom the others all obey as their King.

This spiritual substance is neither heavenly nor hellish, but an airy,
pure, and hearty body, midway between the highest and the lowest,
without reason, but fruitful in works, and the most select and beautiful
of all other heavenly things.

This work of God is far too deep for understanding for it is the last,
greatest, and highest secret of Nature. It is the Spirit of God, which
in the Beginning filled the Earth and brooded over the waters, which the
world cannot grasp without the gracious interposition of the Holy Spirit
and instruction from those who know it, which also the whole world
desires for its virtue, and which cannot be prized enough. For it
reaches to the planets, raises the clouds, drives away mists, gives its
light to all things, turns everything into Sun and Moon, bestows all
health and abundance of treasure, cleanses the leper, brightens the
eyes, banishes sorrow, heals the sick, reveals all hidden treasures,
and, generally, cures all diseases.

Through this spirit have the philosophers invented the Seven Liberal
Arts, and thereby gained their riches. Through the same Moses made the
golden vessels in the Ark, and King Solomon did many beautiful works to
the honour of God. Therewith Moses built the Tabernacle,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Noah the Ark, Solomon the Temple. By this Ezra
restored the Law, and Miriam, Moses' sister, was hospitable; Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and other righteous men, have had life-long abundance
and riches; and all the saints possessing it have therewith praised God.
Therefore is its acquisition very hard, more than that of gold and
silver. For it is the best of all things, because, of all things mortal
that man can desire in this world, nothing can compare with it, and in
it alone is truth. Hence it is called the Stone and Spirit of Truth; in
its works is no vanity, its praise cannot be sufficiently expressed. I
am unable to speak enough of its virtues, because its good qualities and
powers are beyond human thoughts, unutterable by the tongue of man, and
in it are found the properties of all things. Yea, there is nothing
deeper in Nature.

O unfathomable abyss of God's Wisdom, which thus hath united and
comprised in the virtue and power of this one Spirit the qualities of
all existing bodies!

O unspeakable honour and boundless joy granted to mortal man! For the
destructible things of Nature are restored by virtue of the said Spirit.

O mystery of mysteries, most secret of all secret things, and healing
and medicine of all things! Thou last discovery in earthly natures, last
best gift to Patriarchs and Sages, greatly desired by the Whole world!
Oh, what a wondrous and laudable spirit is purity, in which stand all
joy, riches, fruitfulness of life, and art of all arts, a power which to
its initiates grants all material joys! O desirable knowledge, lovely
above all things beneath the circle of the Moon, by which Nature is
strengthened, and heart and limbs

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

are renewed, blooming youth is preserved, old age driven away, weakness
destroyed, beauty in its perfection preserved, and abundance ensured in
all things pleasing to men! O thou spiritual substance, lovely above all
things! O thou wondrous power, strengthening all the world! O thou
invincible virtue, highest of all that is, although despised by the
ignorant, yet held by the wise in great praise, honour, and glory,
that--proceeding from humours--wakest the dead, expellest diseases,
restorest the voice of the dying!

0 thou treasure of treasures, mystery of mysteries, called by Avicenna
'an unspeakable substance,' the purest and most perfect soul of the
world, than which there is nothing more costly under Heaven,
unfathomable in nature and power, wonderful in virtue and works, having
no equal among creatures, possessing the virtues of all bodies under
Heaven! For from it flow the water of life, the oil and honey of eternal
healing, and thus hath it nourished them with honey and water from the
rock. Therefore, saith Morienus: 'He who hath it, the same also hath all
things.' Blessed art Thou, Lord God of our Fathers, in that Thou has
given the prophets this knowledge and understanding, that they have
hidden these things (lest they should be discovered by the blind, and
those drowned in worldly godlessness) by which the wise and pious have
praised Thee! For the discoverers of the mystery of this Thing to the
unworthy are breakers of the seal of Heavenly Revelation, thereby
offending God's Majesty, and bringing upon themselves many misfortunes
and the punishments of God.

Therefore, I beg all Christians, possessing this knowledge,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

to communicate the same to nobody, except it be to one living in
Godliness, of well-proved virtue, and praising God, Who has given such a
treasure to man. For many seek, but few find it. Hence the impure and
those living in vice are unworthy of it. Therefore is this Art to be
shown to all God-fearing persons, because it cannot be bought with a
price. I testify before God that I lie not, although it appear
impossible to fools, that no one has hitherto explored Nature so deeply.

The Almighty be praised for having created this Art and for revealing it
to God-fearing men. Amen.

And thus is fulfilled this precious and excellent work, called the
revealing of the occult spirit, in which lie hidden the secrets and
mysteries of the world.

But this spirit is one genius, and Divine, wonderful and lordly power.
For it embraces the whole world, and overcomes the Elements and the
fifth Substance.

To our Trismegistus Spagyrus,  
        Jesus Christ,  
Be praise and glory immortal.  
                Amen.
