[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr21)  [Next](arr23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION III

"Know, my Son, that the [philosophers](errata.htm#1.md) bind up their
matter with a strong chain that it may contend with the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fire; because the spirits in the washed bodies
desire to dwell therein and to rejoice. In these habitations they vivify
themselves and inhabit there, and the bodies hold them, nor can they be
hereafter separated any more.

"The dead elements are revived, the composed bodies tinge and are
altered, and by a wonderful process they are made permanent, as saith
the philosopher.

"O, permanent watery Form, creatrix of the royal elements! who, having
with thy brethren and a just government obtained the tincture, findest
rest. Our precious stone is cast forth upon the dung-hill, and that
which is most worthy is made vilest of the vile. Therefore, it behoves
us to mortify two Argent vives together, both to venerate and be
venerated, viz., the Argent vive of Auripigment, and the oriental Argent
vive of Magnesia.

"O, Nature, the most potent creatrix of Nature, which containest and
separatist natures in a middle principle. The Stone comes with light,
and with light it is generated, and then it generates and brings forth
the black clouds of darkness, which is the mother of all things.

"But when we marry the crowned King to our red daughter, and in a gentle
fire, not hurtful she doth Conceive an excellent and supernatural son,
which permanent life she doth also feed with a subtle heat, so that he
lives at length in our fire.

"But when thou shalt send forth thy fire upon the foliated sulphur, the
boundary of hearts doth enter in above, it is washed in the same, and
the purified matter thereof is extracted.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

"Then he is transformed, and his tincture by help of the fire remains
red, as it were flesh. But our Son, the king begotten, takes his
tincture from the fire, and death even, and darkness, and the waters
flee away.

"The Dragon shuns the sunbeams which dart through the crevices and our
dead son lives; the king comes forth from the fire and rejoins with his
spouse, the occult treasures are laid open, and the virgin's milk is
whitened. The Son, already vivified, is become a warrior in the fire,
and of tincture super-excellent. For this Son is himself the treasury,
even himself bearing the Philosophic Matter.

"Approach, ye Sons of wisdom, and rejoice; let us now rejoice together,
for the reign of death is finished, and the Son doth rule. And he is
invested with the red garment, and the scarlet colour is put on."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV](arr23.md)
