[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lbp02)  [Next](lbp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![](img/00100.jpg)

# INTRODUCTION.

<span id="img_00101"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/00101.jpg) |

N placing before the reader this collection of Basque legends, fairy
tales, ballads, and popular stories having their origin in the ancient
traditions which formed a portion of the sacred inheritance bequeathed
to the Basque people by their forefathers, and handed down by word of
mouth from generation to generation; I have thought that a few remarks
would not be out of place concerning the moral and historical importance
which these legends and tales possess, as being the reflection of the
ideas and faithful echo of the sentiments of past generations.

If at one time these legends were viewed with contempt by superficial
minds that could not perceive behind the simplicity of their form the
great lessons which they inculcated, and the lofty sentiments they

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

enclosed, these very tales and legends are in our day becoming the
objects of the attention and study of deep thinkers who, by the meagre
light which these tales alone afford them, are able to penetrate the
shadows left by those ancient societies that have disappeared from the
face of the globe, carrying along with them the secrets of their ideas,
civilization, and life, because these traditions constitute the archives
of the people, the treasures of their science and of their beliefs; they
are the records of the lives of their forefathers, the landmarks of the
grandeur of their past history.

The Basques, like all primitive races, separated from the common
paternal family, and holding similar beliefs and customs, must
necessarily possess many analogous points in common, independent of the
effects due to difference of climate, mode of living, religion, and
other physical and moral causes. Yet the Basques are singular in this,
that, in the midst of the great revolutions which have agitated the
whole of Europe, causing radical changes, levelling to the ground or
converting into ruins great empires, powerful nationalities, monuments;
sweeping away languages, and even the very races themselves--the Basques
have known how to pass unscathed through the many storms of devastation,
preserving intact their nationality, institutions, laws, language, and
customs.

Impelled by their singularly energetic activity, and by

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the strength of their warlike spirit, they have fought on land, they
have triumphed by sea, they have explored and conquered unknown regions;
and, by the light of their unassuming but practical intelligence, have
succeeded in consolidating with admirable harmony the elements of a wise
rule which perhaps has no equal in the world. But following that
traditional spirit which is the characteristic mark of the race, and
trusting to that spirit for the preservation of their institutions and
history, they have never sought to transmit in writing to their
descendants the narrative of their great deeds, nor the keystone of
their robust organization, nor, indeed, in one word, the secret of that
immense sovereignty to which they attained, and which is scarcely
comprehensible in our day if we take into account the now limited
conditions of their territory and wealth.

What interest and importance must be attached to collecting, in view of
all these circumstances, the thousands of scattered fragments of a
nation's traditions and beliefs which, shining like vivid flashes of
lightning amid dark shadows, rend the dense veils which conceal the
mysterious secrets of the glorious history of the Basque people?

There are some who would fain put down all popular beliefs on the plea
that they perpetuate superstition in the heart of the people. That the
masses are superstitious is unfortunately a truth which cannot be
denied;

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

but, at the same time, it is true to say that the greatest men and the
most illustrious people of the world have yielded to that weakness. Yet
this fact does not prove that it is only in traditional beliefs where
the origin of the evil is to be sought for. So long as we are unable to
define the limits which separate truth from error in space and time, in
the physical and moral worlds, man will ever allow himself to be carried
away by the irresistible yearning for that which is unknown and
incomprehensible, to seek in the mysterious regions of fancy for
abundant food to satisfy his curiosity, and some explanation for that
which he cannot understand.

By no other means is it comprehensible how superstition has always
subsisted in every race, whatever be the religious profession or degree
of culture it may have reached, or age in which it existed. The object
may have changed, the form may have varied, as it has always done under
the various influences exercised by religion, climate, customs, and
other causes; nevertheless superstition has not ceased to pervade and
dominate the spirit as powerfully now as it has ever done.

It is true that in our days the belief in witches is gone by, but, on
the other hand, a world of spirits have risen up, or rather been
discovered, as many spiritualists assert, who assume to live in perfect
union with them.

We have among us mediums who have, so they tell us, legions of the dead
at their command ever ready to

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

appear at their evocation to fill with wonder and dread the most
cultured city of Europe. And if all the world laughs at divination and
the magic arts, there are few who do not shudder when some somnambulist,
with brow bathed in perspiration and frame quivering in forced sleep,
assures them that he can perceive through his closed eyelids the
beginning of tubercule in the lungs of a patient, or some latent disease
in the heart.

Ancient beliefs as a rule sprang from faith or some moral sentiment in
such a manner that across their gross fictions there shone some great
truth or deeply rooted virtue. Hence they always left behind some moral
teaching or called forth some wholesome emotion. And in proof that the
beliefs of our forefathers tended to inspire the noblest instincts in
man, we have but to take any of the simplest of them. Who, for instance,
has not heard hundreds of times in the Basque Provinces, in one form or
another, the tales of the *Arguiduna*?

"The day has fled, and the poor cottager trudges sadly up the mountain
path which leads to her house. She is weeping, her heart is torn asunder
by grief, for she has lost her only child, who was the sunshine of her
life.

"The shades of twilight, the silence which surrounds her, the sad
mystery of night renew the wounds of her heart! She thinks of her child,
she weeps, looks up to heaven and goes on her way!

"She proceeds, and reaches the graveyard where but

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

a few days since she had laid the loved remains, and the poor mother on
beholding the grave puts both her hands to her beating heart, feeling as
though it must needs burst in twain under that wave of sorrow and
bitterness which the recollection of her loss has raised.

"Suddenly a weird light, mysterious, leaps over the low wall of the
cemetery and approaches to meet her, flickering in fantastic movements
amid the shades. On beholding that light the mother falls on her knees,
puts out her hands towards the flame, and, forgetful of her own pain,
she asks in a faltering voice

"'Child of my heart, are you happy?'

"And the light, as though wishful of replying to her, becomes agitated
and moves rapidly, and approaches nearer and closer to her, and stands
still above her head. The woman, enraptured by an undefinable emotion,
closes her eyes. Who knows? Perchance her ears have caught the sweet
murmur of the words of her son--perchance she has felt on her lips the
loving kiss of that idolized child of her heart!

"But the light begins to ascend and continues rising towards heaven
until it becomes lost amid the shadows. The woman stands for a moment,
her eyes fixed with fond looks on the spot where the light has vanished.
She then directs to heaven a prayer, and starts on her way home, weeping
still; but the tears she sheds are tears of resignation which comfort
her. That night, sleep

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

does not desert her eyelids as on previous nights, nor is she troubled
by visions or phantoms. She sleeps calmly, awakes with peace of soul.
And this is due to her having seen the spirit of her child; it is
because she knows that the child so beloved and wept for has not
forgotten his poor mother; it is that she feels that the soul of the
child of her affections has gone to be reunited with its kindred
spirits, the angels of heaven!"

What has all this been? If you question science it will tell you that it
is due to a very simple phenomenon. Some gases emanating from the
organic bodies of that graveyard have become inflamed on coming into
contact with the air, and produced that flame which in its turn has
caused an hallucination in the overwrought spirit of the poor mother.

The explanation is correct and exact, and science is quite right. But
how much more consoling is it for that hapless mother, the hallucination
which brought peace to the soul, than the cold explanation which would
leave her in all the bitterness of sorrow!

Let us state another example. Above the heights of Amboto appears a
heavy dark cloud presaging a storm. On its appearance the fishermen
return precipitately to port; the field labourers, the traveller, and
the shepherds all fly terrified back to their dwellings, and as they do
so murmur, amid words of prayer, the strange words, *The lady of
Amboto*! *the lady of Amboto*!

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

And who is this lady?

The wandering soul of a woman bereft of faith and conscience, who, after
sacrificing to her ambition the love of a wife, that of a daughter, and
even her hope of eternal salvation, commits the last and greatest
crime--that of self-destruction--by casting herself down a precipice,
and her spirit, in just expiation of so much sin, finds itself condemned
to wail and wander for ever a victim to remorse among the peaks of
Amboto. Her apparition is always followed by some great misfortune. The
traces of her footprints are always marked with tears and blood, and,
like to the birds of prey which are only aroused by the smell of blood,
she foretells also the hour of calamity, and quits her haunts to revel
in tears and wails.

On the other hand, a white lovely mist is seen to rise and hover over
the top of Morumendi, and this mist becomes lost in space like a soft
vapour. If on beholding this mist some become alarmed, this is soon
succeeded by gleams of hope springing up in their hearts, and they hail
the beneficent lady who comes to announce to them that, although the
hours of trial are at hand, she will help them to surmount them. *Here
comes the good lady*! *Here comes the good lady*! is heard from every
lip blessing the spirit of the chaste and heroic maiden who sacrificing
for her aged father her own happiness and affections and her very life,
ended her lonely days in prayer on the rugged peaks of Morumendi.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The soul of the proud, unnatural daughter comes always accompanied by
black clouds presaging disaster.

The apparition of the innocent maiden ever comes amid vapourous mists,
white like her spotless soul, and announcing hope and peace.

The lady of Amboto symbolizes ingratitude, ambition, and crime, and her
spirit dwells in the midst of general execration, and is received with
curses.

The lady of Morumendi symbolizes abnegation, virtue, innocence, and
lives amid the blessings of the grateful hearts of all the people.

All this is fantastic and absurd, there is no doubt. But to the Basque
it has been during twenty generations a moral lesson written with clouds
upon the gigantic peaks of Amboto and Morumendi.

And similarly in all the other traditions which have been preserved,
there is always discovered in their origin either a principle of
morality, or the sacred cultus of the paternal hearth, or the passionate
love of their mountains. That is to say, the three greatest and purest
sentiments of humanity--the love of God, the love of home, and the love
of the country--the three great virtues which the Romans admired in the
Basques some twenty centuries ago These virtues have distinguished the
race throughout that immense space of time, and these very virtues will
still shine in the coming generations, although unfortunately without
the vigorous energy of their forefathers.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

And perchance--can it be doubted?--these popular legends have had no
small share in preserving the character of the Basque race so
distinctly, that at the present day they stand alone and unique amid the
ruin and desolation which have befallen all other primitive races,
retaining its language, customs, beliefs, and the same spirit which so
eminently distinguished them in the midst of all those opulent ancient
empires, the remembrance of which is fast becoming obliterated from the
memory of the people.

Entone at the present day the song of Hanibal which our forefathers sang
thirty centuries ago, or that of Lekovide in the time of Augustus
Octavius, or that of Altabiscar during the epoch of Charlemagne, and the
humblest shepherd of the mountains will understand it as though it had
been composed for him. On the other hand, what people or race
understands the Sagas of the SCALDOS, the poem of the Nibelung, the
chants of Ossian, and the hymns of the Armenians? Only a few learned men
who have made the languages which no longer exist objects of study. And
this is not due solely to the fact that the language of those days is
still preserved as that the spirit which distinguished the race has been
perpetuated, and the people at the present day judge and feel and live
in the same manner as they did in the ancient days of their glory.

By what other means but by tradition do we know

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the names of the heroic chieftains of that race of warriors which
carried terror and dismay into the very centre of proud Rome--the
Lekovides, Uchines, and Lartaunes?

What history has preserved the glorious names of Hernio, Gurutzeta,
Oro-vioc, Betzaide, and others too numerous to mention?

By what explanation could we be able to comprehend better than by the
*Canto of Alos* the imposing solemnity and the deep sentiment of the
funeral ceremony of Gau-illa?

Truly, then, can it be said, that the nation which more completely
gathers together the largest collection of traditions, ballads, and
popular legends, must be the one possessing the most complete history.

For this reason throughout the German States has the prosecution of this
branch of study been followed with interest and assiduity, and in France
also with national spirit.

Hence, if this study is held to be one of such great importance by the
two great nations which are at the head of the literary movements of the
world, and that, moreover, possesses beautiful and multiplied histories
written by the finest intellects with all the philosophical conditions
which modern criticism exact--what interest must not a nation such as
the Basque inspire, which has no chronicles or archives, inscriptions or
any other of the indispensable elements required for forming such a vast
work as this?

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

There remains, therefore, to us but one path open--the memory of the
people.

Let us hasten to collect, each on his part, the materials necessary for
this important object, and the day may dawn when some privileged genius
shall bring to a conclusion the imperfect work which I have commenced of
bringing forward before an enlightened English public the vast array of
not only Basque legends, but the legends of many other provinces of
Spain.

And let us hasten with all speed, for the gods are departing. Through an
irreparable misfortune, which is not sufficiently deplored, this hapless
nation or race is suffering in its depths a deep and laboured
transformation. The levelling breath of the age is wresting from the
heart of the Basques on a par with the superstitions in which they
lived, their lofty sentiments and partriarchal customs; and the people,
on apprehending by the light of new ideas the simple paucity of their
beliefs experience a sad humiliation on perceiving their credulity and
ignorance. In our day it is sad to say, even the most rustic husbandman
appears ashamed to recount those tales which at one time he listened to
with enthusiasm and with implicit faith; and on asking for any narrative
he will look askance, suspecting that the interrogator may sneer at his
simplicity.

Let it not be thought, however, that because we are enthusiastic for all
ancient lore we cease to acknowledge

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the immense benefits humanity owes to illustration and the progress of
modern times; but in this especial point, uniting ourselves for a moment
to the ideas of the Basque people, let me ask, with what ideas and
sentiments could the space be filled up in their history were we to tear
down and scorn the beliefs and traditions, ideas and customs of that
race which so largely contributed to their well-being for more than
twenty centuries, imprinting on the character of the Basque that seal of
wonderful originality which has always distinguished the race? That is
to say, the admirable harmony which unites in them the most peaceful
instincts with an heroic valour in dangers; of spontaneous submission to
authority with an indomitable spirit of liberty; and lastly, a modest
simplicity with an energetic aspiration for all that is grand.

But apart from all this the sad truth must be told the Basque of the
present day, especially the generation that is rising up, does not feel
the love and yearning for home and hearth felt by their elders, and
those traditions and tales of their forefathers no longer satisfy his
spirit. It is urgent, therefore, to gather together these legends from
the generation which is fast passing away, else if we wait much longer
we know not whether even a trace of their footprints will be in
existence. Many traditions have already disappeared, losing along with
them part of the precious treasures of our beloved country's history;

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

but as this cannot now be remedied, let us repair the loss by collecting
what remains, and preserve them with religious veneration, since they
are the relics of the greatness, the virtues, and faith of our
forefathers.

It is a recognized fact that the people inhabiting mountainous countries
are all, more or less, given to believe in the marvellous or the
supernatural, because nature presents herself in those lands under forms
of greater beauty and grandeur, and thus offers to the imagination of
the simple dwellers a more free scope for the marvellous. Such are the
rugged shores of the Rhine strewn with the weird ruins of feudal
castles; the mountains and lakes of Scotland; the broken rocks of the
Hebrides, as well as the vast wild tracts of land of Emerald Erin,
covered with an evergreen underwood. In some may be found *gnomes* or
*ghosts*; in others, *white ladies* riding fantastic steeds; or *Peri*,
or again *Will-o'-the-wisps*--but in all are found innumerable
multitudes of mysterious beings whose cries or dances, games and aërial
cavalcades, have been seen beneath the pale light of the moon, or among
the mists, or the froth of waterfall, or torrent, or mountain stream,
which, as it dashes and splashes up, form supposed canopies for the
spirits inhabiting the waters, or hovering under the branches of the
huge ancient trees of the forest.

Should any enlightened traveller sit down at the hospitable hearth of
one of the dwellers of these countries and

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

listen to the marvellous adventures narrated in perfect faith by the
patriarch of the family, and listened to with the greatest respect and
in deep silence by all his family and retainers; and should the said
traveller interrupt the narrative by any movement or sign of
incredulity, he would see the whole family rise up together and protest
against such an act, not because of its discourtesy, but because it
casts an injurious doubt, and such a doubt would lessen the importance
of that district or village, should they not be able to boast of the
existence of some of these mysterious beings, undefined it is true, but
supposed ever to exert some direct influence on all the important events
of their simple, monotonous life. And, to convince the traveller of the
truth of what is advanced, some stalwart shepherd will assert that he
has been awakened on a certain night by the light kiss of a white
*Will-o'-the-wisp* which has dragged him out of his straw bed and
carried him to a neighbouring wood, sore and tossed by the rapid whirls
of some wild dance. The old man will add that he remembers how in his
youth he saw the *While Lady* of the neighbouring castle pass on
horseback across the wood, with a falcon fastened to her wrist, and
accompanied by a retinue of hunters with bugle-horns, and leading
hunting dogs.

After these asseverations, follow the tales of the aged mistress of the
house, who will relate how she saw *with her own eyes* a wilful imp
spilling the salt, turning over

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

the pots and kettles, and even carrying its audacity to the point of
fastening an old rag to the tail of the most venerable cat of the house.

In view of, to them, such unimpeachable proofs the visitor is bound to
agree with them, that in truth *ghosts* and *peri*, *white ladies* and
*Will-o'-the-wisps* do exist, and in this manner he will once more win
the good opinion of his hosts.

I am of opinion that it is better to allow these good people to live in
peace with their superstitions, which do no harm to any one, leaving to
time the work of undeceiving them, than to put ourselves forward as
reformers among them by endeavouring to root up their simple beliefs.
Moreover, the people that from their simplicity believe in all these
things are found as a rule to be more virtuous, peaceful, and honest,
better disposed to observe religious duties and precepts, and more
obedient to the laws of their respective governments, because these
simple beliefs prepare them in a certain manner to accept other beliefs
which are of greater importance and interest.

And I go further than this: how would they pass the long evenings of
winter were they deprived of the marvellous stories which they narrate
in peace and good fellowship, sitting around the fire, and that serve
them as food for their imagination and of repose and relaxation after
their hard day's rough work in the fields?

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Let us bear in mind that, at least during the time they narrate these
marvellous fables and stories, they are happy and contented. Therefore
let us not embitter with our scepticism the pleasure these people enjoy.

The tract or range of land and mountains which comprises the Basque
Provinces contains mountains similar to those of Scotland, hills as
green as may be found in Ireland, rivers with shores as rugged as are
those of Germany, with bleak coasts as huge and inhospitable as are the
coasts of the Hebrides. This country, topographically so similar to the
above-mentioned nations, possesses a people dowered with an imagination
as vivid as theirs, inclined to create fantastic beings known under the
name of *Lamiæ*, inhabiting their tempestuous coasts; *Bassa-jaon*, or
*jauna*, dwelling in their interminable woods; *Mailagarrys* amid the
luxuriant forests; and *Sorguiñas* on the solitary plains and in the
fissures opened by the force of the mountain torrents,

The legends and historical traditions of a people *sui generis*,
possessing a language at once magnificent, original, and similar to
none, a brilliant poetic imagination, fired with a love which amounts
almost to idolatry for their mountains, a deeply-rooted religious faith,
simple patriarchal habits, extraordinary progress, undoubted virtues,
and an admirable administration worthy of being imitated, must, I feel
assured, prove of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

interest to the English public, which is ever ready to recognize and
acknowledge the grandeur and virtues of foreign nations, and take an
interest even in their fairy and popular stories.

M. M.

<span id="img_01800"></span> ![](img/01800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aquelarre](lbp04)
