[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through
the will of God, and Timothy our brother, unto the church of God which
is at Corinth, with all the saints that are in the whole of Achaia:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed \[be\] the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who comforteth us in all our affliction,
that we may be able to comfort them that are in any affliction, through
the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For as the sufferings of Christ abound unto
us, even so our comfort also aboundeth through Christ.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But whether we are afflicted, it is for
your comfort and salvation; or whether we are comforted, it is for your
comfort, which worketh in the patient enduring of the same sufferings
which we also suffer:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and our hope for you is stedfast; knowing
that, as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so also are ye of the
comfort.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For we would not have you ignorant,
brethren, concerning our affliction which befell \[us\] in Asia, that we
were weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power, insomuch that we
despaired even of life:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> yea, we ourselves have had the sentence of
death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in
God who raiseth the dead:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> who delivered us out of so great a death,
and will deliver: on whom we have set our hope that he will also still
deliver us;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> ye also helping together on our behalf by
your supplication; that, for the gift bestowed upon us by means of many,
thanks may be given by many persons on our behalf.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our glorifying is this, the testimony
of our conscience, that in holiness and sincerity of God, not in fleshly
wisdom but in the grace of God, we behaved ourselves in the world, and
more abundantly to you-ward.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For we write no other things unto you,
than what ye read or even acknowledge, and I hope ye will acknowledge
unto the end:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> as also ye did acknowledge us in part,
that we are your glorying, even as ye also are ours, in the day of our
Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in this confidence I was minded to
come first unto you, that ye might have a second benefit;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> and by you to pass into Macedonia, and
again from Macedonia to come unto you, and of you to be set forward on
my journey unto Judaea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When I therefore was thus minded, did I
show fickleness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to
the flesh, that with me there should be the yea yea and the nay nay?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> But as God is faithful, our word toward
you is not yea and nay.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was
preached among you by us, \[even\] by me and Silvanus and Timothy, was
not yea and nay, but in him is yea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For how many soever be the promises of
God, in him is the yea: wherefore also through him is the Amen, unto the
glory of God through us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Now he that establisheth us with you in
Christ, and anointed us, is God;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> who also sealed us, and gave \[us\] the
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But I call God for a witness upon my
soul, that to spare you I forbare to come unto Corinth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Not that we have lordship over your
faith, but are helpers of your joy: for in faith ye stand fast.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But I determined this for myself, that I
would not come again to you with sorrow.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if I make you sorry, who then is he
that maketh me glad but he that is made sorry by me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I wrote this very thing, lest, when I
came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having
confidence in you all, that my joy is \[the joy\] of you all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For out of much affliction and anguish of
heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be made
sorry, but that ye might know the love that I have more abundantly unto
you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But if any hath caused sorrow, he hath
caused sorrow, not to me, but in part (that I press not too heavily) to
you all.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Sufficient to such a one is this punishment
which was \[inflicted\] by the many;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> so that contrariwise ye should rather
forgive him and comfort him, lest by any means such a one should be
swallowed up with his overmuch sorrow.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Wherefore I beseech you to confirm \[your\]
love toward him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For to this end also did I write, that I
might know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But to whom ye forgive anything, I
\[forgive\] also: for what I also have forgiven, if I have forgiven
anything, for your sakes \[have I forgiven it\] in the presence of
Christ;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> that no advantage may be gained over us
by Satan: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now when I came to Troas for the gospel
of Christ, and when a door was opened unto me in the Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I had no relief for my spirit, because I
found not Titus my brother: but taking my leave of them, I went forth
into Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But thanks be unto God, who always
leadeth us in triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest through us the
savor of his knowledge in every place.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are a sweet savor of Christ unto
God, in them that are saved, and in them that perish;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> to the one a savor from death unto death;
to the other a savor from life unto life. And who is sufficient for
these things?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For we are not as the many, corrupting
the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God, speak we in Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Are we beginning again to commend
ourselves? or need we, as do some, epistles of commendation to you or
from you?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Ye are our epistle, written in our hearts,
known and read of all men;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> being made manifest that ye are an epistle
of Christ, ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in tables \[that are\]
hearts of flesh.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And such confidence have we through Christ
to God-ward:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to
account anything as from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> who also made us sufficient as ministers of
a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter
killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But if the ministration of death, written,
\[and\] engraven on stones, came with glory, so that the children of
Israel could not look stedfastly upon the face of Moses for the glory of
his face; which \[glory\] was passing away:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> how shall not rather the ministration of
the spirit be with glory?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the ministration of condemnation
hath glory, much rather doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in
glory.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For verily that which hath been made
glorious hath not been made glorious in this respect, by reason of the
glory that surpasseth.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if that which passeth away \[was\]
with glory, much more that which remaineth \[is\] in glory.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Having therefore such a hope, we use
great boldness of speech,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and \[are\] not as Moses, \[who\] put a
veil upon his face, that the children of Israel should not look
stedfastly on the end of that which was passing away:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> but their minds were hardened: for until
this very day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil
remaineth, it not being revealed \[to them\] that it is done away in
Christ.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But unto this day, whensoever Moses is
read, a veil lieth upon their heart.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But whensoever it shall turn to the Lord,
the veil is taken away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, \[there\] is liberty.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But we all, with unveiled face beholding
as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore seeing we have this ministry,
even as we obtained mercy, we faint not:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but we have renounced the hidden things of
shame, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully; but by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves
to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And even if our gospel is veiled, it is
veiled in them that perish:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> in whom the god of this world hath blinded
the minds of the unbelieving, that the light of the gospel of the glory
of Christ, who is the image of God, should not dawn \[upon them\].

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For we preach not ourselves, but Christ
Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Seeing it is God, that said, Light shall
shine out of darkness, who shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and
not from ourselves;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> \[we are\] pressed on every side, yet not
straitened; perplexed, yet not unto despair;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> pursued, yet not forsaken; smitten down,
yet not destroyed;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> always bearing about in the body the
dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our
body.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For we who live are always delivered unto
death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in
our mortal flesh.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So then death worketh in us, but life in
you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But having the same spirit of faith,
according to that which is written, I believed, and therefore did I
speak; we also believe, and therefore also we speak;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> knowing that he that raised up the Lord
Jesus shall raise up us also with Jesus, and shall present us with you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For all things \[are\] for your sakes,
that the grace, being multiplied through the many, may cause the
thanksgiving to abound unto the glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Wherefore we faint not; but though our
outward man is decaying, yet our inward man is renewed day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For our light affliction, which is for
the moment, worketh for us more and more exceedingly an eternal weight
of glory;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> while we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we know that if the earthly house of
our tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not
made with hands, eternal, in the heavens.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For verily in this we groan, longing to be
clothed upon with our habitation which is from heaven:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> if so be that being clothed we shall not be
found naked.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For indeed we that are in this tabernacle
do groan, being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but that
we would be clothed upon, that what is mortal may be swallowed up of
life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now he that wrought us for this very thing
is God, who gave unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Being therefore always of good courage, and
knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> (for we walk by faith, not by sight);

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> we are of good courage, I say, and are
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Wherefore also we make it our aim, whether
at home or absent, to be well-pleasing unto him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we must all be made manifest before
the judgment-seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things
\[done\] in the body, according to what he hath done, whether \[it be\]
good or bad.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord,
we persuade men, but we are made manifest unto God; and I hope that we
are made manifest also in your consciences.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> We are not again commending ourselves
unto you, but \[speak\] as giving you occasion of glorying on our
behalf, that ye may have wherewith to answer them that glory in
appearance, and not in heart.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For whether we are beside ourselves, it
is unto God; or whether we are of sober mind, it is unto you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the love of Christ constraineth us;
because we thus judge, that one died for all, therefore all died;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and he died for all, that they that live
should no longer live unto themselves, but unto him who for their sakes
died and rose again.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Wherefore we henceforth know no man after
the flesh: even though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we
know \[him so\] no more.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Wherefore if any man is in Christ, \[he
is\] a new creature: the old things are passed away; behold, they are
become new.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But all things are of God, who reconciled
us to himself through Christ, and gave unto us the ministry of
reconciliation;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not reckoning unto them their
trespasses, and having committed unto us the word of reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> We are ambassadors therefore on behalf of
Christ, as though God were entreating by us: we beseech \[you\] on
behalf of Christ, be ye reconciled to God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Him who knew no sin he made \[to be\] sin
on our behalf; that we might become the righteousness of God in him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And working together \[with him\] we
entreat also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> (for he saith, At an acceptable time I
hearkened unto thee, And in a day of salvation did I succor thee:
behold, now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of
salvation):

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> giving no occasion of stumbling in
anything, that our ministration be not blamed;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but in everything commending ourselves, as
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults,
in labors, in watchings, in fastings;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> in pureness, in knowledge, in long
suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> in the word of truth, in the power of God;
by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> by glory and dishonor, by evil report and
good report; as deceivers, and \[yet\] true;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> as unknown, and \[yet\] well known; as
dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and \[yet\] possessing
all things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Our mouth is open unto you, O
Corinthians, our heart is enlarged.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are
straitened in your own affections.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Now for a recompense in like kind (I
speak as unto \[my\] children), be ye also enlarged.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers:
for what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity? or what communion
hath light with darkness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And what concord hath Christ with Belial?
or what portion hath a believer with an unbeliever?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And what agreement hath a temple of God
with idols? for we are a temple of the living God; even as God said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Wherefore Come ye out from among them,
and be ye separate, saith the Lord, And touch no unclean thing; And I
will receive you,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And will be to you a Father, And ye shall
be to me sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having therefore these promises, beloved,
let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Open your hearts to us: we wronged no man,
we corrupted no man, we took advantage of no man.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I say it not to condemn \[you\]: for I have
said before, that ye are in our hearts to die together and live
together.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Great is my boldness of speech toward you,
great is my glorying on your behalf: I am filled with comfort, I
overflow with joy in all our affliction.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even when we were come into Macedonia
our flesh had no relief, but \[we were\] afflicted on every side;
without \[were\] fightings, within \[were\] fears.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Nevertheless he that comforteth the lowly,
\[even\] God, comforted us by the coming of Titus;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and not by his coming only, but also by the
comfort wherewith he was comforted in you, while he told us your
longing, your mourning, your zeal for me; so that I rejoiced yet more.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For though I made you sorry with my
epistle, I do not regret it: though I did regret \[it\] (for I see that
that epistle made you sorry, though but for a season),

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I now rejoice, not that ye were made sorry,
but that ye were made sorry unto repentance; for ye were made sorry
after a godly sort, that ye might suffer loss by us in nothing.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto
salvation, \[a repentance\] which bringeth no regret: but the sorrow of
the world worketh death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For behold, this selfsame thing, that ye
were made sorry after a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you,
yea what clearing of yourselves, yea what indignation, yea what fear,
yea what longing, yea what zeal, yea what avenging! In everything ye
approved yourselves to be pure in the matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So although I wrote unto you, I \[wrote\]
not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered
the wrong, but that your earnest care for us might be made manifest unto
you in the sight of God.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Therefore we have been comforted: And in
our comfort we joyed the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus, because
his spirit hath been refreshed by you all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For if in anything I have gloried to him
on your behalf, I was not put to shame; but as we spake all things to
you in truth, so our glorying also which I made before Titus was found
to be truth.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And his affection is more abundantly
toward you, while he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear
and trembling ye received him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice that in everything I am of good
courage concerning you.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Moreover, brethren, we make known to you
the grace of God which hath been given in the churches of Macedonia;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> how that in much proof of affliction the
abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches
of their liberality.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For according to their power, I bear
witness, yea and beyond their power, \[they gave\] of their own accord,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> beseeching us with much entreaty in regard
of this grace and the fellowship in the ministering to the saints:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and \[this\], not as we had hoped, but
first they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us through the will
of God.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Insomuch that we exhorted Titus, that as he
made a beginning before, so he would also complete in you this grace
also.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But as ye abound in everything, \[in\]
faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and \[in\] all earnestness, and
\[in\] your love to us, \[see\] that ye abound in this grace also.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I speak not by way of commandment, but as
proving through the earnestness of others the sincerity also of your
love.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might become rich.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And herein I give \[my\] judgment: for
this is expedient for you, who were the first to make a beginning a year
ago, not only to do, but also to will.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But now complete the doing also; that as
\[there was\] the readiness to will, so \[there may be\] the completion
also out of your ability.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For if the readiness is there, \[it is\]
acceptable according as \[a man\] hath, not according as \[he\] hath
not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For \[I say\] not \[this\] that others
may be eased \[and\] ye distressed;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> but by equality: your abundance \[being a
supply\] at this present time for their want, that their abundance also
may become \[a supply\] for your want; that there may be equality:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> as it is written, He that \[gathered\]
much had nothing over; and he that \[gathered\] little had no lack.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But thanks be to God, who putteth the
same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For he accepted indeed our exhortation;
but being himself very earnest, he went forth unto you of his own
accord.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And we have sent together with him the
brother whose praise in the gospel \[is spread\] through all the
churches;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and not only so, but who was also
appointed by the churches to travel with us in \[the matter of\] this
grace, which is ministered by us to the glory of the Lord, and \[to
show\] our readiness:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Avoiding this, that any man should blame
us in \[the matter of\] this bounty which is ministered by us:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> for we take thought for things honorable,
not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and we have sent with them our brother,
whom we have many times proved earnest in many things, but now much more
earnest, by reason of the great confidence which \[he hath\] in you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Whether \[any inquire\] about Titus, \[he
is\] my partner and \[my\] fellow-worker to you-ward, or our brethren,
\[they are\] the messengers of the churches, \[they are\] the glory of
Christ.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Show ye therefore unto them in the face
of the churches the proof of your love, and of our glorying on your
behalf.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For as touching the ministering to the
saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> for I know your readiness, of which I glory
on your behalf to them of Macedonia, that Achaia hath been prepared for
a year past; and your zeal hath stirred up very many of them.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> But I have sent the brethren, that our
glorying on your behalf may not be made void in this respect; that, even
as I said, ye may be prepared:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> lest by any means, if there come with me
any of Macedonia and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye)
should be put to shame in this confidence.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> I thought it necessary therefore to entreat
the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand
your aforepromised bounty, that the same might be ready as a matter of
bounty, and not of extortion.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But this \[I say,\] He that soweth
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully
shall reap also bountifully.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> \[Let\] each man \[do\] according as he
hath purposed in his heart: not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God
loveth a cheerful giver.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God is able to make all grace abound
unto you; that ye, having always all sufficiency in everything, may
abound unto every good work:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> as it is written, He hath scattered abroad,
he hath given to the poor; His righteousness abideth for ever.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And he that supplieth seed to the sower
and bread for food, shall supply and multiply your seed for sowing, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness:

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> ye being enriched in everything unto all
liberality, which worketh through us thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For the ministration of this service not
only filleth up the measure of the wants of the saints, but aboundeth
also through many thanksgivings unto God;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> seeing that through the proving \[of
you\] by this ministration they glorify God for the obedience of your
confession unto the gospel of Christ, and for the liberality of \[your\]
contribution unto them and unto all;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> while they themselves also, with
supplication on your behalf, long after you by reason of the exceeding
grace of God in you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thanks be to God for his unspeakable
gift.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now I Paul myself entreat you by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, I who in your presence am lowly among
you, but being absent am of good courage toward you:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> yea, I beseech you, that I may not when
present show courage with the confidence wherewith I count to be bold
against some, who count of us as if we walked according to the flesh.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For though we walk in the flesh, we do
not war according to the flesh

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> (for the weapons of our warfare are not
of the flesh, but mighty before God to the casting down of strongholds),

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every
thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and being in readiness to avenge all
disobedience, when your obedience shall be made full.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Ye look at the things that are before
your face. If any man trusteth in himself that he is Christ's, let him
consider this again with himself, that, even as he is Christ's, so also
are we.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For though I should glory somewhat
abundantly concerning our authority (which the Lord gave for building
you up, and not for casting you down), I shall not be put to shame:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> that I may not seem as if I would terrify
you by my letters.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For, His letters, they say, are weighty
and strong; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no
account.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let such a one reckon this, that, what
we are in word by letters when we are absent, such \[are we\] also in
deed when we are present.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we are not bold to number or
compare ourselves with certain of them that commend themselves: but they
themselves, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves
with themselves, are without understanding.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But we will not glory beyond \[our\]
measure, but according to the measure of the province which God
apportioned to us as a measure, to reach even unto you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For we stretch not ourselves overmuch,
as though we reached not unto you: for we came even as far as unto you
in the gospel of Christ:

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> not glorying beyond \[our\] measure,
\[that is,\] in other men's labors; but having hope that, as your faith
groweth, we shall be magnified in you according to our province unto
\[further\] abundance,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> so as to preach the gospel even unto
the parts beyond you, \[and\] not to glory in another's province in
regard of things ready to our hand.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But he that glorieth, let him glory in
the Lord.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For not he that commendeth himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Would that ye could bear with me in a
little foolishness: but indeed ye do bear with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy: for I espoused you to one husband, that I might present you
\[as\] a pure virgin to Christ.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I fear, lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve in his craftiness, your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity and the purity that is toward Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For if he that cometh preacheth another
Jesus, whom we did not preach, or \[if\] ye receive a different spirit,
which ye did not receive, or a different gospel, which ye did not
accept, ye do well to bear with \[him\].

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For I reckon that I am not a whit behind
the very chiefest apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But though \[I be\] rude in speech, yet
\[am I\] not in knowledge; nay, in every way have we made \[this\]
manifest unto you in all things.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Or did I commit a sin in abasing myself
that ye might be exalted, because I preached to you the gospel of God
for nought?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I robbed other churches, taking wages
\[of them\] that I might minister unto you;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and when I was present with you and was
in want, I was not a burden on any man; for the brethren, when they came
from Macedonia, supplied the measure of my want; and in everything I
kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and \[so\] will I keep
\[myself\].

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> As the truth of Christ is in me, no man
shall stop me of this glorying in the regions of Achaia.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Wherefore? because I love you not? God
knoweth.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But what I do, that I will do, that I
may cut off occasion from them that desire an occasion; that wherein
they glory, they may be found even as we.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For such men are false apostles,
deceitful workers, fashioning themselves into apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And no marvel; for even Satan
fashioneth himself into an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> It is no great thing therefore if his
ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of righteousness, whose
end shall be according to their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> I say again, let no man think me
foolish; but if \[ye do\], yet as foolish receive me, that I also may
glory a little.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> That which I speak, I speak not after
the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this confidence of glorying.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Seeing that many glory after the flesh,
I will glory also.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For ye bear with the foolish gladly,
being wise \[yourselves\].

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For ye bear with a man, if he bringeth
you into bondage, if he devoureth you, if he taketh you \[captive\], if
he exalteth himself, if he smiteth you on the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I speak by way of disparagement, as
though we had been weak. Yet whereinsoever any is bold (I speak in
foolishness), I am bold also.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they
Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak
as one beside himself) I more; in labors more abundantly, in prisons
more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths oft.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Of the Jews five times received I forty
\[stripes\] save one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was
I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been in
the deep;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> \[in\] journeyings often, \[in\] perils
of rivers, \[in\] perils of robbers, \[in\] perils from \[my\]
countrymen, \[in\] perils from the Gentiles, \[in\] perils in the city,
\[in\] perils in the wilderness, \[in\] perils in the sea, \[in\] perils
among false brethren;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> \[in\] labor and travail, in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Besides those things that are without,
there is that which presseth upon me daily, anxiety for all the
churches.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is
caused to stumble, and I burn not?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If I must needs glory, I will glory of
the things that concern my weakness.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of the Lord Jesus,
he who is blessed for evermore knoweth that I lie not.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus the governor under Aretas
the king guarded the city of the Damascenes in order to take me:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> and through a window was I let down in
a basket by the wall, and escaped his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I must needs glory, though it is not
expedient; but I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I know a man in Christ, fourteen years
ago (whether in the body, I know not; or whether out of the body, I know
not; God knoweth), such a one caught up even to the third heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I know such a man (whether in the
body, or apart from the body, I know not; God knoweth),

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> how that he was caught up into Paradise,
and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> On behalf of such a one will I glory: but
on mine own behalf I will not glory, save in \[my\] weaknesses.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For if I should desire to glory, I shall
not be foolish; for I shall speak the truth: but I forbear, lest any man
should account of me above that which he seeth me \[to be\], or heareth
from me.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And by reason of the exceeding greatness
of the revelations, that I should not be exalted overmuch, there was
given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me,
that I should not be exalted overmuch.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Concerning this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he hath said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee: for \[my\] power is made perfect in weakness. Most
gladly therefore will I rather glory in my weaknesses, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Wherefore I take pleasure in
weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses,
for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I am become foolish: ye compelled me;
for I ought to have been commended of you: for in nothing was I behind
the very chiefest apostles, though I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Truly the signs of an apostle were
wrought among you in all patience, by signs and wonders and mighty
works.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For what is there wherein ye were made
inferior to the rest of the churches, except \[it be\] that I myself was
not a burden to you? forgive me this wrong.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold, this is the third time I am
ready to come to you; and I will not be a burden to you: for I seek not
yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up for the parents,
but the parents for the children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And I will most gladly spend and be
spent for your souls. If I love you more abundantly, am I loved the
less?

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But be it so, I did not myself burden
you; but, being crafty, I caught you with guile.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Did I take advantage of you by any one
of them whom I have sent unto you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I exhorted Titus, and I sent the
brother with him. Did Titus take any advantage of you? walked we not in
the same spirit? \[walked we\] not in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Ye think all this time that we are
excusing ourselves unto you. In the sight of God speak we in Christ. But
all things, beloved, \[are\] for your edifying.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I fear, lest by any means, when I
come, I should find you not such as I would, and should myself be found
of you such as ye would not; lest by any means \[there should be\]
strife, jealousy, wraths, factions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings,
tumults;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> lest again when I come my God should
humble me before you, and I should mourn for many of them that have
sinned heretofore, and repented not of the uncleanness and fornication
and lasciviousness which they committed.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This is the third time I am coming to
you. At the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every word
established.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I have said beforehand, and I do say
beforehand, as when I was present the second time, so now, being absent,
to them that have sinned heretofore, and to all the rest, that, if I
come again, I will not spare;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> seeing that ye seek a proof of Christ
that speaketh in me; who to you-ward is not weak, but is powerful in
you:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for he was crucified through weakness,
yet he liveth through the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but
we shall live with him through the power of God toward you.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Try your own selves, whether ye are in
the faith; prove your own selves. Or know ye not as to your own selves,
that Jesus Christ is in you? unless indeed ye be reprobate.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But I hope that ye shall know that we are
not reprobate.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Now we pray to God that ye do no evil;
not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do that which is
honorable, though we be as reprobate.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For we can do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we rejoice, when we are weak, and ye
are strong: this we also pray for, even your perfecting.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For this cause I write these things
while absent, that I may not when present deal sharply, according to the
authority which the Lord gave me for building up, and not for casting
down.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Finally, brethren, farewell. Be
perfected; be comforted; be of the same mind; live in peace: and the God
of love and peace shall be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> All the saints salute you.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal)
