[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co2)  [Next](eph) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Galatians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle (not from men, neither
through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised
him from the dead),

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and all the brethren that are with me, unto
the churches of Galatia:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you and peace from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us out of this present evil world, according to the will
of our God and Father:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> to whom \[be\] the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> I marvel that ye are so quickly removing
from him that called you in the grace of Christ unto a different gospel;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> which is not another \[gospel\] only there
are some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But though we, or an angel from heaven,
should preach unto you any gospel other than that which we preached unto
you, let him be anathema.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> As we have said before, so say I now again,
if any man preacheth unto you any gospel other than that which ye
received, let him be anathema.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For am I now seeking the favor of men, or
of God? or am I striving to please men? if I were still pleasing men, I
should not be a servant of Christ.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I make known to you, brethren, as
touching the gospel which was preached by me, that it is not after man.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For neither did I receive it from man,
nor was I taught it, but \[it came to me\] through revelation of Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For ye have heard of my manner of life in
time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted
the church of God, and made havoc of it:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and I advanced in the Jews' religion
beyond many of mine own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly
zealous for the traditions of my fathers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But when it was the good pleasure of God,
who separated me, \[even\] from my mother's womb, and called me through
his grace,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> to reveal his Son in me, that I might
preach him among the Gentiles; straightway I conferred not with flesh
and blood:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> neither went I up to Jerusalem to them
that were apostles before me: but I went away into Arabia; and again I
returned unto Damascus.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then after three years I went up to
Jerusalem to visit Cephas, and tarried with him fifteen days.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> But other of the apostles saw I none,
save James the Lord's brother.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Now touching the things which I write
unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then I came unto the regions of Syria and
Cilicia.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And I was still unknown by face unto the
churches of Judaea which were in Christ:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> but they only heard say, He that once
persecuted us now preacheth the faith of which he once made havoc;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> and they glorified God in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then after the space of fourteen years I
went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And I went up by revelation; and I laid
before them the gospel which I preach among the Gentiles but privately
before them who were of repute, lest by any means I should be running,
or had run, in vain.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> But not even Titus who was with me, being a
Greek, was compelled to be circumcised:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and that because of the false brethren
privily brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we
have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to whom we gave place in the way of
subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might
continue with you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But from those who were reputed to be
somewhat (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me: God accepteth
not man's person)-- they, I say, who were of repute imparted nothing to
me:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but contrariwise, when they saw that I had
been intrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision, even as Peter with
\[the gospel\] of the circumcision

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (for he that wrought for Peter unto the
apostleship of the circumcision wrought for me also unto the Gentiles);

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and when they perceived the grace that was
given unto me, James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to be
pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we
should go unto the Gentiles, and they unto the circumcision;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> only \[they would\] that we should
remember the poor; which very thing I was also zealous to do.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But when Cephas came to Antioch, I
resisted him to the face, because he stood condemned.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For before that certain came from James,
he ate with the Gentiles; but when they came, he drew back and separated
himself, fearing them that were of the circumcision.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the rest of the Jews dissembled
likewise with him; insomuch that even Barnabas was carried away with
their dissimulation.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But when I saw that they walked not
uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Cephas
before \[them\] all, If thou, being a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles,
and not as do the Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do
the Jews?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> We being Jews by nature, and not sinners
of the Gentiles,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> yet knowing that a man is not justified
by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we
believed on Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ,
and not by the works of the law: because by the works of the law shall
no flesh be justified.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if, while we sought to be justified
in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a minister of
sin? God forbid.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For if I build up again those things
which I destroyed, I prove myself a transgressor.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For I through the law died unto the law,
that I might live unto God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I have been crucified with Christ; and it
is no longer I that live, but Christ living in me: and that \[life\]
which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, \[the faith\] which is in
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I do not make void the grace of God: for
if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nought.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> O foolish Galatians, who did bewitch you,
before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set forth crucified?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> This only would I learn from you. Received
ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Are ye so foolish? having begun in the
Spirit, are ye now perfected in the flesh?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Did ye suffer so many things in vain? if it
be indeed in vain.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He therefore that supplieth to you the
Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, \[doeth he it\] by the works of
the law, or by the hearing of faith?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Even as Abraham believed God, and it was
reckoned unto him for righteousness.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Know therefore that they that are of faith,
the same are sons of Abraham.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And the scripture, foreseeing that God
would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand unto
Abraham, \[saying,\] In thee shall all the nations be blessed.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So then they that are of faith are blessed
with the faithful Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For as many as are of the works of the
law are under a curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one who
continueth not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to
do them.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now that no man is justified by the law
before God, is evident: for, The righteous shall live by faith;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> and the law is not of faith; but, He that
doeth them shall live in them.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Christ redeemed us from the curse of the
law, having become a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangeth on a tree:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> that upon the Gentiles might come the
blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise
of the Spirit through faith.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Brethren, I speak after the manner of
men: Though it be but a man's covenant, yet when it hath been confirmed,
no one maketh it void, or addeth thereto.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now to Abraham were the promises spoken,
and to his seed. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one,
And to thy seed, which is Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now this I say: A covenant confirmed
beforehand by God, the law, which came four hundred and thirty years
after, doth not disannul, so as to make the promise of none effect.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For if the inheritance is of the law, it
is no more of promise: but God hath granted it to Abraham by promise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> What then is the law? It was added
because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise
hath been made; \[and it was\] ordained through angels by the hand of a
mediator.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now a mediator is not \[a mediator\] of
one; but God is one.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Is the law then against the promises of
God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given which could make
alive, verily righteousness would have been of the law.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But the scriptures shut up all things
under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to
them that believe.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> But before faith came, we were kept in
ward under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be
revealed.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So that the law is become our tutor \[to
bring us\] unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But now faith that is come, we are no
longer under a tutor.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For ye are all sons of God, through
faith, in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> For as many of you as were baptized into
Christ did put on Christ.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> There can be neither Jew nor Greek, there
can be neither bond nor free, there can be no male and female; for ye
all are one \[man\] in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And if ye are Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, heirs according to promise.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But I say that so long as the heir is a
child, he differeth nothing from a bondservant though he is lord of all;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but is under guardians and stewards until
the day appointed of the father.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> So we also, when we were children, were
held in bondage under the rudiments of the world:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> but when the fulness of the time came, God
sent forth his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> that he might redeem them that were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And because ye are sons, God sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> So that thou art no longer a bondservant,
but a son; and if a son, then an heir through God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Howbeit at that time, not knowing God, ye
were in bondage to them that by nature are no gods:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> but now that ye have come to know God, or
rather to be known by God, how turn ye back again to the weak and
beggarly rudiments, whereunto ye desire to be in bondage over again?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Ye observe days, and months, and seasons,
and years.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I am afraid of you, lest by any means I
have bestowed labor upon you in vain.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I beseech you, brethren, become as I
\[am\], for I also \[am become\] as ye \[are\]. Ye did me no wrong:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> but ye know that because of an infirmity
of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you the first time:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> and that which was a temptation to you in
my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but ye received me as an angel
of God, \[even\] as Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Where then is that gratulation of
yourselves? for I bear you witness, that, if possible, ye would have
plucked out your eyes and given them to me.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> So then am I become your enemy, by
telling you the truth?

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They zealously seek you in no good way;
nay, they desire to shut you out, that ye may seek them.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But it is good to be zealously sought in
a good matter at all times, and not only when I am present with you.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My little children, of whom I am again in
travail until Christ be formed in you--

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> but I could wish to be present with you
now, and to change my tone; for I am perplexed about you.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Tell me, ye that desire to be under the
law, do ye not hear the law?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For it is written, that Abraham had two
sons, one by the handmaid, and one by the freewoman.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Howbeit the \[son\] by the handmaid is
born after the flesh; but the \[son\] by the freewoman \[is born\]
through promise.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Which things contain an allegory: for
these \[women\] are two covenants; one from mount Sinai, bearing
children unto bondage, which is Hagar.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Now this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia
and answereth to the Jerusalem that now is: for she is in bondage with
her children.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> But the Jerusalem that is above is free,
which is our mother.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren
that bearest not; Break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: For
more are the children of the desolate than of her that hath the husband.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are
children of promise.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But as then he that was born after the
flesh persecuted him \[that was born\] after the Spirit, so also it is
now.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> Howbeit what saith the scripture? Cast
out the handmaid and her son: for the son of the handmaid shall not
inherit with the son of the freewoman.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Wherefore, brethren, we are not children
of a handmaid, but of the freewoman.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For freedom did Christ set us free: stand
fast therefore, and be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Behold, I Paul say unto you, that, if ye
receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Yea, I testify again to every man that
receiveth circumcision, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Ye are severed from Christ, ye would be
justified by the law; ye are fallen away from grace.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For we through the Spirit by faith wait for
the hope of righteousness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but faith working through love.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye were running well; who hindered you that
ye should not obey the truth?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> This persuasion \[came\] not of him that
calleth you.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> I have confidence to you-ward in the
Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you
shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But I, brethren, if I still preach
circumcision, why am I still persecuted? then hath the stumbling-block
of the cross been done away.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I would that they that unsettle you would
even go beyond circumcision.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For ye, brethren, were called for
freedom; only \[use\] not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but
through love be servants one to another.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the whole law is fulfilled in one
word, \[even\] in this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But if ye bite and devour one another,
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But I say, walk by the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary the one to the
other; that ye may not do the things that ye would.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are
not under the law.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are \[these\]: fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strife,
jealousies, wraths, factions, divisions, parties,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like; of which I forewarn you, even as I did forewarn you, that
they who practise such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> meekness, self-control; against such
there is no law.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And they that are of Christ Jesus have
crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts thereof.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit
let us also walk.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Let us not become vainglorious, provoking
one another, envying one another.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any
trespass, ye who are spiritual, restore such a one in a spirit of
gentleness; looking to thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Bear ye one another's burdens, and so
fulfil the law of Christ.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For if a man thinketh himself to be
something when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But let each man prove his own work, and
then shall he have his glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of
his neighbor.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For each man shall bear his own burden.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But let him that is taught in the word
communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For he that soweth unto his own flesh shall
of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth unto the Spirit shall
of the Spirit reap eternal life.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And let us not be weary in well-doing: for
in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So then, as we have opportunity, let us
work that which is good toward all men, and especially toward them that
are of the household of the faith.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> See with how large letters I write unto
you with mine own hand.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> As many as desire to make a fair show in
the flesh, they compel you to be circumcised; only that they may not be
persecuted for the cross of Christ.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For not even they who receive
circumcision do themselves keep the law; but they desire to have you
circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> But far be it from me to glory, save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world hath been
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For neither is circumcision anything, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And as many as shall walk by this rule,
peace \[be\] upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Henceforth, let no man trouble me; for I
bear branded on my body the marks of Jesus.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with your spirit, brethren. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians](eph)
