[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](oba)  [Next](mic) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Jonah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now the word of Jehovah came unto Jonah the
son of Amittai, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and
cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish
from the presence of Jehovah; and he went down to Joppa, and found a
ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into
it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> But Jehovah sent out a great wind upon the
sea, and there was a mighty tempest on the sea, so that the ship was
like to be broken.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then the mariners were afraid, and cried
every man unto his god; and they cast forth the wares that were in the
ship into the sea, to lighten it unto them. But Jonah was gone down into
the innermost parts of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> So the shipmaster came to him, and said
unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so
be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And they said every one to his fellow,
Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil
is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray
thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; what is thine occupation?
and whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art
thou?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said unto them, I am a Hebrew; and I
fear Jehovah, the God of heaven, who hath made the sea and the dry land.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and
said unto him, What is this that thou hast done? For the men knew that
he was fleeing from the presence of Jehovah, because he had told them.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then said they unto him, What shall we do
unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea grew more and
more tempestuous.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And he said unto them, Take me up, and
cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I
know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Nevertheless the men rowed hard to get
them back to the land; but they could not: for the sea grew more and
more tempestuous against them.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Wherefore they cried unto Jehovah, and
said, We beseech thee, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, let us not perish for
this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood; for thou, O
Jehovah, hast done as it pleased thee.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth
into the sea; and the sea ceased from its raging.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Then the men feared Jehovah exceedingly;
and they offered a sacrifice unto Jehovah, and made vows.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Jehovah prepared a great fish to
swallow up Jonah; and Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and
three nights.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then Jonah prayed unto Jehovah his God out
of the fish's belly.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he said, I called by reason of mine
affliction unto Jehovah, And he answered me; Out of the belly of Sheol
cried I, \[And\] thou heardest my voice.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For thou didst cast me into the depth, in
the heart of the seas, And the flood was round about me; All thy waves
and thy billows passed over me.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And I said, I am cast out from before thine
eyes; Yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The waters compassed me about, even to the
soul; The deep was round about me; The weeds were wrapped about my head.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I went down to the bottoms of the
mountains; The earth with its bars \[closed\] upon me for ever: Yet hast
thou brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah my God.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> When my soul fainted within me, I
remembered Jehovah; And my prayer came in unto thee, into thy holy
temple.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> They that regard lying vanities Forsake
their own mercy.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But I will sacrifice unto thee with the
voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And Jehovah spake unto the fish, and it
vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came unto Jonah the
second time, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city,
and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh,
according to the word of Jehovah. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great
city, of three days' journey.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Jonah began to enter into the city a
day's journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the people of Nineveh believed God; and
they proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them
even to the least of them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the tidings reached the king of
Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and laid his robe from him, and
covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he made proclamation and published
through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let
neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; let them not
feed, nor drink water;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> but let them be covered with sackcloth,
both man and beast, and let them cry mightily unto God: yea, let them
turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in his
hands.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Who knoweth whether God will not turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And God saw their works, that they turned
from their evil way; and God repented of the evil which he said he would
do unto them; and he did it not.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he
was angry.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he prayed unto Jehovah, and said, I
pray thee, O Jehovah, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my
country? Therefore I hasted to flee unto Tarshish; for I knew that thou
art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in
lovingkindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore now, O Jehovah, take, I beseech
thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Jehovah said, Doest thou well to be
angry?

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then Jonah went out of the city, and sat on
the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it
in the shade, till he might see what would become of the city.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Jehovah God prepared a gourd, and made
it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his head, to
deliver him from his evil case. So Jonah was exceeding glad because of
the gourd.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But God prepared a worm when the morning
rose the next day, and it smote the gourd, that it withered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And it came to pass, when the sun arose,
that God prepared a sultry east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of
Jonah, that he fainted, and requested for himself that he might die, and
said, It is better for me to die than to live.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to
be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even unto
death.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Jehovah said, Thou hast had regard
for the gourd, for which thou hast not labored, neither madest it grow;
which came up in a night, and perished in a night:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and should not I have regard for Nineveh,
that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also
much cattle?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah](mic)
