[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mat)  [Next](luk) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Mark

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The beginning of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Even as it is written in Isaiah the
prophet, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, Who shall prepare
thy way.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Make ye ready the way of the Lord, Make his paths straight;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John came, who baptized in the wilderness
and preached the baptism of repentance unto remission of sins.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And there went out unto him all the country
of Judaea, and all they of Jerusalem; And they were baptized of him in
the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And John was clothed with camel's hair, and
\[had\] a leathern girdle about his loins, and did eat locusts and wild
honey.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he preached, saying, There cometh after
me he that is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not
worthy to stoop down and unloose.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I baptized you in water; But he shall
baptize you in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it came to pass in those days, that
Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in the
Jordan.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And straightway coming up out of the
water, he saw the heavens rent asunder, and the Spirit as a dove
descending upon him:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And a voice came out of the heavens, Thou
art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And straightway the Spirit driveth him
forth into the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And he was in the wilderness forty days
tempted of Satan; And he was with the wild beasts; And the angels
ministered unto him.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Now after John was delivered up, Jesus
came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and saying, The time is fulfilled, and
the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe in the gospel.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And passing along by the sea of Galilee,
he saw Simon and Andrew the brother of Simon casting a net in the sea;
for they were fishers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after
me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And straightway they left the nets, and
followed him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And going on a little further, he saw
James the \[son\] of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the
boat mending the nets.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And straightway he called them: and they
left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and went
after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they go into Capernaum; and
straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And they were astonished at his teaching:
For he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And straightway there was in their
synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus thou Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou
art, the Holy One of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy
peace, and come out of him.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And the unclean spirit, tearing him and
crying with a loud voice, came out of him.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And they were all amazed, insomuch that
they questioned among themselves, saying, What is this? a new teaching!
with authority he commandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey
him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And the report of him went out
straightway everywhere into all the region of Galilee round about.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And straightway, when they were come out
of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with
James and John.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Now Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a
fever; and straightway they tell him of her:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and he came and took her by the hand, and
raised her up; and the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And at even, when the sun did set, they
brought unto him all that were sick, and them that were possessed with
demons.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And all the city was gathered together at
the door.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And he healed many that were sick with
divers diseases, and cast out many demons; and he suffered not the
demons to speak, because they knew him.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And in the morning, a great while before
day, he rose up and went out, and departed into a desert place, and
there prayed.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Simon and they that were with him
followed after him;

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> and they found him, and say unto him, All
are seeking thee.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And he saith unto them, Let us go
elsewhere into the next towns, that I may preach there also; for to this
end came I forth.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And he went into their synagogues
throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And there cometh to him a leper,
beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou
wilt, thou canst make me clean.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And being moved with compassion, he
stretched forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will;
be thou made clean.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And straightway the leprosy departed from
him, and he was made clean.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And he strictly charged him, and
straightway sent him out,

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> and saith unto him, See thou say nothing
to any man: but go show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy
cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> But he went out, and began to publish it
much, and to spread abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more
openly enter into a city, but was without in desert places: and they
came to him from every quarter.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when he entered again into Capernaum
after some days, it was noised that he was in the house.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And many were gathered together, so that
there was no longer room \[for them\], no, not even about the door: and
he spake the word unto them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And they come, bringing unto him a man sick
of the palsy, borne of four.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when they could not come nigh unto him
for the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had
broken it up, they let down the bed whereon the sick of the palsy lay.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And Jesus seeing their faith saith unto the
sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins are forgiven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But there were certain of the scribes
sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Why doth this man thus speak? he
blasphemeth: who can forgive sins but one, \[even\] God?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And straightway Jesus, perceiving in his
spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, saith unto them, Why
reason ye these things in your hearts?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Which is easier, to say to the sick of the
palsy, Thy sins are forgiven; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and
walk?

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man
hath authority on earth to forgive sins (he saith to the sick of the
palsy),

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I say unto thee, Arise, take up thy bed,
and go unto thy house.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And he arose, and straightway took up the
bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all amazed,
and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went forth again by the sea side;
and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And as he passed by, he saw Levi the
\[son\] of Alphaeus sitting at the place of toll, and he saith unto him,
Follow me. And he arose and followed him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass, that he was sitting
at meat in his house, and many publicans and sinners sat down with Jesus
and his disciples: for there were many, and they followed him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the scribes of the Pharisees, when
they saw that he was eating with the sinners and publicans, said unto
his disciples, \[How is it\] that he eateth and drinketh with publicans
and sinners?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And when Jesus heard it, he saith unto
them, They that are whole have no need of a physician, but they that are
sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And John's disciples and the Pharisees
were fasting: and they come and say unto him, Why do John's disciples
and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus said unto them, Can the sons of
the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as
they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then will they fast in
that day.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> No man seweth a piece of undressed cloth
on an old garment: else that which should fill it up taketh from it, the
new from the old, and a worse rent is made.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And no man putteth new wine into old
wineskins; else the wine will burst the skins, and the wine perisheth,
and the skins: but \[they put\] new wine into fresh wine-skins.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass, that he was going on
the sabbath day through the grainfields; and his disciples began, as
they went, to pluck the ears.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold,
why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he said unto them, Did ye never read
what David did, when he had need, and was hungry, he, and they that were
with him?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> How he entered into the house of God when
Abiathar was high priest, and ate the showbread, which it is not lawful
to eat save for the priests, and gave also to them that were with him?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he said unto them, The sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the sabbath:

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> so that the Son of man is lord even of
the sabbath.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he entered again into the synagogue;
and there was a man there who had his hand withered.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And they watched him, whether he would heal
him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he saith unto the man that had his hand
withered, Stand forth.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he saith unto them, Is it lawful on the
sabbath day to do good, or to do harm? to save a life, or to kill? But
they held their peace.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And when he had looked round about on them
with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart, he saith unto
the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth; and his hand
was restored.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the Pharisees went out, and straightway
with the Herodians took counsel against him, how they might destroy him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Jesus with his disciples withdrew to
the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed; and from Judaea,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and
beyond the Jordan, and about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, hearing
what great things he did, came unto him.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he spake to his disciples, that a
little boat should wait on him because of the crowd, lest they should
throng him:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> for he had healed many; insomuch that as
many as had plagues pressed upon him that they might touch him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the unclean spirits, whensoever they
beheld him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of
God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he charged them much that they should
not make him known.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he goeth up into the mountain, and
calleth unto him whom he himself would; and they went unto him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he appointed twelve, that they might
be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and to have authority to cast out demons:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> and Simon he surnamed Peter;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and James the \[son\] of Zebedee, and
John the brother of James; and them he surnamed Boanerges, which is,
Sons of thunder:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,
and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the \[son\] of Alphaeus, and
Thaddaeus, and Simon the Cananaean,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
him. And he cometh into a house.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the multitude cometh together again,
so that they could not so much as eat bread.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when his friends heard it, they went
out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the scribes that came down from
Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and, By the prince of the demons
casteth he out the demons.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And he called them unto him, and said
unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And if a house be divided against itself,
that house will not be able to stand.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And if Satan hath rise up against
himself, and is divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But no one can enter into the house of
the strong \[man\], and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong
\[man\]; and then he will spoil his house.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Verily I say unto you, All their sins
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and their blasphemies wherewith
soever they shall blaspheme:

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> but whosoever shall blaspheme against the
Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> because they said, He hath an unclean
spirit.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And there come his mother and his
brethren; and, standing without, they sent unto him, calling him.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And a multitude was sitting about him;
and they say unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek
for thee.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And he answereth them, and saith, Who is
my mother and my brethren?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And looking round on them that sat round
about him, he saith, Behold, my mother and my brethren!

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> For whosoever shall do the will of God,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And again he began to teach by the sea
side. And there is gathered unto him a very great multitude, so that he
entered into a boat, and sat in the sea; and all the multitude were by
the sea on the land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he taught them many things in parables,
and said unto them in his teaching,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Hearken: Behold, the sower went forth to
sow:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and it came to pass, as he sowed, some
\[seed\] fell by the way side, and the birds came and devoured it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And other fell on the rocky \[ground\],
where it had not much earth; and straightway it sprang up, because it
had no deepness of earth:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and when the sun was risen, it was
scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And other fell among the thorns, and the
thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And others fell into the good ground, and
yielded fruit, growing up and increasing; and brought forth, thirtyfold,
and sixtyfold, and a hundredfold.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said, Who hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And when he was alone, they that were
about him with the twelve asked of him the parables.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he said unto them, Unto you is given
the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all
things are done in parables:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> that seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest haply they
should turn again, and it should be forgiven them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he saith unto them, Know ye not this
parable? and how shall ye know all the parables?

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> The sower soweth the word.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And these are they by the way side, where
the word is sown; and when they have heard, straightway cometh Satan,
and taketh away the word which hath been sown in them.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And these in like manner are they that
are sown upon the rocky \[places\], who, when they have heard the word,
straightway receive it with joy;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> and they have no root in themselves, but
endure for a while; then, when tribulation or persecution ariseth
because of the word, straightway they stumble.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And others are they that are sown among
the thorns; these are they that have heard the word,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in,
choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And those are they that were sown upon
the good ground; such as hear the word, and accept it, and bear fruit,
thirtyfold, and sixtyfold, and a hundredfold.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said unto them, Is the lamp
brought to be put under the bushel, or under the bed, \[and\] not to be
put on the stand?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For there is nothing hid, save that it
should be manifested; neither was \[anything\] made secret, but that it
should come to light.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> If any man hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said unto them, Take heed what ye
hear: with what measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you; and more
shall be given unto you.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For he that hath, to him shall be given:
and he that hath not, from him shall be taken away even that which he
hath.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as
if a man should cast seed upon the earth;

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> and should sleep and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring up and grow, he knoweth not how.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> The earth beareth fruit of herself; first
the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But when the fruit is ripe, straightway
he putteth forth the sickle, because the harvest is come.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And he said, How shall we liken the
kingdom of God? or in what parable shall we set it forth?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> It is like a grain of mustard seed,
which, when it is sown upon the earth, though it be less than all the
seeds that are upon the earth,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> yet when it is sown, groweth up, and
becometh greater than all the herbs, and putteth out great branches; so
that the birds of the heaven can lodge under the shadow thereof.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with many such parables spake he the
word unto them, as they were able to hear it;

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> and without a parable spake he not unto
them: but privately to his own disciples he expounded all things.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And on that day, when even was come, he
saith unto them, Let us go over unto the other side.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And leaving the multitude, they take him
with them, even as he was, in the boat. And other boats were with him.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there ariseth a great storm of wind,
and the waves beat into the boat, insomuch that the boat was now
filling.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And he himself was in the stern, asleep
on the cushion: and they awake him, and say unto him, Teacher, carest
thou not that we perish?

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And he awoke, and rebuked the wind, and
said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a
great calm.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And he said unto them, Why are ye
fearful? have ye not yet faith?

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And they feared exceedingly, and said one
to another, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And they came to the other side of the sea,
into the country of the Gerasenes.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And when he was come out of the boat,
straightway there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> who had his dwelling in the tombs: and no
man could any more bind him, no, not with a chain;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> because that he had been often bound with
fetters and chains, and the chains had been rent asunder by him, and the
fetters broken in pieces: and no man had strength to tame him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And always, night and day, in the tombs and
in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And when he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and
worshipped him;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and crying out with a loud voice, he saith,
What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I
adjure thee by God, torment me not.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For he said unto him, Come forth, thou
unclean spirit, out of the man.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he asked him, What is thy name? And he
saith unto him, My name is Legion; for we are many.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And he besought him much that he would
not send them away out of the country.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Now there was there on the mountain side
a great herd of swine feeding.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And they besought him, saying, Send us
into the swine, that we may enter into them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And he gave them leave. And the unclean
spirits came out, and entered into the swine: and the herd rushed down
the steep into the sea, \[in number\] about two thousand; and they were
drowned in the sea.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And they that fed them fled, and told it
in the city, and in the country. And they came to see what it was that
had come to pass.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And they come to Jesus, and behold him
that was possessed with demons sitting, clothed and in his right mind,
\[even\] him that had the legion: and they were afraid.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And they that saw it declared unto them
how it befell him that was possessed with demons, and concerning the
swine.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they began to beseech him to depart
from their borders.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And as he was entering into the boat, he
that had been possessed with demons besought him that he might be with
him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he suffered him not, but saith unto
him, Go to thy house unto thy friends, and tell them how great things
the Lord hath done for thee, and \[how\] he had mercy on thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And he went his way, and began to publish
in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and all men
marvelled.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when Jesus had crossed over again in
the boat unto the other side, a great multitude was gathered unto him;
and he was by the sea.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And there cometh one of the rulers of the
synagogue, Jairus by name; and seeing him, he falleth at his feet,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and beseecheth him much, saying, My
little daughter is at the point of death: \[I pray thee\], that thou
come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be made whole, and live.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And he went with him; and a great
multitude followed him, and they thronged him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And a woman, who had an issue of blood
twelve years,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> and had suffered many things of many
physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered,
but rather grew worse,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> having heard the things concerning Jesus,
came in the crowd behind, and touched his garment.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> For she said, If I touch but his
garments, I shall be made whole.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And straightway the fountain of her blood
was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of her
plague.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And straightway Jesus, perceiving in
himself that the power \[proceeding\] from him had gone forth, turned
him about in the crowd, and said, Who touched my garments?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And his disciples said unto him, Thou
seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he looked round about to see her that
had done this thing.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But the woman fearing and trembling,
knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and
told him all the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> While he yet spake, they come from the
ruler of the synagogue's \[house\] saying, Thy daughter is dead: why
troublest thou the Teacher any further?

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But Jesus, not heeding the word spoken,
saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not, only believe.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And he suffered no man to follow with
him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And they come to the house of the ruler
of the synagogue; and he beholdeth a tumult, and \[many\] weeping and
wailing greatly.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And when he was entered in, he saith unto
them, Why make ye a tumult, and weep? the child is not dead, but
sleepeth.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And they laughed him to scorn. But he,
having put them all forth, taketh the father of the child and her mother
and them that were with him, and goeth in where the child was.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And taking the child by the hand, he
saith unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say
unto thee, Arise.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And straightway the damsel rose up, and
walked; for she was twelve years old. And they were amazed straightway
with a great amazement.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> And he charged them much that no man
should know this: and he commanded that \[something\] should be given
her to eat.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And he went out from thence; and he cometh
into his own country; and his disciples follow him.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when the sabbath was come, he began to
teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying,
Whence hath this man these things? and, What is the wisdom that is given
unto this man, and \[what mean\] such mighty works wrought by his hands?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with us? And they were offended in him.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not
without honor, save in his own country, and among his own kin, and in
his own house.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And he could there do no mighty work, save
that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And he marvelled because of their unbelief.
And he went round about the villages teaching.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he calleth unto him the twelve, and
began to send them forth by two and two; and he gave them authority over
the unclean spirits;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and he charged them that they should take
nothing for \[their\] journey, save a staff only; no bread, no wallet,
now money in their purse;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> but \[to go\] shod with sandals: and,
\[said he\], put not on two coats.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he said unto them, Wheresoever ye
enter into a house, there abide till ye depart thence.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And whatsoever place shall not receive
you, and they hear you not, as ye go forth thence, shake off the dust
that is under your feet for a testimony unto them.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they went out, and preached that
\[men\] should repent.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they cast out many demons, and
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And king Herod heard \[thereof\]; for his
name had become known: and he said, John the Baptizer is risen from the
dead, and therefore do these powers work in him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But others said, It is Elijah. And others
said, \[It is\] a prophet, \[even\] as one of the prophets.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> But Herod, when he heard \[thereof\],
said, John, whom I beheaded, he is risen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For Herod himself had sent forth and laid
hold upon John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his
brother Philip's wife; for he had married her.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For John said unto Herod, It is not
lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And Herodias set herself against him, and
desired to kill him; and she could not;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for Herod feared John, knowing that he
was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. And when he heard him,
he was much perplexed; and he heard him gladly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And when a convenient day was come, that
Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, and the high captains,
and the chief men of Galilee;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and when the daughter of Herodias herself
came in and danced, she pleased Herod and them that sat at meat with
him; and the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt,
and I will give it thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou
shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And she went out, and said unto her
mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptizer.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And she came in straightway with haste
unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou forthwith give me on
a platter the head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And the king was exceeding sorry; but for
the sake of his oaths, and of them that sat at meat, he would not reject
her.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And straightway the king sent forth a
soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring his head: and he went and
beheaded him in the prison,

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> and brought his head on a platter, and
gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her mother.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And when his disciples heard \[thereof\],
they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the apostles gather themselves
together unto Jesus; and they told him all things, whatsoever they had
done, and whatsoever they had taught.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he saith unto them, Come ye
yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while. For there were
many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And they went away in the boat to a
desert place apart.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And \[the people\] saw them going, and
many knew \[them\], and they ran together there on foot from all the
cities, and outwent them.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And he came forth and saw a great
multitude, and he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep not
having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And when the day was now far spent, his
disciples came unto him, and said, The place is desert, and the day is
now far spent;

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> send them away, that they may go into the
country and villages round about, and buy themselves somewhat to eat.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> But he answered and said unto them, Give
ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred
shillings' worth of bread, and give them to eat?

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And he saith unto them, How many loaves
have ye? go \[and\] see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two
fishes.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he commanded them that all should sit
down by companies upon the green grass.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds,
and by fifties.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And he took the five loaves and the two
fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake the loaves; and
he gave to the disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided
he among them all.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they all ate, and were filled.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And they took up broken pieces, twelve
basketfuls, and also of the fishes.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> And they that ate the loaves were five
thousand men.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And straightway he constrained his
disciples to enter into the boat, and to go before \[him\] unto the
other side to Bethsaida, while he himself sendeth the multitude away.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And after he had taken leave of them, he
departed into the mountain to pray.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> And when even was come, the boat was in
the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> And seeing them distressed in rowing, for
the wind was contrary unto them, about the fourth watch of the night he
cometh unto them, walking on the sea; and he would have passed by them:

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> but they, when they saw him walking on
the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out;

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> for they all saw him, and were troubled.
But he straightway spake with them, and saith unto them, Be of good
cheer: it is I; be not afraid.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he went up unto them into the boat;
and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in themselves;

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> for they understood not concerning the
loaves, but their heart was hardened.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> And when they had crossed over, they came
to the land unto Gennesaret, and moored to the shore.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> And when they were come out of the boat,
straightway \[the people\] knew him,

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> and ran round about that whole region,
and began to carry about on their beds those that were sick, where they
heard he was.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> And wheresoever he entered, into
villages, or into cities, or into the country, they laid the sick in the
marketplaces, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the
border of his garment: and as many as touched him were made whole.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And there are gathered together unto him
the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, who had come from Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and had seen that some of his disciples ate
their bread with defiled, that is, unwashen, hands.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> (For the Pharisees, and all the Jews,
except they wash their hands diligently, eat not, holding the tradition
of the elders;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> and \[when they come\] from the
market-place, except they bathe themselves, they eat not; and many other
things there are, which they have received to hold, washings of cups,
and pots, and brasen vessels.)

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Pharisees and the scribes ask him,
Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but
eat their bread with defiled hands?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And he said unto them, Well did Isaiah
prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoreth me
with their lips, But their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But in vain do they worship me, Teaching
\[as their\] doctrines the precepts of men.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ye leave the commandment of God, and hold
fast the tradition of men.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And he said unto them, Full well do ye
reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy
mother; and, He that speaketh evil of father or mother, let him die the
death:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> but ye say, If a man shall say to his
father or his mother, That wherewith thou mightest have been profited by
me is Corban, that is to say, Given \[to God\];

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> ye no longer suffer him to do aught for
his father or his mother;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> making void the word of God by your
tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things ye do.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And he called to him the multitude again,
and said unto them, Hear me all of you, and understand:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> there is nothing from without the man,
that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out of
the man are those that defile the man.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> \[If any man hath ears to hear, let him
hear.\]

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when he was entered into the house
from the multitude, his disciples asked of him the parable.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he saith unto them, Are ye so without
understanding also? Perceive ye not, that whatsoever from without goeth
into the man, \[it\] cannot defile him;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> because it goeth not into his heart, but
into his belly, and goeth out into the draught? \[This he said\], making
all meats clean.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And he said, That which proceedeth out of
the man, that defileth the man.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For from within, out of the heart of men,
evil thoughts proceed, fornications, thefts, murders, adulteries,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> covetings, wickednesses, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, railing, pride, foolishness:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> all these evil things proceed from
within, and defile the man.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And from thence he arose, and went away
into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. And he entered into a house, and
would have no man know it; and he could not be hid.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> But straightway a woman, whose little
daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down
at his feet.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Now the woman was a Greek, a
Syrophoenician by race. And she besought him that he would cast forth
the demon out of her daughter.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And he said unto her, Let the children
first be filled: for it is not meet to take the children's bread and
cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But she answered and saith unto him, Yea,
Lord; even the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he said unto her, For this saying go
thy way; the demon is gone out of thy daughter.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And she went away unto her house, and
found the child laid upon the bed, and the demon gone out.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And again he went out from the borders of
Tyre, and came through Sidon unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst
of the borders of Decapolis.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And they bring unto him one that was
deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to lay
his hand upon him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And he took him aside from the multitude
privately, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spat, and touched
his tongue;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> and looking up to heaven, he sighed, and
saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And his ears were opened, and the bond of
his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he charged them that they should tell
no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they
published it.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And they were beyond measure astonished,
saying, He hath done all things well; he maketh even the deaf to hear,
and the dumb to speak.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In those days, when there was again a great
multitude, and they had nothing to eat, he called unto him his
disciples, and saith unto them,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I have compassion on the multitude, because
they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and if I send them away fasting to their
home, they will faint on the way; and some of them are come from far.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his disciples answered him, Whence
shall one be able to fill these men with bread here in a desert place?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he asked them, How many loaves have ye?
And they said, Seven.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he commandeth the multitude to sit down
on the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and having given thanks, he
brake, and gave to his disciples, to set before them; and they set them
before the multitude.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And they had a few small fishes: and having
blessed them, he commanded to set these also before them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they ate, and were filled: and they
took up, of broken pieces that remained over, seven baskets.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And they were about four thousand: and he
sent them away.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And straightway he entered into the boat
with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the Pharisees came forth, and began
to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, trying him.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and
saith, Why doth this generation seek a sign? verily I say unto you,
There shall no sign be given unto this generation.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And he left them, and again entering into
\[the boat\] departed to the other side.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they forgot to take bread; and they
had not in the boat with them more than one loaf.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he charged them, saying, Take heed,
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And they reasoned one with another,
saying, We have no bread.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And Jesus perceiving it saith unto them,
Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? do ye not yet perceive, neither
understand? have ye your heart hardened?

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears,
hear ye not? and do ye not remember?

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> When I brake the five loaves among the
five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces took ye up? They
say unto him, Twelve.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And when the seven among the four
thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces took ye up? And they say
unto him, Seven.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he said unto them, Do ye not yet
understand?

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And they come unto Bethsaida. And they
bring to him a blind man, and beseech him to touch him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he took hold of the blind man by the
hand, and brought him out of the village; and when he had spit on his
eyes, and laid his hands upon him, he asked him, Seest thou aught?

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And he looked up, and said, I see men;
for I behold \[them\] as trees, walking.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Then again he laid his hands upon his
eyes; and he looked stedfastly, and was restored, and saw all things
clearly.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he sent him away to his home, saying,
Do not even enter into the village.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Jesus went forth, and his disciples,
into the villages of Caesarea Philippi: and on the way he asked his
disciples, saying unto them, Who do men say that I am?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And they told him, saying, John the
Baptist; and others, Elijah; but others, One of the prophets.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he asked them, But who say ye that I
am? Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he charged them that they should tell
no man of him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he began to teach them, that the Son
of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and the
chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise
again.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he spake the saying openly. And Peter
took him, and began to rebuke him.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> But he turning about, and seeing his
disciples, rebuked Peter, and saith, Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou
mindest not the things of God, but the things of men.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And he called unto him the multitude with
his disciples, and said unto them, If any man would come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whosoever would save his life shall
lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's
shall save it.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> For what doth it profit a man, to gain
the whole world, and forfeit his life?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> For what should a man give in exchange
for his life?

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man
also shall be ashamed of him, when he cometh in the glory of his Father
with the holy angels.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, There are some here of them that stand \[by\], who shall in no wise
taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God come with power.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And after six days Jesus taketh with him
Peter, and James, and John, and bringeth them up into a high mountain
apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and his garments became glistering,
exceeding white, so as no fuller on earth can whiten them.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And there appeared unto them Elijah with
Moses: and they were talking with Jesus.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And Peter answereth and saith to Jesus,
Rabbi, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles;
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For he knew not what to answer; for they
became sore afraid.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And there came a cloud overshadowing them:
and there came a voice out of the cloud, This is my beloved Son: hear ye
him.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And suddenly looking round about, they saw
no one any more, save Jesus only with themselves.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And as they were coming down from the
mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they
had seen, save when the Son of man should have risen again from the
dead.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they kept the saying, questioning
among themselves what the rising again from the dead should mean.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And they asked him, saying, \[How is it\]
that the scribes say that Elijah must first come?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he said unto them, Elijah indeed
cometh first, and restoreth all things: and how is it written of the Son
of man, that he should suffer many things and be set at nought?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But I say unto you, that Elijah is come,
and they have also done unto him whatsoever they would, even as it is
written of him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And when they came to the disciples, they
saw a great multitude about them, and scribes questioning with them.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And straightway all the multitude, when
they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him saluted him.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he asked them, What question ye with
them?

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And one of the multitude answered him,
Teacher, I brought unto thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and wheresoever it taketh him, it dasheth
him down: and he foameth, and grindeth his teeth, and pineth away: and I
spake to thy disciples that they should cast it out; and they were not
able.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And he answereth them and saith, O
faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I
bear with you? bring him unto me.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And they brought him unto him: and when
he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him grievously; and he fell on
the ground, and wallowed foaming.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he asked his father, How long time is
it since this hath come unto him? And he said, From a child.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And oft-times it hath cast him both into
the fire and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do
anything, have compassion on us, and help us.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Jesus said unto him, If thou canst!
All things are possible to him that believeth.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Straightway the father of the child cried
out, and said, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And when Jesus saw that a multitude came
running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying unto him, Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and enter no more
into him.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And having cried out, and torn him much,
he came out: and \[the boy\] became as one dead; insomuch that the more
part said, He is dead.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Jesus took him by the hand, and
raised him up; and he arose.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he was come into the house, his
disciples asked him privately, \[How is it\] that we could not cast it
out?

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And he said unto them, This kind can come
out by nothing, save by prayer.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And they went forth from thence, and
passed through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know it.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> For he taught his disciples, and said
unto them, The Son of man is delivered up into the hands of men, and
they shall kill him; and when he is killed, after three days he shall
rise again.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But they understood not the saying, and
were afraid to ask him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And they came to Capernaum: and when he
was in the house he asked them, What were ye reasoning on the way?

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But they held their peace: for they had
disputed one with another on the way, who \[was\] the greatest.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And he sat down, and called the twelve;
and he saith unto them, If any man would be first, he shall be last of
all, and servant of all.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And he took a little child, and set him
in the midst of them: and taking him in his arms, he said unto them,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Whosoever shall receive one of such
little children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever receiveth me,
receiveth not me, but him that sent me.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> John said unto him, Teacher, we saw one
casting out demons in thy name; and we forbade him, because he followed
not us.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there
is no man who shall do a mighty work in my name, and be able quickly to
speak evil of me.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> For he that is not against us is for us.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> For whosoever shall give you a cup of
water to drink, because ye are Christ's, verily I say unto you, he shall
in no wise lose his reward.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And whosoever shall cause one of these
little ones that believe on me to stumble, it were better for him if a
great millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the
sea.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And if thy hand cause thee to stumble,
cut it off: it is good for thee to enter into life maimed, rather than
having thy two hands to go into hell, into the unquenchable fire.

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> \[where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched.\]

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And if thy foot cause thee to stumble,
cut it off: it is good for thee to enter into life halt, rather than
having thy two feet to be cast into hell.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> \[where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched.\]

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And if thine eye cause thee to stumble,
cast it out: it is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with
one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell;

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> For every one shall be salted with fire.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> Salt is good: but if the salt have lost
its saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and
be at peace one with another.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And he arose from thence and cometh into
the borders of Judaea and beyond the Jordan: and multitudes come
together unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them again.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And there came unto him Pharisees, and
asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away \[his\] wife? trying him.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And he answered and said unto them, What
did Moses command you?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And they said, Moses suffered to write a
bill of divorcement, and to put her away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> But Jesus said unto them, For your
hardness of heart he wrote you this commandment.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But from the beginning of the creation,
Male and female made he them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> For this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and the two shall become one flesh: so
that they are no more two, but one flesh.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> What therefore God hath joined together,
let not man put asunder.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And in the house the disciples asked
him again of this matter.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall
put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> and if she herself shall put away her
husband, and marry another, she committeth adultery.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they were bringing unto him little
children, that he should touch them: and the disciples rebuked them.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But when Jesus saw it, he was moved
with indignation, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come
unto me; forbid them not: for to such belongeth the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise
enter therein.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And he took them in his arms, and
blessed them, laying his hands upon them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And as he was going forth into the way,
there ran one to him, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Teacher,
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jesus said unto him, Why callest
thou me good? none is good save one, \[even\] God.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Thou knowest the commandments, Do not
kill, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness,
Do not defraud, Honor thy father and mother.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And he said unto him, Teacher, all
these things have I observed from my youth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jesus looking upon him loved him,
and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go, sell whatsoever thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come, follow me.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> But his countenance fell at the saying,
and he went away sorrowful: for he was one that had great possessions.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus looked round about, and saith
unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into
the kingdom of God!

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the disciples were amazed at his
words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how
hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of
God!

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is easier for a camel to go through
a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And they were astonished exceedingly,
saying unto him, Then who can be saved?

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> Jesus looking upon them saith, With men
it is impossible, but not with God: for all things are possible with
God.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we
have left all, and have followed thee.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Jesus said, Verily I say unto you,
There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
mother, or father, or children, or lands, for my sake, and for the
gospel's sake,

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> but he shall receive a hundredfold now
in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal
life.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> But many \[that are\] first shall be
last; and the last first.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And they were on the way, going up to
Jerusalem; and Jesus was going before them: and they were amazed; and
they that followed were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began
to tell them the things that were to happen unto him,

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> \[saying\], Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests
and the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him unto the Gentiles:

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> and they shall mock him, and shall spit
upon him, and shall scourge him, and shall kill him; and after three
days he shall rise again.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And there come near unto him James and
John, the sons of Zebedee, saying unto him, Teacher, we would that thou
shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall ask of thee.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And he said unto them, What would ye
that I should do for you?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And they said unto him, Grant unto us
that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on \[thy\] left hand, in
thy glory.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not
what ye ask. Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? or to be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And they said unto him, We are able.
And Jesus said unto them, The cup that I drink ye shall drink; and with
the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized:

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> but to sit on my right hand or on
\[my\] left hand is not mine to give; but \[it is for them\] for whom it
hath been prepared.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And when the ten heard it, they began
to be moved with indignation concerning James and John.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And Jesus called them to him, and saith
unto them, Ye know that they who are accounted to rule over the Gentiles
lord it over them; and their great ones exercise authority over them.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> But it is not so among you: but
whosoever would become great among you, shall be your minister;

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> and whosoever would be first among you,
shall be servant of all.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> For the Son of man also came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they come to Jericho: and as he
went out from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, the son
of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the way side.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> And when he heard that it was Jesus the
Nazarene, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou son of David, have
mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And many rebuked him, that he should
hold his peace: but he cried out the more a great deal, Thou son of
David, have mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And Jesus stood still, and said, Call
ye him. And they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good cheer:
rise, he calleth thee.

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> And he, casting away his garment,
sprang up, and came to Jesus.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And Jesus answered him, and said, What
wilt thou that I should do unto thee? And the blind man said unto him,
Rabboni, that I may receive my sight.

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way;
thy faith hath made thee whole. And straightway he received his sight,
and followed him in the way.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when they draw nigh unto Jerusalem,
unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth two of
his disciples,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and saith unto them, Go your way into the
village that is over against you: and straightway as ye enter into it,
ye shall find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat; loose him, and
bring him.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And if any one say unto you, Why do ye
this? say ye, The Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send
him back hither.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they went away, and found a colt tied
at the door without in the open street; and they loose him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And certain of them that stood there said
unto them, What do ye, loosing the colt?

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And they said unto them even as Jesus had
said: and they let them go.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And they bring the colt unto Jesus, and
cast on him their garments; and he sat upon him.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And many spread their garments upon the
way; and others branches, which they had cut from the fields.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And they that went before, and they that
followed, cried, Hosanna; Blessed \[is\] he that cometh in the name of
the Lord:

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Blessed \[is\] the kingdom that cometh,
\[the kingdom\] of our father David: Hosanna in the highest.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he entered into Jerusalem, into the
temple; and when he had looked round about upon all things, it being now
eventide, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And on the morrow, when they were come
out from Bethany, he hungered.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And seeing a fig tree afar off having
leaves, he came, if haply he might find anything thereon: and when he
came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for it was not the season of
figs.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And he answered and said unto it, No
man eat fruit from thee henceforward for ever. And his disciples heard
it.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And they come to Jerusalem: and he
entered into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and them
that bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the
money-changers, and the seats of them that sold the doves;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and he would not suffer that any man
should carry a vessel through the temple.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he taught, and said unto them, Is
it not written, My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the
nations? but ye have made it a den of robbers.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the chief priests and the scribes
heard it, and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him,
for all the multitude was astonished at his teaching.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And every evening he went forth out of
the city.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And as they passed by in the morning,
they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Peter calling to remembrance saith
unto him, Rabbi, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered
away.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Jesus answering saith unto them,
Have faith in God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall
say unto this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea; and
shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what he saith
cometh to pass; he shall have it.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Therefore I say unto you, All things
whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And whensoever ye stand praying,
forgive, if ye have aught against any one; that your Father also who is
in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> \[But if ye do not forgive, neither
will your Father who is in heaven forgive your trespasses.\]

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And they come again to Jerusalem: and
as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests,
and the scribes, and the elders;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and they said unto him, By what
authority doest thou these things? or who gave thee this authority to do
these things?

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Jesus said unto them, I will ask of
you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I
do these things.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The baptism of John, was it from
heaven, or from men? answer me.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From heaven; He will say, Why then did ye not
believe him?

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But should we say, From men--they
feared the people: for all verily held John to be a prophet.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And they answered Jesus and say, We
know not. And Jesus saith unto them, Neither tell I you by what
authority I do these things.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And he began to speak unto them in
parables. A man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged
a pit for the winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into another country.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And at the season he sent to the
husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the
fruits of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And they took him, and beat him, and sent
him away empty.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And again he sent unto them another
servant; and him they wounded in the head, and handled shamefully.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he sent another; and him they killed:
and many others; beating some, and killing some.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> He had yet one, a beloved son: he sent
him last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But those husbandmen said among
themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance
shall be ours.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they took him, and killed him, and
cast him forth out of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> What therefore will the lord of the
vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the
vineyard unto others.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Have ye not read even this scripture:
The stone which the builders rejected, The same was made the head of the
corner;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> This was from the Lord, And it is
marvellous in our eyes?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And they sought to lay hold on him; and
they feared the multitude; for they perceived that he spake the parable
against them: and they left him, and went away.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And they send unto him certain of the
Pharisees and of the Herodians, that they might catch him in talk.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And when they were come, they say unto
him, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and carest not for any one;
for thou regardest not the person of men, but of a truth teachest the
way of God: Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Shall we give, or shall we not give?
But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why make ye trial of
me? bring me a denarius, that I may see it.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And they brought it. And he saith unto
them, Whose is this image and superscription? And they said unto him,
Caesar's.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And Jesus said unto them, Render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
God's. And they marvelled greatly at him.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And there come unto him Sadducees, who
say that there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Teacher, Moses wrote unto us, If a
man's brother die, and leave a wife behind him, and leave no child, that
his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> There were seven brethren: and the
first took a wife, and dying left no seed;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and the second took her, and died,
leaving no seed behind him; and the third likewise:

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> and the seven left no seed. Last of all
the woman also died.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> In the resurrection whose wife shall
she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Jesus said unto them, Is it not for
this cause that ye err, that ye know not the scriptures, nor the power
of God?

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For when they shall rise from the dead,
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as angels in
heaven.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> But as touching the dead, that they are
raised; have ye not read in the book of Moses, in \[the place
concerning\] the Bush, how God spake unto him, saying, I \[am\] the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> He is not the God of the dead, but of
the living: ye do greatly err.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And one of the scribes came, and heard
them questioning together, and knowing that he had answered them well,
asked him, What commandment is the first of all?

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Jesus answered, The first is, Hear, O
Israel; The Lord our God, the Lord is one:

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> and thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> The second is this, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And the scribe said unto him, Of a
truth, Teacher, thou hast well said that he is one; and there is none
other but he:

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> and to love him with all the heart, and
with all the understanding, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbor as himself, is much more than all whole burnt-offerings and
sacrifices.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And when Jesus saw that he answered
discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
And no man after that durst ask him any question.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jesus answered and said, as he
taught in the temple, How say the scribes that the Christ is the son of
David?

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> David himself said in the Holy Spirit,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, Till I make thine
enemies the footstool of thy feet.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> David himself calleth him Lord; and
whence is he his son? And the common people heard him gladly.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And in his teaching he said, Beware of
the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes, and \[to have\]
salutations in the marketplaces,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> and chief seats in the synagogues, and
chief places at feasts:

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> they that devour widows' houses, and
for a pretence make long prayers; these shall receive greater
condemnation.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And he sat down over against the
treasury, and beheld how the multitude cast money into the treasury: and
many that were rich cast in much.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And there came a poor widow, and she
cast in two mites, which make a farthing.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And he called unto him his disciples,
and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, This poor widow cast in more
than all they that are casting into the treasury:

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> for they all did cast in of their
superfluity; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, \[even\]
all her living.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And as he went forth out of the temple,
one of his disciples saith unto him, Teacher, behold, what manner of
stones and what manner of buildings!

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Jesus said unto him, Seest thou these
great buildings? there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
which shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And as he sat on the mount of Olives over
against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him
privately,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Tell us, when shall these things be? and
what \[shall be\] the sign when these things are all about to be
accomplished?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jesus began to say unto them, Take
heed that no man lead you astray.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Many shall come in my name, saying, I am
\[he\]; and shall lead many astray.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And when ye shall hear of wars and rumors
of wars, be not troubled: \[these things\] must needs come to pass; but
the end is not yet.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; there shall be earthquakes in divers places;
there shall be famines: these things are the beginning of travail.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But take ye heed to yourselves: for they
shall deliver you up to councils; and in synagogues shall ye be beaten;
and before governors and kings shall ye stand for my sake, for a
testimony unto them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the gospel must first be preached
unto all the nations.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And when they lead you \[to judgment\],
and deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand what ye shall speak: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye; for it is not
ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And brother shall deliver up brother to
death, and the father his child; and children shall rise up against
parents, and cause them to be put to death.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And ye shall be hated of all men for my
name's sake: but he that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But when ye see the abomination of
desolation standing where he ought not (let him that readeth
understand), then let them that are in Judaea flee unto the mountains:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> and let him that is on the housetop not
go down, nor enter in, to take anything out his house:

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and let him that is in the field not
return back to take his cloak.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But woe unto them that are with child
and to them that give suck in those days!

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And pray ye that it be not in the
winter.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> For those days shall be tribulation,
such as there hath not been the like from the beginning of the creation
which God created until now, and never shall be.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And except the Lord had shortened the
days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the elect's sake, whom he
chose, he shortened the days.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And then if any man shall say unto you,
Lo, here is the Christ; or, Lo, there; believe \[it\] not:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> for there shall arise false Christs and
false prophets, and shall show signs and wonders, that they may lead
astray, if possible, the elect.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But take ye heed: behold, I have told
you all things beforehand.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> But in those days, after that
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and the stars shall be falling from
heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens shall be shaken.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And then shall they see the Son of man
coming in clouds with great power and glory.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And then shall he send forth the
angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from
the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now from the fig tree learn her
parable: when her branch is now become tender, and putteth forth its
leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh;

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> even so ye also, when ye see these
things coming to pass, know ye that he is nigh, \[even\] at the doors.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Verily I say unto you, This generation
shall not pass away, until all these things be accomplished.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away: but
my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> But of that day or that hour knoweth no
one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye
know not when the time is.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> \[It is\] as \[when\] a man, sojourning
in another country, having left his house, and given authority to his
servants, to each one his work, commanded also the porter to watch.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Watch therefore: for ye know not when
the lord of the house cometh, whether at even, or at midnight, or at
cockcrowing, or in the morning;

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> lest coming suddenly he find you
sleeping.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> And what I say unto you I say unto all,
Watch.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now after two days was \[the feast of\]
the passover and the unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the
scribes sought how they might take him with subtlety, and kill him:

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> for they said, Not during the feast, lest
haply there shall be a tumult of the people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And while he was in Bethany in the house
of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an
alabaster cruse of ointment of pure nard very costly; \[and\] she brake
the cruse, and poured it over his head.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But there were some that had indignation
among themselves, \[saying\], To what purpose hath this waste of the
ointment been made?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For this ointment might have been sold
for above three hundred shillings, and given to the poor. And they
murmured against her.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But Jesus said, Let her alone; why
trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For ye have the poor always with you, and
whensoever ye will ye can do them good: but me ye have not always.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> She hath done what she could; she hath
anointed my body beforehand for the burying.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
the gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, that also which
this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Judas Iscariot, he that was one of
the twelve, went away unto the chief priests, that he might deliver him
unto them.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they, when they heard it, were
glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might
conveniently deliver him \[unto them\].

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And on the first day of unleavened
bread, when they sacrificed the passover, his disciples say unto him,
Where wilt thou that we go and make ready that thou mayest eat the
passover?

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he sendeth two of his disciples,
and saith unto them, Go into the city, and there shall meet you a man
bearing a pitcher of water: follow him;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and wheresoever he shall enter in, say
to the master of the house, The Teacher saith, Where is my
guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And he will himself show you a large
upper room furnished \[and\] ready: and there make ready for us.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And the disciples went forth, and came
into the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready
the passover.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And when it was evening he cometh with
the twelve.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And as they sat and were eating, Jesus
said, Verily I say unto you, One of you shall betray me, \[even\] he
that eateth with me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> They began to be sorrowful, and to say
unto him one by one, Is it I?

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And he said unto them, \[It is\] one of
the twelve, he that dippeth with me in the dish.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For the Son of man goeth, even as it is
written of him: but woe unto that man through whom the Son of man is
betrayed! good were it for that man if he had not been born.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And as they were eating, he took bread,
and when he had blessed, he brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take
ye: this is my body.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And he took a cup, and when he had
given thanks, he gave to them: and they all drank of it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And he said unto them, This is my blood
of the covenant, which is poured out for many.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Verily I say unto you, I shall no more
drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in
the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when they had sung a hymn, they
went out unto the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall
be offended: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered abroad.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Howbeit, after I am raised up, I will
go before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But Peter said unto him, Although all
shall be offended, yet will not I.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say
unto thee, that thou to-day, \[even\] this night, before the cock crow
twice, shalt deny me thrice.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he spake exceedingly vehemently, If
I must die with thee, I will not deny thee. And in like manner also said
they all.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And they come unto a place which was
named Gethsemane: and he saith unto his disciples, Sit ye here, while I
pray.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And he taketh with him Peter and James
and John, and began to be greatly amazed, and sore troubled.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And he saith unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful even unto death: abide ye here, and watch.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And he went forward a little, and fell
on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass
away from him.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And he said, Abba, Father, all things
are possible unto thee; remove this cup from me: howbeit not what I
will, but what thou wilt.

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he cometh, and findeth them
sleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? couldest thou not
watch one hour?

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And again he went away, and prayed,
saying the same words.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And again he came, and found them
sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy; and they knew not what to
answer him.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he cometh the third time, and saith
unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough; the hour is
come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Arise, let us be going: behold, he that
betrayeth me is at hand.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And straightway, while he yet spake,
cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a multitude with swords
and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> Now he that betrayed him had given them
a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he; take him, and lead
him away safely.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And when he was come, straightway he
came to him, and saith, Rabbi; and kissed him.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And they laid hands on him, and took
him.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> But a certain one of them that stood by
drew his sword, and smote the servant of the high priest, and struck off
his ear.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them,
Are ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and staves to seize
me?

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> I was daily with you in the temple
teaching, and ye took me not: but \[this is done\] that the scriptures
might be fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> And they all left him, and fled.

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> And a certain young man followed with
him, having a linen cloth cast about him, over \[his\] naked \[body\]:
and they lay hold on him;

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> but he left the linen cloth, and fled
naked.

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> And they led Jesus away to the high
priest: and there come together with him all the chief priests and the
elders and the scribes.

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> And Peter had followed him afar off,
even within, into the court of the high priest; and he was sitting with
the officers, and warming himself in the light \[of the fire\].

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> Now the chief priests and the whole
council sought witness against Jesus to put him to death; and found it
not.

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> For many bare false witness against
him, and their witness agreed not together.

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> And there stood up certain, and bare
false witness against him, saying,

<span id="an_14:58">14:58</span> We heard him say, I will destroy this
temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another
made without hands.

<span id="an_14:59">14:59</span> And not even so did their witness agree
together.

<span id="an_14:60">14:60</span> And the high priest stood up in the
midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which
these witness against thee?

<span id="an_14:61">14:61</span> But he held his peace, and answered
nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and saith unto him, Art thou
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?

<span id="an_14:62">14:62</span> And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see
the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming with the
clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_14:63">14:63</span> And the high priest rent his clothes,
and saith, What further need have we of witnesses?

<span id="an_14:64">14:64</span> Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? And they all condemned him to be worthy of death.

<span id="an_14:65">14:65</span> And some began to spit on him, and to
cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and
the officers received him with blows of their hands.

<span id="an_14:66">14:66</span> And as Peter was beneath in the court,
there cometh one of the maids of the high priest;

<span id="an_14:67">14:67</span> and seeing Peter warming himself, she
looked upon him, and saith, Thou also wast with the Nazarene, \[even\]
Jesus.

<span id="an_14:68">14:68</span> But he denied, saying, I neither know,
nor understand what thou sayest: and he went out into the porch; and the
cock crew.

<span id="an_14:69">14:69</span> And the maid saw him, and began again
to say to them that stood by, This is \[one\] of them.

<span id="an_14:70">14:70</span> But he again denied it. And after a
little while again they that stood by said to Peter, of a truth thou art
\[one\] of them; for thou art a Galilaean.

<span id="an_14:71">14:71</span> But he began to curse, and to swear, I
know not this man of whom ye speak.

<span id="an_14:72">14:72</span> And straightway the second time the
cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word, how that Jesus said unto
him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he
thought thereon, he wept.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And straightway in the morning the chief
priests with the elders and scribes, and the whole council, held a
consultation, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him
up to Pilate.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King
of the Jews? And he answering saith unto him, Thou sayest.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And the chief priests accused him of many
things.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Pilate again asked him, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they accuse thee of.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But Jesus no more answered anything;
insomuch that Pilate marvelled.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Now at the feast he used to release unto
them one prisoner, whom they asked of him.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And there was one called Barabbas,
\[lying\] bound with them that had made insurrection, men who in the
insurrection had committed murder.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the multitude went up and began to
ask him \[to do\] as he was wont to do unto them.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye
that I release unto you the King of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> For he perceived that for envy the
chief priests had delivered him up.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But the chief priests stirred up the
multitude, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Pilate again answered and said unto
them, What then shall I do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And they cried out again, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Pilate said unto them, Why, what
evil hath he done? But they cried out exceedingly, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Pilate, wishing to content the
multitude, released unto them Barabbas, and delivered Jesus, when he had
scourged him, to be crucified.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the soldiers led him away within
the court, which is the Praetorium; and they call together the whole
band.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And they clothe him with purple, and
platting a crown of thorns, they put it on him;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> and they began to salute him, Hail,
King of the Jews!

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they smote his head with a reed,
and spat upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And when they had mocked him, they took
off from him the purple, and put on him his garments. And they lead him
out to crucify him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And they compel one passing by, Simon
of Cyrene, coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus,
to go \[with them\], that he might bear his cross.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And they bring him unto the place
Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they offered him wine mingled with
myrrh: but he received it not.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And they crucify him, and part his
garments among them, casting lots upon them, what each should take.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And it was the third hour, and they
crucified him.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the superscription of his
accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And with him they crucify two robbers;
one on his right hand, and one on his left.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> \[And the scripture was fulfilled,
which saith, And he was reckoned with transgressors.\]

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And they that passed by railed on him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Ha! Thou that destroyest the temple,
and buildest it in three days,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> save thyself, and come down from the
cross.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> In like manner also the chief priests
mocking \[him\] among themselves with the scribes said, He saved others;
himself he cannot save.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now
come down from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that
were crucified with him reproached him.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And when the sixth hour was come, there
was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with
a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And some of them that stood by, when
they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elijah.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And one ran, and filling a sponge full
of vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let be; let
us see whether Elijah cometh to take him down.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jesus uttered a loud voice, and
gave up the ghost.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And the veil of the temple was rent in
two from the top to the bottom.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And when the centurion, who stood by
over against him, saw that he so gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this
man was the Son of God.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And there were also women beholding
from afar: among whom \[were\] both Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother
of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> who, when he was in Galilee, followed
him, and ministered unto him; and many other women that came up with him
unto Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> And when even was now come, because it
was the Preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath,

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> there came Joseph of Arimathaea, a
councillor of honorable estate, who also himself was looking for the
kingdom of God; and he boldly went in unto Pilate, and asked for the
body of Jesus.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Pilate marvelled if he were already
dead: and calling unto him the centurion, he asked him whether he had
been any while dead.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> And when he learned it of the
centurion, he granted the corpse to Joseph.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> And he bought a linen cloth, and taking
him down, wound him in the linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb which had
been hewn out of a rock; and he rolled a stone against the door of the
tomb.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> And Mary Magdalene and Mary the
\[mother\] of Joses beheld where he was laid.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And when the sabbath was past, Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the \[mother\] of James, and Salome, bought spices,
that they might come and anoint him.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And very early on the first day of the
week, they come to the tomb when the sun was risen.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And they were saying among themselves,
Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the tomb?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> and looking up, they see that the stone
is rolled back: for it was exceeding great.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And entering into the tomb, they saw a
young man sitting on the right side, arrayed in a white robe; and they
were amazed.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he saith unto them, Be not amazed: ye
seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who hath been crucified: he is risen; he is
not here: behold, the place where they laid him!

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But go, tell his disciples and Peter, He
goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto
you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And they went out, and fled from the
tomb; for trembling and astonishment had come upon them: and they said
nothing to any one; for they were afraid.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Now when he was risen early on the first
day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had
cast out seven demons.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> She went and told them that had been
with him, as they mourned and wept.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And they, when they heard that he was
alive, and had been seen of her, disbelieved.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And after these things he was
manifested in another form unto two of them, as they walked, on their
way into the country.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And they went away and told it unto the
rest: neither believed they them.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And afterward he was manifested unto
the eleven themselves as they sat at meat; and he upbraided them with
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them
that had seen him after he was risen.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And he said unto them, Go ye into all
the world, and preach the gospel to the whole creation.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> He that believeth and is baptized shall
be saved; but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And these signs shall accompany them
that believe: in my name shall they cast out demons; they shall speak
with new tongues;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> they shall take up serpents, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they shall
lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> So then the Lord Jesus, after he had
spoken unto them, was received up into heaven, and sat down at the right
hand of God.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And they went forth, and preached
everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the
signs that followed. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke](luk)
