[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called
\[to be\] an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> which he promised afore through his
prophets in the holy scriptures,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> concerning his Son, who was born of the
seed of David according to the flesh,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who was declared \[to be\] the Son of God
with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection
from the dead; \[even\] Jesus Christ our Lord,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> through whom we received grace and
apostleship, unto obedience of faith among all the nations, for his
name's sake;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> among whom are ye also called \[to be\]
Jesus Christ's:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To all that are in Rome, beloved of God,
called \[to be\] saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ
for you all, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve in my
spirit in the gospel of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you,
always in my prayers

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> making request, if by any means now at
length I may be prospered by the will of God to come unto you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I long to see you, that I may impart
unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> that is, that I with you may be comforted
in you, each of us by the other's faith, both yours and mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you (and was hindered
hitherto), that I might have some fruit in you also, even as in the rest
of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I am debtor both to Greeks and to
Barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So, as much as in me is, I am ready to
preach the gospel to you also that are in Rome.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel: for
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to
the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For therein is revealed a righteousness
of God from faith unto faith: as it is written, But the righteous shall
live by faith.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hinder
the truth in unrighteousness;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> because that which is known of God is
manifest in them; for God manifested it unto them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For the invisible things of him since the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the
things that are made, \[even\] his everlasting power and divinity; that
they may be without excuse:

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> because that, knowing God, they glorified
him not as God, neither gave thanks; but became vain in their
reasonings, and their senseless heart was darkened.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and
of birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wherefore God gave them up in the lusts
of their hearts unto uncleanness, that their bodies should be dishonored
among themselves:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> for that they exchanged the truth of God
for a lie, and worshipped and served the creature rather than the
Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For this cause God gave them up unto vile
passions: for their women changed the natural use into that which is
against nature:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and likewise also the men, leaving the
natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another, men
with men working unseemliness, and receiving in themselves that
recompense of their error which was due.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And even as they refused to have God in
\[their\] knowledge, God gave them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those
things which are not fitting;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> being filled with all unrighteousness,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, strife,
deceit, malignity; whisperers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> backbiters, hateful to God, insolent,
haughty, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> without understanding, covenant-breakers,
without natural affection, unmerciful:

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> who, knowing the ordinance of God, that
they that practise such things are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but also consent with them that practise them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Wherefore thou art without excuse, O man,
whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judges another, thou
condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest dost practise the same things.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And we know that the judgment of God is
according to truth against them that practise such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And reckonest thou this, O man, who judgest
them that practise such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt
escape the judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> but after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who will render to every man according to
his works:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to them that by patience in well-doing seek
for glory and honor and incorruption, eternal life:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> but unto them that are factious, and obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, \[shall be\] wrath and
indignation,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of
man that worketh evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but glory and honor and peace to every
man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> for there is no respect of persons with
God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For as many as have sinned without law
shall also perish without the law: and as many as have sinned under the
law shall be judged by the law;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> (for when Gentiles that have not the law
do by nature the things of the law, these, not having the law, are the
law unto themselves;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> in that they show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness therewith, and
their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing \[them\]);

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men, according to my gospel, by Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if thou bearest the name of a Jew,
and restest upon the law, and gloriest in God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and knowest his will, and approvest the
things that are excellent, being instructed out of the law,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and art confident that thou thyself art a
guide of the blind, a light of them that are in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of
babes, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> thou therefore that teachest another,
teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal,
dost thou steal?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> thou that sayest a man should not commit
adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost
thou rob temples?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> thou who gloriest in the law, through thy
transgression of the law dishonorest thou God?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For the name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles because of you, even as it is written.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For circumcision indeed profiteth, if
thou be a doer of the law: but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy
circumcision is become uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> If therefore the uncircumcision keep the
ordinances of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be reckoned for
circumcision?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> and shall not the uncircumcision which is
by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who with the letter and
circumcision art a transgressor of the law?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly;
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> but he is a Jew who is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit not in the letter;
whose praise is not of men, but of God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> What advantage then hath the Jew? or what
is the profit of circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Much every way: first of all, that they
were intrusted with the oracles of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what if some were without faith? shall
their want of faith make of none effect the faithfulness of God?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> God forbid: yea, let God be found true, but
every man a liar; as it is written, That thou mightest be justified in
thy words, And mightest prevail when thou comest into judgment.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our righteousness commendeth the
righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who visiteth
with wrath? (I speak after the manner of men.)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> God forbid: for then how shall God judge
the world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But if the truth of God through my lie
abounded unto his glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and why not (as we are slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say), Let us do evil, that good may
come? whose condemnation is just.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? are we better than they? No, in
no wise: for we before laid to the charge both of Jews and Greeks, that
they are all under sin;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> as it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is none that understandeth, There
is none that seeketh after God;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> They have all turned aside, they are
together become unprofitable; There is none that doeth good, no, not, so
much as one:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Their throat is an open sepulchre; With
their tongues they have used deceit: The poison of asps is under their
lips:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Their feet are swift to shed blood;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Destruction and misery are in their ways;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the way of peace have they not known:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There is no fear of God before their
eyes.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Now we know that what things soever the
law saith, it speaketh to them that are under the law; that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may be brought under the judgment of
God:

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> because by the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified in his sight; for through the law \[cometh\] the
knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now apart from the law a
righteousness of God hath been manifested, being witnessed by the law
and the prophets, being witnessed by the law and the prophets;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> even the righteousness of God through
faith in Jesus Christ unto all them that believe; for there is no
distinction;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> for all have sinned, and fall short of
the glory of God;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> whom God set forth \[to be\] a
propitiation, through faith, in his blood, to show his righteousness
because of the passing over of the sins done aforetime, in the
forbearance of God;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for the showing, \[I say\], of his
righteousness at this present season: that he might himself be just, and
the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where then is the glorying? It is
excluded. By what manner of law? of works? Nay: but by a law of faith.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> We reckon therefore that a man is
justified by faith apart from the works of the law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Or is God \[the God\] of Jews only? is he
not \[the God\] of Gentiles also? Yea, of Gentiles also:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> if so be that God is one, and he shall
justify the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we then make the law of none effect
through faith? God forbid: nay, we establish the law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What then shall we say that Abraham, our
forefather, hath found according to the flesh?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if Abraham was justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory; but not toward God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For what saith the scripture? And Abraham
believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now to him that worketh, the reward is not
reckoned as of grace, but as of debt.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But to him that worketh not, but believeth
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Even as David also pronounceth blessing
upon the man, unto whom God reckoneth righteousness apart from works,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> \[saying\], Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, And whose sins are covered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Blessed is the man to whom, the Lord will
not reckon sin.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Is this blessing then pronounced upon the
circumcision, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say, To Abraham
his faith was reckoned for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How then was it reckoned? when he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in
uncircumcision; that he might be the father of all them that believe,
though they be in uncircumcision, that righteousness might be reckoned
unto them;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and the father of circumcision to them
who not only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the steps of
that faith of our father Abraham which he had in uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For not through the law was the promise
to Abraham or to his seed that he should be heir of the world, but
through the righteousness of faith.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if they that are of the law are
heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is made of none effect:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> for the law worketh wrath; but where
there is no law, neither is there transgression.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For this cause \[it is\] of faith, that
\[it may be\] according to grace; to the end that the promise may be
sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that
also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> (as it is written, A father of many
nations have I made thee) before him whom he believed, \[even\] God, who
giveth life to the dead, and calleth the things that are not, as though
they were.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Who in hope believed against hope, to the
end that he might become a father of many nations, according to that
which had been spoken, So shall thy seed be.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And without being weakened in faith he
considered his own body now as good as dead (he being about a hundred
years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> yet, looking unto the promise of God, he
wavered not through unbelief, but waxed strong through faith, giving
glory to God,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and being fully assured that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Wherefore also it was reckoned unto him
for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now it was not written for his sake
alone, that it was reckoned unto him;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> but for our sake also, unto whom it shall
be reckoned, who believe on him that raised Jesus our Lord from the
dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who was delivered up for our trespasses,
and was raised for our justification.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Being therefore justified by faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> through whom also we have had our access by
faith into this grace wherein we stand; and we rejoice in hope of the
glory of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only so, but we also rejoice in our
tribulations: knowing that tribulation worketh stedfastness;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and stedfastness, approvedness; and
approvedness, hope:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and hope putteth not to shame; because the
love of God hath been shed abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit
which was given unto us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For while we were yet weak, in due season
Christ died for the ungodly.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For scarcely for a righteous man will one
die: for peradventure for the good man some one would even dare to die.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But God commendeth his own love toward us,
in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Much more then, being now justified by his
blood, shall we be saved from the wrath \[of God\] through him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if, while we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and not only so, but we also rejoice in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Therefore, as through one man sin entered
into the world, and death through sin; and so death passed unto all men,
for that all sinned:--

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> for until the law sin was in the world;
but sin is not imputed when there is no law.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Nevertheless death reigned from Adam
until Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the likeness of
Adam's transgression, who is a figure of him that was to come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But not as the trespass, so also \[is\]
the free gift. For if by the trespass of the one the many died, much
more did the grace of God, and the gift by the grace of the one man,
Jesus Christ, abound unto the many.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And not as through one that sinned,
\[so\] is the gift: for the judgment \[came\] of one unto condemnation,
but the free gift \[came\] of many trespasses unto justification.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if, by the trespass of the one, death
reigned through the one; much more shall they that receive the abundance
of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one,
\[even\] Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> So then as through one trespass \[the
judgment came\] unto all men to condemnation; even so through one act of
righteousness \[the free gift came\] unto all men to justification of
life.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as through the one man's disobedience
the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one
shall the many be made righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And the law came in besides, that the
trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace did abound more
exceedingly:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> that, as sin reigned in death, even so
might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> What shall we say then? Shall we continue
in sin, that grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> God forbid. We who died to sin, how shall
we any longer live therein?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Or are ye ignorant that all we who were
baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> We were buried therefore with him through
baptism unto death: that like as Christ was raised from the dead through
the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For if we have become united with \[him\]
in the likeness of his death, we shall be also \[in the likeness\] of
his resurrection;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> knowing this, that our old man was
crucified with \[him\], that the body of sin might be done away, that so
we should no longer be in bondage to sin;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> for he that hath died is justified from
sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But if we died with Christ, we believe that
we shall also live with him;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> knowing that Christ being raised from the
dead dieth no more; death no more hath dominion over him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the death that he died, he died unto
sin once: but the life that he liveth, he liveth unto God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Even so reckon ye also yourselves to be
dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal body, that ye should obey the lusts thereof:

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> neither present your members unto sin
\[as\] instruments of unrighteousness; but present yourselves unto God,
as alive from the dead, and your members \[as\] instruments of
righteousness unto God.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For sin shall not have dominion over you:
for ye are not under law, but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? shall we sin, because we are
not under law, but under grace? God forbid.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Know ye not, that to whom ye present
yourselves \[as\] servants unto obedience, his servants ye are whom ye
obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thanks be to God, that, whereas ye
were servants of sin, ye became obedient from the heart to that form of
teaching whereunto ye were delivered;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and being made free from sin, ye became
servants of righteousness.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> I speak after the manner of men because
of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye presented your members \[as\]
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now
present your members \[as\] servants to righteousness unto
sanctification.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when ye were servants of sin, ye were
free in regard of righteousness.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> What fruit then had ye at that time in
the things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is
death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But now being made free from sin and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto sanctification, and the
end eternal life.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages of sin is death; but the
free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Or are ye ignorant, brethren (for I speak
to men who know the law), that the law hath dominion over a man for so
long time as he liveth?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For the woman that hath a husband is bound
by law to the husband while he liveth; but if the husband die, she is
discharged from the law of the husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So then if, while the husband liveth, she
be joined to another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if the
husband die, she is free from the law, so that she is no adulteress,
though she be joined to another man.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Wherefore, my brethren, ye also were made
dead to the law through the body of Christ; that ye should be joined to
another, \[even\] to him who was raised from the dead, that we might
bring forth fruit unto God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For when we were in the flesh, the sinful
passions, which were through the law, wrought in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But now we have been discharged from the
law, having died to that wherein we were held; so that we serve in
newness of the spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God
forbid. Howbeit, I had not known sin, except through the law: for I had
not known coveting, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but sin, finding occasion, wrought in me
through the commandment all manner of coveting: for apart from the law
sin \[is\] dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And I was alive apart from the law once:
but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and the commandment, which \[was\] unto
life, this I found \[to be\] unto death:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> for sin, finding occasion, through the
commandment beguiled me, and through it slew me.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> So that the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and righteous, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Did then that which is good become death
unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might be shown to be sin, by
working death to me through that which is good; --that through the
commandment sin might become exceeding sinful.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the law is spiritual:
but I am carnal, sold under sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For that which I do I know not: for not
what I would, that do I practise; but what I hate, that I do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But if what I would not, that I do, I
consent unto the law that it is good.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> So now it is no more I that do it, but
sin which dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that in me, that is, in my
flesh, dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me, but to do
that which is good \[is\] not.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the good which I would I do not: but
the evil which I would not, that I practise.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But if what I would not, that I do, it is
no more I that do it, but sin which dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find then the law, that, to me who
would do good, evil is present.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I delight in the law of God after the
inward man:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but I see a different law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under
the law of sin which is in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver
me out of the body of this death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So then I of myself with the mind, indeed, serve the law of God;
but with the flesh the law of sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> There is therefore now no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> that the ordinance of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For they that are after the flesh mind the
things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of
the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For the mind of the flesh is death; but the
mind of the Spirit is life and peace:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> because the mind of the flesh is enmity
against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
it be:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> and they that are in the flesh cannot
please God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But ye are not in the flesh but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any man
hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And if Christ is in you, the body is dead
because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But if the Spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he that raised up Christ Jesus from
the dead shall give life also to your mortal bodies through his Spirit
that dwelleth in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> So then, brethren, we are debtors, not to
the flesh, to live after the flesh:

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> for if ye live after the flesh, ye must
die; but if by the Spirit ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye
shall live.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, these are sons of God.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> For ye received not the spirit of bondage
again unto fear; but ye received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit himself beareth witness with
our spirit, that we are children of God:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and if children, then heirs; heirs of
God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with \[him\],
that we may be also glorified with \[him\].

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed to us-ward.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For the earnest expectation of the
creation waiteth for the revealing of the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For the creation was subjected to vanity,
not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> that the creation itself also shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory
of the children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that the whole creation
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And not only so, but ourselves also, who
have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for \[our\] adoption, \[to wit\], the redemption of
our body.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For in hope were we saved: but hope that
is seen is not hope: for who hopeth for that which he seeth?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if we hope for that which we see not,
\[then\] do we with patience wait for it.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And in like manner the Spirit also
helpeth our infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the
Spirit himself maketh intercession for \[us\] with groanings which
cannot be uttered;

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the
saints according to \[the will of\] God.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And we know that to them that love God
all things work together for good, \[even\] to them that are called
according to \[his\] purpose.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For whom he foreknew, he also
foreordained \[to be\] conformed to the image of his Son, that he might
be the firstborn among many brethren:

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> and whom he foreordained, them he also
called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also glorified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What then shall we say to these things?
If God \[is\] for us, who \[is\] against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give
us all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who shall lay anything to the charge of
God's elect? It is God that justifieth;

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> who is he that condemneth? It is Christ
Jesus that died, yea rather, that was raised from the dead, who is at
the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> Even as it is written, For thy sake we
are killed all the day long; We were accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors through him that loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor powers,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing witness with me in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain
in my heart.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For I could wish that I myself were
anathema from Christ for my brethren's sake, my kinsmen according to the
flesh:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> who are Israelites; whose is the adoption,
and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the
service \[of God\], and the promises;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> whose are the fathers, and of whom is
Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all, God blessed for ever.
Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But \[it is\] not as though the word of God
hath come to nought. For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> neither, because they are Abraham's seed,
are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> That is, it is not the children of the
flesh that are children of God; but the children of the promise are
reckoned for a seed.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For this is a word of promise, According to
this season will I come, and Sarah shall have a son.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And not only so; but Rebecca also having
conceived by one, \[even\] by our father Isaac--

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> for \[the children\] being not yet born,
neither having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> it was said unto her, The elder shall
serve the younger.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Even as it is written, Jacob I loved, but
Esau I hated.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have
compassion.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So then it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God that hath mercy.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, For
this very purpose did I raise thee up, that I might show in thee my
power, and that my name might be published abroad in all the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> So then he hath mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will be hardeneth.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he
still find fault? For who withstandeth his will?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why didst thou make me thus?

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Or hath not the potter a right over the
clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> What if God, willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of
wrath fitted unto destruction:

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> and that he might make known the riches
of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he afore prepared unto glory,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> \[even\] us, whom he also called, not
from the Jews only, but also from the Gentiles?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> As he saith also in Hosea, I will call
that my people, which was not my people; And her beloved, that was not
beloved.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And it shall be, \[that\] in the place
where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, There shall they be
called sons of the living God.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Isaiah crieth concerning Israel, If
the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, it is
the remnant that shall be saved:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> for the Lord will execute \[his\] word
upon the earth, finishing it and cutting it short.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And, as Isaiah hath said before, Except
the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, We had become as Sodom, and had
been made like unto Gomorrah.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What shall we say then? That the
Gentiles, who followed not after righteousness, attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith:

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> but Israel, following after a law of
righteousness, did not arrive at \[that\] law.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Wherefore? Because \[they sought it\] not
by faith, but as it were by works. They stumbled at the stone of
stumbling;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> even as it is written, Behold, I lay in
Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence: And he that believeth
on him shall not be put to shame.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brethren, my heart's desire and my
supplication to God is for them, that they may be saved.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I bear them witness that they have a
zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own, they did not subject
themselves to the righteousness of God.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For Christ is the end of the law unto
righteousness to every one that believeth.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For Moses writeth that the man that doeth
the righteousness which is of the law shall live thereby.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the righteousness which is of faith
saith thus, Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that
is, to bring Christ down:)

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> or, Who shall descend into the abyss?
(That is, to bring Christ up from the dead.)

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what saith it? The word is nigh thee,
in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we
preach:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> because if thou shalt confess with thy
mouth Jesus \[as\] Lord, and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised
him from the dead, thou shalt be saved:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> for with the heart man believeth unto
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For the scripture saith, Whosoever
believeth on him shall not be put to shame.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For there is no distinction between Jew
and Greek: for the same \[Lord\] is Lord of all, and is rich unto all
that call upon him:

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> for, Whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him whom they have
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and how shall they preach, except they
be sent? even as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
bring glad tidings of good things!

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But they did not all hearken to the
glad tidings. For Isaiah saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> So belief \[cometh\] of hearing, and
hearing by the word of Christ.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But I say, Did they not hear? Yea,
verily, Their sound went out into all the earth, And their words unto
the ends of the world.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I say, Did Israel not know? First
Moses saith, I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no
nation, With a nation void of understanding will I anger you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And Isaiah is very bold, and saith, I
was found of them that sought me not; I became manifest unto them that
asked not of me.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But as to Israel he saith, All the day
long did I spread out my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I say then, Did God cast off his people?
God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the
tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God did not cast off his people which he
foreknew. Or know ye not what the scripture saith of Elijah? how he
pleadeth with God against Israel:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Lord, they have killed thy prophets, they
have digged down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But what saith the answer of God unto
him? I have left for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the
knee to Baal.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Even so then at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But if it is by grace, it is no more of
works: otherwise grace is no more grace.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What then? that which Israel seeketh for,
that he obtained not; but the election obtained it, and the rest were
hardened:

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> according as it is written, God gave them
a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear, unto this very day.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And David saith, Let their table be made
a snare, and a trap, And a stumblingblock, and a recompense unto them:

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Let their eyes be darkened, that they
may not see, And bow thou down their back always.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I say then, Did they stumble that they
might fall? God forbid: but by their fall salvation \[is come\] unto the
Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Now if their fall, is the riches of the
world, and their loss the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fulness?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> But I speak to you that are Gentiles.
Inasmuch then as I am an apostle of Gentiles, I glorify my ministry;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> if by any means I may provoke to
jealousy \[them that are\] my flesh, and may save some of them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if the casting away of them \[is\]
the reconciling of the world, what \[shall\] the receiving \[of them
be\], but life from the dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And if the firstfruit is holy, so is
the lump: and if the root is holy, so are the branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But if some of the branches were broken
off, and thou, being a wild olive, wast grafted in among them, and didst
become partaker with them of the root of the fatness of the olive tree;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> glory not over the branches: but if
thou gloriest, it is not thou that bearest the root, but the root thee.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou wilt say then, Branches were
broken off, that I might be grafted in.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Well; by their unbelief they were
broken off, and thou standest by thy faith. Be not highminded, but fear:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> for if God spared not the natural
branches, neither will he spare thee.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Behold then the goodness and severity
of God: toward them that fell, severity; but toward thee, God's
goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be
cut off.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And they also, if they continue not in
their unbelief, shall be grafted in: for God is able to graft them in
again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For if thou wast cut out of that which
is by nature a wild olive tree, and wast grafted contrary to nature into
a good olive tree; how much more shall these, which are the natural
\[branches\], be grafted into their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I would not, brethren, have you
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye be wise in your own conceits, that a
hardening in part hath befallen Israel, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and so all Israel shall be saved: even
as it is written, There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer; He shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And this is my covenant unto them, When
I shall take away their sins.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> As touching the gospel, they are
enemies for your sake: but as touching the election, they are beloved
for the fathers' sake.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For the gifts and the calling of God
are not repented of.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For as ye in time past were disobedient
to God, but now have obtained mercy by their disobedience,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> even so have these also now been
disobedient, that by the mercy shown to you they also may now obtain
mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God hath shut up all unto
disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and the knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past tracing out!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> For who hath known the mind of the
Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> or who hath first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed unto him again?

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For of him, and through him, and unto
him, are all things. To him \[be\] the glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, \[which is\] your spiritual service.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And be not fashioned according to this
world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, and ye may
prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For I say, through the grace that was
given me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think; but to think as to think soberly,
according as God hath dealt to each man a measure of faith.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For even as we have many members in one
body, and all the members have not the same office:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> so we, who are many, are one body in
Christ, and severally members one of another.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And having gifts differing according to
the grace that was given to us, whether prophecy, \[let us prophesy\]
according to the proportion of our faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> or ministry, \[let us give ourselves\] to
our ministry; or he that teacheth, to his teaching;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> or he that exhorteth, to his exhorting:
he that giveth, \[let him do it\] with liberality; he that ruleth, with
diligence; he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that
which is evil; cleave to that which is good.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In love of the brethren be tenderly
affectioned one to another; in honor preferring one another;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> in diligence not slothful; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> rejoicing in hope; patient in
tribulation; continuing stedfastly in prayer;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> communicating to the necessities of the
saints; given to hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless them that persecute you; bless,
and curse not.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with them that rejoice; weep
with them that weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Be of the same mind one toward another.
Set not your mind on high things, but condescend to things that are
lowly. Be not wise in your own conceits.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Render to no man evil for evil. Take
thought for things honorable in the sight of all men.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If it be possible, as much as in you
lieth, be at peace with all men.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but
give place unto the wrath \[of God\]: for it is written, Vengeance
belongeth unto me; I will recompense, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if
he thirst, give him to drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of
fire upon his head.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every soul be in subjection to the
higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and the \[powers\] that
be are ordained of God.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Therefore he that resisteth the power,
withstandeth the ordinance of God: and they that withstand shall receive
to themselves judgment.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For rulers are not a terror to the good
work, but to the evil. And wouldest thou have no fear of the power? do
that which is good, and thou shalt have praise from the same:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> for he is a minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not
the sword in vain: for he is a minister of God, an avenger for wrath to
him that doeth evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Wherefore \[ye\] must needs be in
subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience'
sake.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For this cause ye pay tribute also; for
they are ministers of God's service, attending continually upon this
very thing.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Render to all their dues: tribute to whom
tribute \[is due\]; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to
whom honor.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe no man anything, save to love one
another: for he that loveth his neighbor hath fulfilled the law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery,
Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet, and if
there be any other commandment, it is summed up in this word, namely,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Love worketh no ill to his neighbor:
love therefore is the fulfilment of the law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And this, knowing the season, that
already it is time for you to awake out of sleep: for now is salvation
nearer to us than when we \[first\] believed.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is far spent, and the day is
at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armor of light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us walk becomingly, as in the day;
not in revelling and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and jealousy.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the flesh, to \[fulfil\] the lusts
\[thereof\].

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> But him that is weak in faith receive ye,
\[yet\] not for decision of scruples.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> One man hath faith to eat all things: but
he that is weak eateth herbs.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Let not him that eateth set at nought him
that eateth not; and let not him that eateth not judge him that eateth:
for God hath received him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who art thou that judgest the servant of
another? to his own lord he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be made
to stand; for the Lord hath power to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One man esteemeth one day above another:
another esteemeth every day \[alike\]. Let each man be fully assured in
his own mind.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
unto the Lord: and he that eateth, eateth unto the Lord, for he giveth
God thanks; and he that eateth not, unto the Lord he eateth not, and
giveth God thanks.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us liveth to himself, and
none dieth to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For whether we live, we live unto the
Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live
therefore, or die, we are the Lord's.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For to this end Christ died and lived
\[again\], that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But thou, why dost thou judge thy
brother? or thou again, why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we
shall all stand before the judgment-seat of God.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For it is written, As I live, saith the
Lord, to me every knee shall bow, And every tongue shall confess to God.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So then each one of us shall give
account of himself to God.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Let us not therefore judge one another
any more: but judge ye this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock in
his brother's way, or an occasion of falling.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I know, and am persuaded in the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself: save that to him who
accounteth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> For if because of meat thy brother is
grieved, thou walkest no longer in love. Destroy not with thy meat him
for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Let not then your good be evil spoken
of:

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> for the kingdom of God is not eating
and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> For he that herein serveth Christ is
well-pleasing to God, and approved of men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> So then let us follow after things
which make for peace, and things whereby we may edify one another.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Overthrow not for meat's sake the work
of God. All things indeed are clean; howbeit it is evil for that man who
eateth with offence.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> It is good not to eat flesh, nor to
drink wine, nor \[to do anything\] whereby thy brother stumbleth.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> The faith which thou hast, have thou to
thyself before God. Happy is he that judgeth not himself in that which
he approveth.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> But he that doubteth is condemned if he
eat, because \[he eateth\] not of faith; and whatsoever is not of faith
is sin.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now we that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let each one of us please his neighbor
for that which is good, unto edifying.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For Christ also pleased not himself; but,
as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon
me.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For whatsoever things were written
aforetime were written for our learning, that through patience and
through comfort of the scriptures we might have hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now the God of patience and of comfort
grant you to be of the same mind one with another according to Christ
Jesus:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> that with one accord ye may with one
mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Wherefore receive ye one another, even as
Christ also received you, to the glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For I say that Christ hath been made a
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he might confirm
the promises \[given\] unto the fathers,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and that the Gentiles might glorify God
for his mercy; as it is written, Therefore will I give praise unto thee
among the Gentiles, And sing unto thy name.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And again he saith, Rejoice, ye
Gentiles, with his people.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And again, Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles; And let all the peoples praise him.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And again, Isaiah saith, There shall be
the root of Jesse, And he that ariseth to rule over the Gentiles; On him
shall the Gentiles hope.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, in the power of
the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I myself also am persuaded of you,
my brethren, that ye yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all
knowledge, able also to admonish one another.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But I write the more boldly unto you in
some measure, as putting you again in remembrance, because of the grace
that was given me of God,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> that I should be a minister of Christ
Jesus unto the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable, being sanctified
by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have therefore my glorifying in
Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I will not dare to speak of any
things save those which Christ wrought through me, for the obedience of
the Gentiles, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> in the power of signs and wonders, in
the power of the Holy Spirit; so that from Jerusalem, and round about
even unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> yea, making it my aim so to preach the
gospel, not where Christ was \[already\] named, that I might not build
upon another man's foundation;

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> but, as it is written, They shall see,
to whom no tidings of him came, And they who have not heard shall
understand.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Wherefore also I was hindered these
many times from coming to you:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> but now, having no more any place in
these regions, and having these many years a longing to come unto you,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> whensoever I go unto Spain (for I hope
to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by
you, if first in some measure I shall have been satisfied with your
company)--

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> but now, I \[say\], I go unto
Jerusalem, ministering unto the saints.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> For it hath been the good pleasure of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among
the saints that are at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Yea, it hath been their good pleasure;
and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers
of their spiritual things, they owe it \[to them\] also to minister unto
them in carnal things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> When therefore I have accomplished
this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will go on by you unto
Spain.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And I know that, when I come unto you,
I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me in your prayers to God for me;

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> that I may be delivered from them that
are disobedient in Judaea, and \[that\] my ministration which \[I have\]
for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> that I may come unto you in joy through
the will of God, and together with you find rest.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Now the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> I commend unto you Phoebe our sister, who
is a servant of the church that is at Cenchreae:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> that ye receive her in the Lord, worthily
of the saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever matter she may have
need of you: for she herself also hath been a helper of many, and of
mine own self.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila my
fellow-workers in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> who for my life laid down their own
necks; unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of
the Gentiles:

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and \[salute\] the church that is in
their house. Salute Epaenetus my beloved, who is the first-fruits of
Asia unto Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Salute Mary, who bestowed much labor on
you.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen,
and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also
have been in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Salute Ampliatus my beloved in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Salute Urbanus our fellow-worker in
Christ, and Stachys my beloved.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Salute Apelles the approved in Christ.
Salute them that are of the \[household\] of Aristobulus.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute them
of the \[household\] of Narcissus, that are in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who
labor in the Lord. Salute Persis the beloved, who labored much in the
Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Salute Rufus the chosen in the Lord,
and his mother and mine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes,
Patrobas, Hermas, and the brethren that are with them.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and
his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints that are with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.
All the churches of Christ salute you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them
that are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary to
the doctrine which ye learned: and turn away from them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For they that are such serve not our
Lord Christ, but their own belly; and by their smooth and fair speech
they beguile the hearts of the innocent.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> For your obedience is come abroad unto
all men. I rejoice therefore over you: but I would have you wise unto
that which is good, and simple unto that which is evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timothy my fellow-worker saluteth you;
and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I Tertius, who write the epistle,
salute you in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Gaius my host, and of the whole church,
saluteth you. Erastus the treasurer of the city saluteth you, and
Quartus the brother.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> \[The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.\]

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Now to him that is able to establish
you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according
to the revelation of the mystery which hath been kept in silence through
times eternal,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> but now is manifested, and by the
scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal
God, is made known unto all the nations unto obedience of faith:

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> to the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be the glory for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1)
