[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jdg)  [Next](sa1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: Ruth

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And it came to pass in the days when the
judges judged, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of
Bethlehem-judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his
wife, and his two sons.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the name of the man was Elimelech, and
the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and
Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem-judah. And they came into the country
of Moab, and continued there.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died; and
she was left, and her two sons.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And they took them wives of the women of
Moab; the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and
they dwelt there about ten years.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And Mahlon and Chilion died both of them;
and the woman was left of her two children and of her husband.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then she arose with her daughters-in-law,
that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the
country of Moab how that Jehovah had visited his people in giving them
bread.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And she went forth out of the place where
she was, and her two daughters-in-law with her; and they went on the way
to return unto the land of Judah.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Naomi said unto her two
daughters-in-law, Go, return each of you to her mother's house: Jehovah
deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Jehovah grant you that ye may find rest,
each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them, and they
lifted up their voice, and wept.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they said unto her, Nay, but we will
return with thee unto thy people.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters:
why will ye go with me? have I yet sons in my womb, that they may be
your husbands?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Turn again, my daughters, go your way;
for I am too old to have a husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I
should even have a husband to-night, and should also bear sons;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> would ye therefore tarry till they were
grown? would ye therefore stay from having husbands? nay, my daughters,
for it grieveth me much for your sakes, for the hand of Jehovah is gone
forth against me.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they lifted up their voice, and wept
again: and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clave unto her.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And she said, Behold, thy sister-in-law
is gone back unto her people, and unto her god: return thou after thy
sister-in-law.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave
thee, and to return from following after thee, for whither thou goest, I
will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> where thou diest, will I die, and there
will I be buried: Jehovah do so to me, and more also, if aught but death
part thee and me.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And when she saw that she was stedfastly
minded to go with her, she left off speaking unto her.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So they two went until they came to
Bethlehem. And it came to pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that
all the city was moved about them, and \[the women\] said, Is this
Naomi?

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And she said unto them, Call me not
Naomi, call me Mara; for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> I went out full, and Jehovah hath brought
me home again empty; why call ye me Naomi, seeing Jehovah hath testified
against me, and the Almighty hath afflicted me?

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So Naomi returned, and Ruth the
Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned out of the
country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley
harvest.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a
mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let
me now go to the field, and glean among the ears of grain after him in
whose sight I shall find favor. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And she went, and came and gleaned in the
field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on the portion of the
field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and
said unto the reapers, Jehovah be with you. And they answered him,
Jehovah bless thee.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then said Boaz unto his servant that was
set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back
with Naomi out of the country of Moab:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she said, Let me glean, I pray you, and
gather after the reapers among the sheaves. So she came, and hath
continued even from the morning until now, save that she tarried a
little in the house.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not,
my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither pass from hence,
but abide here fast by my maidens.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Let thine eyes be on the field that they do
reap, and go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they
shall not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels,
and drink of that which the young men have drawn.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Then she fell on her face, and bowed
herself to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found favor in thy
sight, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a
foreigner?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Boaz answered and said unto her, It
hath fully been showed me, all that thou hast done unto thy
mother-in-law since the death of thy husband; and how thou hast left thy
father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come unto a
people that thou knewest not heretofore.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Jehovah recompense thy work, and a full
reward be given thee of Jehovah, the God of Israel, under whose wings
thou art come to take refuge.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then she said, Let me find favor in thy
sight, my lord, for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast
spoken kindly unto thy handmaid, though I be not as one of thy
handmaidens.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And at meal-time Boaz said unto her, Come
hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she
sat beside the reapers, and they reached her parched grain, and she did
eat, and was sufficed, and left thereof.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz
commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves,
and reproach her not.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And also pull out some for her from the
bundles, and leave it, and let her glean, and rebuke her not.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So she gleaned in the field until even;
and she beat out that which she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah
of barley.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And she took it up, and went into the
city; and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought
forth and gave to her that which she had left after she was sufficed.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And her mother-in-law said unto her,
Where hast thou gleaned to-day? and where hast thou wrought? blessed be
he that did take knowledge of thee. And she showed her mother-in-law
with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought
to-day is Boaz.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Naomi said unto her daughter-in-law,
Blessed be he of Jehovah, who hath not left off his kindness to the
living and to the dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is nigh of kin
unto us, one of our near kinsmen.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said, Yea, he said
unto me, Thou shalt keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all
my harvest.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And Naomi said unto Ruth her
daughter-in-law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his
maidens, and that they meet thee not in any other field.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz,
to glean unto the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and she
dwelt with her mother-in-law.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Naomi her mother-in-law said unto her,
My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with
thee?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And now is not Boaz our kinsman, with whose
maidens thou wast? Behold, he winnoweth barley to-night in the
threshing-floor.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee,
and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee down to the threshing-floor,
but make not thyself known unto the man, until he shall have done eating
and drinking.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And it shall be, when he lieth down, that
thou shalt mark the place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and
uncover his feet, and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou
shalt do.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And she said unto her, All that thou sayest
I will do.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And she went down unto the threshing-floor,
and did according to all that her mother-in-law bade her.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his
heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain:
and she came softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And it came to pass at midnight, that the
man was afraid, and turned himself; and, behold, a woman lay at his
feet.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he said, Who art thou? And she
answered, I am Ruth thy handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thy
handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said, Blessed be thou of Jehovah,
my daughter: thou hast showed more kindness in the latter end than at
the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor
or rich.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do
to thee all that thou sayest; for all the city of my people doth know
that thou art a worthy woman.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And now it is true that I am a near
kinsman; howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Tarry this night, and it shall be in the
morning, that if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well;
let him do the kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a
kinsman to thee, then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as
Jehovah liveth: lie down until the morning.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And she lay at his feet until the
morning. And she rose up before one could discern another. For he said,
Let it not be known that the woman came to the threshing-floor.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And he said, Bring the mantle that is
upon thee, and hold it; and she held it; and he measured six
\[measures\] of barley, and laid it on her: and he went into the city.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And when she came to her mother-in-law,
she said, Who art thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man
had done to her.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And she said, These six \[measures\] of
barley gave he me; for he said, Go not empty unto thy mother-in-law.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then said she, Sit still, my daughter,
until thou know how the matter will fall; for the man will not rest,
until he have finished the thing this day.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now Boaz went up to the gate, and sat him
down there: and, behold, the near kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by;
unto whom he said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he
turned aside, and sat down.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he took ten men of the elders of the
city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said unto the near kinsman, Naomi,
that is come again out of the country of Moab, selleth the parcel of
land, which was our brother Elimelech's:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And I thought to disclose it unto thee,
saying, Buy it before them that sit here, and before the elders of my
people. If thou wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem
it, then tell me, that I may know; for there is none to redeem it
besides thee; and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the
field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess,
the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his
inheritance.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the near kinsman said, I cannot redeem
it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance: take thou my right of
redemption on thee; for I cannot redeem it.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Now this was \[the custom\] in former time
in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning exchanging, to confirm all
things: a man drew off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor; and this
was the \[manner of\] attestation in Israel.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So the near kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it
for thyself. And he drew off his shoe.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all
the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was
Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of
Naomi.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of
Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead
upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from
among his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses
this day.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And all the people that were in the gate,
and the elders, said, We are witnesses. Jehovah make the woman that is
come into thy house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the
house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in
Bethlehem:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and let thy house be like the house of
Perez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which Jehovah shall give
thee of this young woman.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his
wife; and he went in unto her, and Jehovah gave her conception, and she
bare a son.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be
Jehovah, who hath not left thee this day without a near kinsman; and let
his name be famous in Israel.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he shall be unto thee a restorer of
life, and a nourisher of thine old age, for thy daughter-in-law, who
loveth thee, who is better to thee than seven sons, hath borne him.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Naomi took the child, and laid it in
her bosom, and became nurse unto it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the women her neighbors gave it a
name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they called his name
Obed: he is the father of Jesse, the father of David.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now these are the generations of Perez:
Perez begat Hezron,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat
Amminadab,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon
begat Salmon,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat
Obed,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat
David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Samuel](sa1)
