[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### American Standard Version: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through
the will of God, according to the promise of the life which is in Christ
Jesus,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy,
peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank God, whom I serve from my
forefathers in a pure conscience, how unceasing is my remembrance of
thee in my supplications, night and day

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> longing to see thee, remembering thy tears,
that I may be filled with joy;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> having been reminded of the unfeigned faith
that is in thee; which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy
mother Eunice; and, I am persuaded, in thee also.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For which cause I put thee in remembrance
that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee through the laying
on of my hands.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For God gave us not a spirit of
fearfulness; but of power and love and discipline.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not ashamed therefore of the testimony
of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but suffer hardship with the gospel
according to the power of God;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who saved us, and called us with a holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but hath now been manifested by the
appearing of our Saviour Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought
life and immortality to light through the gospel,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> whereunto I was appointed a preacher, and
an apostle, and a teacher.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For which cause I suffer also these
things: yet I am not ashamed; for I know him whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I have committed unto
him against that day.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Hold the pattern of sound words which
thou hast heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> That good thing which was committed unto
\[thee\] guard through the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in us.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> This thou knowest, that all that are in
Asia turned away from me; of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The Lord grant mercy unto the house of
Onesiphorus: for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> but, when he was in Rome, he sought me
diligently, and found me

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (the Lord grant unto him to find mercy of
the Lord in that day); and in how many things he ministered at Ephesus,
thou knowest very well.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thou therefore, my child, be strengthened
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the things which thou hast heard from
me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall
be able to teach others also.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Suffer hardship with \[me\], as a good
soldier of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> No soldier on service entangleth himself in
the affairs of \[this\] life; that he may please him who enrolled him as
a soldier.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if also a man contend in the games, he
is not crowded, except he have contended lawfully.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The husbandmen that laboreth must be the
first to partake of the fruits.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Consider what I say; for the Lord shall
give thee understanding in all things.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead,
of the seed of David, according to my gospel:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> wherein I suffer hardship unto bonds, as a
malefactor; but the word of God is not bound.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Therefore I endure all things for the
elect's sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ
Jesus with eternal glory.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Faithful is the saying: For if we died
with him, we shall also live with him:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> if we endure, we shall also reign with
him: if we shall deny him, he also will deny us:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> if we are faithless, he abideth faithful;
for he cannot deny himself.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Of these things put them in remembrance,
charging \[them\] in the sight of the Lord, that they strive not about
words, to no profit, to the subverting of them that hear.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Give diligence to present thyself
approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, handling
aright the word of truth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But shun profane babblings: for they will
proceed further in ungodliness,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and their word will eat as doth a
gangrene: or whom is Hymenaeus an Philetus;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> men who concerning the truth have erred,
saying that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of
some.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Howbeit the firm foundation of God
standeth, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his: and, Let
every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Now in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some
unto honor, and some unto dishonor.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> If a man therefore purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, meet for the
master's use, prepared unto every good work.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> after righteousness, faith, love, pace,
with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> But foolish and ignorant questionings
refuse, knowing that they gender strifes.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the Lord's servant must not strive,
but be gentle towards all, apt to teach, forbearing,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> in meekness correcting them that oppose
themselves; if peradventure God may give them repentance unto the
knowledge of the truth,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and they may recover themselves out of
the snare of the devil, having been taken captive by him unto his will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> But know this, that in the last days
grievous times shall come.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For men shall be lovers of self, lovers of
money, boastful, haughty, railers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> without natural affection, implacable,
slanderers, without self-control, fierce, no lovers of good,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> traitors, headstrong, puffed up, lovers of
pleasure rather than lovers of God;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> holding a form of godliness, but having
denied the power therefore. From these also turn away.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For of these are they that creep into
houses, and take captive silly women laden with sins, led away by divers
lusts,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And even as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these also withstand the truth. Men corrupted in mind,
reprobate concerning the faith.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But they shall proceed no further. For
their folly shall be evident unto all men, as theirs also came to be.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But thou didst follow my teaching,
conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, patience,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> persecutions, sufferings. What things
befell me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I
endured. And out of them all the Lord delivered me.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Yea, and all that would live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But evil men and impostors shall wax
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But abide thou in the things which thou
hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned
them.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And that from a babe thou hast known the
sacred writings which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through
faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Every scripture inspired of God \[is\]
also profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction which is in righteousness.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> That the man of God may be complete,
furnished completely unto every good work.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I charge \[thee\] in the sight of God, and
of Christ Jesus, who shall judge the living and the dead, and by his
appearing and his kingdom:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> preach the word; be urgent in season, out
of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and teaching.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time will come when they will not
endure the sound doctrine; but, having itching ears, will heap to
themselves teachers after their own lusts;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and will turn away their ears from the
truth, and turn aside unto fables.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But be thou sober in all things, suffer
hardship, do the work of an evangelist, fulfil thy ministry.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For I am already being offered, and the
time of my departure is come.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> I have fought the good fight, I have
finished the course, I have kept the faith:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> henceforth there is laid up for me the
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give
to me at that day; and not to me only, but also to all them that have
loved his appearing.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Give diligence to come shortly unto me:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for Demas forsook me, having loved this
present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus to
Dalmatia.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and
bring him with thee; for he is useful to me for ministering.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The cloak that I left at Troas with
Carpus, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the
parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the coppersmith did me much
evil: the Lord will render to him according to his works:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> of whom do thou also beware; for he
greatly withstood our words.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> At my first defence no one took my part,
but all forsook me: may it not be laid to their account.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But the Lord stood by me, and
strengthened me; that through me the message might me fully proclaimed,
and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the
mouth of the lion.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The Lord will deliver me from every evil
work, and will save me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom \[be\] the
glory forever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the house
of Onesiphorus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus remained at Corinth: but
Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Give diligence to come before winter.
Eubulus saluteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the
brethren.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord be with thy spirit. Grace be
with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit)
