[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pfs12)  [Next](pfs14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141914135X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by John Maurice Miller, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FALL OF POLOBULAC

This is a tale from Panay. It probably originated with the Spanish
fathers, who wished to impress the doctrine of the Seven Deadly Sins on
the natives. The islands are just off Iloilo.

A little way from Iloilo there once was a beautiful island called
Polobulac, or Isle of Flowers. Its shores were covered with beautiful
trees and plants; splendid gardens of flowers were found everywhere;
fruits grew in abundance; fountains sparkled in the sunlight; and the
people were the happiest in the world. They danced and sang to gay
music, and were free from every care and sorrow.

Filled with confidence in their good fortune, and proud of their
beautiful island, they began to slight the people of the neighboring
islands, and to treat them with insolence and scorn.

One night the sky was darkened, the lightning flashed, the rain fell in
torrents, and a voice cried from the clouds, above the roar of the
thunder:

"I am Pride. Avoid me or perish."

Terrified, they prayed to God for protection, but with the morning sun
their fears left them and they continued as before.

Days passed and the people grew richer, but, not satisfied with their
wealth and with their own beautiful island, they longed to possess the
lands of their neighbors.

Again came the storm, and again a voice cried from the heavens:

"I am Covetousness. Come to me and die."

Once more they appealed for protection, but they did not change their
ways.

Weeks went by, and with wealth came low and base desires. The storm came
as before and brought the warning:

"I am Evil Desire. Fly from me or be lost."

But again it sounded to sealed ears. Months rolled on. The people
quarreled with their neighbors, and sent forth an army to make war upon
them. The voice thundered:

"I am Anger. I give eternal torment."

Years followed, and the tables of the people of Polobulac were loaded
with the finest foods and wines. Day and night found them feasting. The
cry sounded above them:

"I am Gluttony. I devour my children."

The winds alone echoed the warning.

Time flew by. Each man sought to outdo the others in display of luxury
and magnificence. The poor grudged the rich their fortunes, and sought
in every way to injure them. Again a voice came through the darkness:

"I am Envy. My people are condemned."

But they closed their ears and would not hear.

More wealth brought greater luxury. They lolled in idleness. They idled
in the midst of magnificence. The voice warned:

"I am Sloth. I bring final warning."

They were used to the voices now, and gave them not the slightest heed.
Their insolence and greed grew greater. The fair island shook with
dissension and strife.

One day the sun was hidden by blackness. A fearful tempest burst over
the land. The people on the other islands saw Polobulac wrapped in seven
huge pillars of flame.

When the sky cleared, Polobulac was nowhere to be seen. In its place,
seven blackened rocks marked the spot where stood the beautiful isle.

They are there to this day. You can see them as you leave the harbor for
southern ports. Sometimes they appear as one. Again they seem to group
in twos and threes. But there are seven.

They are called the Deadly Sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Escape of Juanita](pfs14)
