[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi275)  [Next](mtsi277) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. ADOPTION OF THE HUMAN RACE

The Moon, Sun, Wind, Rainbow, Thunder, Fire, and Water once met an old
man. This old man was God. One human being was invited to be present.
Then Thunder asked the old man, "Could you make the people of the world
my children?" "No, they can not be your children, but they can be your
grandchildren. If anything arises which is heavy on the people of the
world you can be the sinker of that." The Sun asked the old man the same
question. "No, they can not be your children, but they can be your
friends and grandchildren. You can only be for the purpose of giving
them light to go by." Then the Moon said, "Could you make the people of
the world my children?" "No, I can't do that. The people of the world
can be your nephews and friends." The Fire then asked that the people of
the world be made his children, and the old man replied, "No, I can't
give them to you to be your children, but the people of the world can be
your grandchildren. While they are growing up you can be their warmth
and can give them something cooked to live on." Then the Wind asked the
question. "No, the people of the world can't be your children but they
can be your grandchildren so that you can remove the foul air and all
kinds of diseases." Then the Rainbow wanted the people to be his
children. "No, they can't be your children. You can be only to prevent
floods and prevent rainy weather. You can be honored that way." Then the
Water asked that human beings be made his children, but the old man
said, "No, the people of the world can't be your children. All you can
do is to wash them clean. When they get dirty you can wash them. So you
can be named Long-person." <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76) Then the
old man said, "I have told you all how to guide yourselves and what to
do. You all must remember that these children are my children."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[240:1](mtsi276.htm#fr_77) This name is thought
to have been given because cleanliness prolongs life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Adoption of the Human Race (Second Version)](mtsi277)
