[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi125)  [Next](mtsi127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### 33. THE TAR BABY (63)

Rabbit devoured some vegetables growing in a garden and the people were
angry with him. They watched for him but did not see him. They
considered how they could catch him. "We might do this," they thought.
So they made a doll out of pine tar and set it up between the rows of
peas.

While the doll was standing there Rabbit came and saw what he thought
was a little black man. He said to it, "Get out of my way at once. If
you do not I will kill you." The little black man stood still, not
moving a particle. Rabbit wanted him to move. He went closer, but that
little black man wouldn't move. "If you do not move I will know why,"
said Rabbit, but the doll stood motionless. Then Rabbit came closer. He
came very close but it did not move. "I will hit you unless you move at
once," he said, and when it did not move Rabbit hit it, but one of his
hands got stuck. "Let go of me," he said to the little black man, "I
have still another hand." When he hit it with the other hand that also
stuck. "I have still my head," he said. He poked him with that and his
head stuck. "I still have my feet," be said. So he kicked it with one
foot and his foot stuck. "I have another foot," he said. He kicked it
with his other foot and that also stuck. He could do nothing more. He
was stuck to the doll.

Then Rabbit talked to the doll. "You are holding me, although I was only
talking to you in jest. Let me go and hereafter we will be friends." So
Rabbit spoke to it, but it was not a person. It did not talk to him and
so Rabbit stayed there. Next day the man who had charge of the garden
came, caught Rabbit and beat him to death.

This is how it is told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. The Tar Baby (Second Version)](mtsi127)
