[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi189)  [Next](mtsi191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 54. RABBIT AND BIG MAN-EATER (65)

Big Man-eater traveled along until he came to a town where he killed and
ate all of the people. On the way to another town he met Rabbit, who
said, "At this town all the people have run off. I kill and eat people
and here are their bones." When he met Big Man-eater he carried over his
shoulder a child with a stick run through it. Then they sat down beside
the trail to defecate. Both shut their eyes, and when they defecated Big
Man-eater evacuated bones while Rabbit passed only grass. Rabbit opened
his eyes, picked up Big Man-eater's excrement and put it under himself
and took his own and placed it under Big Man-eater. When both finally
opened their eyes, Big Man-eater said, "Hīha, I never passed anything
like this before." The next time both defecated with their eyes open and
Rabbit passed nothing but grass while Big Man-eater defecated bones.

After that they struck up a friendship. Rabbit said, "Let us go to
Tree-falling-down Camp." So they set out. When they arrived Rabbit said,
"Wait right here while I hunt for a good camping place." He went on
until he saw a tree that shook and was ready to fall, when he called his
companion. "Over here there is a good place," he said and Big Man-eater
went there.

When night came, both lay down, and, while Big Man-eater slept, Rabbit
awoke and pushed the tree down upon him. Then he threw small limbs upon
himself and made a noise as if he had been hurt. Big Man-eater pushed
the tree away and woke up. "This camp is always like that," said Rabbit.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Next time Rabbit said, "Let us go to Ashes-thrown-on Camp," and they
started off. When they got there and had made camp Rabbit picked up a
quantity of wood, kindled it, and made a big fire. But after the two had
lain down Rabbit awoke, gathered up a lot of hot ashes on some bark with
which he had provided himself, and threw them on Big Man-eater. On
himself he threw cold ashes. Big Man-eater was badly hurt.

In the morning Rabbit said, "Let us go to Jumping-bluff Creek," and they
started on. After they had traveled for a while they reached the place
and went down the creek. "Let us jump across it and back four times,"
said Rabbit. Rabbit jumped first four times. When Big Man-eater prepared
to jump Rabbit held for him the bag he was carrying. Before Big
Man-eater had jumped four times he fell from the bluff into the water.
The water rose and Big Man-eater went down into it. "My friend is gone;
he is going far out into the sea," said Rabbit. Rabbit, however, took
Big Man-eater's bag and started home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 55. Rabbit And Big Man-eater (Second Version)](mtsi191)
