[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi266)  [Next](mtsi268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### 2. THE ROLLING HEAD (16)

There were two brothers by the same mother living together. After some
time a woman came to them and they left it to each other who would take
her. Finally the younger brother took her. These brothers were always
going about fishing, and one time they found a big fish which they
wanted to catch. Then the elder brother said to the other, "If we get
hickory bark and plait it into a rope and you tie it about your waist, I
can throw you into the water, and you can pull the fish out." They did
so, but when the younger brother was thrown into the water he jerked
about so much that the rope broke and the big fish swallowed him. Then
the big fish began going round and swam up the creek. The remaining
brother began running around asking everything he could see to help him,
such as the wolf, opossum, polecat, etc. Meanwhile he could hear his
brother singing inside of the fish. All of the things he asked to help
him would get scared when they saw the fish coming toward them. Finally
he came to the Kingfisher and asked him, and the Kingfisher replied,
"That is my trade." Then the Kingfisher perched on a limb over the water
and the fish came toward him, shooting about as he came. The Kingfisher
would dart toward him and then go back to the limb, shaking himself and
shouting. Finally the fish drifted a little way off, turned over on its
side, and drifted about until it came up to the bank of the creek. Now,
the elder brother seized the fish, dragged it ashore, and cut open its
big belly with a mussel shell. Inside he found his brother's head still
singing, but his body had been ground entirely up. Then his brother's
head spoke up, saying, "Wash me and place me on a log." After this was
done it said, "Go home and tell your sister-in-law that we never can go
together and be the way we were before. I will be there in the early
daylight." He added that he would sing most of the time, and talk only a
short time.

After the elder brother got home he and the woman talked all night about
what had happened, and about dawn they heard the younger brother coming
singing. He was flying through the air and he alighted upon the top of
the house. He said, "Is my sister-in-law <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68) lying there?" His brother answered, "She
is lying there." "Ho" he said. Then the head began to sing. After a time
he spoke again, "I wonder what I could do to kill you." And he added,
"If we go over yonder we shall find a lot of palū's (a wild fruit like
grapes, perhaps the muscadine). I thought my sister-in-law could eat
some of that." So after daylight they went with him, and when they
arrived there the head climbed up into the tree and began eating this
fruit itself. He would throw nothing down except the skins

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

which were left. Every now and then the head asked, "Is my sister-in-law
eating them?" and the brother replied, "Yes, she is eating them." After
awhile a Crow came to the two standing below and said, "This head up in
the tree will kill you. Let me fool him while you run off. There is a
dirt-dauber (Natchez, melola) living near by. Go to him and he will help
you," So the two ran off to the dirt-dauber's while the crow remained in
their places, answering the head. After some time the head said, "There
is a voice that I do not know. I guess these berries are so sour that
they make our voices sound differently." Upon this he looked down and
saw the Crow beneath, upon which the Crow flew up, crying "Ha ha ha ha."
Then the head started off on the trail of the man and woman, saying as
he went, "Dī<u>x</u> dī<u>x</u> dī<u>x</u> dī<u>x</u> dī<u>x</u>." Just
as the fugitives had reached the door of the dirt-dauber's house the
woman had stumbled and fallen full length on the ground. When the head
came there he asked if the man and woman had arrived, and the
dirt-dauber answered, "I have not seen any woman." "Why, I see the print
of where the woman fell. Verendorum suorum imaginem humo impressam
video." "Well, you can hunt for her," said the dirt-dauber, and the head
entered.

Now the dirt-dauber had turned the woman into a man who lay on a bed on
one side of the house while the real man lay on a bed on the other side.
The head of the younger brother looked first at one and then at the
other. First he spoke to the woman, saying, "Miror an mane e lectulo
surgens super domus tectum mingere possis," ac dicebat *Pelopaeus
lunatus* (dirt-dauber) "Permitte ut ille te hoc facientem videat." Foras
exibant, atque ad hoc faciendum ea se praeparabat dum caput appropinquat
intenteque observat. Deinde plane super tectum ea mingebat. Postea domum
ingrediebantur, atque caput alterum rogabat ut idem faceret. Deinde hic
alter exibat atque caput intente uti antea observabat. Quum vero
mingeret urinam usque ad mediam tantum altitudinem parietis
ejaculabatur, et caput cachinnabatur. The dirt-dauber had a number of
pottery vessels which he had made, sitting in a row. The head now asked
the man who had been a woman, "Could you shoot an arrow through four of
those jars?" and the dirt-dauber said, "Let him see you shoot through
them." So the man who had been a woman shot at them and her arrow passed
through all four. Then the head asked the other man to do the same
thing, and the dirt-dauber said, "Shoot them; let him see you." But when
this man shot he made a hole through only one. The head laughed at him.
Then the head began wandering about. Finally he spoke out and said to
the former woman, "Can you go hunting and kill something for me to eat?"
The dirt-dauber said, "Hunt for him," and the woman went hunting,
followed by the head. She killed a deer for him and said, "Here it is,"
but after examining it

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

he started off after her without touching it. Then she killed another
deer and the head acted as before. By and by they came to a creek, and
the man's head said to his companion, "Let us swim." So she stepped into
the water, and the head also jumped in. Then she dived under water and
came out on the other side. As she did so she made a noise under water
and said to the human head, "That is your home." As soon as the man
reached the other side he turned back into a woman, upon which the head
began to shout and tumble around, but it could not follow her out.

The woman, however, walked out of the water and started on westward. On
the way she came to be with child by something and gave birth to several
children which she put into a hollow cane. Presently she came to a place
where lived a chief who had several wives, and she became his wife also.
She soon became the chief's favorite, and the others became angry and
began talking about her. "She is shaming us a great deal," they said. So
they determined to have a corn parching contest, and set a time for it.
The day having come the favorite wife took a humming bird, which was one
of the children she had borne on the way, out of her cane and sent it to
the dirt-dauber after popcorn. It went to the dirt-dauber and brought
back the sharp point of a grain of corn. Meanwhile the other women were
all busy carrying corn back and forth in baskets to parch it. "When you
are all through," said the favorite wife, "I will use your pots to parch
mine in." When she put this piece of grain into the pot it began popping
and swelling, and the house was finally filled with the popcorn which
ran outside and covered up all that the other women had parched. They
said, "Where has this woman come from that has shamed us so?" Deinde
dicebant mulieres, "De pilis verendorum nostrorum contendemus." Mulier
inde iteram ad *Pelopaeum lunatum* (dirt-dauber) suum *Trochilum
colubrem* (humming bird) mandabat qui pilum unum verendis ejus
imponendum reportabat. Ad tempus uxores omnes ordine ante principem
stabant qui ad domus portam stabat, de certamine arbitrium acturus. Quum
omnes mulieres vestitus suos elevassent pili uxoris quae in maxima
gratia erat usque infra genua pertinere videbantur. Itaque iterum ea
vincebat, atque aliae mulieres mirabantur ubinam ille hanc quae tantam
eis infamiam adferret mulierem invenisset. Now they thought of
contesting by means of a ball game. So the favorite wife again sent her
humming bird to the dirt-dauber, and the dirt-dauber said to the humming
bird, "You must tell your mother that she must take all of her children
out of the cane to help her." The other women had planned, as soon as
the game was under way, that they would all jump upon this woman and
kill her. When the day came and the ball was thrown up to begin the game
the favorite wife opened her cane and let out all

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

of her children. One of her children was Thunder and Thunder struck all
of the other women and killed them. She and her children were then left
and her children scattered from her while she herself went
westward. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[215:1](mtsi267.htm#fr_69) The woman has now
become the wife of the elder brother.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[218:1](mtsi267.htm#fr_70) "Went westward" are
favorite words with which to end Natchez stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Cannibal's Seven Sons](mtsi268)
