[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi214)  [Next](mtsi216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15. THE ORPHAN BOY AND RABBIT (6, 62)

Two Indian towns stood on opposite sides of a river, and an Indian of
one town went over to the other, found an orphan child sitting down
defecating outside of a house and carried him across on his back. He
carried him along to his house and set him down on the ground and they
fed him. The man made arrows for him and gave them to him, saying, "Kill
some birds." So he went around killing birds. They said to him, "If
turkeys come do not chase them away but drive them close to this place."
White turkeys came and ran off, but before they had gone far they
stopped and came back. When they came again he chased them a short
distance but soon stopped. When they came again and ran off he went with
them and wanted to keep on running. So he went on after them to the edge
of a cliff under which they flew. They kept, going until they came to a
white town, into which they disappeared. The Indian stood there looking
and then lay down for a few minutes. Then he rose and went on back.
Looking down he walked on (or he walked heedlessly), and lay down upon a
corncrib. Presently his foster father called to him, "Did you see what I
told you about? That is your village." Then he took a little blood from
some food that was cooking and hitting him with it, said, "Have monthly
periods like women." <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) Then he said,
"Kill some birds and bring them here." He went out and killed some blue
jays and some Carolina parrakeets. He also killed two rattlesnakes and
brought them to him. Then he dressed the feathers, stringing them
together, and made a crown for him. And he made leggings for him,
moccasins, and a bag, into which he put rocks. When he made the garters,
he ornamented them with rattles of the rattlesnake, and he showed him a
trail and sent him along it. When he set out and blew upon a flute all
of the birds and rattlesnakes made noises. "When you start along, you
will meet some

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

women each of whom will say, 'Kill for me that bird perched on the
tree.' Kill it for her, but do not pick up your arrow again. Leave it
and go on."

Then he started on and a woman met him who said, "Kill that bird perched
on the tree for me." He killed it for her but left the arrow. "Take your
arrow standing up here," she said, but he left it and went on. As he was
traveling along another one met him find said, "Kill the bird perched on
that tree for me." He killed it for her and went on. Another met him,
asking the same service. He killed the bird for her and went on. Quum
quartae mulieri obvenisset, lapidem quem secum portaverat in vaginam
ejus intrudebat atque dentes qui ibi erant diffringebat.

Going on from this place he met Rabbit. They stood talking to each other
for a while, and Rabbit, who had a white deerskin and cords made of
slippery elm bark, said, "I am going to tie up the legs of turtles and
take them out of the water." He teased the orphan so much to accompany
him that he finally consented to go. So they traveled on together. When
they got to the water the fine clothes were laid down flat on the ground
with the dressed deerskin over them. Then both started into the water
together. "When I say 'Now' we will dive," they said, and when they said
"Now" they dived. Then Rabbit came out quickly and looked about. Not
seeing his companion he got out of the water, tied all of the clothing
up in a bundle and ran off with it. The other, however, stayed in the
water and kept tying up terrapin, and when he came out he had no
clothing. He was very sad. Then he took the terrapins and went on. As he
was traveling along late in the evening he found a persimmon tree, shook
it, and ate of the fruit. After he had eaten enough he shook it again,
picked up some persimmons, mashed them, and rubbed them over his entire
body. It made the surface of his body rough. Then he took the terrapin
and went on. Coming near a house he put the terrapin down in a clay hole
and stood looking at the house. Presently a girl came out and stood for
some minutes regarding him. Then she went back and said to her mother,
"There is a man standing out there." "Oh! you have a person. Go and
bring him here," she said, and the girl went out and brought him in.
When he got to the bed she said, "Sit down here." But he replied, "I am
too dirty. I will sit here," and he moved the bed a little and sat down
on the floor. He remained there until night, when they washed him and
made him lie down. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) So he remained
there and at the end of four days he said, "Let us go to bathe." They
set out. They went down to a big creek near by and as soon as they got
there he dived out of sight under water. After the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

woman had sat waiting for a few minutes he came out on the other side of
the creek. He dived again and came out close by her. After he had done
this four times; he said, "All right." The woman stayed to wash her
hair. Then both came out and returned to the house.

"Tell all of your people to go to the water and look," he said to her.
So his wife told all of her people. They went and looked and the water
was white with the multitudes of fish. They gathered them and put them
into baskets, and, when they had roasted them, they ate.

Not long afterwards the man took his gun and started off. Walking along
close to the creek, he discharged his gun from time to time and
presently returned. "Let all of your people follow my trail," he said.
So they went along where he had been and found dead deer split open
hanging on trees all about. Gathering these, they brought them home,
cooked them, and had lots of venison to eat.

And then he combed his wife's hair and parted it and made a line of red
paint down the middle. He took a war club, stood facing her, and struck
her so that he split her into two women.

After that Rabbit said to his wife in the same way, "Let us go to bathe
in the creek." So they went. When they got to the creek Rabbit dived
into the water and after remaining there a while came out, and they
returned home. When they got there he said to his wife, "Tell all of
your people to go to the creek and look into it." All went down and
looked into the water but there was nothing there except a single minnow
floating upon the surface. They went back without anything.

The day after all had gotten home Rabbit took his gun and went out and
killed a small deer with unbranched horns. He walked on with it, and,
instead of discharging his gun again, he cut the meat up and walked
about hanging it up on trees, after which he came home, "Let them follow
my trail," he said, and his wife told all of her people. On following
his trail about they found one small piece of meat hanging up. They did
not want to hunt longer and went home. "That is a foolish, lying man,"
all said.

Next Rabbit made his wife sit down, combed her hair, and parted it. He
stood facing her, seized something like a war club, struck her, and
killed her.

Then Rabbit ran off and was pursued by dogs. He got inside of a hollow
tree and the people seized sticks and hit about in it for a while but
did not know how to get him out. Then they went to get an ax, saying to
Blue Crane, "You have a good voice. Stay and keep watch of him and call
for us if it is necessary." They made him stay there and went off to
hunt for an ax.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

After Crane had stood on guard for a while, Rabbit said, "Look in and
see what I have here." When he tried to look inside, Rabbit said, "Give
me some small, strong twine." He gave it to him. Then he tied up Crane's
neck. He tied him up inside, came out, broke a switch off, and whipped
him. After he had whipped him for a while Crane called loudly. Then the
people came running, but before they got there Rabbit ran off and
disappeared. He had whipped Crane very severely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[178:1](mtsi215.htm#fr_55) Some element is
missing in this part of the story. The boy is made to visit the town of
the white turkeys and is afterwards told that it was the one to which he
belonged. Why a feminine organic function was afterwards bestowed upon
him is not explained.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[179:1](mtsi215.htm#fr_56) The story teller
forgot to mention the terrapins again, though they played a part in the
hero's cordial reception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. The Story of Crow](mtsi216)
