[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi276)  [Next](mtsi278) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. ADOPTION OF THE HUMAN RACE

### (SECOND VERSION)

An old man looked at human beings and held a meeting attended by
Thunder, Wind, Rainbow, Fire, Sun, Moon, and Water. Thunder said,
"Perhaps all of the people in the world will be my children," but the
old person answered, "It will not be so. They will be your

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

grandchildren, your friends. You will take away anything dangerous from
them." Wind also asked to have them for his children. "That shall not
happen either. They shall be your grandchildren, he said. Rainbow asked
to have them as his children. "It can't be. They shall be your
grandchildren," the old man answered. Sun asked to make them his
children. "It can't be," said the old man, "they shall be your nephews,
your friends." Moon asked to have them as his children. "It can't be.
They shall be your nephews, your friends." Fire also asked to have them
as his children. "It can't be," he replied. "They shall be your
grandchildren. You can warm them and cook their food as long as you
live. They shall be your grandchildren." Water also asked to have them
as children. "It can't be. You can have them as your friends, as your
grandchildren, and keep them nice and clean. Your name will be
Long-person. I can not let them be your children. They are my children,"
said he from the place where be sat. This is what they always used to
say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. The Cannibal](mtsi278)
