[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi175)  [Next](mtsi177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 40. THE BIG LIZARD (HANABIA TCOBA) <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) (33)

Some men were hunting about in the woods for bear and one of them threw
fire down inside of a hollow tree. The others waited beneath ready to
shoot. Presently a big lizard came out. One man shot at him but missed
him and he came down, jumping to the ground from a considerable height.
Then all ran away.

The big lizard followed one of these, who became so weak he could hardly
walk. It seized him, carried him back to the tree, and fed him to its
young ones. Then it followed another and he became weak. It seized him
and brought him to the tree. It trailed another and got him.

When it started after the last one, the man who had put fire into the
tree came down and ran off. It followed the other person and seized him.
And then it pursued the man who had run off last, and he became weak.
When he had nearly gotten to a river he could just crawl along, but he
jumped down the bank, got into a skiff (or canoe), pushed off, and
drifted down the stream. The big lizard reached the stream and crossed
it. It crossed without seeing him and went back again. After it had
crossed and recrossed three or four times without finding him it went
back to its den.

Then the man crossed over and went home. At the camp he told the others
about it. After a while some Shawnee Indians wanted to try to kill the
big lizard and he went with them to show it to them and tell them about
it. He was afraid but he climbed up into a tree again and threw fire
down into the lizard's den. Again the big lizard came out of the hollow
tree.

Now the Shawnee <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) went around the
hollow tree in circles and caused it to be boggy. Presently the lizard
jumped down but it could not walk in the bog. Then the Shawnee ran up
and killed it with their tomahawks. They rubbed its mouth with tobacco
so that it would not return to life. Under the tree were found the bones
of many persons whom the lizard had killed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[153:1](mtsi176.htm#fr_45) This is said to
resemble a scorpion and to have a red mouth.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[153:2](mtsi176.htm#fr_46) Shawnee formerly
trapped beaver near the present Alabama settlement but it is not thought
that this story was obtained from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 41. The Black Snake](mtsi177)
