[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi075)  [Next](mtsi077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 74. RABBIT RIDES WOLF (61)

### (THIRD VERSION)

(Tuggle collection)

The Rabbit wanted to get a wife and the Wolf was courting at the same
house.

The Wolf being finer looking made the better impression, so Rabbit one
day said to the ladies:

"The Wolf is my riding horse."

They did not believe him, so he told them he would prove it by riding
him there the next day.

Then Rabbit went to the Wolf's house and said to him: "Let us go
courting to-morrow."

The Wolf agreed and Rabbit told him to call for him the next day so that
they could go together. But when the Wolf called at the Rabbit's house
Rabbit pretended he was too sick to go. He said: "I can not walk, but if
you will carry me on your back I will go." The Wolf consented to carry
him on his back, so Rabbit got up and they started. As they were
ascending a hill the Rabbit fell off and complained that he was still
sick and that he could not stay on unless the Wolf consented to let him
put on spurs. The Wolf agreed and Rabbit put on his spurs to steady him
as he sat on the Wolf's back.

As they went along Rabbit said:

"Suppose you make out you are my horse. You know a horse always gets the
most to eat and has the best time. Wherever we stop I promise to bring
out your dinner first, before I eat."

The Wolf agreed and they went on in a friendly way.

When they got in sight of the house of the ladies, who were looking for
them, Rabbit said:

"Now, we must make a good appearance as we go up near the ladies and you
must caper and dance gaily."

The Wolf said he would do so, and, as they approached the ladies, Rabbit
stuck his spurs into the Wolf's side and up he dashed in fine style.
Then Rabbit fastened his horse to a post, walked up to the ladies and
said:

"You see I told you the truth. There is my horse."

They were pleased at this and so he won his bride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 75. The Tar Baby](mtsi077)
