[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi094)  [Next](mtsi096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. THE ORIGIN OF TOBACCO (15)

A man had lost his horses and was looking for them. A woman was also
hunting for horses. They, the man and the woman, met and talked to each
other. They sat talking together under a hickory tree which cast a good
shade. The woman said, "I am hunting for some horses that have been
hidden away." The man said," I am also hunting for horses." As they sat
talking something occurred to the man and he spoke to his companion as
follows, "I am hunting about for horses; you too are hunting about for
horses. Let us be friends, and lie here together, after which we will
start on." The woman considered the matter and said, "All right." Both
lay down, and when they got up the man went on his way and the woman
went on hers.

Next summer the man was looking for horses again and happened to pass
near the place where he and the woman had talked. The man thought, "I
will go by that place just to look at it." When he got there he saw that
a weed had grown up right where they had lain, but he did not know what
it was. He stood looking at it for a while and then started off. He
traveled on and told the old men about it.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He said, "I saw something like this and this
growing," and one answered, "Examine it to see whether it is good. When
it is ripe we will find out what it is."

Afterwards the man started off to look at it. He saw that it had grown
still bigger. He dug close about it to soften the soil and it grew still
better. He took care of it and saw the leaves grow larger. When it
blossomed the flowers were pretty, and he saw that they were big. When
they ripened the seeds were very small. He took the seeds from the hull,
gathered leaves, and took them to the old men. They looked at these but
did not know what the plant was. After they had looked at them in vain
for some time they gave it up.

Then one of them pulverized the leaves and put them into a cob pipe,
lighted it and smoked it. The aroma was grateful. All of the old men
said, "The leaves of the thing are good," and they named it. They called
it hitci (which m cans both "see" and "tobacco"), they say. Therefore
woman and man together created tobacco. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[88:1](mtsi095.htm#fr_25) As to the origin of
the name see [p. 19](mtsi011.htm#page_19).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Origin of Wolves](mtsi096)
