[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi265)  [Next](mtsi267) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

# NATCHEZ STORIES

### 1. THE FLOOD (2)

A certain man had a Dog. One day the Dog looked westward and began
howling. The man also had a hen and chickens which began to dance about
in the stomp dance. Then the man said to his Dog, "Why are you howling?"
"I have discovered something that is making me howl. In about four days
everything is going to be overflowed by water. You ought to make a raft
on which to escape, gather all the wood you can on top of it, and keep a
little fire burning upon it. When you have finished the raft plait a
hickory rope with which to tie it so that it will not drift off into the
ocean."

After the man had gotten everything gathered together the mountains
burst open and water poured from them, flooding everything. He and the
Dog got on the raft. The Dog had said, "When all of the mountains burst
open all kinds of dangerous creatures will appear. Therefore, get a
forked stick made of sumac, take the bark off, and use it to push away
anything that comes toward your raft." When the water rose the raft rose
upon it, and many people could be seen climbing up into trees. When it
rose still higher the man could see all sorts of dangerous creatures
swimming about devouring people. Finally the flood rose so high that all
living things were drowned out and he was carried far up above the
clouds where the country looked as it does on earth, all mountains and
rocks. There were also all kinds of cedars and birds hanging to them.
Then the Dog asked him to throw him off, saying, "You will go back by
yourself to the place from which you started. When the water begins to
fall you must return, but you must stay on the raft seven days before
you get off. It will be too boggy until then." After some hesitation the
man obeyed his Dog and threw him off into the water. On the seventh day
after his return people began to appear to get fire from that he had on
his raft. Some of them were naked, some wore ragged clothes, and some
wore very good clothes. After they had divided the fire up and the
ground had begun to get firm he kept hearing noises toward the east as
if there were people there. He went in that direction in order to find
them, but when he reached the place where he had thought they were he
found none, and the noises turned out to have been made by all kinds of
bugs and mosquitoes. By and by an old man came and stood near him. He
said, "All these noises you hear are made by people you think are not
living. You must know that they are living. The people that came to get
fire were people that had died a long time ago. Some had not been dead
so long as others. They have kept on living until the present
time." <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_67)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[214:1](mtsi266.htm#fr_68) For another Natchez
version of the flood legend see Bull. 73, Bur, Amer. Ethn., p. 316.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Rolling Head](mtsi267)
