[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi218)  [Next](mtsi220) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 19. THUNDER AND LAIGATONŌHONA

Thunder used to beat everyone playing with the chunk stone. On one
occasion he won all of the property from a certain man and finally his
wife. When the man was stingy of her and would not give her up Thunder
took fire and blew it on him so that he burned him all over. So the man
ran away. Walking by the side of a river he heard someone pounding iron.
He went to the place and found that Iron-woman was making the noise.
When he reached her Iron-woman said, "Sit down on my bed," but he
answered, "No; I am dirty." Then she took him to the water, and, when
she put him in, the minnows ate off all of the burned meat so that he
got well. Then Iron-woman said, "I want you to win everything back from
him," and she made arrows for him with which he started back. Iron-woman
also said to him, "When you arrive Thunder will say, 'Let us gamble
together as we formerly did.' Then say to him, 'My arrows are not very
good.' He will say 'Crane has a good one; let him loan it to you.'" It
happened so, but the man went to get his own arrows. When they played
the man won everything from Thunder, including his wife, but Thunder was
stingy of her. Then the person blew fire on him and burned him and made
him run off. He pursued him round all of the four corners of the earth,
blowing fire upon him. He burned him so that his bones were split and
dropped down. Laigatonōhona ("dung roller"), <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) which was this person's name, picked them
up and made a feather headdress out of them. They are stuck on his head
to this day. Thunder, however, disappeared in the east. This is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[184:1](mtsi219.htm#fr_57) An insect which rolls
balls of cow manure about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. Thunder](mtsi220)
