[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil58)  [Next](egil60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LVIII.  
  
*Of king Eric and Egil.*  
  

        King Eric heard the concluding words of Egil that he spake last
at the Thing, and his wrath waxed hot. But all men had gone weaponless
to the Thing, therefore the king attempted no attack. He bade his men
hasten to their ships, and they did as he bade. Then, when they came to
the strand, the king summoned his household Thing, and told them his
purpose.  
        'We must now,' said he, 'untent our ships and row after
Arinbjorn and Egil, and this I will have you know, that we will take
Egil's life if we get the chance, and spare no man who shall stand up
for him.'  
        After that they went aboard, made all ready as speedily as might
be, and pushed out the ships and rowed to the place where Arinbjorn's
ships had been. These were now all gone. Then the king bade that they
should row after them northwards by the sound. And when he came to
Sogn-sea, then there was Arinbjorn's company rowing in towards
Sheeping-sound, and thither the king turned in after them, and he came
up with Arinbjorn's ship in the inner part of Sheeping-sound. At once
the king made for it, and they exchanged words. The king asked whether
Egil was in the ship. Arinbjorn answered.  
        'Egil is not here,' he said; 'that, O king, thou mayest at once
see. Here on board on none but those whom thou knowest; and Egil will
not be found down under the benches, though thou shouldst seek him
there.'  
        The king asked Arinbjorn what he knew latest of Egil. He said
that Egil was on a cutter with thirty men, and they took their way out
to Stone-sound. Then the king told his men to row by the inner sound,
and shape their course so as to meet Egil.  
        There was a man named Kettle Hod; he was of king Eric's guard,
an Uplander by family. He was pilot on the king's ship, and steered the
same. Kettle was a tall man and a handsome; he was near of kin to the
king. And 'twas generally said that he and the king were like in
appearance.  
        Now Egil, before going to the Thing, had had his ship launched
and the cargo put on board. And after parting with Arinbjorn, he and his
went their way to Stone-sound, till they came to his ship, which lay
there afloat in the haven with tent overspread. Then they went up aboard
the ship, but the cutter rode beside the rudder of the ship between the
land and the ship, and the oars lay there in the loops.  
        Next morning, when day had hardly dawned, the watch were aware
that some ships were rowing for them. But when Egil saw that it was an
enemy, he stood up and bade that they should leap into the cutter. He
armed himself at once, as did they all. Egil took up those chests of
silver which king Athelstan gave him, and bore them with him. They leapt
armed into the cutter, and rowed forward between the land and the
long-ship that was advancing nearest to the land; this was king Eric's
ship. But, as it happened suddenly and there was little light, the two
ships ran past each other. And when the stern-castles were opposite,
then Egil hurled a spear and smote in the middle the man who sat
steering, Kettle Hod to wit, and at once he got his bane. Then king Eric
called out and bade men row after Egil and his party, but as their
vessels ran past Egil's merchant-ship, the king's men leapt aboard of
that. And those of Egil's men who had been left behind, and not leapt
into the cutter, were all slain who could be caught, but some escaped to
land. Ten men of Egil's followers were lost there.  
        Some ships rowed after Egil, but some plundered the
merchant-ship. All the booty on board was taken, and the ship burnt. But
those who rowed after Egil pulled hard; two at each oar, and they could
even so take the rowing by turns. For they had no lack of men on board,
while Egil's crew was short, they being now but eighteen on the cutter.
So the distance between them lessened. But inside of the island was a
shallow sound between it and other islands. It was now low water. Egil
and his rowers ran their cutter into that shallow sound, but the
long-ships could not float there; thus pursuers and pursued were parted.
The king then turned back southwards, but Egil went north to seek
Arinbjorn. Then sang Egil a stave:  
  
                                'Wakener of weapon-din,  
                                The warlike prince, hath wrought  
                                (Where I escaped scot-free)  
                                Scathe on our gallant ten.  
                                Yet sped my hand a spear,  
                                Like springing salmon swift,  
                                That rushed and Kettle's ribs  
                                Rent sore with deathful wound.'  
  
        Egil came to Arinbjorn, and told him these tidings. Arinbjorn
said that he could expect nothing better in dealing with king Eric. 'But
you shall not want for money, Egil. I will make good the loss of your
ship, and give you another, in which you can well sail to Iceland.'
Asgerdr, Egil's wife, had remained at Arinbjorn's while they went to the
Thing. Arinbjorn gave Egil a good sea-worthy ship, and had it laden with
such things as Egil wished. This ship Egil got ready for sea, and again
he had a crew of about thirty men. Then he and Arinbjorn parted in
friendship. And Egil sang:  
  
                                'Requite him, righteous gods,  
                                For robbery of my wealth!  
                                Hunt him away, be wroth,  
                                High Odin, heavenly powers!  
                                Foe of his folk, base king,  
                                May Frey and Njord make flee!  
                                Hate him, land-guardians, hate,  
                                Who holy ground hath scorn'd!'  
  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LIX. King Eric slays his brothers.](egil60.md)
