[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil92.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XCII.  
  

Of Thorstein's descendants.  

  
        Thorstein Egil's son received baptism when Christianity came to
Iceland, and he had a church built at Borg. He was true to the faith,
and a good man. He lived to be old, and died in his bed; he was buried
at Borg by the church which he had built.  
        From Thorstein have come numerous descendants; many great men,
many poets: they are of the stock of the Myra-men, as are all who sprang
from Skallagrim. It long held good of that kin that the men were tall,
and great warriors, some too were of prophetic sight. They were of two
distinct types: for in that stock have been born the handsomest men in
Iceland—such were Thorstein Egil's son, and Kjartan Olaf's son, sister's
son of Thorstein, and Hall Gudmund's son, also Helga the fair,
Thorstein's daughter (about whom Gunnlaug Worms-tongue and Skald-raven
quarrelled). But the more part of the Myra-men were very ill-favoured.  
        Of the brothers, sons of Thorstein, Thorgeir was the strongest,
Skuli was the tallest. He dwelt at Borg after the days of Thorstein his
father. Skuli was long time out freebooting. He was forecastleman of
earl Eric on the Iron Ram when king Olaf Tryggvason fell. Skuli was in
seven battles, and was deemed a great warrior and a brave. He afterwards
came out to Iceland, settled in the house at Borg, and dwelt there till
old age; many have been his descendants. And so ends this story.  
  
