[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil11)  [Next](egil13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XI.  
  
*The king feasts with Thorolf.*  
  

        King Harold went that summer to Halogaland, and banquets were
made ready against his coming, both where his estates were, and also by
barons and powerful landowners. Thorolf prepared a banquet for the king
at great cost; it was fixed for when the king should come there. To this
he bade a numerous company, the best men that could be found. The king
had about three hundred men with him when he came to the banquet, but
Thorolf had five hundred present. Thorolf had caused a large granary to
be fitted up where the drinking should be, for there was no hall large
enough to contain all that multitude. And all around the building
shields were hung.  
        The king sate in the high seat; but when the foremost bench was
filled, then the king looked round, and he turned red, but spoke not,
and men thought they could see he was angry. The banquet was
magnificent, and all the viands of the best. The king, however, was
gloomy; he remained there three nights, as had been intended. On the day
when the king was to leave Thorolf went to him, and offered that they
should go together down to the strand. The king did so, and there,
moored off the land, floated that dragon-ship which Thorolf had had
built, with tent and tackling complete. Thorolf gave the ship to the
king, and prayed the king to believe that he had gathered such numbers
for this end, to show the king honour, and not to enter into rivalry
with him. The king took Thorolf's words well, and then became merry and
cheerful. Many added their good word, saying (as was true) that the
banquet was most splendid, and the farewell escort magnificent, and that
the king gained much strength by such men. Then they parted with much
affection.  
The king went northwards through Halogaland as he had purposed, and
returned south as summer wore on. He went to yet other banquets there
that were prepared for him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XII. Hildirida's sons talk with Harold.](egil13)
