[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil87)  [Next](egil89.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LXXXVII.  
  

Of Egil and Aunund Sjoni.  

  
        The next day Egil Skallagrimsson went to the Thing-brink, and
with him Thorstein and all their party. Thither came also Aunund and
Steinar, Tongue-Odd and Einar, and company. And when the law pleadings
were finished, then stood up Egil and spoke thus: 'Are Steinar and
Aunund, father and son, present, so that they can hear my words?' Aunund
answered that they were.  
        'Then will I,' said Egil, 'deliver my judgment between Steinar
and Thorstein. I begin the cause with this: Grim my father came to this
island, and took to him here all the land of Myrar and the district
round about, and chose him a homestead at Borg, and assigned a parcel of
land thereto, but gave to his friends choice of land outside that same,
in which they have since settled. To Ani he gave a homestead at
Anabrekka, where Aunund and Steinar have hitherto dwelt. We all know
this, Steinar, what are the landmarks between Borg and Anabrekka, that
the chief one is Hafs-brook. Now therefore not from ignorance, Steinar,
did you act in grazing on Thorstein's land, for you, Steinar, and you,
Aunund, might know that Ani received the land of my father Grim: but you
encroached on his land, thinking that he would be so degenerate as
tamely to submit to your robbery. But Thorstein slew two thralls of
yours. Now it is evident to all that these died for their ill-deeds, and
are therefore unatonable, nay, even had they been free men, yet had they
been unatonable, no fine could have been claimed for them. But as for
you, Steinar, seeing that you devised to rob my son Thorstein of his
property which he took with my authority, and I took by inheritance
after my father, you shall therefore lose your land at Anabrekka, and
have no payment for the same. And further, you shall have neither
homestead nor lodgment here in the district south of Long-river. And you
must quit Anabrekka before flitting days are past; else may you,
immediately after flitting days, be slain with impunity by any who wish
to help Thorstein, if you refuse to go away or break any of these terms
that I have pronounced for you.'  
        But when Egil sat down, then Thorstein named witnesses to his
decision.  
        Then spoke Aunund Sjoni: ''Twill be said, Egil, that this
judgment which you have given and pronounced is very crooked. And what I
have to say is this: hitherto I have done all I could to prevent strife,
but henceforth I shall not spare to do what I can to harm Thorstein.'
'This I forebode,' said Egil, 'that the longer our quarrel lasts, the
worse will be the fortune of you and your son. I thought you must have
known, Aunund, that I have held mine own before men quite as great as
are you and your son. But for Odd and Einar, who have so eagerly thrust
themselves into this cause, they have reaped therefrom due honour.'  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXXXVIII. Of Thorgeir.](egil89.md)
