[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil35)  [Next](egil37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXXV.  
  
*Thorolf goes abroad.*  
  

        Thora bare a child in the summer; it was a girl. She was
sprinkled with water, and named Asgerdr. Bera got a woman to look after
the girl. Bjorn stayed for the winter with Skallagrim as did all his
shipmates. Thorolf struck up a friendship with Bjorn, and was ever in
his company. But when spring came, one day Thorolf had a talk with his
father, and asked him what counsel he would give about Bjorn his winter
guest, or what help he would lend him. Grim asked Thorolf what Bjorn had
in view.  
        'I think,' said Thorolf, 'that Bjorn would soonest go to Norway,
if he could be there in peace. Methinks, father, this plan lies before
us, that you send men to Norway to offer atonement for Bjorn; Thorir
will greatly honour your word.'  
        Thorolf by his persuasion so managed that Skallagrim yielded and
gave men for the outward voyage that summer. These went with message and
tokens to Thorir Hroaldsson, and sought atonement between him and Bjorn.
But no sooner did Brynjolf hear this than he, too, set his whole mind to
offer atonement for Bjorn. And the end of this matter was that Thorir
took atonement for Bjorn, because he saw that it had come to this now
that Bjorn had nothing to fear. Thus Brynjolf got atonement accepted for
Bjorn, and Skallagrim's messengers abode with Thorir for the winter. In
the summer following they went back; and on their coming back in autumn
they told their tidings that Bjorn was admitted to atonement in Norway.
Bjorn was with Skallagrim for yet a third winter. But next spring he
made him ready for departure with his following. And when Bjorn was
ready for going, then Bera said she would fain have Asgerdr, her
foster-child, left-behind. This Bjorn accepted, and the girl was left
behind and brought up with Skallagrim's family. Thorolf, Skallagrim's
son, settled to go with Bjorn, and Skallagrim gave him mean for the
journey. So he went abroad in the summer with Bjorn. Their voyage sped
well, and they came off the main into Sogn-sea. Bjorn then sailed into
Sogn, and thence on home to his father, and Thorolf with him. Brynjolf
received them joyfully. Then word was sent to Thorir Hroaldsson. He and
Brynjolf set a time for a meeting; to this meeting Bjorn also came. He
and Thorir there ratified their atonement. Then Thorir paid out of hand
such property in his house as belonged to Thora; and thereafter Thorir
and Bjorn were good brothers-in-law and friends. Bjorn then stayed at
home at Aurland with Brynjolf, Thorolf also being there in much favour
both with father and son.  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXXVI. Of Eric Bloodaxe and Thorolf.](egil37.md)
