[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil88)  [Next](egil90.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LXXXVIII.  
  

Of Thorgeir.  

  
        Thorgeir Blund was there at the Thing, Egil's sister's son; he
had given Thorstein much help in this suit. He begged father and son to
give him some land out there on the Moors. Hitherto he had dwelt south
of White-river below Blunds-water. Egil received the request well, and
persuaded Thorstein to let him come thither. So they settled Thorgeir at
Anabrekka, but Steinar moved house beyond Long-river and settled down at
Leiru-brook. But Egil rode home southwards to Ness, father and son
parting on friendly terms.  
        There was a man with Thorstein named Iri, fleet of foot and keen
of sight above others; he was a foreigner, a freedman of Thorstein's,
but he still had the care of his flocks, and especially to gather the
wethers up to the fell in spring, and in autumn down to the fold. Now,
after flitting days, Thorstein bade gather the wethers that had been
left behind in spring, meaning to have them driven to the fell. Iri was
there in the sheepfold, but Thorstein and his house-carles rode up to
the fell, being eight in all. Thorstein was having a fence made across
Grisar-tongue, between Long-water and Cleave-river; at which many of his
men were employed in the spring. After inspecting his house-carles' work
here, Thorstein rode homewards. Now as he came over against the
Thing-field, Iri came running to meet them, and said that he wished to
speak to Thorstein alone. Thorstein bade his companions ride on while
they spoke together. Iri said he had gone up to Einkunnir that day, and
looked to the sheep. 'But I saw,' said he, 'in the wood above the winter
road the gleam of twelve spears and some shields.' Then Thorstein said
in a loud voice, so that his companions could hear: 'Why can he be in
such a hurry to see me that I may not ride on my way home? However
Aulvald will think it strange that I refuse him the visit if he is
sick.' Iri then ran up to the fell as fast as he could. Thorstein said
to his companions: 'I think we must lengthen our way, for we must first
ride south to Aulvaldstead. Aulvald send me word I am to go to him. And
he will think it no more than a fair return for the ox that he gave me
last autumn that I should go and see him, if he deems the matter
important.' Whereupon Thorstein with his company rode south by the moor
above Stangar-holt, and so on south to Gufa-river, and down along the
river by the riding-path. And when they came down below the lake, they
saw south of the river man cattle and a man with them. He was a
house-carle of Aulvald's. Thorstein asked whether all was well there. He
said that all was well, and that Aulvald was in the copse cutting wood.
'Then tell him,' said Thorstein, 'if he has an urgent errand with me, to
come to Borg, for I will now ride home.' And so he did. It was
afterwards learnt that Steinar, with eleven more, had lain in ambush at
Einkunnir that same day. Thorstein made as though he had heard nought of
it, and things remained quiet.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXXXIX. Thorstein goes to a feast.](egil90.md)
