[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil76)  [Next](egil78.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LXXVI.  
  

Egil comes to landowner Alf.  
  

Egil said to his comrades that he would go on his way and abide no
longer. Thorfinn had a son named Helgi, a valiant man. Father and son
offered Egil their company through the wood. They said they knew for a
fact that Armod Beard had put six men into the wood to lie in wait for
them, and it was likely that there would be more ambushed in the wood in
case the first should fail. There were with Thorfinn four that offered
to go. Then Egil sang a stave:  
  
                        'If four with me follow,  
                        Thou findest not six men  
                        With us bloody sword-blows  
                        To barter in fight.  
                        And if he with eight go,  
                        Undaunted in courage  
                        On twelve black-browed Egil  
                        The battle will dare.'  
  
Thorfinn and his men decided to go into the wood with Egil: thus they
were eight in all. And when they came where the ambush was set, they saw
men there. But these house-carles of Armod who were in ambush, on seeing
that the travellers were eight in number, thought they were overmatched,
and hid them away in the wood. And when Egil's party came where the
liers-in-wait had been, they saw that all was not peaceful. And now Egil
said that Thorfinn and his men should go back, but they offered to go
further. However Egil would not have it, and bade them go home; so they
did so and turned back.  
But Egil and his men went on forward, being now four. And as the day
wore on they perceived that there were six men in the wood, and they
were pretty sure that these also were house-carles of Armod. Up leapt
the liers-in-wait and made at them, and they met their charge: and the
encounter ended in Egil's saying two and the rest running back into the
wood.  
Then Egil's company went on their way, and nothing more happened till
they got out of the wood and found lodging near the wood with a
landowner named Alf, who was called Alf the wealthy. He was an old man,
wealthy in money, of a strange temper, so that he could keep but few in
his household. A good reception Egil found there, and with him Alf was
talkative. Egil asked many questions, and Alf told him what he asked.
They spoke much about the earl and the king of Norway's messengers, who
had before gone eastward to gather the tribute. Alf in his talk was no
friend to the earl.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXXVII. Egil gathers tribute.](egil78.md)
