[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil07)  [Next](egil09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER VII.  
  
*Of Bjorgolf, Brynjolf, Bard, and Hildirida.*  
  

        There was a man in Halogaland named Bjorgolf; he dwelt in
Torgar. He was a baron, powerful and wealthy; in strength, stature, and
kindred half hill-giant. He had a son named Brynjolf, who was like his
father. Bjorgolf was now old, and his wife was dead; and he had given
over into his son's hands all business, and found him a wife, Helga,
daughter of Kettle Hæing of Hrafnista. Their son was named Bard; he soon
grew to be tall and handsome, and became a right doughty man.  
        One autumn there was a banquet where many men were gathered,
Bjorgolf and his son being there the most honourable guests. In the
evening they were paired off by lot to drink together, as the old custom
was. Now, there was at the banquet a man named Hogni, owner of a farm in
Leka, a man of great wealth, very handsome, shrewd, but of low family,
who had made his own way. He had a most beautiful daughter, Hildirida by
name; and it fell to her lot to sit by Bjorgolf. They talked much
together that evening, and the fair maiden charmed the old man. Shortly
afterwards the banquet broke up.  
        That same autumn old Bjorgolf journeyed from home in a cutter of
his own, with thirty men aboard. He came to Leka, and twenty of them
went up to the house, while ten guarded the ship. When they came to the
farm, Hogni went out to meet him, and made him welcome, invited him and
his comrades to lodge there, which offer Bjorgolf accepted, and they
entered the room. But when they had doffed their travelling clothes and
donned mantles, then Hogni gave orders to bring in a large bowl of beer;
and Hildirida, the daughter of the house, bare ale to the guests.  
        Bjorgolf called to him Hogni the goodman, and said, 'My errand
here is this: I will have your daughter to go home with me, and will
even now make with her a hasty wedding.'  
        Hogni saw no choice but to let all be as Bjorgolf would; so
Bjorgolf bought her with an ounce of gold, and they became man and wife,
and Hildirida went home with Bjorgolf to Torgar. Brynjolf showed him
ill-pleased at this business. Bjorgolf and Hildirida had two sons; one
was named Harek, the other Hærek.  
        Soon after this Bjorgolf died; but no sooner was he buried than
Brynjolf sent away Hildirida and her sons. She went to her father at
Leka, and there her sons were brought up. They were good-looking, small
of stature, naturally shrewd, like their mother's kin. They were
commonly called Hildirida's sons. Brynjolf made little count of them,
and did not let them inherit aught of their father's. Hildirida was
Hogni's heiress, and she and her sons inherited from him and dwelt in
Leka, and had plenty of wealth. Bard, Brynjolf's son, and Hildirida's
sons were about of an age.  
        Bjorgolf and his son Brynjolf had long held the office of going
to the Finns, and collecting the Finns' tribute.  
        Northwards, in Halogaland is a firth called Vefsnir, and in the
firth lies an island called Alost, a large island and a good, and in
this a farm called Sandness. There dwelt a man named Sigurd, the richest
man thereabouts in the north; he was a baron, and wise of understanding.
He had a daughter named Sigridr; she was thought the best match in
Halogaland, being his only child and sole heiress to her father. Bard
Brynjolf's son journeyed from home with a cutter and thirty men aboard
northwards to Alost, and came to Sigurd at Sandness. There he declared
his business, and asked Sigridr to wife. This offer was well received
and favourable answered, and so it came about that Bard was betrothed to
the maiden. The marriage was to take place the next summer. Bard was
then to come north for the wedding.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER VIII. Of Bard and Thorolf.](egil09)
