[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil85)  [Next](egil87.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER LXXXV.  
  

Of Aunund Sjoni and Steinar his son.  

  
        Aunund Sjoni dwelt at Anabrekka, while Egil dwelt at Borg.
Aunund married Thorgerdr daughter of Thorbjorn the Stout, of
Snæfell-strand: the children of Aunund and his wife were a son Steinar,
and a daughter Dalla. And when Aunund grew old and his sight was dim,
then he gave up the housekeeping to Steinar his son. Father and son had
much wealth.  
        Steinar was above other men tall and strong, ill-favoured, with
a stoop, long in the legs, short in the body. He was a very quarrelsome
man, vehement, overbearing, and obstinate, a most headstrong fellow. And
when Thorstein Egil's son came to dwell at Borg, there was at once a
coolness between him and Steinar. South of Hafs-brook lies a moor called
Stack-moor. In winter this is under water, but in spring, when the ice
breaks up, such good grazing for cattle is there, that it was deemed
equal to stacked hay. Hafs-brook by old custom marked the boundary; but
in spring Steinar's cattle encroached much on Stack-moor, when driven
out to Hafs-brook, and Thorstein's house-carles complained of it.
Steinar took no notice of this; and so matters went on for the first
summer without anything happening. But in the second spring Steinar
continued to take the pasturage; wherefore Thorstein spoke with him
about it, but quietly, asking him to control the grazing of his kine, as
had been the old usage. Steinar said the cattle should go where they
would. He spoke on the whole matter with obstinacy, and he and Thorstein
had words about it. Thorstein then had the cattle turned back to the
moor beyond Hafs-brook. This when Steinar knew, he charged Grani his
thrall to sit by the cattle on Stack-moor, and he sat there every day.
This was in the latter part of the summer: all the pasture south of
Hafs-brook had been grazed by then.  
        Now it happened one day that Thorstein had mounted a knoll to
look round. He saw where Steinar's cattle were moving. Out he went on to
the moor: it was late in the day. He saw that the cattle had now come
far out on the fenny hollow. Thorstein ran out on the moor. And when
Grani saw that, he drove the cattle away apace till they came to the
milking-shed. Thorstein followed, and he and Grani met in the gate.
Thorstein slew him there: and it has been called since Grani's gate: it
is in the wall of the enclosure. Thorstein pulled down the wall over
Grani, and so covered his body. Then he went home to Borg, but the women
who came to the milking-shed found Grani where he lay. After that they
carried him home to the house, and told Steinar these tidings. Steinar
buried him up on the hillside, and soon got another thrall to go with
the cattle, who name is not told. Thorstein made as though he knew
nothing about the pasture for the remainder of the summer.  
        It now happened that Steinar in the early part of the winter
went out to Snæfell-strand and stayed there awhile. There he saw a
thrall named Thrand, who was tall and strong above other men. Steinar,
wishing to buy him, bid a large sum: but his owner valued him at three
marks of silver, which was twice the price of a common thrall, and at
this sum the bargain was made. Steinar took Thrand home with him, and
when they came home, then spoke Steinar with Thrand: 'Now stand matters
so that I will have work of you. But as all the work is already
arranged, I will put on you a task of but little trouble: you shall sit
by my cattle. I make a great point of their being well kept at pasture.
I would have you go by no man's rule but your own, take them wherever
the pasture on the moor is best. I am no judge of a man's look if you
have not courage and strength enough to hold your own against any
house-carle of Thorstein's.'  
        Steinar delivered into Thrand's hand a large axe. whose blade
was an ell long, it was keen as a razor. 'This I think of you, Thrand,'
said Steinar, 'that you would not regard the priesthood of Thorstein if
ye two were face to face.' Thrand answered: 'No duty do I, as I deem,
owe to Thorstein; and methinks I understand what work you have laid
before me. You think you risk little where I am; and I believe I shall
come well out of it if I and Thorstein try our strength together.'  
        After this Thrand took charge of the cattle. He understood, ere
he had been long there, whither Steinar had had his cattle taken, and he
sat by them on Stack-moor. When Thorstein was aware of this, he sent a
house-carle to seek Thrand, bidding him tell Thrand the boundary between
his land and Steinar's. When the house-carle came to Thrand, he told him
his errand, and bade him take the cattle otherwither, saying that the
land on which they were belonged to Thorstein Egil's son. Thrand said,
'I care not a jot who owns the land; I shall take the cattle where I
think the pasture is best.' Then they parted: the house-carle went home
and told him the thrall's answer. Thorstein let the matter rest, and
Thrand took to sitting by the cattle night and day.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER LXXXVI. Slaying of Thrand.](egil87.md)
