[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil30)  [Next](egil32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXX.  
  
*Of the coming out of Yngvar, and of Skallagrim's iron-forging.*  
  

        King Harold Fair-hair took for his own all those lands that
Kveldulf and Skallagrim had left behind in Norway, and all their other
property that he could lay hands on. He also sought diligently after
those men who had been in the counsels or confidence or in any way
helpers of Skallagrim and his folk in the deeds which they wrought
before Skallagrim went abroad out of the land. And so far stretched the
enmity of the king against father and son, that he bore hatred against
their kith and kin, or any whom he knew to have been their dear friends.
Some suffered punishment from him, many fled away and sought refuge,
some within the land, some out of the land altogether. Yngvar
Skallagrim's wife's father was one of these men aforesaid. This rede did
he take, that he turned all his wealth that he could into movables, then
gat him a sea-going ship and a crew thereto, and made ready to go to
Iceland, for he had heard that Skallagrim had taken up his abode there,
and there would be no lack of choice land there with Skallagrim. So when
they were ready and a fair wind blew, he sailed out to sea, and his
voyage sped well. He came to Iceland on the south coast, and held on
westwards past Reykja-ness, and sailed into Borgar-firth, and entering
Long-river went up it even to the Falls. There they put out they ship's
lading.  
        But when Skallagrim heard of Yngvar's coming, he at once went to
meet him and bade him to his house with as many men as he would. Yngvar
accepted this offer. The ship was drawn up, and Yngvar went to Borg with
many men, and stayed that winter with Skallagrim. In the spring
Skallagrim offered him choice land. He gave Yngvar the farm which he had
on Swan-ness, and land inwards to Mud-brook and outwards to
Strome-firth. Thereupon Yngvar went out to this farm and took
possession, and he was a most able man and a wealthy. Skallagrim then
built a house on Ship-ness, and this he kept for a long time
thereafter.  
        Skallagrim was a good iron-smith, and in winter wrought much in
red iron ore. He had a smithy set up some way out from Borg, close by
the sea, at a place now called Raufar-ness. The woods he thought were
not too far from thence. But since he could find no stone there so hard
or smooth as he thought good for hammering iron on (for there are no
beach pebbles, the seashore being all fine sand), one evening, when
other were gone to sleep, Skallagrim went to the sea, and pushed out an
eight-oared boat he had, and rowed out to the Midfirth islands. There he
dropped an anchor from the bows of the boat, then stepped overboard, and
dived down to the bottom, and brought up a large stone, and lifted it
into the boat. Then he himself climbed into the boat and rowed to land,
and carried the stone to the smithy and laid it down before the smithy
door, and thenceforth he hammered iron on it. That stone lies there yet,
and much slag beside it; and the marks of the hammering may be seen on
its upper face, and it is a surf-worn boulder, unlike the other stones
that are there. Four men nowadays could not lift a larger mass.
Skallagrim worked hard at smithying, but his house-carles grumbled
thereat, and thought it over early rising. Then Skallagrim composed this
stave:  
  
                                'Who wins wealth by iron  
                                Right early must rise:  
                                Of the sea's breezy brother  
                                Wind-holders need blast.  
                                On furnace-gold glowing  
                                My stout hammer rings,  
                                While heat-feeding bellows  
                                A whistling storm stir.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXXI. Of Skallagrim's children.](egil32)
