[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil31)  [Next](egil33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXXI.  
  
*Of Skallagrim's children.*  
  

        Skallagrim and Bera had a great many children, but at first they
all died. Then they had a son, who was sprinkled with water and named
Thorolf. As a child he soon grew to be tall and was fair of countenance.
It was the talk of all that he would be just such another as Thorolf
Kveldulf's son, after whom he was named. Thorolf was far beyond children
of his own age in strength. And as he grew to manhood he became doughty
in most accomplishments then in vogue among those who were well trained.
Thorolf was of a right cheery mood. Early did he come to such full
strength as to be deemed fit for warlike service with other men. He was
soon a favourite with all, and his father and mother loved him well.
Skallagrim and his wife had two daughters; one was named Sæunn, the
other Thorunn. They also were of great promise as they grew up. Then
Skallagrim and his wife had yet another son. He was sprinkled with water
and named, and his name was Egil. But as he grew up it was soon seen
that he would be ill-favoured, like his father, with black hair. When
but three years old he was as tall and strong as other boys of six or
seven. He was soon talkative and word-wise. Somewhat ill to manage was
he when at play with other lads.  
        That spring, Yngvar went to Borg, his errand being to bid
Skallagrim to a feast at his house, he also named for the party his
daughter Bera and Thorolf her son, and any others that Skallagrim liked
to bring. Skallagrim promised to come. Yngvar then went home, prepared
for the banquet, and had ale brewed. But when the set time came that
Skallagrim and Bera should go to the feast, Thorolf made him ready to go
with them, as also some house-carles, so that they were fifteen in all.
Egil told his father that he wished to go.  
        'I am,' said he, 'as much akin to Yngvar as is Thorolf.'  
        'You shall not go,' said Skallagrim, 'for you know not how to
behave yourself in company where there is much drinking, you who are not
good to deal with though you be sober.'  
        Then Skallagrim mounted his horse and rode away, but Egil was
ill content with his lot.  
        He went out of the yard, and found a draught horse of
Skallagrim's, got on its back and rode after Skallagrim's party. No easy
way had he over the moor, for he did not know the road; but he kept his
eyes on the riders before him when copse or wood were not in the way.
And this is to tell of his journey, that late in the evening he came to
Swan-ness, when men sat there a-drinking. He went into the room, but
when Yngvar saw Egil he received him joyfully, and asked why he had come
so late. Egil told of his words with Skallagrim. Yngvar made Egil sit by
him, they two sat opposite Skallagrim and Thorolf. For merriment over
their ale they fell to reciting staves. Then Egil recited a stave:  
  
                                'Hasting I came to the hearth fire  
                                Of Yngvar, right fain so to find him,  
                                Him who on heroes bestoweth  
                                Gold that the heather-worm guardeth.  
                                Thou, of the snake's shining treasure  
                                Always a generous giver,  
                                Wilt not than me of three winters  
                                Doughtier song-smith discover.'  
  
Yngvar praised this stave, and thanked Egil much therefor, but on the
morrow he brought to Egil as reward for the poem three sea-snail shells
and a duck's egg. And next day at the drinking Egil recited another
stave about his poem's reward:  
  
                                'The wielder of keen-biting wound-fowl  
                                Gave unto Egil the talker  
                                Three silent dogs of the surf-swell,  
                                Meet for the praise in his poem.  
                                He, the skilled guide of the
sea-horse,  
                                Knowing to please with a present,  
                                Gave as fourth gift to young Egil  
                                Round egg, the brook-bird's
bed-bolster.'  
  
        Egil's poetry won him thanks from many men. No more tidings were
there of that journey. Egil went home with Skallagrim.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXXII. Of lord Brynjolf and Bjorn, his son.](egil33.md)
