[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil37)  [Next](egil39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER XXXVII.  
  
*The journey to Bjarmaland.*  
  

        Eric Bloodaxe now took a share in the realm. He held oversight
in Hordaland and the Firths; he took and kept about him a body-guard.
And one spring Eric Bloodaxe made ready to go to Bjarmaland, and chose
him much people for that voyage. Thorolf betook him to this voyage with
Eric, and was in the forecastle of his ship, and bare his standard.
Thorolf was then taller and stronger than other men, and herein like his
father. In that expedition befell much tidings. Eric had a great battle
by the river Dvina in Bjarmaland, wherein he won the victory, as is told
in the lays about him. And in that voyage he took Gunnhilda, daughter of
Auzur Toti, and brought her home with him. Gunnhilda was above all women
beautiful and shrewd, and of magic cunning. There was great intimacy
between Thorolf and Gunnhilda. Thorolf ever spend the winters with Eric,
the summers in freebooting.  
        The next tidings were that Thora Bjorn's wife fell sick and
died. But some while after Bjorn took to him another wife; she was named
Alof, the daughter of Erling the wealthy of Ostr. They two had a
daughter named Gunnhilda.  
        There was a man named Thorgeir Thornfoot; he dwelt in Fenhring
of Hordaland, at a place called Askr. He had three sons—one named Hadd,
another Bergonund, the third Atli the short. Bergonund was beyond other
men tall and strong, and he was grasping and ungentle; Atli the short
was of small stature, square-built, of sturdy strength. Thorgeir was a
very rich man, a devoted heathen worshipper, of magic cunning. Hadd went
out freebooting, and was seldom at home.  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER XXXVIII. Thorolf comes out to Iceland.](egil39.md)
