[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sagas & Legends](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egil04)  [Next](egil06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER IV.  
  
*Battle of king Harold and Audbjorn.*  
  

        King Audbjorn went with his forces northwards to Mæra; there he
joined king Arnvid and Solvi Bandy-legs, and altogether they had a large
host. King Harold also had come from the north with his forces, and the
armies met inside Solskel. There was fought a great battle, with much
slaughter in either host. Of the Mærian forces fell the kings Arnvid and
Audbjorn, but Solvi escaped, and afterwards became a great sea-rover,
and wrought much scathe on Harold's kingdom, and was nicknamed
Bandy-legs. On Harold's side fell two earls, Asgaut and Asbjorn, and two
sons of earl Hacon, Grjotgard and Herlaug, and many other great men.
After this Harold subdued South Mæra. Vemund Audbjorn's brother still
retained the Firthfolk, being made king. It was now autumn, and king
Harold was advised not to go south in autumn-tide. So he set earl
Rognvald over North and South Mæra and Raumsdale, and kept a numerous
force about himself.  
        That same autumn the sons of Atli set on Aulvir Hnuf at his
home, and would fain have slain him. They had such a force that Aulvir
could not withstand them, but fled for his life. Going northwards to
Mæra, he there found Harold, and submitted to him, and went north with
the king to Throndheim, and he became most friendly with him, and
remained with him for a long time thereafter, and was made a skald.  
        In the winter following earl Rognvald went the inner way by the
Eid-sea southwards to the Firths. Having news by spies of the movements
of king Vemund, he came by night to Naust-dale, where Vemund was at a
banquet, and, surrounding the house, burnt within it the king and ninety
men. After that Karl of Berdla came to earl Rognvald with a long-ship
fully manned, and they two went north to Mæra. Rognvald took the ships
that had belonged to Vemund and all the chattels he could get. Kari of
Berdla then went north to king Harold at Throndheim, and became his
man.  
        Next spring king Harold went southwards along the coast with a
fleet, and subdued firths and fells, and arranged for men of his own to
rule them. Earl Hroald he set over the Firthfolk. King Harold was very
careful, when he had gotten new peoples under his power, about barons
and rich landowners, and all those whom he suspected of being at all
likely to raise rebellion. Every such man he treated in one of two ways:
he either made him become his liege-man, or go abroad; or (as a third
choice) suffer yet harder conditions, some even losing life or limb.
Harold claimed as his own through every district all patrimonies, and
all land tilled or untilled, likewise all seas and freshwater lakes. All
landowners were to be his tenants, as also all that worked in the
forest, salt-burners, hunters and fishers by land and sea, all these
owed him duty. But many fled abroad from this tyranny, and much waste
land was then colonized far and wide, both eastwards in Jamtaland and
Helsingjaland, and also the West lands, the Southern isles, Dublin in
Ireland, Caithness in Scotland, and Shetland. And in that time Iceland
was found.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER V. The king's message to Kveldulf.](egil06)
