[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](asw02)  [Next](asw04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

# III.

### UNITY.

<span id="img_fig12"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig12.jpg" alt="Fig. 12. Ardanari Iswari" /><br />
Fig. 12. Ardanari Iswari</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

MANY are the efforts made to set forth to the eye the conception of
Deity in one person. The idea has evidently been one of growth from the
crude to the more acceptable; and the result attained denotes composite
labor.

[Fig. 12](#img_fig12.md) is a figure of this kind. It is a copy of an
original drawing made by a learned Hindu pundit, for Win. Simpson, Esq.,
of London. It represents Brahma Supreme, who, in the act of creation,
made himself double, i.e., male and female, as indicated by the *crux
ansata* in the central part of the figure, which occupies the place of
the conjoined triad and yoni of the original; the original being far too
grossly shown for the public eye. The reader will notice the triad
formed by the thumb and two fingers and serpent in the male hand, while
in the female hand is to be seen a germinating seed, indicative of
reproduction of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

father and mother. The whole stands upon a lotus flower, the symbol of
androgenity.

This figure is of interest as a study; not as a work of art, but to
measure the outcropping of primitive ideas. The extremities of the right
Bide are less masculine than those of men, though the broad right
shoulder and chest are conspicuous compared with the feminine left. The
dolphin fish on the head is a supplemental female symbol, as was
mentioned before, on the subject of "Fish and Good Friday." The yoni and
the crescent on the forehead are not distinctly shown in Mr. Simpson's
figure. We have added them in this, in imitation of the same personage
in Moore's "Hindu Pantheon." They denote the preponderance, of the
Yonigic bias of faith over the Lingasic. When the two personalities-male
and female--are thus combined in one, the mystic number counts as a

### FOURFOLD GOD.

AMONG church paraphernalia and ecclesiastical ornament we find many
mystic figures. A very ancient and prominent one is been in his form,
[Fig. 13](#img_fig13.md), <span id="img_fig13"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig13.jpg" alt="Fig. 13." /><br />
Fig. 13.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

an oval or egg-shaped ring added to the **T**. This is known as the
*crux ansata*. What does it mean? It is another step in the augmentation
of the idea of sexual theism. It means the triad is joined to the unit,
which make four. In other words, it signifies the linga, or phallus, the
male God, embraces the yoni, or female God. "Male and female created he
them." We can only select a few from among a large number of curious,
and, many times, complicated, devices, all of which, with greater or
less conspicuity, portray the prevailing thought of divine lustfulness,
as four in one, and three in one, two in one, or, all as a whole.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="img_fig14"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig14.jpg" alt="Fig. 14." /><br />
Fig. 14.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\[paragraph continues\] [Fig. 14](#img_fig14.md) is a device denoting the
triad or cross connected with the angular yoni. It is a favorite figure
placed upon steeples and prominent parts of church edifices; the lower
part is often formed in a circle or ring. [Fig. 15](#img_fig15.md)<span
id="img_fig15"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig15.jpg" alt="Fig. 15." /><br />
Fig. 15.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

is still another. The **T**, or cross proper, is dropped, but the unit
and triad condensed in the three balls are unmistakable. There
metaphoric figures are so infinitely varied that only the learned in
them will be apt to recognize their hidden meaning. What more rational
explanation is there for the three gilded balls over the door of the
pawnbrokers' shops than that they originally represented the triad, and
gave color of orthodoxy to their trade. [Fig. 16](#img_fig16.md) is
another. It is the <span id="img_fig16"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig16.jpg" alt="Fig. 16." /><br />
Fig. 16.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Egyptian crux ansata and the Christian cross. We see in it the picture
of the same conjugal tenets of four deities in one, as above stated. But
it and [Fig. 15](#img_fig15.md) indicate the tendency to depart from the
plain **T** and become more conventional. The more conventional, the
more is its origin concealed. [Fig. 16](#img_fig16.md) is seen repeatedly
figured on Egyptian bass-reliefs as held in the hand. But [Fig.
17](#img_fig17.md) puts it to another use. <span id="img_fig17"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig17.jpg" alt="Fig. 17." /><br />
Fig. 17.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Worn as a part of the dress it is called the priest's pallium. It
combines the cross and yoni--the triad and unit--with the prelate's head
passed through the latter. The robe or surplice is a telltale portion of
phallic and yonijic worship. It is common at the present time in all but
the most democratic churches in this country. The surplice is a figment
of woman's dress; it can be traced back to the Egyptians, Assyrians,
Phœnicians, and others, who worshiped Isis, Astarte,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Venus, Iswari and others in that garb. The
priests put on female habiliments in which to perform their sacred
rites, as the most pleasing, characteristic, and to make themselves like
their Creator. On the other hand, women put on male attire. When
religious rule instigates to sex consideration in dress, it is but a
short step to a more overruling consideration of devout sex
intercommunion and behavior, of which see sequel.

<span id="img_fig18"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig18.jpg" alt="Fig. 18." /><br />
Fig. 18.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Another of the quadruple symbols is [Fig 18](#img_fig18.md), the hand,
which is both a sign and gesture. it is copied from the statuette of
Isis and child. The three fingers denote the trinity, the unit is
self-evident.

<span id="img_fig19"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig19.jpg" alt="Fig. 19." /><br />
Fig. 19.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The Serpent, [Fig. 19](#img_fig19.md), with his tail in his mouth, is as
significant as if is forbidding. It indicates the conjunction of male
and female, also the ring or unit; it was at the same time a sign of
eternity. [Fig. 20](#img_fig20.md) <span id="img_fig20"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig20.jpg" alt="Fig. 20." /><br />
Fig. 20.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

is a picture of two Egyptian deities al worship before the sacred triad,
each holding, in faithful homage, the *crux ansata*.

These visible emblems may have been needful for an uncultured people,
but Paul discarded them in visible form, though he seems to have clung
to them in idea, or by the "eye of faith." His definition of
faith--*i.e.*, "the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things *not seen*"--points to the Linga-Yoni mysteries, and those
mysteries explain his otherwise hidden meaning of faith.

It is curious to be able to notice, in the present year of the world,
how the fourfold conception of the unseen powers of the universe exists
among ourselves. Throughout our churches a Trinity is worshiped, and a
fourth

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

power deprecated: the beneficent is portrayed as three, the malignant
one--Typhon of antiquity, or the Devil of modern orthodoxy--is depicted
as single. In Roman Catholic countries, on the other hand, the Godhead
is painted as it was in Babylon: i. e., the male triad with the female
unit. In Gen. xxiii, 2, we find Arba, which signifies "giant Baal," or
"Baal-Hercules;" the correct etymons appear to be *Arba-el*, "God is
fourfold," or<span id="img_fig21"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig21.jpg" alt="Fig. 21." /><br />
Fig. 21.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

simply the Armaic Arba "four." And--strange to say, if it were not so
common--the worshipful four is allied with *erva*, the pudenda of both
sexes. [Fig. 21](#img_fig21.md) is a quadruple God planted in the centre of
an elaborately carved yoni with a *urethra* or conduit, the elephant,
the emblem of strength and Almighty power, Standing near, and a devotee
below. It is to be borne in mind, there were in India different sects,
as in our time. One, the Lingacitas, who worshiped the Trinity, or male
Deity, whose emblem is Fig. 22, and the sect of Yonijas, or worshipers
of woman, as figured above.

There is, indeed, no single Papal church, whether chapel or cathedral,
to which the name Beth-Arbel, "Fourfold God," would not apply; for all
are types in which adoration is paid to the undivided trinity in unity,
and the Celestial Virgin, the mother of God and man. The name has also
been traced to the Hebrew *ar* and *bel*: i.e., "a hero is Bel," or,
"Bel is powerful."

### MERU.

THE learned Higgins, an English judge, who for some years spent ten
hours a day in antiquarian studies, Says that Moriah, of Isaiah and
Abraham, is the Meru

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of the Hindus, and the Olympus of the Greeks. Solomon built high places
for Ashtoreth, Astarte, or Venus, which became mounts of Venus, *mons
veneris*--Meru and Mount Calvary--each a slightly elevated skull-shaped
mount that might be represented by a bare head. The Bible translators
perpetuate the same idea in the word "calvaria." Prof. Stanley denies
that "Mount Calvary" took its name from its being the place of the
crucifixion of Jesus. Looking elsewhere and in earlier times for the
bare calvaria, we find among Oriental women, the Mount of Venus, *mons
veneris*, through motives of neatness or religious sentiment, deprived
of all hirsute appendage. <span id="img_fig22"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig22.jpg" alt="Fig. 22." /><br />
Fig. 22.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

See a Mount Calvary, in imitation, in the shaved poll of the head of the
priest, Fig. 17. The priests of China, says, Mr. J. M. Peebles, continue
to shave the head. To make a place holy, among the Hindus, Tartars, and
people of Thibet, it was necessary to have a Mount Meru. also a
Linga-Yoni, or Arba, [Fig. 22](#img_fig22.md).

### RELIGIOUS PROSTITUTION.

PASSING from figures, paintings, statuary, ornaments and symbols, it is
requisite to notice the religious observances, the actual practice of
the faith held by the world's primal worshipers.

It would appear, or rather it does appear, that phallic worship, or
religion, was, first, an instinct or passion; second, it was a privilege
and luxury; third, it was a pastime or calling; fourth, it became
dominating and imperative; fifth, by euphemistic transformation, it was

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

merged into the Hebrew cultus; and seventh, the Hebrew cultus was
further modified into the Christian religion. In support of the first
proposition that it was instinctive, or passion, and sexual passion at
that, we have the law which ruled out those male devotees whose damaged
sexual structure disqualified them for actuating their rites (Deut.
xxiii, 1): "He that is wounded in the testicles, or hath his privy
member cut off, shall not enter the congregation of the Lord." The above
quotation also offers a shoulder of support to our second proposition,
namely, that their religious rites were a privileged luxury. As men were
inspected in regard to fitness, women were provided in view of that
fitness.

In Num. xxxi, 18 and 35, we are assured, without a lisp or a twinge of
horror, that thirty-two thousand Midianitish virgins were consecrated to
this end. We need not go into details about the manner in which the
sacrifice was made; but we must call attention to the fact that a
Christian church still promulgates the same idea, in an alleged
spiritual form, and that the nunneries of Christendom are vailed,
perhaps decent, counterparts of those Oriental establishments where
women consecrated their bodies and. themselves to fulfil the special
duties of their sex, so they were taught in the name and for the
glorification of their Deity.

There was a temple in Babylonia where every female had to perform once
in her life a (to us) strange act of religion: namely, prostitution with
a stranger. The name of it was *Bit-Shagatha*, or, "The Temple," the
"Place of Union."

Words and history corroborate each other, or are apt to do so if
cotemporaneous. Thus *kadesh*, or kaesh, designate

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

in Hebrew "a consecrated one," and history tells the unworthy tale in
descriptive plainness, as will be shown in the sequel.

That the religion was dominating and imperative is determined by Deut.
xvii, 12, where presumptuous refusal to listen to the priest was death
to the offender. To us it is inconceivable that the indulgence of
passion could be associated with religion, but so it was. Much as it is
covered over by altered words and substituted expressions in the
Bible--an example of which see *men* for male organ, Ezek. xvi, 17--it
yet stands out offensively bold. The words expressive of "sanctuary,"
"consecrated," and "Sodomite," are in the Hebrew essentially the same.
They indicate the passion of amatory devotion. It is among the Hindus of
to-day as it was in Greece and Italy of classic times; and we find that
"holy women" is a title given to those who devote their bodies to be
used for hire, the price of which hire goes to the service of the
temple.

As a general rule, we may assume that priests who make or expound the
laws, which they declare to be from God, are men, and, consequently,
through all time, have .thought, and do think, of the gratification of
the masculine half of humanity. The ancient and modern Orientals are not
exceptions. They lay it down as a momentous fact that virginity is the
most precious of all the possessions of a woman, and, being so, it
ought, in some way or other, to be devoted to God.

Throughout India, and also through the densely inhabited parts of Asia,
and modern Turkey, there is a class of females who dedicate themselves
to the service of the Deity whom they adore; and the rewards accruing
from their prostitution are devoted to the service of the temple

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and the priests officiating therein. With an eye to piety and pelf, the
clerical officials at the Hindu shrines take effectual means for
procuring none but the most fascinating women for the use of their
worshipers. The same practice prevailed at Athens, Corinth, and
elsewhere, where the temples of Venus were supported by troops of women,
who consecrated themselves, or were dedicated by their parents, to the
use of the male worshipers. In modern times, reform and improvements
have been effected; but it is certain that intercourse between the sexes
in sacred places is common in India at the present day. The Hebrew word
*zanah*, which signifies "*semen emittere*," was the name of a woman who
lived and practiced the same rite outside of the temple, from motives
other than those esteemed pious. Feasts and holy days were devoted to
this passion, and generally concluded with excess.

### SHAGA.

IN the Assyrian language, Shaga signifies "a feast." The nature of this
feast is explained by Diodorus Siculus. He says: "Our Gala or Solar days
begin with fasting as a prelude to another form of sensual enjoyment." A
detailed description of one of them conveys only a proximate idea of
them. The most disgraceful of the Babylonian customs is the following:
"Every native woman is obliged once in her life to sit in the temple of
Venus and have intercourse with a stranger. And many, disdaining to mix
with the rest, being proud on account of their wealth, dome in covered
carriages, and take up their station at the temple with a numerous train
of servants attending them. But the far greater do thus: Many sit down
in the temple of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Venus wearing a crown of cord around their
heads; some are continually coming in, others are going out; passages
marked out in a straight line lead in every direction through the women,
along which strangers pass and make their choice. When a woman has once
seated herself, she must not return home until some stranger has thrown
a piece of silver into her lap, and lain with her outside of the temple.
He who throws the silver must say thus: 'I beseech the Goddess Mylitta
to favor thee,' Mylitta being the Assyrian name for Venus. The silver
may be ever so small, for she will not reject it, inasmuch as it is
unlawful for her to do so, for such silver is accounted sacred. The
woman follows the first man that throws, and refuses none. When she has
had intercourse, and has absolved herself from her goddess, she returns
home. Those that are endowed with beauty and symmetry of shape are so-on
set free, but the deformed are detained a long time from inability to
satisfy the law: some wait for the space of three or four years."

A similar custom exists in some parts of Cyprus. This custom is referred
to in I. Sam. ii, 22, where "the sons of Eli lay with the women that
assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation." It is
needless to say for the benefit of the captious that the temple of the
Assyrians was the tabernacle of the Hebrews. In both were congregations
of the Lord. In both the holy presence of their God was made manifest.

### COMMUNION

HAS long been a custom in Christendom. Without explaining the origin of
this custom, it will here suffice to give an example of it in early
times, as an index of its character. Says S. B. Gould ("Origin

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

of Religious Belief"): "The idea involved in communion is the reception
of something from God. By prayer, man asks something; by purification,
he makes himself meet to approach God; by communion, he receives what he
desires. of Deity by union with him."

The methods adopted by different religions for accomplishing the desired
union are numerous. The grossest and most repulsive is by sexual
intercourse. The numerous legends and myths representing the union of
Gods and women (as in Gen. vi, 2), or men and Goddesses, are
reminiscences of ancient mysteries, the object of which was to effect
such a union. At the summit of the temple of Belus was a chamber in
which was a bed beside a figure of gold; the same was to be seen in
Egyptian Thebes, says Herodotus, and every night a woman was laid in
this bed, to which the God was supposed to descend. The same took place
at Patara in Lycia, where a priestess was locked into the temple every
night. Diodorus alludes to the tombs of the concubines of Jupiter Ammon,
and Strabo says the fairest and noblest ladies were vowed to share his
couch. It is easy to see how the obscene orgies celebrated during some
of the festivals of the Gods rose out of this superstition. "The prince,
head of Agapemone, as the impersonation of Deity, performed the sexual
act with a young girl in the presence of the whole community,
professedly in order to make her thereby a partaker of the divine
nature."

In Casgrain's "*Vie de Marie de l'Incarnation*" is a frank confession of
the bearing of erotic sanctimony, nearer home than the above. This
Marie, a woman of intense piety and heroism, says of herself in her
journal: "Going to prayer, I trembled in myself and exclaimed, 'Let us
go into a solitary place, my dear love, that I may

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

embrace you, *a mon aise* (at my ease), and that, breathing my soul into
you, it may be but yourself only, in the union of love. Oh, my love,
when shall I embrace you? Have you no pity on me in the torments that I
suffer? Alas, alas I my love, my beauty, my life! instead of healing my
pain, you take pleasure in it. Come, let me embrace you, and die in your
sacred arms!' . . . Then, as I was spent with fatigue, I was forced to
say, 'My divine love, since you wish me to live, I pray you let me rest
a little, that I may better serve you'; and I promised him that
afterward I would suffer myself to consume in his chaste and divine
embraces." From a similar source, we find it stated that St Christina, a
virgin and abbess, believed herself to have received favors which left
her no longer a virgin.

The state of society and that of the public mind evinced by such social
habits may not be considered depraved: they were undeveloped. Society
had not risen above the crude; the moral mind had not reached the status
of chaste refinement. With so prodigal a use of virtue, immodesty was
without a contrast and without a name. Therefore these customs were
inspired by the same artful and self-involving spirit which inspired the
Assyrian and Hindu priests to invent a special hell for childless women.
A relic of the same spirit continues in modern times among Christians,
where masses have been said, saints invoked, offerings presented, for
the cure of physical impotence.

The above is further testimony in proof of our first proposition: that
the primitive religion in this early day of adolescent manhood was
purely passion consecrated and sanctified--a religion of *feeling*. It
was a physical

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

heaven counterpoised by a physical hell. Promises were sensuous bliss,
and punishments were bodily woe. A religion of intellect or reason,
apart from corporeal touch, seems unknown to them. It was based on the
dynamics of nerve.

We must notice how this sexual faith has come down to recent times, and
how it constitutes the framework of certain modern observances.

### BUNS AND RELIGIOUS CAKES.

SAYS Hyslop: "The hot cross-buns of Good Friday, and the dyed eggs of
Pasch or Easter Sunday, figured in the Chaldean rites just as they do
now. The buns known, too, by that [identical](errata.htm#0.md) name were
used in the worship of the Queen of Heaven, the Goddess Easter (Ishtar
or Astarte), as early as the days of Cecrops, the founder of Athens,
1,500 years before the Christian era." "One species of bread," says
Bryant, "'which used to be offered to the gods, was of great antiquity,
and called *Boun*.' Diogenes mentioned 'they were made of flour and
honey.'" It appears that Jeremiah the Prophet was familiar with this
lecherous worship. He says: "The children gather wood, the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes to the
Queen of Heaven (Jer. vii, 18). Hyslop does not add that the "buns"
offered to the Queen of Heaven, and in sacrifices to other deities, were
framed in the shape of the sexual organs, but that they were so in
ancient times we have abundance of evidence.

Martial distinctly speaks of such things in two epigrams, first wherein
the male organ is spoken of, second wherein the female part is
commemorated,. the cakes being

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

made of the finest flour, and kept especially for the palate of the fair
one.

Captain Wilford ("Asiatic Researches," viii, p 365) says: "When the
people of Syracuse were sacrificing to Goddesses, they offered cakes
called *mulloi*, shaped like the female organ, and in some temples where
the priestesses were probably ventriloquists they so far imposed on the
credulous multitude who came to adore the Vulva as to make them believe
that it spoke and gave oracles."

We can understand how such things were allowed in licentious Rome, but
we can scarcely comprehend bow they were tolerated in Christian Europe,
as, to all innocent surprise, we find they were, from the second part of
the "Remains of the Worship of Priapus": that in Saintonge, in the
neighborhood of La Rochelle, small cakes baked in the form of the
phallus are made as offerings at Easter, carried and presented from
house to house. Dulare states that in his time the festival of Palm
Sunday, in the town of Saintes, was called *le fete des pinnes*--feast
of the privy members--and that during its continuance the women and
children carried in the procession a phallus made of bread, which they
called a *pinne*, at the end of their palm branches; these *pinnes* were
subsequently blessed by the priests, and carefully preserved by the
women during the year. Palm Sunday! Palm, it is to be remembered, is an
euphemism of the male organ, and it is curious to see it united with the
phallus in Christendom. Dulare also says that, in some of the earlier
inedited French books on cookery, receipts are given for making cakes of
the salacious form in question, which are broadly named. He further
tells us those cakes Symbolized the male, in Lower Limousin, and
especially

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

at Brives, while the female emblem was adopted at Clermont, in Auvergne,
and other places.

### ANTIQUITY OF THE CROSS.

In a work entitled "The Celtic Druids," by Godfrey Higgins, occurs this
strong statement "Few causes have been more powerful in producing
mistakes in ancient history than the idea, hastily formed by all ages,
that every monument of antiquity marked with a cross, or with any of
those symbols which they conceived to be monograms of Christ, were of
Christian origin. The cross is as common in India as in Egypt or
Europe." The Rev. Mr. Maurice says ("Indian Antiquities"): "Let not the
piety of the Catholic Christian be offended at the assertion that the
cross was one of the most usual symbols of Egypt and India. The emblem
of universal nature is equally honored in the Gentile and Christian
world. In the cave of Elephanta in India, over the heal of the principal
figure, may be seen the cross, and a little in front a huge lingham
(male organ)." The last-named author describes a statue in Egypt as
bearing a kind of a cross in his hand--that is to say, a lingham--which.
among the Egyptians was the symbol of fertility. Upon the breast of one
of the Egyptian mummies in the museum of the London University is a
cross exactly in the shape of [Fig. 23](#img_fig23.md), <span
id="img_fig23"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/fig23.jpg" alt="Fig. 23." /><br />
Fig. 23.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

namely, a cross upon a Calvary, a Meru, or Mount of Venus. People in the
above-named countries marked their sacred water jars, dedicated to
Canopus, with **T** or this <span id="img_05200"></span>
![](img/05200.jpg). Sometimes they were marked thus<span
id="img_05201"></span> ![](img/05201.jpg) From the erudite Dr. G. L.
Ditson, on this subject, we learn:

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "The rabbins say that when Aaron was made high
priest he was marked in the forehead by Moses with the figure **X**. And
whenever proselytes were admitted into the religious mysteries of
Eleusis they were marked with a cross." Tertullian says: "The Devil
signed his soldiers with the cross in the forehead in imitation of the
Christians."

### CRUCIFIXION.

FROM the cross we are naturally led to the topic of crucifixion. Many
Deities have been crucified. Christ was preceded by Christna,
Prometheus, Esculapius, Wittoba, and Buddha. They were all crucified
Redeemers long before Jesus of Nazareth was born. They were all sons of
virgins: So say mythological accounts.

In view of the prevalent ideas in relation to the cross, it is singular
and more than strange that the cross is not to be seen on any ancient
sculpture as an instrument of punishment. In none of the ancient gems
pictured by Layard is any form of the cross except the *crux ansata* to
be found. In the Ninevite remains, the punishment which is depicted of
the vanquished is impalement. We are told by Herodotus (Book III, 159)
that, after the taking of Babylon, Darius impaled about three thousand
of its principal citizens, and his plan, Seneca tells us, was one
carried out among the Romans. When the cross was made of two pieces of
wood, there seems to have been no orthodox shape, and the victims were
sometimes, tied and sometimes nailed, being usually left to perish of
thirst and hunger. We learn from Juvenal that crucifixion was a
punishment for slaves.

Whether the story of the crucifixion of Jesus has any better foundation
than the myths of antiquity, like those

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

relating to Christna, Wittoba, and Prometheus, we will not discuss: but
it is pertinent to our subject to speak of the idea which possessed the
minds of Christian bishops that met in the third century at Nicca, and
determined that the cross should be the characteristic emblem of the
Catholic faith. We may admit that they regarded the emblem as a sign of
the death of the Redeemer by a painful method; but we must believe that
the astute bishops of Africa and the East recognized in it the emblem of
fertility. Their doctrine was that all men were dead in sins, but that
through Christ they received life. Shorn of palpable phallic immodesty,
and of all its offensive indications, there was nothing in the symbol of
the cross to offend the eye, while they were able to attach to it much
that suggested certain doctrines. From it alone, as from a text, one
hierarch might expatiate on the sufferings of the Savior, while another
might dwell on the glories of the resurrection; one might paint the
horrors of eternal death, another the glories or eternal life; one might
view it as a man with arms outstretched so as to secure the whole world
under his care, another as an emblem pointing two ways--one to heaven,
the other to hell.

Whatever may have been its precedents, one thing seems to be perfectly
certain, that its form was extremely simple, and that every modern
addition, namely, the addition of the circle and the triple ornaments,
is a return to ancient heathenism, a commingling of ancient tenets with
modern dogmas.

Higgins (p. 70) gives an account of the crucifixion of Salivahana,
Wittoba, and Buddha, who were Hindu divinities, and figured in a drawing
(Ball, ii) from the famous temple of the crucified Wittoba at Tripetty.
These

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

differ in no respect from the crucified Jesus with which we are
familiar. A halo of glory shiner upon his head, on which there is a
crown, serrated with sharp angler, on its upper margin. The hands are
extended, the feet are slightly separated, and all are marked with
stigmata--the notable nail prints. These are pictures of the
imagination, instead of pictures of reality.

The resemblance between Christna and Christ is too striking not to
append a short sketch of the Hindu God, and compare their likenesses.

### CHRISTNA

WAS mouldy with years ere Jesus was born. He is one of the most popular
of all the Hindu Deities. An immense number of legends are told of him
which are not worth recording, but the following, condensed from the
"Anacalypsis," of Godfrey Higgins, will repay perusal. It appears to be
the legitimate fountain from which that of Christ springs.

He is represented as the son of Brahma and Maria, or as some say of
Devaci, and is usually called "the Savior," or the preserver. He, being
God, became incarnate in the flesh. As soon as he was born, he was
saluted by a chorus of devatars, or angels. His birthplace was Mathura.
He was cradled among shepherds. Soon after his birth he was carried away
by night to a remote place, for fear of a tyrant, Cansa, whose destroyer
it was foretold he would become) and who ordered all male children to be
slain. (An episode marked in the sculptures at Elephanta; and over the
head of this slaughtering figure, surrounded by supplicating mothers and
murdered male infants, are the *mitre*, a *crosier*, and a *cross*.) By
the male line he was of royal descent, though born in a dungeon,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

which on his arrival he illuminated, while the face of his parents
shone. He was believed to be born of the left intercostal rib of the
Virgin Davaci. Christna spoke as soon as he was born and comforted his
mother. He was persecuted by his brother Ram, who helped him to purify
the world of monsters and demons. Christna descended into Hades and
returned to Viacontha. One of his names is the Good Shepherd. An Indian
prophet, Nared-Saphos, or Wisdom, visited him, consulted the stars, and
pronounced him a celestial being. Christna cured a leper; a woman poured
a box of ointment on his head, and he cured her of disease. He was
chosen king among his fellow cowherds. He washed the feet of Brahmins.
Christna had a dreadful fight with the serpent Caluga. He was sent to a
tutor, whom be astonished with his learning. Christna was crucified
between two thieves, went to hell, and afterward to heaven.

The story of Jesus of Nazareth is so identical with that of Christna in
name, origin, office, history, incidents, and death, as to make it
manifest that the latter was copied from the earlier almost entire. Some
whose reverent sympathy feels hurt at the thought that the story of
Christ may not be original try to maintain that Christna's is subsequent
to Christ. But the following points of historic fact afford a burden of
proof that puts a bar to controversy thereon. "It has been
satisfactorily proved, on the authority of a passage in Adrian, that the
worship of Christna was practiced in the time of Alexander the Great
(330 years before Christ), at what still remains one of the most famous
temples of India, the temple of Mathura, on Jumna, the Matura Deorum of
Ptolemy. Further, the statue of the God Christna is [to](errata.htm#1.md)
be found in the very oldest caves and temples, the inscriptions on

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

which are in a language used previously to the Sanskrit, and now totally
unknown to all mankind. This may be seen any day among the places in the
city of Seringham and at the temple at Malvalipurram."

Why were these twins, Christna and Christ, born in eras so divergent,
with incidents so identical?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Phallic and Sun Worship](asw04.md)
