[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gvp06)  [Next](gvp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

# THE SIMILITUDES OF DEMOPHILUS

1\. Flattery is like painted armour, because it affords delight, but is
of no use.

2\. Learning is similar to a golden crown; for it is both honourable and
advantageous.

3\. Flighty men, like empty vessels, are easily laid hold of by the
ears. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

4\. Life, like a musical instrument, being harmonized by remission and
intention, becomes more agreeable.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

5\. Reason, like a good potter, introduces a beautiful form to the soul.

6\. The intellect of wise men, like gold, possesses the greatest weight.

7\. Boasting, like gilt armour, is not the same within as without.

8\. Reason has the same power as an ointment, for it benefits us when we
are disordered, but delights us when well.

9\. Of a bad man, as of a bad dog, the silence is more to be dreaded
than the voice.

10\. It is neither becoming to prefer a mistress to a wife; nor flattery
to a friend.

11\. Garrulous men, like magpies, by their continued loquacity destroy
the pleasures of conversation.

12\. The Furies pursue the sins of bad men who are impious, and those
also of the stupid and daring, when they grow old.

13\. It is necessary that a well-educated man should depart from life
elegantly, as from a banquet.

14\. A port is a place of rest to a ship, but friendship, to life.

15\. The reproof of a father is a pleasant medicine; for it is more
advantageous than severe chastisements.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

16\. It is necessary that a worthy man, like a good wrestler, should
oppose his weight to fortune, when acting the part of an antagonist.

17\. The possession of self-sufficiency, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) like a short and pleasant road, has much
grace and but little labour.

18\. Restive horses are led by the bridle, but irritable minds, by
reasoning.

19\. Tests, like salt, should be used sparingly.

20\. Both a well-adapted shoe, and a well-harmonized life, are
accompanied with but little pain.

21\. Garments reaching to the feet impede the body <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4); and immoderate riches, the soul.

22\. To those who run in the stadium, the reward of victory is in the
end of the race;

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

but to those who delight to labour in wisdom, the reward is in old age.

23\. It is necessary that he who hastens to behold virtue as his
country, should pass by pleasures, as he would by the sirens.

24\. As those who sail in fair weather are wont to have things prepared
against a storm, so also those who are wise in prosperity, should
prepare things necessary for their assistance against adversity.

25\. Garments that are made clean and bright become soiled again by use;
but the soul being once purified from ignorance, remains splendid
forever.

26\. Fugitive slaves, although they are not pursued, are affrighted; but
the unwise suffer perturbation, although they have not yet acted badly.

27\. The wealth of the avaricious, like the sun when it has descended
under the earth, delights no living thing.

28\. The fruits of the earth spring up once a year; but the fruits of
friendship at all times.

29\. It is the business of a musician to harmonize every instrument; but
of a well-educated man to adapt himself harmoniously to every fortune.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

30\. Neither the blows of a sick man, nor the threats of a stupid one,
are to be feared.

31\. It is necessary to provide an inward garment for the protection of
the breast, and intellect as a protection against pain.

32\. The diet of the sick, and the soul of the unwise, are full of
fastidiousness.

33\. Untaught boys confound letters, but uneducated men, things.

34, The intellect derived from philosophy is similar to a charioteer;
for it is present with our desires, and always conducts them to the
beautiful.

35\. Time, indeed, will render the herb absinthium sweeter than honey,
but circumstances may sometimes make an enemy preferable to a friend.

36\. A good pilot sometimes suffers shipwreck, and a worthy man is
sometimes unfortunate.

37\. Thunder especially frightens children; but threats, the unwise.

38\. Figure adorns a statue; but actions adorn a man,

39\. It is the same thing to drink a deadly medicine from a golden cup,
and to receive counsel from an injudicious friend.

40\. Swallows signify fair weather; but

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the discourses of philosophy, exemption from pain.

41\. Orphan children have not so much need of guardians as stupid men.

42\. Fortune is like a depraved rewarder of contests; for she frequently
crowns him who accomplishes nothing.

43\. There is need of a pilot and a wind for a prosperous navigation;
but of reasoning and fortune, to effect a happy life.

44\. A timid man bears armour against himself; and a fool employs riches
for the same purpose.

45\. It is the same thing to moor a boat by an infirm anchor, and to
place hope in a depraved mind.

46\. Clouds frequently obscure the sun; but the passions, the reasoning
power.

47\. Neither does a golden bed benefit a sick man; nor a splendid
fortune, a stupid man.

48\. Pure water dissolves inflammation; but mild discourse dissolves
anger.

49\. Austere wine is mot adapted for copious drinking, nor rustic
manners for conversation.

50\. The anger of an ape, and the threats of a flatterer, are to be
alike regarded.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

51\. Of life, the first part is childhood, on which account all men are
attentive to it, as to the first part of a drama.

52\. It is necessary that we should be cautious in our writings, but
splendid in our actions.

53\. As in plants, so also in youth, the first blossoms indicate the
fruit of virtue.

54\. In banquets, he who is not intoxicated with wine is the more
pleasant; but in prosperity, he who does not conduct himself illegally.

55\. It is the same thing to nourish a serpent, and to benefit a
depraved man; for gratitude is produced from neither.

56\. It is rare to suffer shipwreck in fair weather; and equally so not
to suffer shipwreck from want of counsel.

57\. Wind inflates empty bladders; but false opinions puff up stupid
men.

58\. It is necessary that he who exercises himself should avoid fatigue,
and he who is prosperous, envy.

59\. "Measure is most excellent," says one of the wise men; to which
also we being in like manner persuaded, O most friendly and pious
Asclepiades, here finish the curations of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[37:1](gvp07.htm#fr_2) The handle of a vessel was
called an ear by the Greeks.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[39:1](gvp07.htm#fr_3) Self-sufficiency must not
be considered in the vulgar sense, as consummate arrogance; but as the
internal possession of everything requisite to felicity.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[39:2](gvp07.htm#fr_4) Long garments or robes,
both by ancients and moderns, have always been worn as marks of
distinction; consequently, like riches, they are among the objects of
desire; and although not so extensively pernicious, yet the philosopher
very properly places them among things that are by no means free from
danger; and which are neither to be embraced by everyone, nor without
the greatest caution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pythagorean Ethical Sentences from Stobæus](gvp08)
