[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gvp02)  [Next](gvp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE GOLDEN VERSES OF PYTHAGORAS

1\. First worship the Immortal Gods, as they are established and
ordained by the Law.

2\. Reverence the Oath, and next the Heroes, full of goodness and light.

3\. Honour likewise the Terrestrial Dæmons by rendering them the worship
lawfully due to them.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

4\. Honour likewise thy parents, and those most nearly related to thee.

5\. Of all the rest of mankind, make him thy friend who distinguishes
himself by his virtue.

6\. Always give ear to his mild exhortations, and take example from his
virtuous and useful actions.

7\. Avoid as much as possible hating thy friend for a slight fault.

8\. \[And understand that\] power is a near neighbour to necessity.

9\. Know that all these things are as I have told thee; and accustom
thyself to overcome and vanquish these passions:--

10\. First gluttony, sloth, sensuality, and anger.

11\. Do nothing evil, neither in the presence of others, nor privately;

12\. But above all things respect thyself.

13\. In the next place, observe justice in thy actions and in thy words.

14\. And accustom not thyself to behave thyself in any thing without
rule, and without reason.

15\. But always make this reflection, that it is ordained by destiny
that all men shall die.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

16\. And that the goods of fortune are uncertain; and that as they may
be acquired, so may they likewise be lost.

17\. Concerning all the calamities that men suffer by divine fortune,

18\. Support with patience thy lot, be it what it may, and never repine
at it.

19\. But endeavour what thou canst to remedy it.

20\. And consider that fate does not send the greatest portion of these
misfortunes to good men.

21\. There are among men many sorts of reasonings, good and bad;

22\. Admire them not too easily, nor reject them.

23\. But if falsehoods be advanced, hear them with mildness, and arm
thyself with patience.

24\. Observe well, on every occasion, what I am going to tell thee:--

25\. Let no man either by his words, or by his deeds, ever seduce thee.

26\. Nor entice thee to say or to do what is not profitable for thyself.

27\. Consult and deliberate before thou act, that thou mayest not commit
foolish actions.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

28\. For it is the part of a miserable man to speak and to act without
reflection.

29\. But do that which will not afflict thee afterwards, nor oblige thee
to repentance.

30\. Never do anything which thou dost not understand.

31\. But learn all thou ought'st to know, and by that means thou wilt
lead a very pleasant life.

32\. in no wise neglect the health of thy body;

33\. But give it drink and meat in due measure, and also the exercise of
which it has need.

34\. Now by measure I mean what will not incommode thee.

35\. Accustom thyself to a way of living that is neat and decent without
luxury.

36\. Avoid all things that will occasion envy.

37\. And be not prodigal out of season, like one who knows not what is
decent and honourable.

38\. Neither be covetous nor niggardly; a due measure is excellent in
these things.

39\. Do only the things that cannot hurt thee, and deliberate before
thou dost them.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

40\. Never suffer sleep to close thy eyelids, after thy going to bed,

41\. Till thou hast examined by thy reason all thy actions of the day.

42\. Wherein have I done amiss? What have I done? What have I omitted
that I ought to have done?

43\. If in this examination thou find that thou hast done amiss,
reprimand thyself severely for it;

44\. And if thou hast done any good, rejoice.

45\. Practise thoroughly all these things; meditate on them well; thou
oughtest to love them with all thy heart.

46\. 'Tis they that will put thee in the way of divine virtue.

47\. I swear it by him who has transmitted into our souls the Sacred
Quaternion, the source of nature, whose cause is eternal.

48\. But never begin to set thy hand to any work, till thou hast first
prayed the gods to accomplish what thou art going to begin.

49\. When thou hast made this habit familiar to thee,

50\. Thou wilt know the constitution of the Immortal Gods and of men.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

51\. Even how far the different beings extend, and what contains and
binds them together.

52\. Thou shalt likewise know that according to Law, the nature of this
universe is in all things alike,

53\. So that thou shalt not hope what thou ought'st not to hope; and
nothing in this world shall be hid from thee.

54\. Thou wilt likewise know, that men draw upon themselves their own
misfortunes voluntarily, and of their own free choice.

55\. Unhappy that they are! They neither see nor understand that their
good is near them.

56\. Few know how to deliver themselves out of their misfortunes.

57\. Such is the fate that blinds mankind, and takes away his senses.

58\. Like huge cylinders they roll to and fro, and always oppressed with
ills innumerable.

59\. For fatal strife, innate, pursues them everywhere, tossing them up
and down; nor do they perceive it.

60\. Instead of provoking and stirring it up, they ought, by yielding,
to avoid it.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

61\. Oh! Jupiter, our Father! if Thou would'st deliver men from all the
evils that oppress them,

62\. Show them of what dæmon they make use.

63\. But take courage; the race of man is divine.

64\. Sacred nature reveals to them the most hidden mysteries.

65\. If she impart to thee her secrets, thou wilt easily perform all the
things which I have ordained thee.

66\. And by the healing of thy soul, thou wilt deliver it from all
evils, from all afflictions.

67\. But abstain thou from the meats, which we have forbidden in the
purifications and in the deliverance of the soul;

68\. Make a just distinction of them, and examine all things well.

69\. Leaving thyself always to be guided and directed by the
understanding that comes from above, and that ought to hold the reins.

70\. And when, after having divested thyself of thy mortal body, thou
arrivest at the most pure Æther,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

71\. Thou shalt be a God, immortal, incorruptible, and Death shall have
no more dominion over thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Golden Verses of Pythagoras from the Commentaries of
Hierocles](gvp04)
