[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr25)  [Next](rhr27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A very true Narrative of a Gentleman R. C., who hath the continual
society of a Guardian Genius*. <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108)

Oblation of itself was such a sacrifice to God, that a good and holy man
could offer no greater, as appears by the acceptance of a gentleman by
descent from the lynes of the Plantaginets, who was in Egypt, Italy, and
Arabia, and there frequented the society of the inspired Christians,
with whom he became acquainted after this manner. In England, being at a
tavern in Cheap-side more to hear and better his judgment of the reputed
wise than to drink wine, their discourse being of the nature and dignity
of Angels, which was interrupted by a gentleman, for so he appeared,
that said to another in the company--"Sir, you are not far

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

from the Kingdome of God." At this many were silent, yet several
thoughts arose; some desired this strange gentleman to stay, but he
refused, and being pressed, he gave the gentleman a paper of white and
yellow powder, bade him read the chapter that lay open in the Bible in
his chamber, and sing such psalms; then the window flew open and the
gentleman vanished.

He burnt the pouder as he was bid, and there appeared a shining flye
upon the Bible which he had in his hand. This vanished whilest he slept,
which was then about eight in the morning, Gemini being the ascendant,
and Mercury in Virgo. The gentleman conceived that this spirit had been
with him all his life-time, as he gathered from certain monitory dreams
and visions, whereby he was forwarned as well of several dangers as
vices.

Mr Waters and two gentlemen more were at his house, and desired him to
go along with them to the Exchange, and dine with them and some other
merchants, which he did, and going along, one of them espied a ball of
gold upon his breast shining so gloriously that it dazled the eyes of
them all, and this continued all the rising of Mercury, who was then in
Vergo. This spirit discovered himself to him after he had for a whole
year together earnestly prayed to God to send a good angel to him, to be
a guide of his life and action; also he prayed for a token that this was
the will and pleasure of God, which was granted, for in a bright shining
day, no cloud appearing, there fell a drop of water upon his hat, which
to this day is not dry, and, I think, never will be, although it be
worne in this hot weather.

He prayes God to defend him and guide him in the true religion, reading
two or three hours in the Holy Bible.

After this, amongst many other divine dreams and visions,

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

he once in his sleep seemed to hear the voice of God, saying to him, "I
will save thy soul; I am He that before appeared unto thee." Since doth
the spirit every day knock at his doore about three or four o’clock in
the morning. He rising, there appeareth a child of faire stature, very
comely, who gave him a book which he keepeth very well, yet letteth many
see it that can prevaile with him; this book is full of divine things,
such as I never red or heard of. Another time his candle did fall down
upon the ground and went out, and there appeared before him something
about the bignesse of a nut, round and shining, and made a noyse; he
strived to take it up, but it turned like quicksilver, so that he could
not handle it.

Many gentlemen have been in his company when he hath been pulled by the
coat, as they have seen but could not perceive who did it; sometimes his
gloves, lying at one end of the table, have been brought and given him,
but they see the gloves, as they thought, come of themselves.

Another time, being with some merchants at dinner that were strangers to
this spirit, and were abashed when they heard the noise but saw nothing,
presently a paper was given to the gentleman, who read it, and so did
the others. It said that he should serve God and fear nothing, for the
enemies of his father which hated him should all surely die, and so
should all that sought to do him hurt, and to be assured he named such a
man, and said he shall die such a day, and he died. The merchants were
strucken with fear, but he bid them be of good courage, for there was no
hurt towards them, and, the better to assure them of it, he told the
truth of the whole matter.

Ever since this spirit hath been alwaies with him, and by some sensible
signe did ever advertise him of things, as by

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

striking his right eare, if he did not well, if otherwise, his left; if
any danger threatened, he was foretold of it. When he began to praise
God in psalms, he was presently raised and strengthened with a spiritual
and supernatural power. He daily begged of God that He would teach him
His will, His law, and His truth; he set one day of the week apart for
reading the Scripture and meditation, with singing of Psalms all the day
in his house, but in his ordinary conversation he is sufficiently merry,
if he like his company and be of a cheerful minde; if he talk of any
vain thing, or indiscreetly, or offer to discover any secret he is
forbidden, or if he at any time would discover any inspired secret, he
is forthwith admonished thereof in his eare. Every morning he is called
to prayer. He often goes to meet the Holy Company at certain times, and
they make resolution of all their actions.

He gives almes secretly, and the more he bestows the more prosperous he
is; he dares not commit any known fault, and hath by Providence of God
been directed through many eminent dangers; even those that sought his
life died.

At another time, when he was in very great danger, upon the ascendant
coming to the body of the Sun, and the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
opposing his ascendant, he being newly gone to bed, he said that the
spirit would not let him alone till he had raised him again and told him
he was falsely accused, wherefore he watched and prayed all that night.
The day after he escaped the hands of his persecutors in a wonderful
manner--one died and the other is very sick. Then came a voice to him,
saying, "Sing *Qui sedit in Latibulo Altissimi*."

Many other passages happen to this party daily, as a hundred will
testifie; but it is an endless labour to recite

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

them all. The man is now alive, in good health, and well known among all
men to be a friend to all and desirous to do good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[340:1](rhr26.htm#fr_108) This story is another
theft from the works of Henry More, who does not state that the subject
of the narrative was "a gentleman R. C."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spirit Euterpe](rhr27)
