[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rhr33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026L7FOU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Real History of the Rosicrucians*, by Arthur Edward Waite,
\[1887\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

### APPENDIX OF ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS.

By an error of transcription the preface to the "Fama Fraternitatis" was
omitted from the text of the present revised version. It is addressed to
"the wise and understanding reader."

Wisdome (sayeth Solomon) is a treasure unto men that never faileth, for
she is the breth of the power of God and an inherence flowing from the
glory of the Almighty; she is the brightness of the everlasting light,
the unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of His goodness.
She teacheth civility with righteousness and strength, she knoweth
things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come; she knoweth the
subtleties of speaches and can expound darke sentences; she foreseeth
signes and wonders, with the advent of seasons and times. With this
treasure was our first father Adam before his fall fully indued; hence
it doth appear that after God had brought before him all the creatures
of the field and the fowls under the heavens, he gave to everyone of
them theyr proper name, accordinge to their Nature.

Although now, through the sorrowful! fall into sinn, this excellent
jewell wisdome hath bene lost, and mere darkness and ignorance is come
into the world, yet, notwithstanding, the Lord God hath sometimes
hetherto bestowed and made manifest the same to some of his friends; the
wise Kinge Solomon Both testifie of himself that he upon his

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

earnest prayer and desire obtained such wisdome of God that thereby he
knew how the world was made, understood the operation of the elements,
the beginninge, endinge, and middest of the times, the alterations, the
dayes of the turning of the sunne, the change of seasons, the circuits
of yeres and the positions of stars, the natures of livinge creatures
and the furies of wild beasts, the violence of winds, the reasonings of
men, the diversities of plants, the vertues of roots, and all such
things as are either secret or manifest, them he knewe.

Now, I doe not think that there can be found anyone whoe would not wish
and desire with all his heart to be partaker of this noble treasure, but
seinge the same felicity canne happen to none except God Himself give
wisdome and send His Holy Spirit from above, we have sett forth in print
this little treaty, to wit, the *Famam* and *Confessionem* of the
Laudable Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, to be read by every one, because
in them is clearly shewn and discovered what concerning it the world
hath hereafter to expect. Although now these things may seem somewhat
strange, and many might esteme it to be a philosophical showe and no
true historie which is published and spoken of the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, it shall therefore sufficiently appear by our Confession
that there is more *in recessu* then may be imagined, and it shall also
be easily understood and observed by everyone, (yf he be not altogether
void of understandinge) what now adayes is meant thereby.

Those who are true disciples of wisdome and true followers of the
spirituall arte will consider better of these things, and have them in
greater estimation, as also judge farr otherwise of them, as hath been
done of some principal!

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

persons but espetially of Adam Haselmeyer, *Notarius Publicus* to the
Archduke Maximilian, whoe likewise hath made an extract *ex scriptis
Theologicis Theophrasti*, and written a treatise under the title
Jesuits, wherein he willeth that every Christian should be a true
Jesuite, that is, should walke, live, and be in Jesus. He was but ill
rewarded of the Jesuites, because in his answer written upon the *Famam*
he did name those of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, "the highly
illuminated men and undeceiving Jesuites," for they, not able to brook
this, layde hands on him and put him into the gallies, for which they
likewise are to expect theyr reward.

Blessed Aurora will now begin to appeare, whoe (after the passing away
of the darke night of Saturne) with her brightness altogether
extinguished the shinninge of the moon, or the small sparkles of the
heavenly wisdome which yet remaines with men, and is a fore runner of
pleasant Phœbus, whoe, with her cleare and fiery glisteninge beames,
brings forth that blessed day, long wished for of many true-hearted, by
which daylight then shall truely be knowne and seene, all heavenly
treasures of godly wisdome, as also the secrets of all hidden and
invisible things in the world, according to the doctrine of our
forefathers and auncient wise men.

This will be the right Kingly Rubie, most excellent shining Carbuncle,
of the which it is sayd that he doth shine and give light in darkenes,
and is a perfect medecine of all imperfect metaline bodyes, to change
them into the best gould and to cure all diseases of men, easing them of
theyr paynes and miseries.

Be therefore gentle reader admonished, that with me you doe earnestly
pray to God, that it may please Him to open

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

the harts and eares of all ill-hearing people, and to grant unto them
His blessing, that they may be able to know Him in His omnipotency, with
admiring contemplation of Nature, to His honor and praise, and to the
love, helpe, comfort, and strengthening of our neighbours,, and to the
restoring of health of all the diseased. Amen.

### A ROSICRUCIAN ALLEGORY. <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117)

There is a mountain situated in the midst of the *earth* or *centre* of
the *world*, which is both *small* and *great*. It is soft also above
measure, hard and strong. It is *far off and near at hand;* but, by the
Providence of God, it is invisible. In it are hidden most ample
treasures, which the world is not able to value. This mountain, by the
envy of the devil, is compassed about with very cruel beasts and
ravenous birds, which make the way thither both difficult and dangerous;
and, therefore, hitherto, because the time is not yet come, the way
thither could not be sought after by all, but only by the worthy man's
self-labour and investigation.

To this *mountain* you shall go in a *certain night*, when it comes most
long and dark, and see that you *prepare* yourself by *prayer*. *Insist*
upon the *way* that leads to the *mountain*, but ask not of any man
where it lies; only follow your *guide*, who will *offer* himself to
you, and will meet you in the way.

This guide will bring you to the mountain at *midnight*, when all things
are silent and dark. It is necessary that you arm yourself with a
resolute, heroic courage, lest you

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

fear those things that will happen, and fall back. You need no sword or
other bodily weapon, only call upon your God, *sincerely and heartily
seeking Him*.

When you have discovered the mountain, the first miracle that will
appear is this--a most vehement and very great wind will *shake* the
whole *mountain* and shatter the *rocks* to pieces. You will be
encountered by lions, dragons, and other terrible wild beasts; but fear
not any of these things. Be resolute and take heed that you return not,
for your guide who brought you thither will not suffer any evil to
befall you. As for the *treasure*, it is not yet discovered, but it is
very near. After this wind will come an earthquake, which will overthrow
those things which the wind had left. Be sure you fall not off. The
*earthquake* being passed, there shall follow a *fire* that will consume
the earthly rubbish and discover the treasure, but as yet you cannot see
it. After all these things, and near daybreak, there shall be a great
*calm*, and you shall see the *day-star* arise, and the darkness will
disappear. You will *conceive* a great treasure; the chiefest thing and
the most perfect is a certain exalted tincture, with which the world, if
it served God and were worthy of such gifts, might be tinged and turned
into most pure gold.

### THE ROSIE CRUCIAN PRAYER TO GOD.

*Jesus Mihi Omnia*.

Oh Thou everywhere and good of all, whatsoever I do remember, I beseech
Thee, that I am but dust, but as a vapour sprung from earth, which even
Thy smallest breath can scatter. Thou hast given me a soul and laws to
govern it; let that fraternal rule which Thou didst first appoint

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

to sway man order me; make me careful to point at Thy glory in all my
wayes, and where I cannot rightly know Thee, that not only my
understanding but my ignorance may honour Thee. Thou art all that can be
perfect; Thy revelation hath made me happy. Be not angry, O Divine One,
O God the most high Creator! If it please Thee, suffer these revealed
secrets, Thy gifts alone, not for my praise but to Thy glory, to
manifest themselves. I beseech Thee, most gracious God, they may not
fall into the hands of ignorant envious persons that cloud these truths
to Thy disgrace, saying they are not lawful to be published because what
God reveals is to be kept secret. But Rosie Crucian philosophers lay up
this secret into the bosome of God which I have presumed to manifest
clearly and plainly. I beseech the Trinity it may be printed as I have
written it that the truth may no more be darkened with ambiguous
language. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) Good God, besides Thee
nothing is! O stream Thyself into my soul, and flow it with Thy grace,
illumination and revelation! Make me to depend on Thee. Thou delightest
that man should account Thee as his King, and not hide what honey of
knowledge he hath revealed. I cast myself as an honourer of Thee at Thy
feet, and because I cannot be defended by Thee unless I believe after
Thy laws, keep me, O my soul's Soveraign, in the obedience of Thy will,
and that I wound not my conscience with vice and hiding Thy gifts and
graces bestowed upon me, for this, I know, will destroy me within, and
make Thy illuminating Spirit leave me. I am afraid I have already
infinitely swerved from the revelations of that Divine Guide which Thou
hast commanded to direct me to the truth, and for this I am a sad
prostrate and penitent at the

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

foot of Thy throne. I appeal only to the abundance of Thy remissions, O
God, my God. I know it is a mysterie beyond the vast soul's
apprehension, and therefore deep enough for man to rest in safety in! O
Thou Being of all beings, cause me to work myself to Thee, and into the
receiving arms of Thy paternal mercies throw myself. For outward things
I thank Thee, and such as I have I give unto others, in the name of the
Trinity, freely and faithfully, without hiding anything of what was
revealed to me and experienced to be no diabolical delusion or dream,
but the *Adjectamenta* of Thy richer graces--the mines and deprivation
are both in Thy hands. In what Thou hast given me I am content. Good
God, ray Thyself into my soul! Give me but a heart to please Thee, I beg
no more then Thou hast given, and that to continue me uncontemnedly and
unpittiedly honest. Save me from the devil, lusts, and men, and from
those fond dotages of mortality which would weigh down my soul to
lowness and debauchment. Let it be my glory (planting myself in a noble
height above them) to contemn them. Take me from myself and fill me but
with Thee. Sum up Thy blessings in these two, that I may be rightly good
and wise, and these, for Thy eternal truth's sake, grant and make
grateful.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[443:1](rhr34.htm#fr_117) See the preface to
Heydon's "Holy Guide"; also "A Suggestive Inquiry concerning the
Rosicrucian Mystery."

<span id="fn_118"></span>[445:1](rhr34.htm#fr_118) The speaker is John
Heydon, in "The Holy Guide."

 
