<span class="small">[Sacred Texts Index](../../index)  [Hinduism
Index](../index)  [Laws of Manu Index](../manu)  [Next](manu02) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER I.

1\. The great sages approached Manu, who was seated with a collected
mind, and, having duly worshipped him, spoke as follows:

2\. 'Deign, divine one, to declare to us precisely and in due order the
sacred laws of each of the (four chief) castes (varna) and of the
intermediate ones.

3\. 'For thou, O Lord, alone knowest the purport, (i.e.) the rites, and
the knowledge of the soul, (taught) in this whole ordinance of the
Self-existent (Svayambhu), which is unknowable and unfathomable.'

4\. He, whose power is measureless, being thus asked by the high-minded
great sages, duly honoured them, and answered, 'Listen!'

5\. This (universe) existed in the shape of Darkness, unperceived,
destitute of distinctive marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable,
wholly immersed, as it were, in deep sleep.

6\. Then the divine Self-existent (Svayambhu, himself) indiscernible,
(but) making (all) this, the great elements and the rest, discernible,
appeared with irresistible (creative) power, dispelling the darkness.

7\. He who can be perceived by the internal organ (alone), who is
subtile, indiscernible, and eternal, who contains all created beings and
is inconceivable, shone forth of his own (will).

8\. He, desiring to produce beings of many kinds from his own body,
first with a thought created the waters, and placed his seed in them.

9\. That (seed) became a golden egg, in brilliancy equal to the sun; in
that (egg) he himself was born as Brahman, the progenitor of the whole
world.

10\. The waters are called narah, (for) the waters are, indeed, the
offspring of Nara; as they were his first residence (ayana), he thence
is named Narayana.

11\. From that (first) cause, which is indiscernible, eternal, and both
real and unreal, was produced that male (Purusha), who is famed in this
world (under the appellation of) Brahman.

12\. The divine one resided in that egg during a whole year, then he
himself by his thought (alone) divided it into two halves;

13\. And out of those two halves he formed heaven and earth, between
them the middle sphere, the eight points of the horizon, and the eternal
abode of the waters.

14\. From himself (atmanah) he also drew forth the mind, which is both
real and unreal, likewise from the mind egoism, which possesses the
function of self-consciousness (and is) lordly;

15\. Moreover, the great one, the soul, and all (products) affected by
the three qualities, and, in their order, the five organs which perceive
the objects of sensation.

16\. But, joining minute particles even of those six, which possess
measureless power, with particles of himself, he created all beings.

17\. Because those six (kinds of) minute particles, which form the
(creator's) frame, enter (a-sri) these (creatures), therefore the wise
call his frame sarira, (the body.)

18\. That the great elements enter, together with their functions and
the mind, through its minute parts the framer of all beings, the
imperishable one.

19\. But from minute body (-framing) particles of these seven very
powerful Purushas springs this (world), the perishable from the
imperishable.

20\. Among them each succeeding (element) acquires the quality of the
preceding one, and whatever place (in the sequence) each of them
occupies, even so many qualities it is declared to possess.

21\. But in the beginning he assigned their several names, actions, and
conditions to all (created beings), even according to the words of the
Veda.

22\. He, the Lord, also created the class of the gods, who are endowed
with life, and whose nature is action; and the subtile class of the
Sadhyas, and the eternal sacrifice.

23\. But from fire, wind, and the sun he drew forth the threefold
eternal Veda, called Rik, Yagus, and Saman, for the due performance of
the sacrifice.

24\. Time and the divisions of time, the lunar mansions and the planets,
the rivers, the oceans, the mountains, plains, and uneven ground.

25\. Austerity, speech, pleasure, desire, and anger, this whole creation
he likewise produced, as he desired to call these beings into existence.

26\. Moreover, in order to distinguish actions, he separated merit from
demerit, and he caused the creatures to be affected by the pairs (of
opposites), such as pain and pleasure.

27\. But with the minute perishable particles of the five (elements)
which have been mentioned, this whole (world) is framed in due order.

28\. But to whatever course of action the Lord at first appointed each
(kind of beings), that alone it has spontaneously adopted in each
succeeding creation.

29\. Whatever he assigned to each at the (first) creation, noxiousness
or harmlessness, gentleness or ferocity, virtue or sin, truth or
falsehood, that clung (afterwards) spontaneously to it.

30\. As at the change of the seasons each season of its own accord
assumes its distinctive marks, even so corporeal beings (resume in new
births) their (appointed) course of action.

31\. But for the sake of the prosperity of the worlds he caused the
Brahmana, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra to proceed from his
mouth, his arms, his thighs, and his feet.

32\. Dividing his own body, the Lord became half male and half female;
with that (female) he produced Virag.

33\. But know me, O most holy among the twice-born, to be the creator of
this whole (world), whom that male, Virag, himself produced, having
performed austerities.

34\. Then I, desiring to produce created beings, performed very
difficult austerities, and (thereby) called into existence ten great
sages, lords of created beings,

35\. Mariki, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Praketas,
Vasishtha, Bhrigu, and Narada.

36\. They created seven other Manus possessing great brilliancy, gods
and classes of gods and great sages of measureless power,

37\. Yakshas (the servants of Kubera, the demons called) Rakshasas and
Pisakas, Gandharvas (or musicians of the gods), Apsarases (the dancers
of the gods), Asuras, (the snake-deities called) Nagas and Sarpas, (the
bird-deities called) Suparnas and the several classes of the manes,

38\. Lightnings, thunderbolts and clouds, imperfect (rohita) and perfect
rainbows, falling meteors, supernatural noises, comets, and heavenly
lights of many kinds,

39 (Horse-faced) Kinnaras, monkeys, fishes, birds of many kinds, cattle,
deer, men, and carnivorous beasts with two rows of teeth,

40\. Small and large worms and beetles, moths, lice, flies, bugs, all
stinging and biting insects and the several kinds of immovable things.

41\. Thus was this whole (creation), both the immovable and the movable,
produced by those high-minded ones by means of austerities and at my
command, (each being) according to (the results of) its actions.

42\. But whatever act is stated (to belong) to (each of) those creatures
here below, that I will truly declare to you, as well as their order in
respect to birth.

43\. Cattle, deer, carnivorous beasts with two rows of teeth, Rakshasas,
Pisakas, and men are born from the womb.

44\. From eggs are born birds, snakes, crocodiles, fishes, tortoises, as
well as similar terrestrial and aquatic (animals).

45\. From hot moisture spring stinging and biting insects, lice, flies,
bugs, and all other (creatures) of that kind which are produced by heat.

46\. All plants, propagated by seed or by slips, grow from shoots;
annual plants (are those) which, bearing many flowers and fruits, perish
after the ripening of their fruit;

47\. (Those trees) which bear fruit without flowers are called vanaspati
(lords of the forest); but those which bear both flowers and fruit are
called vriksha.

48\. But the various plants with many stalks, growing from one or
several roots, the different kinds of grasses, the climbing plants and
the creepers spring all from seed or from slips.

49\. These (plants) which are surrounded by multiform Darkness, the
result of their acts (in former existences), possess internal
consciousness and experience pleasure and pain.

50\. The (various) conditions in this always terrible and constantly
changing circle of births and deaths to which created beings are
subject, are stated to begin with (that of) Brahman, and to end with
(that of) these (just mentioned immovable creatures).

51\. When he whose power is incomprehensible, had thus produced the
universe and men, he disappeared in himself, repeatedly suppressing one
period by means of the other.

52\. When that divine one wakes, then this world stirs; when he slumbers
tranquilly, then the universe sinks to sleep.

53\. But when he reposes in calm sleep, the corporeal beings whose
nature is action, desist from their actions and mind becomes inert.

54\. When they are absorbed all at once in that great soul, then he who
is the soul of all beings sweetly slumbers, free from all care and
occupation.

55\. When this (soul) has entered darkness, it remains for a long time
united with the organs (of sensation), but performs not its functions;
it then leaves the corporeal frame.

56\. When, being clothed with minute particles (only), it enters into
vegetable or animal seed, it then assumes, united (with the fine body),
a (new) corporeal frame.

57\. Thus he, the imperishable one, by (alternately) waking and
slumbering, incessantly revivifies and destroys this whole movable and
immovable (creation).

58\. But he having composed these Institutes (of the sacred law),
himself taught them, according to the rule, to me alone in the
beginning; next I (taught them) to Mariki and the other sages.

59\. Bhrigu, here, will fully recite to you these Institutes; for that
sage learned the whole in its entirety from me.

60\. Then that great sage Bhrigu, being thus addressed by Manu, spoke,
pleased in his heart, to all the sages, 'Listen!'

61\. Six other high-minded, very powerful Manus, who belong to the race
of this Manu, the descendant of the Self-existent (Svayambhu), and who
have severally produced created beings,

62\. (Are) Svarokisha, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Kakshusha, possessing
great lustre, and the son of Vivasvat.

63\. These seven very glorious Manus, the first among whom is
Svayambhuva, produced and protected this whole movable and immovable
(creation), each during the period (allotted to him).

64\. Eighteen nimeshas (twinklings of the eye, are one kashtha), thirty
kashthas one kala, thirty kalas one muhurta, and as many (muhurtas) one
day and night.

65\. The sun divides days and nights, both human and divine, the night
(being intended) for the repose of created beings and the day for
exertion.

66\. A month is a day and a night of the manes, but the division is
according to fortnights. The dark (fortnight) is their day for active
exertion, the bright (fortnight) their night for sleep.

67\. A year is a day and a night of the gods; their division is (as
follows): the half year during which the sun progresses to the north
will be the day, that during which it goes southwards the night.

68\. But hear now the brief (description of) the duration of a night and
a day of Brahman and of the several ages (of the world, yuga) according
to their order.

69\. They declare that the Krita age (consists of) four thousand years
(of the gods); the twilight preceding it consists of as many hundreds,
and the twilight following it of the same number.

70\. In the other three ages with their twilights preceding and
following, the thousands and hundreds are diminished by one (in each).

71\. These twelve thousand (years) which thus have been just mentioned
as the total of four (human) ages, are called one age of the gods.

72\. But know that the sum of one thousand ages of the gods (makes) one
day of Brahman, and that his night has the same length.

73\. Those (only, who) know that the holy day of Brahman, indeed, ends
after (the completion of) one thousand ages (of the gods) and that his
night lasts as long, (are really) men acquainted with (the length of)
days and nights.

74\. At the end of that day and night he who was asleep, awakes and,
after awaking, creates mind, which is both real and unreal.

75\. Mind, impelled by (Brahman's) desire to create, performs the work
of creation by modifying itself, thence ether is produced; they declare
that sound is the quality of the latter.

76\. But from ether, modifying itself, springs the pure, powerful wind,
the vehicle of all perfumes; that is held to possess the quality of
touch.

77\. Next from wind modifying itself, proceeds the brilliant light,
which illuminates and dispels darkness; that is declared to possess the
quality of colour;

78\. And from light, modifying itself, (is produced) water, possessing
the quality of taste, from water earth which has the quality of smell;
such is the creation in the beginning.

79\. The before-mentioned age of the gods, (or) twelve thousand (of
their years), being multiplied by seventy-one, (constitutes what) is
here named the period of a Manu (Manvantara).

80\. The Manvantaras, the creations and destructions (of the world, are)
numberless; sporting, as it were, Brahman repeats this again and again.

81\. In the Krita age Dharma is four-footed and entire, and (so is)
Truth; nor does any gain accrue to men by unrighteousness.

82\. In the other (three ages), by reason of (unjust) gains (agama),
Dharma is deprived successively of one foot, and through (the prevalence
of) theft, falsehood, and fraud the merit (gained by men) is diminished
by one fourth (in each).

83\. (Men are) free from disease, accomplish all their aims, and live
four hundred years in the Krita age, but in the Treta and (in each of)
the succeeding (ages) their life is lessened by one quarter.

84\. The life of mortals, mentioned in the Veda, the desired results of
sacrificial rites and the (supernatural) power of embodied (spirits) are
fruits proportioned among men according to (the character of) the age.

85\. One set of duties (is prescribed) for men in the Krita age,
different ones in the Treta and in the Dvapara, and (again) another
(set) in the Kali, in a proportion as (those) ages decrease in length.

86\. In the Krita age the chief (virtue) is declared to be (the
performance of) austerities, in the Treta (divine) knowledge, in the
Dvapara (the performance of) sacrifices, in the Kali liberality alone.

87\. But in order to protect this universe He, the most resplendent one,
assigned separate (duties and) occupations to those who sprang from his
mouth, arms, thighs, and feet.

88\. To Brahmanas he assigned teaching and studying (the Veda),
sacrificing for their own benefit and for others, giving and accepting
(of alms).

89\. The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the people, to bestow gifts,
to offer sacrifices, to study (the Veda), and to abstain from attaching
himself to sensual pleasures;

90\. The Vaisya to tend cattle, to bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to
study (the Veda), to trade, to lend money, and to cultivate land.

91\. One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Sudra, to serve
meekly even these (other) three castes.

92\. Man is stated to be purer above the navel (than below); hence the
Self-existent (Svayambhu) has declared the purest (part) of him (to be)
his mouth.

93\. As the Brahmana sprang from (Brahman's) mouth, as he was the
first-born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the lord of
this whole creation.

94\. For the Self-existent (Svayambhu), having performed austerities,
produced him first from his own mouth, in order that the offerings might
be conveyed to the gods and manes and that this universe might be
preserved.

95\. What created being can surpass him, through whose mouth the gods
continually consume the sacrificial viands and the manes the offerings
to the dead?

96\. Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those which are
animated; of the animated, those which subsist by intelligence; of the
intelligent, mankind; and of men, the Brahmanas;

97\. Of Brahmanas, those learned (in the Veda); of the learned, those
who recognise (the necessity and the manner of performing the prescribed
duties); of those who possess this knowledge, those who perform them; of
the performers, those who know the Brahman.

98\. The very birth of a Brahmana is an eternal incarnation of the
sacred law; for he is born to (fulfil) the sacred law, and becomes one
with Brahman.

99\. A Brahmana, coming into existence, is born as the highest on earth,
the lord of all created beings, for the protection of the treasury of
the law.

100\. Whatever exists in the world is, the property of the Brahmana; on
account of the excellence of his origin The Brahmana is, indeed,
entitled to all.

101\. The Brahmana eats but his own food, wears but his own apparel,
bestows but his own in alms; other mortals subsist through the
benevolence of the Brahmana.

102\. In order to clearly settle his duties those of the other (castes)
according to their order, wise Manu sprung from the Self-existent,
composed these Institutes (of the sacred Law).

103\. A learned Brahmana must carefully study them, and he must duly
instruct his pupils in them, but nobody else (shall do it).

104\. A Brahmana who studies these Institutes (and) faithfully fulfils
the duties (prescribed therein), is never tainted by sins, arising from
thoughts, words, or deeds.

105\. He sanctifies any company (which he may enter), seven ancestors
and seven descendants, and he alone deserves (to possess) this whole
earth.

106\. (To study) this (work) is the best means of securing welfare, it
increases understanding, it procures fame and long life, it (leads to)
supreme bliss.

107\. In this (work) the sacred law has been fully stated as well as the
good and bad qualities of (human) actions and the immemorial rule of
conduct, (to be followed) by all the four castes (varna).

108\. The rule of conduct is transcendent law, whether it be taught in
the revealed texts or in the sacred tradition; hence a twice-born man
who possesses regard for himself, should be always careful to (follow)
it.

109\. A Brahmana who departs from the rule of conduct, does not reap the
fruit of the Veda, but he who duly follows it, will obtain the full
reward.

110\. The sages who saw that the sacred law is thus grounded on the rule
of conduct, have taken good conduct to be the most excellent root of all
austerity.

111\. The creation of the universe, the rule of the sacraments, the
ordinances of studentship, and the respectful behaviour (towards Gurus),
the most excellent rule of bathing (on return from the teacher's house),

112\. (The law of) marriage and the description of the (various)
marriage-rites, the regulations for the great sacrifices and the eternal
rule of the funeral sacrifices,

113\. The description of the modes of (gaining) subsistence and the
duties of a Snataka, (the rules regarding) lawful and forbidden food,
the purification of men and of things,

114\. The laws concerning women, (the law) of hermits, (the manner of
gaining) final emancipation and (of) renouncing the world, the whole
duty of a king and the manner of deciding lawsuits,

115\. The rules for the examination of witnesses, the laws concerning
husband and wife, the law of (inheritance and) division, (the law
concerning) gambling and the removal of (men nocuous like) thorns,

116\. (The law concerning) the behaviour of Vaisyas and Sudras, the
origin of the mixed castes, the law for all castes in times of distress
and the law of penances,

117\. The threefold course of transmigrations, the result of (good or
bad) actions, (the manner of attaining) supreme bliss and the
examination of the good and bad qualities of actions,

118\. The primeval laws of countries, of castes (gati), of families, and
the rules concerning heretics and companies (of traders and the like)-
(all that) Manu has declared in these Institutes.

119\. As Manu, in reply to my questions, formerly promulgated these
Institutes, even so learn ye also the (whole work) from me.
