[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41004)  [Next](cc41006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>COMMENTARIES ON THE

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>EPISTLE OF PAUL

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>TO THE GALATIANS.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Paul, an apostle, (not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him
from the dead,)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Paulus apostolus, non ab
hominibus, neque per hominem, sed per Iesum Christum, et Deum Patrem,
qui suscitavit illum ex mortuis,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And all the brethren which are
with me, unto the churches of Galatia:

<span id="iii.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et qui mecum sunt fratres omnes,
ecclesiis Galatiae:

<span id="iii.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Grace *be* to you, and peace, from
God the Father, and *from* our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre,
et Domino nostro Iesu Christo,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Who gave himself for our sins,
that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the
will of God and our Father:

<span id="iii.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Qui dedit se ipsum pro peccatis
nostris, ut nos eriperet a praesenti saeculo maligno, secundum
voluntatem Dei et Patris nostri,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** To whom *be* glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Cui gloria in saecula saeculorum.
Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p14"></span>**1.** *Paul, an apostle*. In the
salutations with which he commenced his Epistles, Paul was accustomed to
claim the title of “an Apostle.” His object in doing so, as we have
remarked on former occasions, was to employ the authority of his
station, for the purpose of enforcing his doctrine. This authority
depends not on the judgment or opinion of men, but exclusively on the
calling of God; and therefore he demands a hearing on the ground of his
being “an Apostle.” Let us always bear this in mind, that in the church
we ought to listen to God alone, and to Jesus Christ, whom he has
appointed to be our teacher. Whoever assumes a right to instruct us,
must speak in the name of God or of Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p15"></span>But as the calling of Paul was more
vehemently disputed among the Galatians, he asserts it more strongly in
his address to that church, than in his other Epistles; for he does not
simply affirm that he was called by God, but states expressly that it
was *not either from men or by men*. This statement, be it observed,
applies not to the office which he held in common with other pastors,
but to the apostleship. The authors of the calumnies which he has in his
eye did not venture to deprive him altogether of the honor of the
Christian ministry. They merely refused to allow him the name and rank
of an apostle.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p16"></span>We are now speaking of the apostleship
in the strictest sense; for the word is employed in two different ways.
Sometimes, it denotes preachers of the Gospel, to whatever class they
might belong; but here it bears a distinct reference to the highest rank
in the church; so that Paul is equal to Peter and to the other twelve.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p17"></span>The first clause, that he was called
*not from men*, he had in common with all the true ministers of Christ.
As no man ought to “take this honor unto himself,” (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>[Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>,) so it is not in the power of men to
bestow it on whomsoever they choose. It belongs to God alone to govern
his church; and therefore the calling cannot be lawful, unless it
proceed from Him. So far as the church is concerned, a man who has been
led to the ministry, not by a good conscience, but by ungodly motives,
may happen to be regularly called. But Paul is here speaking of a call
ascertained in so perfect, a manner, that nothing farther can be
desired.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p18"></span>It will, perhaps, be objected — Do not
the false apostles frequently indulge in the same kind of boasting? I
admit they do, and in a more haughty and disdainful style than the
servants of the Lord venture to employ; but they want that actual call
from Heaven to which Paul was entitled to lay claim.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p19"></span>The second clause, that he was called
*not by man*, belonged in a peculiar manner to the apostles; for in an
ordinary pastor, this would have implied nothing wrong. Paul himself,
when travelling through various cities in company with Barnabas,
“ordained elders in every church,” by the votes of the people, (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>[Ac
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>;) and he enjoins Titus and Timothy to
proceed in the same work. (<span id="iii.iii.i-p19.2"></span>[1Ti
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span id="iii.iii.i-p19.2"></span>
<span id="iii.iii.i-p19.3"></span>Titus 1:5.) Such is the ordinary
method of electing pastors; for we are not entitled to wait until God
shall reveal from heaven the names of the persons whom he has chosen.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p20"></span>But if human agency was not improper, if
it was even commendable, why does Paul disclaim it in reference to
himself? I have already mentioned that something more was necessary to
be proved than that Paul was a pastor, or that he belonged to the number
of the ministers of the Gospel; for the point in dispute was the
apostleship. It was necessary that the apostles should be elected, not
in the same manner as other pastors, but by the direct agency of the
Lord himself. Thus, Christ himself (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>[Mt
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>) called the Twelve; and when a successor
was to be appointed in the room of Judas, the church does not venture to
choose one by votes, but has recourse to *lot*. (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.2"></span>[Ac
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.2"></span>.) We are certain that the lot was not
employed in electing pastors. Why was it resorted to in the election of
Matthias? To mark the express agency of God for it was proper that the
apostles should be distinguished from other ministers. And thus Paul, in
order to shew that he does not belong to the ordinary rank of ministers,
contends that his calling proceeded immediately from God.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p22"></span>But how does Paul affirm that he was
*not* called *by men*, while Luke records that Paul and Barnabas were
called by the church at Antioch? Some have replied, that he had
previously discharged the duties of an apostle, and that, consequently,
his apostleship was not founded on his appointment by that church. But
here, again, it may be objected, that this was his first designation to
be the apostle of the Gentiles, to which class the Galatians belonged.
The more correct, and obvious reply is, that he did not intend here to
set aside entirely the calling of that church, but merely to shew that
his apostleship rests on a higher title. This is true; for even those
who laid their hands on Paul at Antioch did so, not of their own accord,
but in obedience to express revelation.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p23"></span>“As they ministered to the Lord, and
fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away.” (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>[Acts
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p24"></span>Since, therefore, he was called by
Divine revelation, and was also appointed and declared by the Holy
Spirit to be the apostle of the Gentiles, it follows, that he was not
brought forward *by men*, although the customary rite of ordination was
afterwards added.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p26"></span>It will, perhaps, be thought that an
indirect contrast between Paul and the false apostles is here intended.
I have no objection to that view; for they were in the habit of glorying
in the name of men. His meaning will therefore stand thus: “Whoever may
be the persons by whom others boast that they have been sent, I shall be
superior to them; for I hold my commission from God and Christ.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p27"></span>*By Jesus Christ and God the Father* He
asserts that God the Father and Christ had bestowed on him his
apostleship. Christ is first named, because it is his prerogative to
send, and because we are his ambassadors. But to make the statement more
complete, the Father is also mentioned; as if he had said, “If there be
any one whom the name of Christ is not sufficient to inspire with
reverence, let him know that I have also received my office from God the
Father.”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p28"></span>*Who raised him from the dead*. The
resurrection of Christ is the commencement of his reign, and is
therefore closely connected with the present subject. It was a reproach
brought by them against Paul that he had held no communication with
Christ, while he was on the earth. He argues, on the other hand, that,
as Christ was glorified by his resurrection, so he has actually
exercised his authority in the government of his church. The calling of
Paul is therefore more illustrious than it would have been, if Christ,
while still a mortal, had ordained him to the office. And this
circumstance deserves attention; for Paul intimates that the attempt to
set aside his authority, involved a malignant opposition to the
astonishing power of God, which was displayed in the resurrection of
Christ; because the same heavenly Father, who raised Christ from the
dead, commanded Paul to make known that exertion of his power.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p30"></span>**2.** *And all the brethren who are
with me*. — He appears to have usually written in the name of many
persons, judging that, if those to whom he wrote should attach less
weight to a solitary individual, they might listen to a greater number,
and would not despise a whole congregation. His general practice is, to
insert the salutations from brethren at the conclusion, instead of
introducing them at the commencement as joint authors of the epistle: at
least, he never mentions more than two names, and those very well known.
But here he includes all the brethren; and thus adopts, though not
without good reason, an opposite method. The concurrence of so many
godly persons must have had some degree of influence in softening the
minds of the Galatians, and preparing them to receive instruction.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p31"></span>*To the churches of Galatia*. It was an
extensive country, and therefore contained many churches scattered
through it. But is it not wonderful that the term “Church”, which always
implies unity of faith, should have been applied to the Galatians, who
had almost entirely revolted from Christ? I reply, so long as they
professed Christianity, worshipped one God, observed the sacraments, and
enjoyed some kind of Gospel ministry, they retained the external marks
of a church. We do not always find in churches such a measure of purity
as might be desired. The purest have their blemishes; and some are
marked, not by a few spots, but by general deformity. Though the
doctrines and practices of any society may not, in all respects, meet
our wishes, we must not instantly pronounce its defects to be a
sufficient reason for withholding from it the appellation of a Church.
Paul manifests here a gentleness of disposition utterly at variance with
such a course. Yet our acknowledgment of societies to be churches of
Christ must be accompanied by an explicit condemnation of everything in
them that is improper or defective; for we must not imagine, that,
wherever there is some kind of church, everything in it that ought to be
desired in a church is perfect.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p32"></span>I make this observation, because the
Papists, seizing on the single word *Church*, think that whatever they
choose to force upon us is sanctioned; though the condition and aspect
of the Church of Rome are widely different from what existed in Galatia.
If Paul were alive at the present day, he would perceive the miserable
and dreadfully shattered remains of a church; but he would perceive no
building. In short, the word Church is often applied by a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole, to any portion of the
church, even though it may not fully answer to the name.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p33"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p34"></span>**3.** *Grace be to you and peace*. This
form of salutation, which occurred in the other epistles, has received
an explanation, to which I still adhere. Paul wishes for the Galatians a
state of friendship with God, and, along with it, all good things; for
the favor of God is the source from which we derive every kind of
prosperity. He presents both petitions to Christ, as well as to the
Father; because without Christ neither grace, nor any real prosperity,
can be obtained.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p35"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p36"></span>**4.** *Who gave himself for our sins*.
He begins with commending the grace of Christ, in order to recall and
fix on Him the attention of the Galatians; for, if they had justly
appreciated this benefit of redemption, they would never have fallen
into opposite views of religion. He who knows Christ in a proper manner
beholds him earnestly, embraces him with the warmest affection, is
absorbed in the contemplation of him, and desires no other object. The
best remedy for purifying our minds from any kind of errors or
superstitions, is to keep in remembrance our relation to Christ, and the
benefits which he has conferred upon us.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p37"></span>These words, *who gave himself for our
sins*, were intended to convey to the Galatians a doctrine of vast
importance; that no other satisfactions can lawfully be brought into
comparison with that sacrifice of himself which Christ offered to the
Father; that in Christ, therefore, and in him alone, atonement for sin,
and perfect righteousness, must be sought; and that the manner in which
we are redeemed by him ought to excite our highest admiration. What Paul
here ascribes to Christ is, with equal propriety, ascribed in other
parts of Scripture to God the Father; for, on the one hand, the Father,
by an eternal purpose, decreed this atonement, and gave this proof of
his love to us, that he “spared not his only-begotten Son, (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>[Ro
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>,) but delivered him up for us all;” and
Christ, on the other hand, offered himself a sacrifice in order to
reconcile us to God. Hence it follows, that his death is the
satisfaction for sins.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p39"></span>*That he might deliver us*. He likewise
declares the design of our redemption to be, that Christ, by his death,
might purchase us to be his own property. This takes place when we are
separated from the world; for so long as we are of the world, we do not
belong to Christ. The word αιών, (*age*,) is here put for the corruption
which is in the world; in the same manner as in the first Epistle of
John, (<span id="iii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>[1Jo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>) where it is said that “the whole world
lieth in the wicked one,” and in his Gospel, (<span
id="iii.iii.i-p39.2"></span>[Joh
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p39.2"></span>,) where the Savior says,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p40"></span>“I pray not that thou shouldst take them
out of the world,  
but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil;”

<span id="iii.iii.i-p41"></span>for there it signifies the present life.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p42"></span>What then is meant by the word “World”
in this passage? Men separated from the kingdom of God and the grace of
Christ. So long as a man lives to himself, he is altogether condemned.
The World is, therefore, contrasted with regeneration, as nature with
grace, or the flesh with the spirit. Those who are born of the world
have nothing but sin and wickedness, not by creation, but by corruption.
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) Christ, therefore, died for our
sins, in order to redeem or separate us from the world.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p44"></span>*From the present wicked age.* By adding
the epithet “wicked”, he intended to shew that he is speaking of the
corruption or depravity which proceeds from sin, and not of God’s
creatures, or of the bodily life. And yet by this single word, as by a
thunderbolt, he lays low all human pride; for he declares, that, apart
from that renewal of the nature which is bestowed by the grace of
Christ, there is nothing in us but unmixed wickedness. We are of the
world; and, till Christ take us out of it, the world reigns in us, and
we live to the world. Whatever delight men may take in their fancied
excellence, they are worthless and depraved; not indeed in their own
opinion, but in the judgment of our Lord, which is here pronounced by
the mouth of Paul, and which ought to satisfy our minds.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p45"></span>*According to the will*. He points out
the original fountain of grace, namely, the purpose of God;

<span id="iii.iii.i-p46"></span>“for God so loved the world, that he
gave his only-begotten Son.” (<span id="iii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>[Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p47"></span>But it deserves notice, that Paul is
accustomed to represent the decree of God as setting aside all
compensation or merit on the part of men, and so *Will* denotes here
what is commonly called “good pleasure.”  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) The meaning is, that Christ suffered for
us, not because we were worthy, or because anything done by us moved him
to the act, but because such was the purpose of God. *Of God and our
Father* is of the same import as if he had said, “Of God who is our
Father.”  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="iii.iii.i-p50"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p51"></span>**5.** *To whom be glory*. By this
sudden exclamation of thanksgiving, he intends to awaken powerfully in
his readers the contemplation of that invaluable gift which they had
received from God, and in this manner to prepare their minds more fully
for receiving instruction. It must at the same time be viewed as a
general exhortation. Every instance in which the mercy of God occurs to
our remembrance, ought to be embraced by us as an occasion of ascribing
glory to God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**6**. I marvel that ye are so soon
removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another
gospel:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Miror quod ita cito transferimini
a Christo, qui vos vocavit in gratia, ad aliud evangehum;

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Which is not another; but there
be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Quod non est aliud, nisi quod
sunt quidant, qui vos turbant, ae volunt evertere evangelium Christi.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** But though we, or an angel from
heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Verum etiamsi nos, aut Angelus e
coelo evangelizet vobis praeter id quod evangelizavimus vobis, anathema
sit.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** As we said before, so say I now
again, If any *man* preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Quemadmodum praediximus, nunc
quoque iterum dico; si quis vobis evangelizaverit praeterquam quod
accepistis, anathema sit.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *I wonder.* He commences by
administering a rebuke, though a somewhat milder one than they deserved;
but his greatest severity of language is directed, as we shall see,
against the false apostles. He charges them with turning aside, not only
from his gospel, but from Christ; for it was impossible for them to
retain their attachment to Christ, without acknowledging that he has
graciously delivered us from the bondage of the law. But such a belief
cannot be reconciled with those notions respecting the obligation of
ceremonial observance which the false apostles inculcated. They were
*removed from* Christ; not that they entirely rejected Christianity, but
that the corruption of their doctrines was such as to leave them nothing
more than an imaginary Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p13"></span>Thus, in our own times, the Papists,
choosing to have a divided and mangled Christ, have none, and are
therefore “removed from Christ.” They are full of superstitions, which
are directly at variance with the nature of Christ. Let it be carefully
observed, that we are *removed from Christ*, when we fall into those
views which are inconsistent with his mediatorial office; for light can
have no fellowship with darkness.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>On the same principle, he calls it
*another gospel*, that is, a gospel different from the true one. And yet
the false apostles professed that they preached the gospel of Christ;
but, mingling with it their own inventions,  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) by which its principal efficacy was
destroyed, they held a false, corrupt, and spurious gospel. By using the
present tense, (“ye are removed”) he appears to say that they were only
in the *act* of failing. As if he had said, “I do not yet say that ye
have been removed; for then it would be more difficult to return to the
right path. But now, at the critical moment, do not advance a single
step, but instantly retreat.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p16"></span>*From Christ, who called you by grace.*
Others read it, “from him who called you by the grace of Christ,”
understanding it to refer to the Father; but the reading which we have
followed is more simple. When he says that they were called by Christ
through grace, this tends to heighten the criminality of their
ingratitude. To revolt from the Son of God under any circumstances, is
unworthy and disgraceful; but to revolt from him, after being invited to
partake salvation by grace, is more eminently base. His goodness to us
renders our ingratitude to him more dreadfully heinous.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p17"></span>*So soon*. When it is considered how
*soon* they had discovered a want of steadfastness, their guilt is still
further heightened. A proper season, indeed, for departing from Christ
cannot be imagined. But the fact, that no sooner had Paul left them than
the Galatians were led away from the truth, inferred still deeper blame.
As the consideration of the grace by which they had been called was
adduced to aggravate their ingratitude, so the circumstance of the time
when they were removed is now adduced to aggravate their levity.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p18"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p19"></span>**7.** *Which is not another thing*
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) Some explain it thus, “though
there is not another gospel;” as if it were a sort of correction of the
Apostle’s language, to guard against the supposition that there were
more gospels than one. So far as the explanation of the words is
concerned, I take a more simple view of them; for he speaks
contemptuously of the doctrine of the false apostles, as being nothing
else than a mass of confusion and destruction. As if he had said, “What
do those persons allege? On what grounds do they attack the doctrine
which I have delivered? They merely trouble you, and subvert the gospel.
They do nothing more.” But it amounts to the same meaning; for this,
too, I acknowledge, is a correction of the language he had used about
*another gospel*. He declares that it is not a gospel, but a mere
disturbance. All I intended to say was, that, in my opinion, the word
*another* means *another thing*. It resembles strongly the expression in
common use, “this amounts to *nothing, but that* you wish to deceive.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p21"></span>*And wish to pervert.* He charges them
with the additional crime of doing an injury to Christ, by endeavoring
to subvert his gospel. Subversion is an enormous crime. It is worse than
corruption. And with good reason does he fasten on them this charge.
When the glow of justification is ascribed to another, and a snare is
laid for the consciences of men, the Savior no longer occupies his
place, and the doctrine of the gospel is utterly ruined.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>*The gospel of Christ*. To know what
are the leading points of the gospel, is a matter of unceasing
importance. When these are attacked, the gospel is destroyed. When he
adds the words, *of Christ*, this may be explained in two ways; either
that it has come from Christ as its author, or that it purely exhibits
Christ. The apostle’s reason for employing that expression
unquestionably was to describe the true and genuine gospel, which alone
is worthy of the name.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24"></span>**8.** *But though we*. As he proceeds
in defending the authority of his doctrine, his confidence swells. First
of all, he declares that the doctrine which he had preached is the only
gospel, and that the attempt to set it aside is highly criminal. But
then he was aware, the false apostles might object: “We will not yield
to you in our desire to maintain the gospel, or in those feelings of
respect for it which we are accustomed to cherish.” Just as, at the
present day, the Papists describe in the strongest terms the sacredness
with which they regard the gospel, and kiss the very name with the
deepest reverence, and yet, when brought to the trial, are found to
persecute fiercely the pure and simple doctrine of the gospel.
Accordingly, Paul does not rest satisfied with this general declaration,
but proceeds to define what the gospel is, and what it contains, and
declares boldly that his doctrine is the true gospel; so as to resist
all further inquiry.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25"></span>Of what avail was it to profess respect
for the gospel, and not to know what it meant? With Papists, who hold
themselves bound to render *implicit faith*, that might be perfectly
sufficient; but with Christians, where there is no knowledge, there is
no faith. That the Galatians, who were otherwise disposed to obey the
gospel, might not wander hither and thither, and “find no rest for the
sole of their foot,” (<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Ge
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>,) Paul enjoins them to stand steadfastly
by his doctrine. He demands such unhesitating belief of his preaching,
that he pronounces a curse on all who dared to contradict it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p26"></span>And here it is not a little remarkable,
that he begins with himself; for thus he anticipates a slander with
which his enemies would have loaded him. “You wish to have everything
which comes from you received without hesitation, because it is your
own.” To show that there is no foundation for such a statement, he
instantly surrenders the right of advancing anything against his own
doctrine. He claims no superiority, in this respect, over other men, but
justly demands from all, equally with himself, subjection to the word of
God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p27"></span>*Or an angel from heaven.* In order to
destroy more completely the pretensions of the false apostles, he rises
so high as to speak of angels; and, on the supposition that they taught
a different doctrine, he does not satisfy himself with saying that they
were not entitled to be heard, but declares that they ought to be held
accursed. Some may think, that it was absurd to engage in a controversy
with angels about his doctrine; but a just view of the whole matter will
enable any one to perceive, that this part of the apostle’s proceedings
was proper and necessary. It is impossible, no doubt, for angels from
heaven to teach anything else than the certain truth of God. But when
the credit due to doctrines which God had revealed concerning the
salvation of men was the subject of controversy, he did not reckon it
enough to disclaim the judgment of men, without declining, at the same
time, the authority of angels.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p28"></span>And thus, when he pronounces a curse on
angels who should teach any other doctrine  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) though his argument is derived from an
impossibility, it is not superfluous. This exaggerated language must,
have contributed greatly to strengthen the confidence in Paul’s
preaching. His opponents, by employing the lofty titles of men,
attempted to press hard on him and on his doctrine. He meets them by the
bold assertion, that even angels are unable to shake his authority. This
is no disparagement to angels. To promote the glory of God by every
possible means was the design of their creation. He who endeavors, in a
pious manner, to accomplish this object, by an apparently desrespectful
mention of their name, detracts nothing from their high rank. This
language not only exhibits, in an impressive manner, the majesty of the
word of God, but yields, also, a powerful confirmation to our faith
while, in reliance on that word, we feel ourselves at liberty to treat
even angels with defiance and scorn. When he says, “let him be
accursed,” the meaning must be, “let him be held by you as accursed.” In
expounding <span id="iii.iii.ii-p29.2"></span>[1Co
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p29.2"></span>, we had occasion to speak of the word
ἀνάθεμα.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) . Here it denotes
cursing, and answers to the Hebrew word, <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p30.3"></span>םרה (hherem.)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p31"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p32"></span>**9.** *As we said before*. Leaving
out, in this instance, the mention of himself and of angels, he repeats
the former assertion, that it is unlawful for any man to teach anything
contrary to what they had learned.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)
Observe the expression — *ye have received*; for he uniformly insists,
that they must not regard the gospel as something unknown, existing in
the air, or in their own imaginations. He exhorts them to entertain a
firm and serious conviction, that the doctrine which they had received
and embraced is the true gospel of Christ. Nothing can be more
inconsistent with the nature of faith than a feeble, wavering assent.
What, then, must be the consequence, if ignorance of the nature and
character of the gospel shall lead to hesitation? Accordingly he enjoins
them to regard as devils those who shall dare to bring forward a gospel
different from his, — meaning by *another gospel*, one to which the
inventions of other men are added;  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)
for the doctrine of the false apostles was not entirely contrary, or
even different, from that of Paul, but corrupted by false additions.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p35"></span>To what poor subterfuges do the Papists
resort, in order to escape from the Apostle’s declaration! First, they
tell us, that we have not in our possession the whole of Paul’s
preaching, and cannot know what it contained, unless the Galatians who
heard it shall be raised from the dead, in order to appear as witnesses.
Next, they assert, that it is not every kind of addition which is
forbidden, but that *other gospels* only are condemned. What Paul’s
doctrine was, so far as it concerns us to know, may be learned with
sufficient clearness from his writings. Of this gospel, it is plain, the
whole of Popery is a dreadful perversion. And from the nature of the
case, we remark in conclusion, it is manifest that any spurious doctrine
whatever is at variance with Paul’s preaching; so that these cavils will
avail them nothing.

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** For do I now persuade men, or
God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not
be the servant of Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Nunc enim suadeone secundum
homines, an secundum Deum? vel quaero hominibus placere? si enim adhuc
hominibus placerem, Christi servus non essem.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** But I certify you, brethren,
that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Notum autem vobis faeio,
fratres, Deuteronomy Evangelio, quod evangelizatum est a me, quod non
est secundum hominem;

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** For I neither received it of
man, neither was I taught *it*, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Neque enim ego ab hormine
accepi illud, neque didici; sed per revelationem Iesu Christi.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** For ye have heard of my
conversation in time past in the Jews’ religion, how that beyond measure
I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it;

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Audistis enim conversationem
meam, quae aliquando fuit in Iudaismo; quod supra modum persequebar
ecclesiam Dei, et vastabam illam,

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p10"></span>**14.** And profited in the Jews’
religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly
zealous of the traditions of my fathers.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Et proficiebam in Iudaismo
supra multos aequales meos in gernere meo, quum vehementius studiosus
essem paternarum traditionum.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p13"></span><span id="iii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p14"></span>Having extolled so confidently his own
preaching, he now shows that this was no idle or empty boast. He
supports his assertion by two arguments. The first is, that he was not
prompted by ambition, or flattery, or any similar passion, to
accommodate himself to the views of men. The second and far stronger
argument is, that he was not the author of the gospel, but delivered
faithfully what he had received from God.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p15"></span>10. *For do I now persuade according
to men or according to God?* The ambiguity of the Greek construction in
this passage, has given rise to a variety of expositions. Some render
it, *Do I now persuade men or God?*  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) Others interpret the words “God” and
“men,” as meaning divine and human concerns. This sense would agree very
well with the context, if it were not too wide a departure from the
words. The view which I have preferred is more natural; for nothing is
more common with the Greeks than to leave the preposition κατὰ,
*according to*, to be understood.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p17"></span>Paul is speaking, not about the
subject of his preaching, but about the purpose of his own mind, which
could not refer so properly to men as to God. The disposition of the
speaker, it must be owned, may have some influence on his doctrine. As
corruption of doctrine springs from ambition, avarice, or any other
sinful passion, so the truth is maintained in its purity by an upright
conscience. And so he contends that his doctrine is sound, because it is
not modified so as to gratify men.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p18"></span>*Or, do I seek to please men?* This
second clause differs not much, and yet it differs somewhat from the
former; for the desire of obtaining favor is one motive for speaking
“according to men.” When there reigns in our hearts such ambition, that
we desire to regulate our discourse so as to obtain the favor of men,
our instructions cannot be sincere. Paul therefore declares, that he is
in no degree chargeable with this vice; and, the more boldly to repel
the calumnious insinuation, he employs the interrogative form of speech;
for interrogations carry the greater weight, when our opponents are
allowed an opportunity of replying, if they have anything to say. This
expresses the great boldness which Paul derived from the testimony of a
good conscience; for he knew that he had discharged his duty in such a
manner as not to be liable to any reproach of that kind. (<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>[Ac
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>[2Co
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p19"></span>*If I yet pleased men* This is a
remarkable sentiment; that ambitious persons, that is, those who hunt
after the applause of men, cannot serve Christ. He declares for himself,
that he had freely renounced the estimation of men, in order to devote
himself entirely to the service of Christ; and, in this respect, he
contrasts his present position with that which he occupied at a former
period of life. He had been regarded with the highest esteem, had
received from every quarter loud applause; and, therefore, if he had
chosen to please men, he would not have found it necessary to change his
condition. But we may draw from it the general doctrine which I have
stated, that those who resolve to serve Christ faithfully, must have
boldness to despise the favor of men.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p20"></span>The word *men* is here employed in a
limited sense; for the ministers of Christ ought not to labor for the
express purpose of displeasing men. But there are various classes of
men. Those to whom Christ “is precious,” (<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>[1Pe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>,) are men whom we should endeavor to
please in Christ; while they who choose that the true doctrine shall
give place to their own passions, are men to whom we must give no
countenance. And godly, upright pastors, will always find it necessary
to contend with the offenses of those who choose that, on all points,
their own wishes shall be gratified; for the Church will always contain
hypocrites and wicked men, by whom their own lusts will be preferred to
the word of God. And even good men, either through ignorance, or through
weak prejudice, are sometimes tempted by the devil to be displeased with
the faithful warnings of their pastor. Our duty, therefore, is not to
take alarm at any kind of offenses, provided, at the same time, that we
do not excite in weak minds a prejudice against Christ himself.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p21"></span>Many interpret this passage in a
different manner, as implying an admission to the following effect: “If
I pleased men, *then I should not be the servant of Christ*. I own it,
but who shall bring such a charge against me? Who does not see that I do
not court the favor of men?” But I prefer the former view, that Paul is
relating how large an amount of the estimation of men he had
relinquished, in order to devote himself to the service of Christ.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p22"></span><span id="iii.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p23"></span>**11.** *Now I make known to you.*
This is the most powerful argument, the main hinge on which the question
turns, that he has not received the gospel from men, but that it has
been revealed to him by God. As this might be denied, he offers a proof,
drawn from a narrative of facts. To give his declaration the greater
weight, he sets out with stating that the matter is not doubtful,  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) but one which he is prepared to prove;
and thus introduces himself in a manner well adapted to a serious
subject. He affirms that it is *not according to man*; that it savours
of nothing human, or, that it was not of human contrivance; and in proof
of this he afterwards adds, that he had not been instructed by any
earthly teacher.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p26"></span><span id="iii.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p27"></span>**12.** *For I neither received it
from man*. What then? shall the authority of the word be diminished,
because one who has been instructed by the instrumentality of men shall
afterwards become a teacher? We must take into account, all along, the
weapons with which the false apostles attacked him, alleging that his
gospel was defective and spurious; that he had obtained it from an
inferior and incompetent teacher; and that his imperfect education led
him to make unguarded statements. They boasted, on the other hand, that
they had been instructed by the highest apostles, with whose views they
were most intimately acquainted. It was therefore necessary that Paul
should state his doctrine in opposition to the whole world, and should
rest it on this ground, that he had acquired it not in the school of any
man, but by revelation from God. In no other way could he have set aside
the reproaches of the false apostles.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p28"></span>The objection, that Ananias (<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>[Ac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>) was his teacher, may be easily answered.
His divine instruction, communicated to him by immediate inspiration,
did not render it improper that a man should be employed in teaching
him, were it only to give weight to his public ministry. In like manner,
we have already shown, that he had a direct call from God by revelation,
and that he was ordained by the votes and the solemn approbation of men.
These statements are not inconsistent with each other.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p29"></span><span id="iii.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p30"></span>**13.** *For ye have heard of my
conversation*. The whole of this narrative was added as a part of his
argument. He relates that, during his whole life, he had such an
abhorrence of the gospel, that he was a mortal enemy of it, and a
destroyer of the name of Christianity. Hence we infer that his
conversion was divine. And indeed he calls them as witnesses of a matter
not at all doubtful, so as to place beyond controversy what he is about
to say.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p31"></span>His *equals* were those of his own
age; for a comparison with older persons would have been unsuitable.
When he speaks of *the traditions of the fathers*, he means, not those
additions by which the law of God had been corrupted, but the law of God
itself, in which he had been educated from his childhood, and which he
had received through the hands of his parents and ancestors. Having been
strongly attached to the customs of his fathers, it would have been no
easy matter to tear him from them, had not the Lord drawn him by a
miracle.

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
1:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** But when it pleased God, who
separated me from my mother’s womb, and called *me* by his grace,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p3"></span>**15.** At postquam placuit Deo, qui me
segregaverat ab utero matris meae, et vocavit per gratiam suam,

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p4"></span>**16.** To reveal his Son in me, that I
might preach him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with
flesh and blood:

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Revelare Filium suum mihi, ut
praedicarem ipsnm inter Gentes, continuo non contuli cum carne et
sanguine;

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p6"></span>**17.** Neither went I up to Jerusalem
to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and
returned again unto Damascus.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p7"></span>**17.** Neque redii Hierosolymam, ad eos
qui ante me fuerunt Apestoli; sed abii in Arabiam, ac denuo reversus sum
Damascum.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p8"></span>**18.** Then, after three years, I went
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p9"></span>**18.** Deinde post annos tres redii
Hierosolymam, ut viderein Petrum; et mansi apud illum dies quindecim.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p10"></span>**19.** But other of the apostles saw I
none, save James the Lord’s brother.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p11"></span>**19.** Alium antem ex Apostolis non
vidi quenquam, nisi Iacobum fratrem Domini.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p12"></span>**20.** Now the things which I write
unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p13"></span>**20.** Porro quae scribo vobis, ecce
coram Deo, non mentier.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p14"></span>**21.** Afterwards I came into the
regions of Syria and Cilicia;

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p15"></span>**21.** Deinde vent in regiones Syriae
ac Ciliciae.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p16"></span>**22.** And was unknown by face unto
the churches of Judea which were in Christ:

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p17"></span>**22.** Eram autem facie ignotus
Ecclesiis Iudaeae, qute erant in Christo.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p18"></span>**23.** But they had heard only, that
he which persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the faith which once
he destroyed.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p19"></span>**23.** Sed tantum hic rumor apud illos
erat; Qui persequebatur nos aliquando, nunc praedicat fidem quam quondam
expugnabat.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p20"></span>**24.** And they glorified God in me.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p21"></span>**24.** Et glorificabant in me Deum.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p22"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p23"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p24"></span>**15.** *But after that it pleased
God.* This is the second part of the narrative, and relates to his
miraculous conversion. He tells us, first, that he had been called by
the grace of God to preach Christ among the Gentiles; and, next, that as
soon as he had been called, without consulting the apostles, he
unhesitatingly proceeded to the performance of the work, which, he felt
assured, had been enjoined upon him by the appointment of God. In the
construction of the words, Erasmus differs from the Vulgate. He connects
them in the following manner: “When it pleased God that I should preach
Christ among the Gentiles, who called me for this purpose that he might
reveal him *by me*.” But I prefer the old translation; for Christ had
been revealed to Paul before he received a command to preach. Admitting
that Erasmus were right in translating ἐν ἐμοὶ, *by me*, still the
clause, *that I might preach*, is added for the purpose of describing
the kind of revelation.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p25"></span>Paul’s reasoning does not, at first
sight, appear so strong; for although, when he had been converted to
Christianity, he instantly, and without consulting the apostles, entered
into the office of preaching the gospel, it does not thence follow that
he had been appointed to that office by the revelation of Christ. But
the arguments which he employs are various, and, when they are all
collected, will be found sufficiently strong to establish his
conclusion. He argues, first, that he had been called by the grace of
God; next, that his apostleship had been acknowledged by the other
apostles; and the other arguments follow. Let the reader, therefore,
remember to read the whole narrative together, and to draw the
inference, not from single parts, but from the whole.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p26"></span>*Who had separated me.* This separation
was the purpose of God, by which Paul was appointed to the apostolic
office, before he knew that he was born. The calling followed afterwards
at the proper time, when the Lord made known his will concerning him,
and commanded him to proceed to the work. God had, no doubt, decreed,
before the foundation of the world, what he would do with regard to
every one of us, and had assigned to every one, by his secret counsel,
his respective place. But the sacred writers frequently introduce those
three steps: the eternal predestination of God, the destination from the
womb, and the calling, which is the effect and accomplishment of both.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p27"></span>The word of the Lord which came to
Jeremiah, though expressed a little differently from this passage, has
entirely the same meaning.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p28"></span>“Before I formed thee in the belly, I
knew thee; and before thou camest forth from the womb I sanctified thee;
a prophet to the nations have I made thee.” (<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p28.1"></span>[Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p29"></span>Before they even existed, Jeremiah had
been set apart to the office of a prophet, and Paul to that of an
apostle; but he is said to separate us from the womb, because the design
of our being sent into the world is, that he may accomplish, in us, what
he has decreed. The calling is delayed till its proper time, when God
has prepared us for the office which he commands us to undertake.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p30"></span>Paul’s words may therefore be read
thus: “When it pleased God to reveal his Son, by me, who called me, as
he had formerly separated me.” He intended to assert, that his calling
depends on the secret election of God; and that he was ordained an
apostle, not because by his own industry he had fitted himself for
undertaking so high an office, or because God had accounted him worthy
of having it bestowed upon him, but because, before he was born, he had
been set apart by the secret purpose of God.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p31"></span>Thus, in his usual manner, he traces
his calling to the good pleasure of God. This deserves our careful
attention; for it shows us that we owe it to the goodness of God, not
only that we have been elected and adopted to everlasting life, but that
he deigns to make use of our services, who would otherwise have been
altogether useless, and that he assigns to us a lawful calling, in which
we may be employed. What had Paul, before he was born, to entitle him to
so high an honor? In like manner we ought to believe, that it is
entirely the gift of God, and not obtained by our own industry, that we
have been called to govern the Church.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p32"></span>The subtle distinctions into which some
commentators have entered in explaining the word *separated*, are
altogether foreign to the subject. God is said to *separate* us, not
because he bestows any peculiar disposition of mind which distinguishes
us from others, but because he appoints us by his own purpose  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) . Although the apostle had most
explicitly attributed his calling to the free grace of God, when he
pronounced that voluntary separation from the womb to be the origin of
it, yet he repeats the direct statement, both that, by his commendation
of Divine grace, he may take away all grounds of boasting, and that he
may testify his own gratitude to God. On this subject he is wont freely
to expatiate, even when he has no controversy with the false apostles.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p34"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p35"></span>**16.** *To reveal his Son to me*. If
we read it, “to reveal *by* *me*,” it will express the design of the
apostleship, which is to make Christ known. And how was this to be
accomplished? By preaching him among the Gentiles, which the false
apostles treated as a crime. But I consider the Greek phrase ἐν εμοὶ
 <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) to be a Hebrew idiom for *to me*;
for the Hebrew particle <span id="iii.iii.iv-p36.2"></span>ב (beth) is
frequently redundant, as all who know that language are well aware. The
meaning will therefore be, that Christ was revealed *to* Paul, not that
he might alone enjoy, and silently retain in his own bosom the knowledge
of Christ, but that he might preach among the Gentiles the Savior whom
he had known.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p37"></span>*Immediately I conferred not*. To
*confer with flesh and blood*, is to consult with flesh and blood. So
far as the meaning of these words is concerned, his intention was
absolutely to have nothing to do with any human counsels. The general
expression, as will presently appear from the context, includes all men,
and all the prudence or wisdom which they may possess.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) He even makes a direct reference to the
apostles, for the express purpose of exhibiting, in a stronger light,
the immediate calling of God. Relying on the authority of God alone, and
asking nothing more, he proceeded to discharge the duty of preaching the
gospel.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p39"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p40"></span>**17.** *Neither did I return to
Jerusalem.* What he had just written is now explained, and more fully
stated. As if he had said, “I did not ask the authority of any man,” not
even of the apostles themselves. It is a mistake to suppose, that,
because the apostles are now separately mentioned, they are not included
in the words, *flesh and blood*. Nothing new or different is here added,
but merely a clearer explanation of what had been already said. And no
disrespect to the apostles is implied in that expression. For the
purpose of shewing that he did not owe his commission to man, the false
boasting of unprincipled men laid him under the necessity of
contrasting. the authority of the apostles themselves with the authority
of God. When a creature is brought into comparison with God, however
contemptuous or humiliating may be the language employed, he has no
reason to complain.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p41"></span>*But I went into Arabia*. In the Acts
of the Apostles, Luke has omitted these three years. In like manner,
there are other passages of the history which he does not touch; and
hence the slander of those who seek to build on this a charge of
inconsistency in the narratives is ridiculous. Let godly readers
consider the severe temptation with which Paul was called to struggle at
the very commencement of his course. He who but yesterday, for the sake
of doing him honor, had been sent to Damascus with a magnificent
retinue, is now compelled to wander as an exile in a foreign land: but
he does not lose his courage.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p42"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p43"></span>**18.** *Then after three years*. It
was not till three years after he had begun to discharge the apostolic
office, that he *went up to Jerusalem*. Thus, he did not, at the outset,
receive the calling of men. But lest it should be supposed that he had
separate interests from theirs, and was desirous to avoid their society,
he tells us that he went up for the express purpose *to see*  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) *Peter.*  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) Although he had not waited for their
sanction before undertaking the office, yet it was not against their
will, but with their full consent and approbation, that he held the rank
of an apostle. He is desirous to shew that at no period was he at
variance with the apostles, and that even now he is in full harmony with
all their views. By mentioning the short time that he remained there, he
shews that he had come, not with a view to learn, but solely for mutual
intercourse.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p46"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p47"></span>**19.** *But I saw no other of the
apostles.* This is added to make it evident that he had but one object
in his journey, and attended to nothing else.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p48"></span>*Except James.* Who this James was,
deserves inquiry. Almost all the ancients are agreed that he was one of
the disciples, whose surname was “Oblias” and “The Just,” and that he
presided over the church at Jerusalem.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) Yet others think that he was the son of
Joseph by another wife, and others (which is more probable) that he was
the cousin of Christ by the mother’s side:  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) but as he is here mentioned among the
apostles, I do not hold that opinion. Nor is there any force in the
defense offered by Jerome, that the word Apostle is sometimes applied to
others besides the twelve; for the subject under consideration is the
highest rank of apostleship, and we shall presently see that he was
considered one of the chief *pillars*. (<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p50.2"></span>[Ga
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p50.2"></span>.) It appears to me, therefore, far more
probable, that the person of whom he is speaking is the son of Alpheus.
 <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p52"></span>The rest of the apostles, there is
reason to believe, were scattered through various countries; for they
did not idly remain in one place. Luke relates that Paul was brought by
Barnabas to the apostles. (<span id="iii.iii.iv-p52.1"></span>[Ac
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p52.1"></span>.) This must be understood to relate, not
to the twelve, but to these two apostles, who alone were at that time
residing in Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p53"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p54"></span>**20.** *Now the things which I write
to you*. This affirmation extends to the whole narrative. The vast
earnestness of Paul on this subject is evinced by his resorting to an
oath, which cannot lawfully be employed but on great and weighty
occasions. Nor is it wonderful that he insists with so much earnestness
on this point; for we have already seen to what expedients the impostors
had recourse in order to take from him the name and credit of an
apostle. Now the modes of swearing used by good men deserve our
attention; for we learn from them that an oath must be viewed simply as
an appeal to the judgment-seat of God for the integrity and truth of our
words and actions; and such a transaction ought to be guided by religion
and the fear of God.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p55"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p56"></span>**22.** *And was unknown by face*. This
appears to be added for the sake of shewing more strongly the wickedness
and malignity of his slanderers. If the churches of Judea who *had only
heard* respecting him, were led to give glory to God for the astonishing
change which he had wrought in Paul, how disgraceful was it that those
who had beheld the fruits of his amazing labors should not have acted a
similar part! If the mere report was enough for the former, why did not
the facts before their eyes satisfy the latter?

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p57"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p58"></span>**23.** *Which once he destroyed*. This
does not mean that *faith*  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) may
actually be destroyed, but that he lessened its influence on the minds
of weak men. Besides, it is the will, rather than the deed, that is here
expressed.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p60"></span><span id="iii.iii.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p61"></span>**24.** *And they glorified God in me*
 <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) This was an evident proof that his
ministry was approved by all the churches of Judea, and approved in such
a manner, that they broke out into admiration and praise of the
wonderful power of God. Thus he indirectly reproves their malice, by
showing that their venom and slanders could have no other effect than to
hide the glory of God, which, as the apostles admitted and openly
acknowledged, shone brightly in the apostleship of Paul.

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p63"></span>This reminds us of the light in which
the saints of the Lord ought to be regarded by us. When we behold men
adorned with the gifts of God, such is our depravity, or ingratitude, or
proneness to superstition, that we worship them as gods, unmindful of
Him by whom those gifts were bestowed. These words remind us, on the
contrary, to lift up our eyes to the Great Author, and to ascribe to Him
what is his own, while they at the same time inform us that an occasion
of offering praise to God was furnished by the change produced on Paul,
from being an enemy to becoming a minister of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc41005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p21"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.i-p21.1"></span>C’est a dire, sans aucun moyen des hommes.”
“That is, without any agency of men.”

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc41005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>Quoy
que depuis on ait observe la ceremonie accoustumee en l’ordination des
ministeres.” “Although the ceremony usually performed at the ordination
of ministers was afterwards added.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc41005.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p38"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>Pour
nos pechez.” “For our sins.”

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc41005.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p43"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.i-p43.1"></span>Non
pas que cela viene de la creation, mais de leur corruption.” “Not that
this comes from creation, but from their corruption.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc41005.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p48"></span> <span id="iii.iii.i-p48.1"></span>Οὐκ
εἶπε κατ ᾿ ἐπιταγὴν τοῦ Πατρὸς ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸ θέλημα, τουτέστι τὴν
εὐδοκίαν “He did not say, according to the command, but according to the
will, that is, according to the good pleasure, of the Father.” —
Theophylact.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc41005.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p49"></span> “An English reader would readily
suppose that ‘God and our Father’ are two different persons. The
original text suggests no such idea. The meaning is, ‘our God and
Father’. — The particle <span id="iii.iii.i-p49.1"></span>καὶ (and) is
here hermeneutic. As Crellius says, it is equivalent to ‘that is’ or
‘who is;’ or rather, it does not connect different persons, but
different descriptions of the same person: <span
id="iii.iii.i-p49.2"></span>[1Co
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.3"></span>[Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.4"></span>[Eph
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.5"></span>[1Th
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.5"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.6"></span>[1Th
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p49.6"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.i-p49.7"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.7"></span>
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.8"></span>̔Ημῶν belongs equally to both nouns,
<span id="iii.iii.i-p49.9"></span>Θεοῦ and <span
id="iii.iii.i-p49.10"></span>Πατρός — *Brown.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc41005.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p15"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>Leurs songes et inventions.” “Their dreams
and inventions.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc41005.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>ὃ
οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλο. Some have questioned the genuineness of <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p20.2"></span>ἄλλο,— conjecturing that some one first
introduced <span id="iii.iii.ii-p20.3"></span>ἀλλὰ into the margin as an
interpretation of <span id="iii.iii.ii-p20.4"></span>εἰ μή, and then
some other person changed it into <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p20.5"></span>ἄλλο, <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p20.6"></span>*per incuriam*, and introduced it into the
text. This is ingenious, but, like all conjectural criticism on the New
Testament, is of no value.” — *Brown*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc41005.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p29"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>Quand il denonce les anges pour excommuniez
et pour abominables, s’ils enseignent autre chose.” “When he denounces
the angels as excommunicated and detestable persons, if they teach
anything else.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc41005.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>
᾿Ανάθεμα. This word, which we render *accursed*, doth not signify
‘accursed or condemned of God to the punishments of another world.’ This
the Apostle would not wish to the worst of men. The meaning is, ‘Let him
be as a person excommunicated, or wholly cut off from the synagogue, or
church, with whom it is unlawful to have any commerce or correspondence
whatever.’ And so it is not properly a wish of the apostle, but a
direction to the Galatians how to behave, *Let him be* <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p30.2"></span>ἀνάθεμα. ‘Hold him, and treat him as an
excommunicated and accursed person.’” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc41005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p33"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>D’enseigner autre doctrine que cello qu’il
avoit enseignee aux Galatiens.” “To teach any other doctrine than that
which he had taught to the Galatians.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc41005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p34"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>Quand on y mesle des inventions humaines,
et des choses qui ne sont point de mesme.” “When it is mixed up with
human inventions, and with things that are contrary to it.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc41005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p16"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>Πείθω. This word, which we render
*persuade*, frequently signifies ‘to obtain by treaty,’ or, ‘to endeavor
the friendship and good will of any person.’ Thus in <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.2"></span>[Mt
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.2"></span>, the chief-priests tell the soldiers,
whom they corrupted, to give a false report: ‘If this come to the
governor’s ears, we will *persuade* him, and secure you, that is,
prevail with him to be favorable to you, and save you from punishment.’
Thus, <span id="iii.iii.iii-p16.3"></span>[Ac
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.3"></span>, <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.4"></span>πείσαντες Βλάστον, we render, ‘having made
Blastus their friend.’ Vid. Pind. Ol. 3:28. And in the Apocryphal book
of Maccabees, (<span id="iii.iii.iii-p16.5"></span>[2Ma
4:45](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#045)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.5"></span>,) when Menelaus found himself convicted
of his crimes, he promised Ptolemy a large sum of money, <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p16.6"></span>πεῖσαι τὸν βασιλέα, ‘to pacify the king,’
to prevent his displeasure, and secure his favor. And thus, in the place
before us, ‘to persuade God,’ is to endeavor to secure his approbation;
which, the Apostle assures the Galatians, was his great and only view,
as well as his great support, under the censure and displeasure of men,
for preaching the pure and uncorrupted doctrines of the gospel.” —
Chandler.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc41005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p24"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>Qu’il ne parle point d’une chose
incertaine ou incognue.” “That he does not speak about a thing uncertain
or unknown.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc41005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p25"></span> “The idiom by which there is a
transposition of <span id="iii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>ὅτι is frequent,
and may here, Schott thinks, have been made use of, in order to place a
highly important topic in the most prominent point of view” —
Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc41005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p33"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p33.1"></span>Quand par son conseil il nous destine a
quelque chose.” “When he appoints us to any thing by his purpose.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc41005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.iv-p36.1"></span>
᾿Εν ἐμοὶ, that is, ‘to me;’ but yet it appears to denote something
more.” — Beza. “The ancient commentators, and, of the moderns, Winer,
Schott, and Scott, seem right in regarding this as a strong expression
for ‘in my mind and heart.’” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc41005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p38"></span> “The expression, ‘flesh and blood,’ is
used to denote men. Thus when Peter confessed to our Lord, ‘Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God,’ Jesus answered, ‘Flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee.’ (<span id="iii.iii.iv-p38.1"></span>[Mt
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p38.1"></span>.) That is, no man hath made this
discovery; and thus it hath the same meaning in the place before us. But
as the apostle speaks of his countrymen and equals in age, in the verses
before, I apprehend he particularly means them, and that he intends to
assure the Galatians, that, notwithstanding his former zeal for the law
and the traditions of the Jews, yet that, after his extraordinary
conversion, he had no longer any dependence on them, nor sought the
least direction from the wisest among them.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc41005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p44"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.iv-p44.1"></span>
̔ιστορεῖν signifies either ‘to ascertain any *thing* by inquiry, or any
*person* by personal examination;’ but sometimes, as here, to visit for
the purpose of becoming acquainted with any one by personal
communication.’ So Josephus, Bell. 6:1-8, <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p44.2"></span>ὃν (scil. Julianum), <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p44.3"></span>ἱστόρησα, ‘whom when I came to know and be
with.’ See <span id="iii.iii.iv-p44.4"></span>[Acts
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p44.4"></span>.” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc41005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p44.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p45"></span> “The distinguished guest of a
distinguished host.” — Grotius.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc41005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p49"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p49.1"></span>Qui estoit pasteur en l’eglise de
Jerusalem.” “Who was pastor in the church at Jerusalem.”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc41005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p50"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.iv-p50.1"></span>Qu’il estoit cousin-germain de Jesus
Christ, fils de la soeur de sa mere.” “That he was cousin-german of
Jesus Christ, his mother’s sister’s son.”

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc41005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p51"></span> This is fully consistent with the
opinion commonly held, that Alpheus or Cleopas was the husband of the
sister of Mary, the mother of our Lord, and consequently that James, the
son of Alpheus, was our Lord’s cousin-german. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc41005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p59"></span>”The word <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p59.1"></span>πίστις denotes not only the act of
believing, but that which is believed.” — Beza.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc41005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.iii.iv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p62"></span> “He does not say, They praised or
glorified me, but, They glorified God. He says, They glorified God in
me; for all that belongs to me was from the grace of God.” — OEcumenius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc41006)
