[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41016)  [Next](cc41018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Be ye therefore followers of God, as
dear children;

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sitis ergo imitatores Dei
quemadmodum filii dilecti;

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And walk in love, as Christ also
hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et ambulate in charitate quemadmodum
et Christus nos dilexit, ac se ipsum tradidit pro nobis oblationem et
hostiam Deo, in odorem bonae fragrantiae.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Be ye therefore followers.* The
same principle is followed out and enforced by the consideration that
children ought to be like their father. He reminds us that we are the
children of God, and that therefore we ought, as far as possible, to
resemble Him in acts of kindness. It is impossible not to perceive, that
the division of chapters, in the present instance, is particularly
unhappy, as it has made a separation between parts of the subject which
are very closely related. If, then, we are the children of God, we ought
to be *followers of God.* Christ also declares, that, unless we shew
kindness to the unworthy, we cannot be the children of our heavenly
Father.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p9"></span>“Love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully
use you and persecute you; *that ye may be the children of your* *Father
which is in heaven*; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on
the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.”  
(<span id="iv.vi.i-p9.2"></span>[Matt.
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iv.vi.i-p9.2"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)

<span id="iv.vi.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p12"></span>**2.** *And walk in love as Christ also
hath loved us.* Having called on us to imitate God, he now calls on us
to imitate Christ, who is our true model. We ought to embrace each other
with that love with which Christ has embraced us, for what we perceive
in Christ is our true guide.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p13"></span>*And gave himself for us.* This was a
remarkable proof of the highest love. Forgetful, as it were, of himself,
Christ spared not his own life, that he might redeem us from death. If
we desire to be partakers of this benefit, we must cultivate similar
affections toward our neighbors. Not that any of us has reached such
high perfection, but all must aim and strive according to the measure of
their ability.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p14"></span>*An offering and a sacrifice to God of a
sweet smelling savor.* While this statement leads us to admire the grace
of Christ, it bears directly on the present subject. No language,
indeed, can fully represent the consequences and efficacy of Christ’s
death. This is the only price by which we are reconciled to God. The
doctrine of faith on this subject holds the highest rank. But the more
extraordinary the discoveries which have reached us of the Redeemer’s
kindness, the more strongly are we bound to his service. Besides, we may
infer from Paul’s words, that, unless we love one another, none of our
duties will be acceptable in the sight of God. If the reconciliation of
men, effected by Christ, was *a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor,*
 <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) we, too, shall be “unto God a
sweet savor,” (<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.5"></span>[2Co
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.5"></span>,)
when this holy perfume is spread over us. To this applies the saying of
Christ,

<span id="iv.vi.i-p16"></span>“Leave thy gift before the altar, and go
and be reconciled to thy brother.” (<span id="iv.vi.i-p16.1"></span>[Mt
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="iv.vi.i-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#000)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>: 3-7

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** But fornication, and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as
becometh saints;

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Scortatio vero et omnis
immundities, aut avaritia, ne nominentur quidem inter vos; sicut decet
sanctos.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p4"></span>**4.** Neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient; but rather giving of
thanks.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Turpitudo, stultiloquium, facetia;
quae non conveniunt, sed magis gratia.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p6"></span>**5.** For this ye know, that no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater,
hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p7"></span>**5.** Hoc enim scitis, quod omnis
scortator, vel immundus, vel avarus, qui est idololatra, non obtinebit
haereditatem in regno Christi et Dei.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8"></span>**6.** Let no man deceive you with vain
words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p9"></span>**6.** Nemo vos decipiat inanibus verbis;
nam propter haec venit ira Dei in filios inobedientes (*vel,
incredulos.*)

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p10"></span>**7.** Be not ye therefore partakers with
them.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p11"></span>**7.** Ne sitis igitur illorum consortes.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p14"></span>**3.** *But fornication.* This chapter,
and the <span id="iv.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>[Col
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#000)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>,
contain many parallel passages, which an intelligent reader will be at
no loss to compare without my assistance. Three things are here
enumerated, which the apostle desires Christians to hold in such
abhorrence, that they shall not even be named, or, in other words, shall
be entirely unknown among them. By *uncleanness* he means all base and
impure lusts; so that this word differs from *fornication,* only as the
whole class differs from a single department. The third is
*covetousness,* which is nothing more than an immoderate desire of gain.
To this precept he adds the authoritative declaration, that he demands
nothing from them but that which *becometh saints,* — manifestly
excluding from the number and fellowship of the saints all fornicators,
and impure and covetous persons.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p16"></span>**4.** *Neither filthiness.* To those
three — other three are now added. By *filthiness* I understand all that
is indecent or inconsistent with the modesty of the godly. By *foolish
talking* I understand conversations that are either unprofitably or
wickedly foolish; and as it frequently happens that idle talk is
concealed under the garb of *jesting* or wit, he expressly mentions
pleasantry, — which is so agreeable as to seem worthy of commendation, —
and condemns it as a part of *foolish talking* The Greek word εὐτραπελία
is often used by heathen writers, in a good sense, for that ready and
ingenious pleasantry in which able and intelligent men may properly
indulge. But as it is exceedingly difficult to be witty without becoming
satirical, and as jesting itself carries in it a portion of conceit not
at all in keeping with the character of a godly man, Paul very properly
dissuades from this practice.  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)
Of all the three offenses now mentioned, Paul declares that they are
*not convenient,* or, in other words, that they are inconsistent with
Christian duty.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p18"></span>*But rather grace.* Others render it
*giving of thanks;* but I prefer Jerome’s interpretation. With the vices
which had been formerly mentioned it was proper that Paul should
contrast something of a general character, displaying itself in all our
communications with each other. If he had said, “While they take
pleasure in idle or abusive talk, do you give thanks to God,” the
exhortation would have been too limited. The Greek word, εὐχαριστία,
though it usually signifies *Thanksgiving,* admits of being translated
*Grace.* “All our conversations ought to be, in the true sense of the
words, sweet and graceful; and this end will be gained if the useful and
the agreeable are properly mingled.”

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p19"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p20"></span>**5.** *For this ye know.* If his readers
were at all captivated by the allurements of those vices which have been
enumerated, the consequence would be that they would lend a hesitating
or careless ear to his admonitions. He determines, therefore, to alarm
them by this weighty and dreadful threatening, that such vices shut
against us the kingdom of God. By appealing to their own knowledge, he
intimates that this was no doubtful matter. Some might think it harsh,
or inconsistent with the Divine goodness, that all who have incurred the
guilt of fornication or covetousness are excluded from the inheritance
of the kingdom of heaven. But the answer is easy. Paul does not say that
those who have fallen into those sins, and recovered from them, are not
pardoned, but pronounces sentence on the sins themselves. After
addressing the Corinthians in the same language, he adds:

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p21"></span>“And such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.”  
(<span id="iv.vi.ii-p21.2"></span>[1Co
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span
id="iv.vi.ii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p22"></span>When men have repented, and thus give
evidence that they are reconciled to God, they are no longer the same
persons that they formerly were. But let all fornicators, or unclean or
covetous persons, so long as they continue such, be assured that they
have no friendship with God, and are deprived of all hope of salvation.
It is called *the kingdom of Christ and of God,* because God hath given
it to his Son that we may obtain it through him.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p23"></span>*Nor covetous man, who is an idolater.*
“Covetousness,” as he says in another place, “is idolatry,” (<span
id="iv.vi.ii-p23.2"></span>[Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p23.2"></span>,)
— not the idolatry which is so frequently condemned in Scripture, but
one of a different description. All covetous men must deny God, and put
wealth in his place; such is their blind greediness of wretched gain.
But why does Paul attribute to covetousness alone what belongs equally
to other carnal passions? In what respect is covetousness better
entitled to this disgraceful name than ambition, or than a vain
confidence in ourselves? I answer, that this disease is widely spread,
and not a few minds have caught the infection. Nay, it is not reckoned a
disease, but receives, on the contrary, very general commendation. This
accounts for the harshness of Paul’s language, which arose from a desire
to tear from our hearts the false view.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p24"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p25"></span>**6.** *Let no man deceive you.* There
have always been ungodly dogs,  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155)
by whom the threatenings of the prophets were made the subject of
merriment and ridicule. We find such characters in our own day. In all
ages, indeed, Satan raises up sorcerers of this description, who
endeavor by unholy scoffs to escape the Divine judgment, and who
actually exercise a kind of fascination over consciences not
sufficiently established in the fear of God. “This is a trivial fault.
Fornication is viewed by God as a light matter. Under the law of grace
God is not so cruel. He has not formed us so as to be our own
executioners. The frailty of nature excuses us.” These and similar
expressions are often used by the scoffers. Paul, on the contrary,
exclaims that we must guard against that sophistry by which consciences
are ensnared to their ruin.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p27"></span>*For because of these things cometh the
wrath of God.* If we consider the present tense to be here used,
agreeably to the Hebrew idiom, for the future, these words are a
threatening of the last judgment. But I agree with those who take the
word *cometh* in an indefinite sense, — *the word of God* usually
*cometh,* — as reminding them of the ordinary judgments of God which
were executed before their own eyes. And certainly, if we were not blind
and slothful, there are sufficiently numerous examples by which God
testifies that he is the just avenger of such crimes, — examples of the
pouring out of divine indignation, privately against individuals, and
publicly against cities, and kings, and nations.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p28"></span>*Upon the children of disobedience,* —
upon *unbelievers* or *rebels.* This expression must not be overlooked.
Paul is now addressing believers, and his object is not so much to
present alarming views of their own danger, as to rouse them to behold
reflected in wicked men, as in mirrors, the dreadful judgments of God.
God does not make himself an object of terror to his children, that they
may avoid him, but does all that can be done in a fatherly manner, to
draw them to himself. They ought to learn this lesson, not to involve
themselves in a dangerous fellowship with the ungodly, whose ruin is
thus foreseen.

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>**8.** For ye were sometimes darkness,
but now *are ye* light in the Lord: walk as children of light;

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p3"></span>**8.** Eratis aliquando tenabrae; nunc
autem lux in Domino; tanquam filii lucis ambulate;

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p4"></span>**9.** (For the fruit of the Spirit *is*
in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth;)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p5"></span>**9.** (Fructus enim lucis in omni
bonitate, et justitia, et veritate:)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6"></span>**10.** Proving what is acceptable unto
the Lord.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7"></span>**10.** Probantes, quid sit acceptum Deo.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p8"></span>**11.** And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove *them*

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p9"></span>**11.** Et ne communicetis operibus
infructuosis tenebrarum; quin potius etiam redarguitote.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p10"></span>**12.** For it is a shame even to speak
of those things which are done of them in secret.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p11"></span>**12.** Quae enim clam fiunt ab illis,
turpe est vel dicere.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p12"></span>**13.** But all things that are reproved
are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is
light.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p13"></span>**13.** Omnia autem, dum coarguuntur, a
luce manifestantur; omne enim quod manifestat lux est.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p14"></span>**14.** Wherefore he saith, Awake thou
that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p15"></span>**14.** Quamobrem dicit: Surge qui
dormis, et exsurge ex mortuis; et illucescet tibi Christus.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p16"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p17"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p18"></span>**8.** *For ye were once darkness.* The
precepts which immediately follow derive greater weight from the motives
with which they are mingled. Having spoken of unbelievers, and warned
the Ephesians not to become partakers of their crimes and their
destruction, he argues still further, that they ought to differ widely
from the life and conduct of those men. At the same time, in order to
guard them against ingratitude to God, he refreshes their remembrance of
their own past life. “You ought,” he says, “to be very different persons
from what you formerly were; for out of darkness God hath made you
light.” *Darkness* is the name here given to the whole nature of man
before regeneration; for, where the brightness of God does not shine,
there is nothing but fearful darkness. *Light,* again, is the name given
to those who are *enlightened* by the Spirit of God; for immediately
afterwards in the same sense, he calls them *children of light,* and
draws the inference, that they ought to walk in light, because by the
mercy of God they had been rescued from darkness. Observe here, we are
said to be *light in the Lord,* because, while we are out of Christ, all
is under the dominion of Satan, whom we know to be the Prince of
darkness.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p19"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p20"></span>**9.** *For the fruit of the light.*
 <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) This parenthesis is introduced,
to point out the road in which the *children of light* ought to walk. A
complete description is not given, but a few parts of a holy and pious
life are introduced by way of example. To give them a general view of
duty, their attention is again directed to the will of God. Whoever
desires to live in a proper and safe manner, let him resolve to obey
God, and to take his will as the rule. To regulate life entirely by his
command is, as he says in another Epistle, *a reasonable service,*
(<span id="iv.vi.iii-p21.3"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.3"></span>,) or, as another inspired man expresses it,
*To obey is better than sacrifice.* (<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.4"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.4"></span>.) I wonder how the word Spirit (πνεὐματος)
has crept into many Greek manuscripts, as the other reading is more
consistent, — *the fruit of the light* Paul’s meaning indeed is not
affected; for in either case it will be this, that believers must walk
in the light, because they are “children of the light.” This is done,
when they do not live according to their own will, but devote themselves
entirely to obedience to God, — when they undertake nothing but by his
command. Besides, such obedience is testified by its fruits, such as
*goodness, righteousness, and truth.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p22"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p23"></span>**11.** *And have no fellowship.* As
“the children of light” dwell amidst the darkness, or, in other words,
in the midst of “a perverse and crooked generation,” (<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>[De
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>,) — there is good reason for warning them
to keep themselves apart from wicked actions. It is not enough that we
do not, of our own accord, undertake anything wicked. We must beware of
joining or assisting those who do wrong. In short, we must abstain from
giving any consent, or advice, or approbation, or assistance; for in all
these ways we *have fellowship.* And lest any one should imagine that he
has done his duty, merely by not conniving, he adds, *but rather reprove
them.*  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) Such a course is opposed
to all dissimulation. Where a manifest offense is committed against God,
every man will be eager to vindicate himself from any share in the
guilt, but very few will guard against connivance; nearly all will
practice some kind of dissimulation. But rather than the truth of God
shall not remain unshaken, let a hundred worlds perish.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p25"></span>The word ἐλέγχειν, which is translated
*reprove,* answers to the metaphor of darkness; for it literally
signifies to drag forth to the light what was formerly unknown. As
ungodly men flatter themselves in their vices, (<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>[Ps
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>,) and wish their crimes to be concealed, or
to be reckoned virtues, Paul enjoins that they shall be *reproved.* He
calls them *unfruitful;* because they not only do no good, but are
absolutely hurtful.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p27"></span>**12.** *Which are done by them in
secret.* This shews the advantage of reproving the ungodly. If they do
but escape the eyes of men, there is no crime, however shocking to be
mentioned, which they will not perpetrate. To use a common proverb,
“Night has no shame.” What is the reason of this? Sunk in the darkness
of ignorance, they neither see their own baseness, nor think that it is
seen by God and by angels. But let the torch of God’s word be brought
forward, and their eyes are opened. Then they begin to blush and be
ashamed. By their advices and reproofs the saints enlighten blind
unbelievers, and drag forth from their concealment to the light of day
those who were sunk in ignorance.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p28"></span>When unbelievers keep the doors of their
houses shut, and withdraw from the view of men, *it is a shame even to
speak of* the baseness and wickedness with which they rush into all
manner of licentiousness. Would they thus lay aside all shame, and give
loose reins to their passions, if darkness did not give them courage, —
if they did not entertain the hope that what is hidden will pass
unpunished? But do you, by reproving them, bring forward the light, that
they may be ashamed of their own baseness. Such shame, arising from an
acknowledgment of baseness, is the first step to repentance.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p29"></span>“If there come in one that believeth
not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all; and
thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so, falling down on
his face, he worships God” (<span id="iv.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>[1 Cor.
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p30"></span>It may be thought that the word is used
here in an unusual acceptation. Erasmus, by substituting another word
for *reprove,* has destroyed the whole meaning; for Paul’s object is to
shew that it will not be without advantage if the works of unbelievers
are reproved.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p31"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p32"></span>**13.** *But when all things are
reproved.* As the participle, (φανερούμενον,) which is translated, *that
which doth make manifest,* is in the middle voice, it admits either of a
passive or active signification. It may be either rendered, *that which
is made manifest,* or *that which doth make manifest.* If the passive
signification, which is followed by the ancient translator, be
preferred, the word *light* will denote, as formerly, *that which gives
light,* and the meaning will be, that evil works, which had been
concealed, will stand out to public view, when they have been *made
manifest* by the word of God: If the participle be taken actively, there
will still be two ways of expounding it: 1. Whatever manifests is light;
2. That which manifests anything or all things, is light; taking the
singular as put for the plural number. There is no difficulty, as
Erasmus dreaded, about the article; for the apostles are not in the
habit of adhering very strictly to rule about placing every article, and
even among elegant writers this mode of using it would be allowable. The
context appears to me to shew clearly that this is Paul’s meaning. He
had exhorted them to reprove the evil works of unbelievers, and thus to
drag them out of darkness; and he now adds, that what he enjoins upon
them is the proper business of light — *to make manifest* It is Light,
he says, which makes all things manifest; and hence it followed that
they were unworthy of the name, if they did not bring to light what was
involved in darkness.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p33"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p34"></span>**14.** *Wherefore he saith.*
Interpreters are at great pains to discover the passage of Scripture
which Paul appears to quote, and which is nowhere to be found. I shall
state my opinion. He first exhibits Christ as speaking by his ministers;
for this is the ordinary message which is every day delivered by
preachers of the gospel. What other object do they propose than to raise
the dead to life?

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p35"></span>“The hour is coming, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live”  
(<span id="iv.vi.iii-p35.2"></span>[Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p35.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p36"></span>Let us now attend to the context.
“Unbelievers,” Paul had said, “must be reproved, that, being brought
forth to the light, they may begin to acknowledge their wickedness.” He
therefore represents Christ as uttering a voice which is constantly
heard in the preaching of the gospel,

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p37"></span>*Arise, thou that sleepest.* The
allusion, I have no doubt, is to the prophecies which relate to Christ’s
kingdom; such as that of Isaiah,

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p38"></span>“Arise, shine; for thy light is come,
and the glory of Jehovah  
is risen upon thee” (<span id="iv.vi.iii-p38.2"></span>[Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p38.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p39"></span>Let us therefore endeavor, as far as
lies in our power, to rouse the sleeping and dead, that we may bring
them to the light of Christ.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p40"></span>*And Christ shall give thee light.* This
does not mean that, when we have risen from death to life, his light
begins to shine upon us, as if our performances came before his grace.
All that is intended is to show that, when Christ enlightens us, we rise
from death to life, — and thus to confirm the former statement, that
unbelievers must be recovered from their blindness, in order to be
saved. Instead of ἐπιφαύσει, *he* *shall give light,* some copies read
ἐφάψεται, *he shall touch;* but this reading is an evident blunder, and
may be dismissed without any argument.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p2"></span>**15.** See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Videte igitur, quomodo exacte
ambuletis; non tanquam insipientes, sed tanquam sapientes:

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p4"></span>**16.** Redeeming the time, because the
days are evil.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Redimentes tempus, quoniam dies
mali sunt.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p6"></span>**17.** Wherefore be ye not unwise, but
understanding what the will of the Lord *is*

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p7"></span>**17.** Quare ne sitis imprudentes, sed
intelligentes, quae sit voluntas Domini.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p8"></span>**18.** And be not drunk with wine,
wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit;

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9"></span>**18.** Et ne inebriemini vino, in quo
inest lascivia, sed impleamini Spiritu.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p10"></span>**19.** Speaking to yourselves in psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart
to the Lord;

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p11"></span>**19.** Vobis ipsis loquentes psalmis et
hymnis, et canticis spiritualibus, canentes et psallentes in corde
vestro, Domino;

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p12"></span>**20.** Giving thanks always for all
things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13"></span>**20.** Gratias agentes semper de
omnibus, in nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi, Deo et Patri.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p16"></span>**15.** *See then.* If believers must not
neglect to drive away the darkness of others by their own brightness,
how much less ought they to be blind as to their own conduct in life?
What darkness shall conceal those on whom Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, has arisen? Placed, as it were, in a crowded theater,
they ought to live under the eye of God and of angels. Let them stand in
awe of these witnesses, though they may be concealed from the view of
all mortals. Dismissing the metaphor of darkness and light, he enjoins
them to regulate their life *circumspectly as wise men,*  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) who have been educated by the Lord in
the school of true wisdom. Our understanding must shew itself by taking
God for our guide and instructor, to teach us his own will.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p18"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p19"></span>**16.** *Redeeming the time.* By a
consideration of the time he enforces his exhortation. *The days are
evil.* Everything around us tends to corrupt and mislead; so that it is
difficult for godly persons, who walk among so many thorns, to escape
unhurt. Such corruption having infected the age, the devil appears to
have obtained tyrannical sway; so that *time* cannot be dedicated to God
without being in some way *redeemed.* And what shall be the price of its
redemption? To withdraw from the endless variety of allurements which
would easily lead us astray; to rid ourselves from the cares and
pleasures of the world; and, in a word, to abandon every hinderance. Let
us be eager to recover it in every possible way, and let the numerous
offenses and arduous toil, which many are in the habit of alleging as an
apology for indolence, serve rather to awaken our vigilance.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p20"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p21"></span>**17.** *Wherefore be ye not unwise.* He
whose

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p22"></span>“delight is in the law of the Lord, and
who meditates in it day and night,”  
(<span id="iv.vi.iv-p22.2"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p22.2"></span>,)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p23"></span>will triumph over every obstacle which
Satan can oppose to his progress. Whence comes it that some wander,
others fall, others strike against a rock, others go away, — but because
we allow ourselves to be gradually blinded by Satan, and lose sight of
the will of God, which we ought constantly to remember? And observe,
that Paul defines *wisdom* to be, *understanding what the will of the
Lord is*

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p24"></span>“How shall a young man,” says David,
“direct his way? By attending to thy word, O Lord.” (<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p24.1"></span>[Ps
119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p25"></span>He speaks of youths, but it is the same
wisdom which belongs to old men.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p27"></span>**18.** *And be not drunk with wine.*
When he enjoins them *not to be drunk,* he forbids excessive and
immoderate drinking of every description. “Be not intemperate in
drinking.”

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p28"></span>*In which*  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) *is lasciviousness.* The Greek word
ἀσωτία, which is translated “lasciviousness,” points out the evils which
arise from drunkenness. I understand by it all that is implied in a
wanton and dissolute life; for to translate it *luxury,* would quite
enfeeble the sense. The meaning therefore is, that drunkards throw off
quickly every restraint of modesty or shame; that where wine reigns,
profligacy naturally follows; and consequently, that all who have any
regard to moderation or decency ought to avoid and abhor drunkenness.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p30"></span>The children of this world are accustomed
to indulge in deep drinking as an excitement to mirth. Such carnal
excitement is contrasted with that holy joy of which the Spirit of God
is the Author, and which produces entirely opposite effects. To what
does drunkenness lead? To unbounded licentiousness, — to unbridled,
indecent merriment. And to what does spiritual joy lead, when it is most
strongly excited?  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p32"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p33"></span>**19.** *To psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs.* These are truly pleasant and delightful fruits. The
*Spirit* means “joy in the Holy Ghost,” (<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p33.1"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p33.1"></span>;) and the exhortation, *be ye filled*, (ver.
18,) alludes to deep drinking, with which it is indirectly contrasted*.
Speaking to themselves,* is *speaking among themselves.* Nor does he
enjoin them to sing inwardly or alone; for he immediately adds, *singing
in your hearts;* as if he had said, “Let your praises be not merely on
the tongue, as hypocrites do, but from the heart.” What may be the exact
difference between *psalms* and *hymns,* or between *hymns* and *songs,*
it is not easy to determine, though a few remarks on this subject shall
be offered on a future occasion.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) The appellation *spiritual,* given to
these songs, is strikingly appropriate; for the songs most frequently
used are almost always on trifling subjects, and very far from being
chaste.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p35"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p36"></span>**20.** *Giving thanks always.* He means
that this is a pleasure which ought never to lose its relish; that this
is an exercise of which we ought never to weary. Innumerable benefits
which we receive from God yield fresh cause of joy and thanksgiving. At
the same time, he reminds believers that it will argue ungodly and
disgraceful sloth, if they shall not *always* give thanks, — if their
whole life shall not be spent in the study and exercise of praising God.

<span id="iv.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021)<span id="iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p2"></span>**21.** Submitting yourselves one to
another in the fear of God.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p3"></span>**21.** Subditi estote invicem in timore
Christi (*vel, Dei.*)

<span id="iv.vi.v-p4"></span>**22.** Wives, submit yourselves unto your
own husbands, as unto the Lord.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p5"></span>**22.** Mulieres suis maritis subditae sint
tanquam Domino;

<span id="iv.vi.v-p6"></span>**23.** For the husband is the head of the
wife, even as Christ is the head of the church; and he is the savior of
the body.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p7"></span>**23.** Quoniam vir est caput uxoris,
quemadmodum et Christus caput est Ecclesiae, qui idem est servator
corporis.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p8"></span>**24.** Therefore, as the church is subject
unto Christ, so *let* the wives *be* to their own husbands in every
thing.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p9"></span>**24.** Caeterum quemadmodum Ecclesia
subest Christo, ita et mulieres suis maritis in omnibus.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p10"></span>**25.** Husbands, love your wives, even as
Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it;

<span id="iv.vi.v-p11"></span>**25.** Viri, diligite vestras uxores;
quemadmodum et Christus dilexit Ecclesiam, et se ipsum tradidit pro ea,

<span id="iv.vi.v-p12"></span>**26.** That he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word;

<span id="iv.vi.v-p13"></span>**26.** Ut eam sanctificaret, mundans
lavacro aquae in Verbo;

<span id="iv.vi.v-p14"></span>**27.** That he might present it to
himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p15"></span>**27.** Ut sisteret eam sibi gloriosam
Ecclesiam, non habentem maculam, aut rugam, aut quicquam tale; sed ut
esset sancta et irreprehensibilis.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p16"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.v-p17"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p18"></span>**21.** *Submit yourselves.* God has bound
us so strongly to each other, that no man ought to endeavor to avoid
subjection; and where love reigns, mutual services will be rendered. I
do not except even kings and governors, whose very authority is held for
the *service* of the community. It is highly proper that all should be
exhorted to be subject to each other in their turn.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p19"></span>But as nothing is more irksome to the mind
of man than this mutual subjection, he directs us to *the fear of
Christ,* who alone can subdue our fierceness, that we may not refuse the
yoke, and can humble our pride, that we may not be ashamed of serving
our neighbors. It does not much affect the sense, whether we interpret
*the fear of Christ,* passively, thus, — let us submit to our neighbors,
because we fear Christ; or actively, — let us submit to them, because
the minds of all godly persons ought to be influenced by such fear under
the reign of Christ. Some Greek manuscripts read, “the fear *of God.*”
The change may have been introduced by some person, who thought that the
other phrase, *the fear of Christ,* though by far the most appropriate,
sounded a little harsh.  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="iv.vi.v-p21"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p22"></span>**22.** *Wives, submit yourselves.* He
comes now to the various conditions of life; for, besides the universal
bond of subjection, some are more closely bound to each other, according
to their respective callings. The community at large is divided, as it
were, into so many yokes, out of which arises mutual obligation. There
is, first, the yoke of marriage between husband and wife; — secondly,
the yoke which binds parents and children; — and, thirdly, the yoke
which connects masters and servants. By this arrangement there are six
different classes, for each of whom Paul lays down peculiar duties. He
begins with wives, whom he enjoins to be subject to their husbands, in
the same manner as to Christ, — *as to the Lord.* Not that the authority
is equal, but wives cannot obey Christ without yielding obedience to
their husbands.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p23"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p24"></span>**23.** *For the husband is the head of
the wife.* This is the reason assigned why wives should be obedient.
Christ has appointed the same relation to exist between a husband and a
wife, as between himself and his church. This comparison ought to
produce a stronger impression on their minds, than the mere declaration
that such is the appointment of God. Two things are here stated. God has
given to the husband authority over the wife; and a resemblance of this
authority is found in Christ, who *is the head of the church,* as the
husband is of the wife.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p25"></span>*And he is the savior of the body.* The
pronoun HE (αὐτός) is supposed by some to refer to *Christ;* and, by
others, to *the husband.* It applies more naturally, in my opinion, to
Christ, but still with a view to the present subject. In this point, as
well as in others, the resemblance ought to hold. As Christ rules over
his church for her salvation, so nothing yields more advantage or
comfort to the wife than to be subject to her husband. To refuse that
subjection, by means of which they might be saved, is to choose
destruction.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p27"></span>**24.** *But,* *as the church is subject
to Christ*. The particle *but,* may lead some to believe that the words,
*he is the savior of the body,* are intended to anticipate an objection.
Christ has, no doubt, this peculiar claim, that he is the Savior of the
Church: nevertheless, let wives know, that their husbands, though they
cannot produce equal claims, have authority over them, after the example
of Christ. I prefer the former interpretation; for the argument derived
from the word *but,* (ἀλλά,) does not appear to me to have much weight.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p28"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p29"></span>**25.** *Husbands, love your wives.* From
husbands, on the other hand, the apostle requires that they cherish
toward their wives no ordinary love; for to them, also, he holds out the
example of Christ, — *even as Christ also loved the church.* If they are
honored to bear his image, and to be, in some measure, his
representatives, they ought to resemble him also in the discharge of
duty.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p30"></span>*And gave himself for it.* This is
intended to express the strong affection which husbands ought to have
for their wives, though he takes occasion, immediately afterwards, to
commend the grace of Christ. Let husbands imitate Christ in this
respect, that he scrupled not to die for his church. One peculiar
consequence, indeed, which resulted from his death, — that by it he
redeemed his church, — is altogether beyond the power of men to imitate.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p31"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p32"></span>**26.** *That he might sanctify,* — or,
that he might separate it to himself; for such I consider to be the
meaning of the word *sanctify* This is accomplished by the forgiveness
of sins, and the regeneration of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p33"></span>*Washing it with the washing of water.*
Having mentioned the inward and hidden sanctification, he now adds the
outward symbol, by which it is visibly confirmed; as if he had said,
that a pledge of that sanctification is held out to us by baptism. Here
it is necessary to guard against unsound interpretation, lest the wicked
superstition of men, as has frequently happened, change a sacrament into
an idol. When Paul says that we are washed by baptism, his meaning is,
that God employs it for declaring to us that we are washed, and at the
same time performs what it represents. If the truth — or, which is the
same thing, the exhibition of the truth — were not connected with
baptism, it would be improper to say that baptism is the washing of the
soul. At the same time, we must beware of ascribing to the sign, or to
the minister, what belongs to God alone. We must not imagine that
washing is performed by the minister, or that water cleanses the
pollutions of the soul, which nothing but the blood of Christ can
accomplish. In short, we must beware of giving any portion of our
confidence to the element or to man; for the true and proper use of the
sacrament is to lead us directly to Christ, and to place all our
dependence upon him.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p34"></span>Others again suppose that too much
importance is given to the sign, by saying that baptism is the washing
of the soul. Under the influence of this fear, they labor exceedingly to
lessen the force of the eulogium which is here pronounced on baptism.
But they are manifestly wrong; for, in the first place, the apostle does
not say that it is the sign which washes, but declares it to be
exclusively the work of God. It is God who washes, and the honor of
performing it cannot lawfully be taken from its Author and given to the
sign. But there is no absurdity in saying that God employs a sign as the
outward means. Not that the power of God is limited by the sign, but
this assistance is accommodated to the weakness of our capacity. Some
are offended at this view, imagining that it takes from the Holy Spirit
a work which is peculiarly his own, and which is everywhere ascribed to
him in Scripture. But they are mistaken; for God acts by the sign in
such a manner, that its whole efficacy depends upon his Spirit. Nothing
more is attributed to the sign than to be an inferior organ, utterly
useless in itself, except so far as it derives its power from another
source.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p35"></span>Equally groundless is their fear, that by
this interpretation the freedom of God will be restrained. The grace of
God is not confined to the sign; so that God may not, if he pleases,
bestow it without the aid of the sign. Besides, many receive the sign
who are not made partakers of grace; for the sign is common to all, to
the good and to the bad alike; but the Spirit is bestowed on none but
the elect, and the sign, as we have said, has no efficacy without the
Spirit. The Greek participle καθαρίσας, is in the past tense, as if he
had said, “After having washed.” But, as the Latin language has no
active participle in the past tense, I chose rather to disregard this,
and to translate it (<span id="iv.vi.v-p35.1"></span>*mundans*)
*washing,* instead of (<span id="iv.vi.v-p35.2"></span>*mundatam*)
*having been* *washed;* which would have kept out of view a matter of
far greater importance, namely, that to God alone belongs the work of
cleansing.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p36"></span>*In the word.*  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) This is very far from being a
superfluous addition; for, if the *word* is taken away, the whole power
of the sacraments is gone. What else are the sacraments but seals of the
word? This single consideration will drive away superstition. How comes
it that superstitious men are confounded by signs, but because their
minds are not directed to the *Word,* which would lead them to God?
Certainly, when we look to anything else than to the word, there is
nothing sound, nothing pure; but one absurdity springs out of another,
till at length the signs, which were appointed by God for the salvation
of men, become profane, and degenerate into gross idolatry. The only
difference, therefore, between the sacraments of the godly and the
contrivances of unbelievers, is found in the Word.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p38"></span>By the *Word* is here meant the promise,
which explains the value and use of the signs. Hence it appears, that
the Papists do not at all observe the signs in a proper manner. They
boast indeed, of having “the Word,” but appear to regard it as a sort of
enchantment; for they mutter it in an unknown tongue; as if it were
addressed to dead matter, and not to men. No explanation of the mystery
is made to the people; and in this respect, were there no other, the
sacrament begins to be nothing more than the dead element of water. *In
the word* is equivalent to “By the word.”

<span id="iv.vi.v-p39"></span><span id="iv.vi.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p40"></span>**27.** *That he might present it to
himself.* He declares what is the design of baptism and of our being
washed. It is, that we may live in a holy and unblamable manner before
God. We are washed by Christ, not that we may return to our pollution,
but that we may retain through our life the purity which we have once
received. This is described in metaphorical language appropriate to his
argument.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p41"></span>*Not having spot or wrinkle.* As the
beauty of the wife produces love in the husband, so Christ adorns the
Church his bride with holiness as a proof of his regard. This metaphor
contains an allusion to marriage; but he afterwards lays aside the
figure, and says plainly, that Christ has reconciled the church, *that
it might be holy and without blemish.* The true beauty of the church
consists in this conjugal chastity, that is, in holiness and purity.

<span id="iv.vi.v-p42"></span>The word *present* (παραστήσὟ) implies
that the church ought to be holy, not only in the view of men, but in
the eyes of the Lord; for Paul says, *that he might present it to
himself,* not that he might shew it to others, though the fruits of that
hidden purity become afterwards evident in outward works. Pelagians were
wont to quote this passage in order to prove the perfection of
righteousness in this life, but have been successfully answered by
Augustine. Paul does not state what has been done, but for what purpose
Christ has cleansed his church. Now, when a thing is said to be done
that another may afterwards follow, it is idle to conclude that this
latter thing, which ought to follow, has been already done. We do not
deny that the holiness of the church is already begun; but, so long as
there is daily progress, there cannot be perfection.

<span id="iv.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
5:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028)<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p2"></span>**28.** So ought men to love their wives
as their own bodies: he that loveth his wife loveth himself.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p3"></span>**28.** Ita viri debent diligere suas
uxores, tanquam sua corpora. Qui diligit uxorem suam, se ipsum diligit.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p4"></span>**29.** For no man ever yet hated his own
flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church:

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p5"></span>**29.** Nemo enim unquam carnem suam odio
habuit, sed nutrit et fovet eam; quemadmodum et Christus Ecclesiam.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p6"></span>**30.** For we are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p7"></span>**30.** Quia membra sumus corporis ejus,
ex ejus carne et ex ejus ossibus.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p8"></span>**31.** For this cause shall a man leave
his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two
shall be one flesh.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p9"></span>**31.** Hujus causa relinquet homo patrem
et matrem suam, et adhaerebit uxori suae; et erunt duo in carnem unam.
(<span id="iv.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>[Ge
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="iv.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p10"></span>**32.** This is a great mystery: but I
speak concerning Christ and the church.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p11"></span>**32.** Arcanum hoc magnum est; ego autem
dico in Christo et in Ecclesia.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p12"></span>**33.** Nevertheless, let every one of
you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife *see*
that she reverence *her* husband.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p13"></span>**33.** Caeterum vos quoque singuli, suam
quisque uxorem diligat; mulier autem timeat maritum.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p16"></span>**28.** *He that loveth his wife.* An
argument is now drawn from nature itself, to prove that men ought to
love their wives. Every man, by his very nature, loves himself. But no
man can love himself without loving his wife. Therefore, the man who
does not love his wife is a monster. The minor proposition is proved in
this manner. Marriage was appointed by God on the condition that the two
should be *one flesh;* and that this unity may be the more sacred, he
again recommends it to our notice by the consideration of Christ and his
church. Such is the amount of his argument, which to a certain extent
applies universally to human society. To shew what man owes to man,
Isaiah says, “hide not thyself from thine own flesh.” (<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p16.1"></span>[Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p16.1"></span>.) But this refers to our common nature.
Between a man and his wife there is a far closer relation; for they not
only are united by a resemblance of nature, but by the bond of marriage
have become one man. Whoever considers seriously the design of marriage
cannot but love his wife.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p17"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p18"></span>**29.** *Even as Christ the church.* He
proceeds to enforce the obligations of marriage by representing to us
Christ and his Church; for a more powerful example could not have been
adduced. The strong affection which a husband ought to cherish towards
his wife is exemplified by Christ, and an instance of that unity which
belongs to marriage is declared to exist between himself and the Church.
This is a remarkable passage on the mysterious intercourse which we have
with Christ.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p19"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p20"></span>**30.** *For we are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones.* First, this is no exaggeration, but the
simple truth. Secondly, he does not simply mean that Christ is a
partaker of our nature, but expresses something higher (καὶ
ἐμφατικώτερον) *and* *more emphatic.*

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p21"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p22"></span>**31.** *For this cause.* This is an
exact quotation from the writings of Moses. (<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p22.1"></span>[Ge
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p22.1"></span>.) And what does it mean? As Eve was formed
out of the substance of her husband, and thus was a part of himself; so,
if we are the true members of Christ, we share his substance, and by
this intercourse unite into one body. In short, Paul describes our union
to Christ, a symbol and pledge of which is given to us in the ordinance
of the supper. Those who talk about the torture exercised on this
passage to make it refer to the Lord’s supper, while no mention is made
of the supper, but of marriage, are egregiously mistaken. When they
admit that the death of Christ is commemorated in the supper, but not
that such intercourse exists as we assert from the words of Christ, we
quote this passage against them. Paul says that *we are members of his
flesh and of his bones.* Do we wonder then, that in the Lord’s supper he
holds out his body to be enjoyed by us, and to nourish us unto eternal
life? Thus we prove that the only union which we maintain to be
represented by the Lord’s supper is here declared in its truth and
consequences by the apostle.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p23"></span>Two subjects are exhibited together; for
the spiritual union between Christ and his church is so treated as to
illustrate the common law of marriage, to which the quotation from Moses
relates. He immediately adds, that the saying is fulfilled in *Christ
and the church.* Every opportunity which presents itself for proclaiming
our obligations to Christ is readily embraced, but he adapts his
illustration of them to the present subject. It is uncertain whether
Moses introduces Adam as using these words, or gives them as an
inference drawn by himself from the creation of man. Nor is it of much
consequence which of these views be taken; for, in either case, we must
hold it to be an announcement of the will of God, enjoining the duties
which men owe to their wives.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p24"></span>*He shall leave his father and mother.*
As if he had said, “Let him rather *leave his father and mother* than
not cleave to his wife.” The marriage bond does not set aside the other
duties of mankind, nor are the commandments of God so inconsistent with
each other, that a man cannot be a good and faithful husband without
ceasing to be a dutiful son. It is altogether a question of degree.
Moses draws the comparison, in order to express more strongly the close
and sacred union which subsists between husband and wife. A son is bound
by an inviolable law of nature to perform his duties towards his father;
and when the obligations of a husband towards his wife are declared to
be stronger, their force is the better understood. He who resolves to be
a good husband will not fail to perform his filial duties, but will
regard marriage as more sacred than all other ties.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p25"></span>*And they two shall be one flesh.* They
shall be one man, or, to use a common phrase, they shall constitute one
person; which certainly would not hold true with regard to any other
kind of relationship. All depends on this, that the wife was formed of
the flesh and bones of her husband. Such is the union between us and
Christ, who in some sort makes us partakers of his substance. “We are
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,” (<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p25.1"></span>[Ge
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p25.1"></span>;) not because, like ourselves, he has a
human nature, but because, by the power of his Spirit, he makes us a
part of his body, so that from him we derive our life.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p27"></span>**32.** *This is a great mystery.* He
concludes by expressing his astonishment at the spiritual union between
Christ and the church. *This is a great mystery;* by which he means,
that no language can explain fully what it implies. It is to no purpose
that men fret themselves to comprehend, by the judgment of the flesh,
the manner and character of this union; for here the infinite power of
the Divine Spirit is exerted. Those who refuse to admit anything on this
subject beyond what their own capacity can reach, act an exceedingly
foolish part. We tell them that the flesh and blood of Christ are
exhibited to us in the Lord’s supper. “Explain to us the manner,” they
reply, “or you will not convince us.” For my own part, I am overwhelmed
by the depth of this mystery, and am not ashamed to join Paul in
acknowledging at once my ignorance and my admiration. How much more
satisfactory would this be than to follow my carnal judgment, in
undervaluing what Paul declares to be a deep mystery! Reason itself
teaches how we ought to act in such matters; for whatever is
supernatural is clearly beyond our own comprehension. Let us therefore
labor more to feel Christ living in us, than to discover the nature of
that intercourse.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p28"></span>We cannot avoid admiring the acuteness of
the Papists, who conclude from the word *mystery* (μυστήριον) that
marriage is one of seven sacraments, as if they had the power of
changing water into wine. They enumerate seven sacraments, while Christ
has instituted no more than two; and, to prove that matrimony is one of
the seven, they produce this passage. On what ground? Because the
Vulgate has adopted the word *Sacrament* (<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p28.1"></span>*sacramentum*) as a translation of the word
*Mystery,* which the apostle uses. As if Sacrament (<span
id="iv.vi.vi-p28.2"></span>*sacramentum*) did not frequently, among
Latin writers, denote *Mystery,* or as if *Mystery* had not been the
word employed by Paul in the same Epistle, when speaking of the calling
of the Gentiles. But the present question is, Has marriage been
appointed as a sacred symbol of the grace of God, to declare and
represent to us something spiritual, such as Baptism or the Lord’s
Supper? They have no ground for such an assertion, unless it be that
they have been deceived by the doubtful signification of a Latin word,
or rather by their ignorance of the Greek language. If the simple fact
had been observed, that the word used by Paul is *Mystery,* no mistake
would ever have occurred.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p29"></span>We see then the hammer and anvil with
which they fabricated this sacrament. But they have given another proof
of their indolence in not attending to the correction which is
immediately added,

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p30"></span>*But I speak concerning Christ and the
church.* He intended to give express warning that no man should
understand him as speaking of marriage; so that his meaning is more
fully expressed than if he had uttered the former sentiment without any
exception. The *great mystery* is, that Christ breathes into the church
his own life and power. But who would discover here anything like a
sacrament? This blunder arose from the grossest ignorance.

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p31"></span><span id="iv.vi.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p32"></span>**33.** *Nevertheless, let every one.*
Having digressed a little from this subject, though the very digression
aided his design, he adopts the method usually followed in short
precepts, by giving a brief summary of duties. Husbands are required to
love their wives, and wives to *fear* (φοβὢται) their husbands,
understanding by *fear* that *reverence* which will lead them to be
submissive. Where reverence does not exist, there will be no willing
subjection.  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc41017.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p10"></span> “To institute an action against one who
has injured us is human; not to take revenge on him is the part of a
philosopher; but to compensate him with benefits is divine, and makes
men of earth followers of the Father who is in heaven.” — Clem. Ep.,
quoted by Eadie.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc41017.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p15"></span> “The offering, in being presented to God,
was meant to be, and actually was, a sweet savor to Him. The phrase is
based on the peculiar sacrificial idiom of the Old Testament. (<span
id="iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>[Ge
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.2"></span>[Lev.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017), [Lev.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012), [Lev.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.2"></span>.)
It is used typically in <span id="iv.vi.i-p15.3"></span>[2Co
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.3"></span>,
and is explained and expanded in <span id="iv.vi.i-p15.4"></span>[Php
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.i-p15.4"></span> —
‘a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.’ The burning of spices or
incense, so fragrant to the Oriental senses, is figuratively applied to
God.” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc41017.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p17"></span> “He doth not condemn the innocent
pleasantries and mirth of a cheerful conversation; but that kind of
obscene discourse which we mean by the French expression of <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p17.1"></span>*double entendre;* when men, for the sake of
merriment and sport, convey lewd sentiments and thoughts to others,
under chaste and cleanly expressions. This seems to be the proper
meaning of the word <span id="iv.vi.ii-p17.2"></span>εὐτραπελία,
*jesting,* in this place. The original sense of it is, ‘an artfully
turned discourse.’ And accordingly it is used either in a good sense, to
denote proper wit; or in a bad sense, to signify any kind of lewd and
scurrilous discourse, that artfully conveys an ill meaning. And as it is
here joined with ‘filthiness and foolish talking,’ it is plain that the
apostle intended by it such ambiguous forms of speech as are intended to
raise mirth by dishonest and corrupt meanings.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc41017.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p26"></span> “<span
id="iv.vi.ii-p26.1"></span>Mastins.” “Mastiffs.”

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc41017.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p21"></span> The English version reads, *The fruit
of the Spirit*; Calvin’s, *The fruit of light.* Without attempting, in a
brief note, to balance the various readings, it may be proper to
mention, that, instead of <span id="iv.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>πνεύματος,
(*of the Spirit*,) many Greek manuscripts have <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.2"></span>θωτὸς, (*of the light*,) and the latter
reading has been adopted by Griesbach. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc41017.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p24"></span> “Most expositors supply <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>αὐτοὺς, meaning the doers of the works; and
they render <span id="iv.vi.iii-p24.2"></span>ἐλέγχετε, *reprove,* viz.,
by wholesome correction. This, however, is so harsh, that it is better
(with Theodoret, the Pesch. Syr., Wakefield, Schleusner, Photius, and
Wahl) to supply <span id="iv.vi.iii-p24.3"></span>αὐτὰ, that is, <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p24.4"></span>ἔργα τοῦ σκότους, and to interpret <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p24.5"></span>ἐλέγχετε ‘bring to the light, and evince
their evil nature,’ namely, by shewing in contrast the opposite virtues.
This sense is required by verse 13, with which the present closely
connects; and so <span id="iv.vi.iii-p24.6"></span>ἐλέγχω is used both
in the Scriptural and Classical writers.” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc41017.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p41"></span> “The various spellings of the verb, and
the change of <span id="iv.vi.iii-p41.1"></span>φ into <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p41.2"></span>ψ, have arisen from inadvertence. This
variation is as old as the days of Chrysostom; for he notices it, and
decides for the common reading. The verb itself occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament, though it is once found in the ‘Acts of Thomas,’
section 34. That light from Christ flashes upon the awakened and
resuscitated; nay, it awakens and resuscitates them. As it streams upon
the dead, it startles them into life. It illuminates every topic on
which a sinner needs information, with a pure, steady, and mellowed
radiance.” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc41017.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p17"></span> “In <span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.1"></span>μὴ
ὡς ἄσοφοι ἀλλ ᾿ ὡς σοφοὶ we have an antithetical parallelism, (such as
is found in the Classical as well as the Scriptural writers,) where, for
emphasis’ sake, a proposition is expressed both affirmatively and
negatively, as in <span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.2"></span>[Joh
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.2"></span>,
<span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.3"></span>ὡμολόγησε καὶ οὐκ ἠρνήσατο, ‘he
confessed and denied not.’ By <span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.4"></span>ἄσοφοι,
and <span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.5"></span>σοφοὶ are meant the persons just
before denoted by <span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.6"></span>κότος and <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p17.7"></span>φῶς, and, a little after, termed <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p17.8"></span>ἄφρονες and <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p17.9"></span>συνίεντες, by a frequent Hebrew idiom,
whereby Wisdom stands for Virtue, and Folly for Vice” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc41017.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p29"></span> “The antecedent to <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p29.1"></span>ᾧ is not <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p29.2"></span>οἴνος, but the entire clause — ‘in which
vicious inebriety there is profligacy.’ The term, if it be derived from
<span id="iv.vi.iv-p29.3"></span>α privative and <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p29.4"></span>σώζω, is the picture of a sad result. The
adjective <span id="iv.vi.iv-p29.5"></span>ἄσωτος is used by the
classics to signify one who is, as we say, ‘past redemption.’ The adverb
<span id="iv.vi.iv-p29.6"></span>ἀσώτὠς is used of the conduct of the
prodigal son in the far country. (<span id="iv.vi.iv-p29.7"></span>[Lu
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p29.7"></span>.)” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc41017.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p31"></span> “This is a pleasant kind of drunkenness,
which stimulates you, not to wanton dances or foolish songs, by which
the Gentiles render homage to their deities, but to psalms, to hymns, to
spiritual songs, by which you rejoice, and sing, and offer praise to the
Lord, not with indecent roaring, as is the custom of drunk people, but
inwardly in your minds and hearts.” — Erasmus.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc41017.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p34"></span> See Calvin Commentary on Philippians,
Colossians, etc., page217.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc41017.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p20"></span> “Here, indeed, there is great reason to
think that <span id="iv.vi.v-p20.1"></span>Χριστοῦ, (instead of <span
id="iv.vi.v-p20.2"></span>Θεοῦ,) found in very many of the best MSS.,
ancient Versions, and early Fathers, (and which has been edited by
Griesbach, Vater, Tittmann, and Scholz,) is the true reading.” —
Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc41017.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.vi.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v-p37"></span> “<span id="iv.vi.v-p37.1"></span>Par la
parolle.” “By the word.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc41017.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iv.vi.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vi-p33"></span> “One peculiarity in this injunction has
been usually overlooked. What is instructive on either side is not
enforced, but what is necessary to direct and hallow such an instinct is
inculcated. The woman loves in deep, undying sympathy; but, to teach her
how this fondness should know and fill its appropriate sphere, she is
commanded to obey and honor. The man, on the other hand, feels that his
position is to govern; but, to shew him what should be the essence and
means of his government, he is enjoined to love.” — Eadie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc41018)
