[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc41012)  [Next](cc41014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>COMMENTARIES ON THE

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by
the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful
in Christ Jesus:

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Paulus Apostolus Iesu Christi per
voluntatem Dei, sanctis omnibus qui sunt Ephesi, et fidelibus in Christo
Iesu,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Grace *be* to you, and peace, from
God our Father, and *from* the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Blessed *be* the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings
in heavenly *places* in Christ;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Benedictus Deus et Pater Domini
nostri Iesu Christi, qui benedixit nos in omni benedictione spirituali,
in coelestibus Christo;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>**4.** According as he hath chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love:

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quemadmodum elegit nos in ipso ante
mundi creationem, ut simus sancti et inculpati in conspectu suo per
charitatem;

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Having predestinated us unto the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Qui praedestinavit nos in
adoptionem per Iesum Christum in seipso, secundum beneplacitum
voluntatis suae,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>**6.** To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>**6.** In laudem gloriae gratiae suae, qua
nos gratos habuit in dilecto.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p16"></span>**1.** *Paul, an apostle.* As the same
form of salutation, or at least very little varied, is found in all the
Epistles, it would be superfluous to repeat here the observations which
we have formerly made. He calls himself “an apostle of Jesus Christ;”
for all to whom has been given the ministry of reconciliation are his
ambassadors. The word Apostle, indeed, carries something more; for it is
not every minister of the gospel, as we shall afterwards see, (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p16.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.i-p16.1"></span>,.md)
that can be called an apostle. But this subject has been explained more
fully in my remarks on the Epistle to the Galatians. (See Calvin on
“<span id="iv.ii.i-p16.2"></span>[Ga
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.i-p16.2"></span>”.md)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p17"></span>He adds, *by the will of God;* for “no man
ought to take this honor unto himself,” (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p17.1"></span>[Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.i-p17.1"></span>,.md)
but every man ought to wait for the calling of God, which alone makes
lawful ministers. He thus meets the jeers of wicked men by holding out
the authority of God, and removes every occasion of inconsiderate
strife.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p18"></span>*To all the saints.* He gives the name of
*saints* to those whom he afterwards denominates *faithful in Christ
Jesus.* No man, therefore, is a believer who is not also a saint; and,
on the other hand, no man is a saint who is not a believer. Most of the
Greek copies want the word *all;* but I was unwilling to strike it out,
because it must, at all events, be understood.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *Blessed*  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) *be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.* The lofty terms in which he extolls the grace of God
toward the Ephesians, are intended to rouse their hearts to gratitude,
to set them all on flame, to fill them even to overflowing with this
thought. They who perceive in themselves discoveries of the Divine
goodness, so full and absolutely perfect, and who make them the subject
of earnest meditation, will never embrace new doctrines, by which the
very grace which they feel so powerfully in themselves is thrown into
the shade. The design of the apostle, therefore, in asserting the riches
of divine grace toward the Ephesians, was to protect them against having
their faith shaken by the false apostles, as if their calling were
doubtful, or salvation were to be sought in some other way. He shews, at
the same time, that the full certainty of future happiness rests on the
revelation of his love to us in Christ, which God makes in the gospel.
But to confirm the matter more fully, he rises to the first cause, to
the fountain, — the eternal election of God, by which, ere we are born,
(<span id="iv.ii.i-p21.3"></span>[Ro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.i-p21.3"></span>,.md)
we are adopted as sons. This makes it evident that their salvation was
accomplished, not by any accidental or unlooked-for occurrence, but by
the eternal and unchangeable decree of God.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p22"></span>The word *bless* is here used in more than
one sense, as referring to God, and as referring to men. I find in
Scripture four different significations of this word. **1.** We are said
to bless God when we offer praise to him for his goodness. **2.** God is
said to bless us, when he crowns our undertakings with success, and, in
the exercise of his goodness, bestows upon us happiness and prosperity;
and the reason is, that our enjoyments depend entirely upon his
pleasure. Our attention is here called to the singular efficacy which
dwells in the very word of God, and which Paul expresses in beautiful
language. **3.** Men bless each other by prayer. **4.** The priest’s
blessing is not simply a prayer, but is likewise a testimony and pledge
of the Divine blessing; for the priests received a commission to bless
in the name of the Lord. Paul therefore blesses God, because *he hath
blessed us,* that is, hath enriched us with all blessing and grace.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p23"></span>*With all spiritual blessings.* I have no
objection to Chrysostom’s remark, that the word *spiritual* conveys an
implied contrast between the blessing of Moses and of Christ. The law
had its blessings; but in Christ only is perfection found, because he
gives us a perfect revelation of the kingdom of God, which leads us
directly to heaven. When the body itself is presented to us, figures are
no longer needed.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p24"></span>*In heavenly.* Whether we understand the
meaning to be, in heavenly Places, or in heavenly Benefits, is of little
consequence. All that was intended to be expressed is the superiority of
that grace which we receive through Christ. The happiness which it
bestows is not in this world, but in heaven and everlasting life. In the
Christian religion, indeed, as we are elsewhere taught, (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p24.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.i-p24.1"></span>,.md)
is contained the “promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come;” but its aim is spiritual happiness, for the kingdom of Christ
is spiritual. A contrast is drawn between Christ and all the Jewish
emblems, by which the blessing under the law was conveyed; for where
Christ is, all those things are superfluous.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p26"></span>**4.** *According as he hath chosen us.*
The foundation and first cause, both of our calling and of all the
benefits which we receive from God, is here declared to be his eternal
election. If the reason is asked, why God has called us to enjoy the
gospel, why he daily bestows upon us so many blessings, why he opens to
us the gate of heaven, — the answer will be constantly found in this
principle, that *he hath chosen us before the foundation of the world.*
The very time when the election took place proves it to be free; for
what could we have deserved, or what merit did we possess, before the
world was made? How childish is the attempt to meet this argument by the
following sophism! “We were chosen because we were worthy, and because
God foresaw that we would be worthy.” We were all lost in Adam; and
therefore, had not God, through his own election, rescued us from
perishing, there was nothing to be foreseen. The same argument is used
in the Epistle to the Romans, where, speaking of Jacob and Esau, he
says,

<span id="iv.ii.i-p27"></span>“For the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth.” (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p27.1"></span>[Ro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.i-p27.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p28"></span>But though they had not yet acted, might a
sophist of the *Sorbonne* reply, God foresaw that they would act. This
objection has no force when applied to the depraved natures of men, in
whom nothing can be seen but materials for destruction.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p29"></span>*In Christ.* This is the second proof that
the election is free; for if we are chosen *in* Christ, it is *not of*
ourselves. It is not from a perception of anything that we deserve, but
because our heavenly Father has introduced us, through the privilege of
adoption, into the body of Christ. In short, the name of Christ excludes
all merit, and everything which men have of their own; for when he says
that we are *chosen in Christ,* it follows that in ourselves we are
unworthy.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p30"></span>*That we should be holy.* This is the
immediate, but not the chief design; for there is no absurdity in
supposing that the same thing may gain two objects. The design of
building is, that there should be a house. This is the immediate design,
but the convenience of dwelling in it is the ultimate design. It was
necessary to mention this in passing; for we shall immediately find that
Paul mentions another design, the glory of God. But there is no
contradiction here; for the glory of God is the highest end, to which
our sanctification is subordinate.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p31"></span>This leads us to conclude, that holiness,
purity, and every excellence that is found among men, are the fruit of
election; so that once more Paul expressly puts aside every
consideration of merit. If God had foreseen in us anything worthy of
election, it would have been stated in language the very opposite of
what is here employed, and which plainly means that all our holiness and
purity of life flow from the election of God. How comes it then that
some men are religious, and live in the fear of God, while others give
themselves up without reserve to all manner of wickedness? If Paul may
be believed, the only reason is, that the latter retain their natural
disposition, and the former have been chosen to holiness. The cause,
certainly, is not later than the effect. Election, therefore, does not
depend on the righteousness of works, of which Paul here declares that
it is the cause.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p32"></span>We learn also from these words, that
election gives no occasion to licentiousness, or to the blasphemy of
wicked men who say, “Let us live in any manner we please; for, if we
have been elected, we cannot perish.” Paul tells them plainly, that they
have no right to separate holiness of life from the grace of election;
for

<span id="iv.ii.i-p33"></span>“whom he did predestinate, them he also
called, and whom he called, them he also justified.” (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ro
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span id="iv.ii.i-p33.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p34"></span>The inference, too, which the Catharists,
Celestines, and Donatists drew from these words, that we may attain
perfection in this life, is without foundation. This is the goal to
which the whole course of our life must be directed, and we shall not
reach it till we have finished our course. Where are the men who dread
and avoid the doctrine of predestination as an inextricable labyrinth,
who believe it to be useless and almost dangerous? No doctrine is more
useful, provided it be handled in the proper and cautious manner, of
which Paul gives us an example, when he presents it as an illustration
of the infinite goodness of God, and employs it as an excitement to
gratitude. This is the true fountain from which we must draw our
knowledge of the divine mercy. If men should evade every other argument,
election shuts their mouth, so that they dare not and cannot claim
anything for themselves. But let us remember the purpose for which Paul
reasons about predestination, lest, by reasoning with any other view, we
fall into dangerous errors.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p35"></span>*Before him it love.* Holiness *before
God* (κατενώπιον αὐτοῦ) is that of a pure conscience; for God is not
deceived, as men are, by outward pretense, but looks to faith, or, which
means the same thing, the truth of the heart. If we view the word *love*
as applied to God, the meaning will be, that the only reason why he
chose us, was his love to men. But I prefer connecting it with the
latter part of the verse, as denoting that the perfection of believers
consists in love; not that God requires love alone, but that it is an
evidence of the fear of God, and of obedience to the whole law.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p36"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p37"></span>**5.** *Who hath predestinated us.* What
follows is intended still further to heighten the commendation of divine
grace. The reason why Paul inculcated so earnestly on the Ephesians the
doctrines of free adoption through Christ, and of the eternal election
which preceded it, has been already considered. But as the mercy of God
is nowhere acknowledged in more elevated language, this passage will
deserve our careful attention. Three causes of our salvation are here
mentioned, and a fourth is shortly afterwards added. The efficient cause
is *the good pleasure of the will* of God, the material cause is, *Jesus
Christ,* and the final cause is, *the praise of the glory of his grace.*
Let us now see what he says respecting each.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p38"></span>To the first belongs the whole of the
following statement *God hath predestinated us in himself, according to
the good pleasure of his will, unto the adoption of sons, and hath made
us accepted by his grace.* In the word *predestinate* we must again
attend to the order. We were not then in existence, and therefore there
was no merit of ours. The cause of our salvation did not proceed from
us, but from God alone. Yet Paul, not satisfied with these statements,
adds *in himself.* The Greek phrase is, εἰς αὑτὸν, and has the same
meaning with ἐν αὑτῷ. By this he means that God did not seek a cause out
of himself, but predestinated us, because such was his will.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p39"></span>But this is made still more clear by what
follows, *according to the good pleasure of his will.* The word *will*
was enough, for Paul very frequently contrasts it with all outward
causes by which men are apt to imagine that the mind of God is
influenced. But that no doubt may remain, he employs the word *good
pleasure,* which expressly sets aside all merit. In adopting us,
therefore, God does not inquire what we are, and is not reconciled to us
by any personal worth. His single motive is the eternal good pleasure,
by which he predestinated us.  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md)
Why, then, are the sophists not ashamed to mingle with them other
considerations, when Paul so strongly forbids us to look at anything
else than the good pleasure of God?

<span id="iv.ii.i-p41"></span>Lest anything should still be wanting, he
adds, ἐχαρίτωσεν ἐν χάριτι  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) This
intimates, that, in the freest manner, and on no mercenary grounds, does
God bestow upon us his love and favor, just as, when we were not yet
born, and when he was prompted by nothing but his own will, he fixed
upon us his choice.  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p44"></span>The material cause both of eternal
election, and of the love which is now revealed, is *Christ, the
Beloved.* This name is given, to remind us that by him the love of God
is communicated to us. Thus he is the well-beloved, in order that we may
be reconciled by him. The highest and last end is immediately added, the
glorious praise of such abundant grace. Every man, therefore, who hides
this glory, is endeavoring to overturn the everlasting purpose of God.
Such is the doctrine of the sophists, which entirely overturns the
doctrine of Christ, lest the whole glory of our salvation should be
ascribed undividedly to God alone.

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
1:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** In whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**7.** In quo habemus redemptionem per
sangiunem ejus, remissionem peccatorum, secundum divitias gratiae ejus;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Wherein he hath abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Qua exundavit in nos in omni
sapientia et prudentia;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>**9.** Having made known unto us the
mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he hath
purposed in himself:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Patefacto nobis arcano voluntatis
suae, secundum beneplacitum suum, quod in seipso proposuerat.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>**10.** That, in the dispensation of the
fullness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ,
both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, *even* in him:

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>**10.** In dispensationem plenitudinis
temporum; ut recolligeret omnia in Christo, tam quae in coelis sunt,
quam quae super terram, in ipso.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>**11.** In whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who
worketh all things after the counsel of his own will;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>**11.** Per quem etiam in sortem adsciti
sumus, praedestinati secundum propositum ejus, qui omnia efficit
secundum consilium voluntatis suae;

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span>**12.** That we should be to the praise
of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span>**12.** Ut simus in laudem gloriae
ipsius, nos qui ante speravimus in Christo.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p16"></span>**7.** *In whom we have redemption.* The
apostle is still illustrating the material cause, — the manner in which
we are reconciled to God through Christ. By his death he has restored us
to favor with the Father; and therefore we ought always to direct our
minds to the blood of Christ, as the means by which we obtain divine
grace. After mentioning that, through the blood of Christ, we obtain
redemption, he immediately styles it *the forgiveness of sins,* — to
intimate that we are redeemed, because our sins are not imputed to us.
Hence it follows, that we obtain by free grace that righteousness by
which we are accepted of God, and freed from the chains of the devil and
of death. The close connection which is here preserved, between our
redemption itself and the manner in which it is obtained, deserves our
notice; for, so long as we remain exposed to the judgment of God, we are
bound by miserable chains, and therefore our exemption from guilt,
becomes an invaluable freedom.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17"></span>*According to the riches of his grace.*
He now returns to the efficient cause, — the largeness of the divine
kindness, which has given Christ to us as our Redeemer. *Riches,* and
the corresponding word *overflow,* in the following verse, are intended
to give us large views of divine grace. The apostle feels himself unable
to celebrate, in a proper manner, the goodness of God, and desires that
the contemplation of it would occupy the minds of men till they are
entirely lost in admiration. How desirable is it that men were deeply
impressed with “the riches of that grace” which is here commended! No
place would any longer be found for pretended satisfactions, or for
those trifles by which the world vainly imagines that it can redeem
itself; as if the blood of Christ, when unsupported by additional aid,
had lost all its efficacy.  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p19"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20"></span>**8.** *In all wisdom.* He now comes to
the formal cause, the preaching of the gospel, by which the goodness of
God *overflows upon us.*  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) It is
through faith that we receive Christ, by whom we come to God, and by
whom we enjoy the privilege of adoption. Paul gives to the gospel the
magnificent appellations of *wisdom and prudence,* for the purpose of
leading the Ephesians to despise all contrary doctrines. The false
apostles insinuated themselves, under the pretense of imparting views
more elevated than the elementary instructions which Paul conveyed. And
the devil, in order to undermine our faith, labors, as far as he can, to
disparage the gospel. Paul, on the other hand, builds up the authority
of the gospel, that believers may rest upon it with unshaken confidence.
*All wisdom* means — full or perfect wisdom.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23"></span>**9.** *Having made known to us the
mystery of his will.* Some were alarmed at the novelty of his doctrine.
With a view to such persons, he very properly denominates it a *mystery
of the divine will,* and yet a mystery which God has now been pleased to
reveal. As he formerly ascribed their election, so he now ascribes their
calling, to the good pleasure of God. The Ephesians are thus led to
consider that Christ has been made known, and the gospel preached to
them, not because they deserved any such thing, but because it pleased
God.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24"></span>*Which he hath purposed in himself.* All
is wisely and properly arranged. What can be more just than that his
purposes, with which men are unacquainted, should be known to God alone,
so long as he is pleased to conceal them, — or, again, that it should be
in his own will and power to fix the time when they shall be
communicated to men? The decree to adopt the Gentiles is declared to
have been till now hidden in the mind of God, but so hidden, that God
reserved it in his own power until the time of the revelation. Does any
one now complain of it as a new and unprecedented occurrence, that those
who were formerly “without God in the world,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>,) should be received into the church? Will
he have the hardihood to deny that the knowledge of God is greater than
that of men?

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p26"></span>**10.** *That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times.* That no man may inquire, why one time rather than
another was selected, the apostle anticipates such curiosity, by calling
the appointed period *the fullness of times,* the fit and proper season,
as he also did in a former epistle. (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>.md)
Let human presumption restrain itself, and, in judging of the succession
of events, let it bow to the providence of God. The same lesson is
taught by the word *dispensation,* for by the judgment of God the lawful
administration of all events is regulated.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p27"></span>*That he might gather together in one.*
In the old translation it is rendered *(*<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>*instaurare) restore;* to which Erasmus has
added *(*<span id="iv.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>*summatim) comprehensively.* I
have chosen to abide closely by the meaning of the Greek word,
ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι,  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) because it
is more agreeable to the context. The meaning appears to me to be, that
out of Christ all things were disordered, and that through him they have
been restored to order. And truly, out of Christ, what can we perceive
in the world but mere ruins? We are alienated from God by sin, and how
can we but present a broken and shattered aspect? The proper condition
of creatures is to keep close to God. Such a *gathering together*
(ἀνακεφαλαίωσις) as might bring us back to regular order, the apostle
tells us, has been made in Christ. Formed into one body, we are united
to God, and closely connected with each other. Without Christ, on the
other hand, the whole world is a shapeless chaos and frightful
confusion. We are brought into actual unity by Christ alone.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p29"></span>But why are heavenly beings included in
the number? The angels were never separated from God, and cannot be said
to have been scattered. Some explain it in this manner. Angels are said
to be *gathered together,* because men have become members of the same
society, are admitted equally with them to fellowship with God, and
enjoy happiness in common with them by means of this blessed unity. The
mode of expression is supposed to resemble one frequently used, when we
speak of a whole building as repaired, many parts of which were ruinous
or decayed, though some parts remained entire.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p30"></span>This is no doubt true; but what hinders
us from saying that the angels also have been *gathered together?* Not
that they were ever scattered, but their attachment to the service of
God is now perfect, and their state is eternal. What comparison is there
between a creature and the Creator, without the interposition of a
Mediator? So far as they are creatures, had it not been for the benefit
which they derived from Christ, they would have been liable to change
and to sin, and consequently their happiness would not have been
eternal. Who then will deny that both angels and men have been brought
back to a fixed order by the grace of Christ? Men had been lost, and
angels were not beyond the reach of danger. By *gathering* both into his
own body, Christ hath united them to God the Father, and established
actual harmony between heaven and earth.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p31"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p32"></span>**11.** *Through whom also we have
obtained an inheritance.* Hitherto he has spoken generally of all the
elect; he now begins to take notice of separate classes. When he says,
*WE have obtained,* he speaks of himself and of the Jews, or, perhaps
more correctly, of all who were the first fruits of Christianity; and
afterwards he comes to the Ephesians. It tended not a little to confirm
the faith of the Ephesian converts, that he associated them with himself
and the other believers, who might be said to be the first-born in the
church. As if he had said, “The condition of all godly persons is the
same with yours; for we who were first called by God owe our acceptance
to his eternal election.” Thus, he shews, that, from first to last, all
have obtained salvation by free grace, because they have been freely
adopted according to eternal election.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p33"></span>*Who worketh all things.* The
circumlocution employed in describing the Supreme Being deserves
attention. He speaks of Him as the sole agent, and as doing everything
according to His own will, so as to leave nothing to be done by man. In
no respect, therefore, are men admitted to share in this praise, as if
they brought anything of their own. God looks at nothing out of himself
to move him to elect them, for *the counsel of his own will* is the only
and actual cause of their election. This may enable us to refute the
error, or rather the madness, of those who, whenever they are unable to
discover the reason of God’s works, exclaim loudly against his design.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p34"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p35"></span>**12.** *That we should be to the praise
of his glory.* Here again he mentions the *final* cause of salvation;
for we must eventually become illustrations of the glory of God, if we
are nothing but vessels of his mercy. The word *glory,* by way of
eminence, (κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν) denotes, in a peculiar manner, that which
shines in the goodness of God; for there is nothing that is more
peculiarly his own, or in which he desires more to be glorified, than
goodness.

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**13.** In whom ye also *trusted*, after
that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom
also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of
promise,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**13.** In quo vos etiam, audito sermone
veritatis, Evangelio salutis vestrae; in quo etiam, postquam
credidistis, obsignati estis Spiritu promissionis sancto,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**14.** Which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Qui est arrhabo haereditatis
nostrae, in redemptionem acquisitae possessionis, in laudem gloriae
ejus.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** *In whom ye also.* He associates
the Ephesians with himself, and with the rest of those who were the
first fruits; for he says that they, in like manner, trusted in Christ.
His object is, to shew that both had the same faith; and therefore we
must supply the word *trusted* from the twelfth verse. He afterwards
states that they were brought to that hope by the preaching of the
gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>Two epithets are here applied to the
gospel, — *the word of truth,* and *the gospel of your salvation.* Both
deserve our careful attention. Nothing is more earnestly attempted by
Satan than to lead us either to doubt or to despise the gospel. Paul
therefore furnishes us with two shields, by which we may repel both
temptations. In opposition to every doubt, let us learn to bring forward
this testimony, that the gospel is not only certain truth, which cannot
deceive, but is, by way of eminence, (κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) *the word of
truth,* as if, strictly speaking, there were no truth but itself. If the
temptation be to contempt or dislike of the gospel, let us remember that
its power and efficacy have been manifested in bringing to us salvation.
The apostle had formerly declared that

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>“it is the power of God to salvation to
every one that believeth,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>but here he expresses more, for he
reminds the Ephesians that, having been made partakers of salvation,
they had learned this by their own experience. Unhappy they who weary
themselves, as the world generally does, in wandering through many
winding paths, neglecting the gospel, and pleasing themselves with wild
romances, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>“ever learning and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth,”  
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>[2Ti
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>or to find life! But happy they who have
embraced the gospel, and whose attachment to it is steadfast; for this,
beyond all doubt, is truth and life.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>*In whom also, after that ye believed.*
Having maintained that the gospel is certain, he now comes to the proof.
And what higher surety can be found than the Holy Spirit? “Having
denominated the gospel *the word of truth,* I will not prove it by the
authority of men; for you have the testimony of the Spirit of God
himself, who seals the truth of it in your hearts.” This elegant
comparison is taken from Seals, which among men have the effect of
removing doubt. Seals give validity both to charters and to testaments;
anciently, they were the principal means by which the writer of a letter
could be known; and, in short, a seal distinguishes what is true and
certain, from what is false and spurious. This office the apostle
ascribes to the Holy Spirit, not only here, but in another part of this
Epistle, (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>,) and in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>[2Co
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>.) Our minds never become so firmly
established in the truth of God as to resist all the temptations of
Satan, until we have been confirmed in it by the Holy Spirit. The true
conviction which believers have of the word of God, of their own
salvation, and of religion in general, does not spring from the judgment
of the flesh, or from human and philosophical arguments, but from the
sealing of the Spirit, who imparts to their consciences such certainty
as to remove all doubt. The foundation of faith would be frail and
unsteady, if it rested on human wisdom; and therefore, as preaching is
the instrument of faith, so the Holy Spirit makes preaching efficacious.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>But is it not the faith itself which is
here said to be sealed by the Holy Spirit? If so, faith goes before the
sealing. I answer, there are two operations of the Spirit in faith,
corresponding to the two parts of which faith consists, as it
enlightens, and as it establishes the mind. The commencement of faith is
knowledge: the completion of it is a firm and steady conviction, which
admits of no opposing doubt. Both, I have said, are the work of the
Spirit. No wonder, then, if Paul should declare that the Ephesians, who
received by faith the truth of the gospel, were confirmed in that faith
by the seal of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>*With that Holy Spirit of promise.* This
title is derived from the effect produced; for to him we owe it that the
promise of salvation is not made to us in vain. As God promises in his
word, “that he will be to us a Father,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>[2Co
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>,) so he gives to us the evidence of having
adopted us by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span>**14.** *Which is the earnest*  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) *of our inheritance.* This phrase is
twice used by Paul in another Epistle. (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>[2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md), [2 Cor.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>.) The metaphor is taken from bargains, in
which, when a pledge has been given and accepted, the whole is
confirmed, and no room is left for a change of mind. Thus, when we have
received the Spirit of God, his promises are confirmed to us, and no
dread is felt that they will be revoked. In themselves, indeed, the
promises of God are not weak; but, until we are supported by the
testimony of the Spirit, we never rest upon them with unshaken
confidence. The Spirit, then, is *the earnest of our inheritance* of
eternal life, *until the redemption,* that is, until the day of complete
redemption is arrived. So long as we are in this world, our warfare is
sustained by hope, and therefore this earnest is necessary; but when the
possession itself shall have been obtained, the necessity and use of the
earnest will then cease.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>The significance of a pledge lasts no
longer than till both parties have fulfilled the bargain; and,
accordingly, he afterwards adds, *ye are* *sealed to the day of
redemption,* (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>[Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>,) which means the day of judgment. Though
we are now redeemed by the blood of Christ, the fruit of that redemption
does not yet appear; for “every creature groaneth, desiring to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption. And not only they, but
ourselves also, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we
ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, *the
redemption* of our body;” for we have not yet obtained it, but by hope.
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20.2"></span>[Ro
8:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p20.2"></span>.) But we shall obtain it in reality, when
Christ shall appear to judgment. Such is the meaning of the word
*redemption* in the passage now quoted from the Epistle to the Romans,
and in a saying of our Lord,

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>“Look up, and lift up your heads, for
your redemption draweth nigh.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21.2"></span>[Lu
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>Περιποίησις, which we translate *the
possession obtained,* is not the kingdom of heaven, or a blessed
immortality, but the Church itself. This is added for their consolation,
that they might not think it hard to cherish their hope till the day of
Christ’s coming, or be displeased that they have not yet obtained the
promised inheritance; for such is the common lot of the whole Church.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span>*To the praise of his glory.* The word
*praise,* as in the twelfth verse, <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>[Eph
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>
signifies “making known.”  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) The
glory of God may sometimes be concealed, or imperfectly exhibited. But
in the Ephesians God had given proofs of his goodness, that his glory
might be celebrated and openly proclaimed. Those persons, therefore, who
slighted the calling of the Ephesians, might be charged with envying and
slighting the glory of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span>The frequent mention of the glory of God
ought not to be regarded as superfluous, for what is infinite cannot be
too strongly expressed. This is particularly true in commendations of
the Divine mercy, for which every godly person will always feel himself
unable to find adequate language. He will be more ready to utter, than
other men will be to hear, the expression of praise; for the eloquence
both of men and angels, after being strained to the utmost, falls
immeasurably below the vastness of this subject. We may likewise
observe, that there is not a more effectual method of shutting the
mouths of wicked men, than by shewing that our views tend to illustrate,
and theirs to obscure, the glory of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
1:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** Wherefore I also, after I heard of
your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Quapropter ego etiam, audita fide
quae apud vos est in Domino Iesu, et charitate erga omnes sanctos,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**16.** Cease not to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Non cesso gratias agere pro vobis,
memoriam vestri faciens in orationibus meis;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**17.** That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**17.** Ut Deus Domini nostri Iesu
Christi, Pater gloriae, det vobis Spiritum sapientiae et revelationis,
in agnitione ipsius,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**18.** The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and
what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>**18.** Illuminatos oculos mentis vestrae,
ut sciatis quae sit spes vocationis ipsius, et quae divitiae gloriae
haereditatis ejus in sanctis,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>**19.** And what *is* the exceeding
greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working
of his mighty power.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>**19.** Et quae superexcellens magnitudo
potentiae ejus erga nos, qui credidimus secundum efficaciam potentiae
roboris ejus.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>**15.** *Wherefore I also.* This
thanksgiving was not simply an expression of his ardent love to the
Ephesians. He congratulated them before God, that the opinion which he
had formed respecting them was highly favorable. Observe here, that
under *faith and love* Paul includes generally the whole excellence of
Christian character. He uses the expression, *faith in the Lord Jesus,*
 <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) because Christ is the aim and
object of faith. *Love* ought to embrace all men, but here the *saints*
are particularly mentioned; because love, when properly regulated,
begins with them, and is afterwards extended to all others. If our love
must have a view to God, the nearer any man approaches to God, the
stronger unquestionably must be his claims to our love.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>**16.** *Making mention of you.* To
thanksgiving, as his custom is, he adds prayer, in order to excite them
to additional progress. It was necessary that the Ephesians should
understand that they had entered upon the proper course. But it was
equally necessary that they should not turn aside to any new scheme of
doctrine, or become indifferent about proceeding farther; for nothing is
more dangerous than to be satisfied with that measure of spiritual
benefits which has been already obtained. Whatever, then, may be the
height of our attainments, let them be always accompanied by the desire
of something higher.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span>**17.** *That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ.* But what does Paul wish for the Ephesians? *The spirit of
wisdom,* and *the eyes of their understanding being enlightened.* And
did they not possess these? Yes; but at the same time they needed
increase, that, being endowed with a larger measure of the Spirit, and
being more and more enlightened, they might more clearly and fully hold
their present views. The knowledge of the godly is never so pure, but
that some dimness or obscurity hangs over their spiritual vision. But
let us examine the words in detail.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>*The God of our Lord Jesus Christ.* The
Son of God became man in such a manner, that God was his God as well as
ours.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span>“I ascend,” says he, “to my Father, and
your Father; and to my God, and your God.” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>And the reason why he is our God, is,
that he is the God of Christ, whose members we are. Let us remember,
however, that this relates to his human nature; so that his subjection
takes nothing away from his eternal godhead.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>*The Father of glory.* This title springs
from the former; for God’s glory, as a Father, consists in subjecting
his Son to our condition, that, through him, he might be our God. *The
Father of glory* is a well-known Hebrew idiom for *The glorious Father*.
There is a mode of pointing and reading this passage, which I do not
disapprove, and which connects the two clauses in this manner: *That
God, the glorious Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, may give to you.*

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span>*The Spirit of wisdom and revelation* is
here put, by a figure of speech, (metonymy,) for the grace which the
Lord bestows upon us by his own Spirit. But let it be observed, that the
gifts of the Spirit are not the gifts of nature. Till the Lord opens
them, *the eyes of our heart* are blind. Till the Spirit has become our
instructor, all that we know is folly and ignorance. Till the Spirit of
God has made it known to us by a secret revelation, the knowledge of our
Divine calling exceeds the capacity of our own minds.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25"></span>*In the knowledge of him.* This might
also be read, *In the* *knowledge of himself*. Both renderings agree
well with the context, for he that knows the Son knows also the Father;
but I prefer the former as more natively suggested by the Greek pronoun,
ἐν ἐπιγνώσει αὐτοῦ

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p27"></span>**18.** *The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened.* *The* *eyes of your heart* is the rendering of the
Vulgate, which is supported by some Greek manuscripts. The difference is
immaterial, for the Hebrews frequently employ it to denote the rational
powers of the soul, though more strictly, being the seat of the
affections, it means the will or desire; but I have preferred the
ordinary translation.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28"></span>*And what the riches.* A comparison,
suggested by its excellence, reminds us how unfit we are to receive this
elevated knowledge; for the power of God is no small matter. This great
power, he tells us, had been exerted, and in a very extraordinary
manner, towards the Ephesians, who were thus laid under constant
obligations to follow his calling. By thus extolling the grace of God
toward themselves, he intended to check every tendency to despise or
dislike the duties of the Christian life. But the splendid encomiums
which he pronounces on faith convey to us also this instruction, that it
is so admirable a work and gift of God, that no language can do justice
to its excellence. Paul is not in the habit of throwing out hyperboles
without discrimination; but when he comes to treat of a matter which
lies so far beyond this world as faith does, he raises our minds to the
admiration of heavenly power.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p30"></span>**19.** *According to the working.* Some
consider this clause as referring solely to the word *believe*, which
comes immediately before it; but I rather view it as an additional
statement, tending to heighten the greatness of the power, as a
demonstration, or, if you prefer it, an instance and evidence of the
efficacy of the power. The repetition of the word *power,* (δυνάμεως)
has the appearance of being superfluous; but in the former case it is
restricted to one class, — in the next, it has a general application.
Paul, we find, never thinks that he can say enough in his descriptions
of the Christian calling. And certainly the power of God is wonderfully
displayed, when we are brought from death to life, and when, from being
the children of hell, we become the children of God and heirs of eternal
life.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p31"></span>Foolish men imagine that this language is
absurdly hyperbolical; but godly persons, who are engaged in daily
struggles with inward corruption, have no difficulty in perceiving that
not a word is here used beyond what is perfectly just. As the importance
of the subject cannot be too strongly expressed, so our unbelief and
ingratitude led Paul to employ this glowing language. We never form
adequate conceptions of the treasure revealed to us in the gospel; or,
if we do, we cannot persuade ourselves that it is possible for us to do
so, because we perceive nothing in us that corresponds to it, but
everything the reverse. Paul’s object, therefore, was not only to
impress the Ephesians with a deep sense of the value of Divine grace,
but also to give them exalted views of the glory of Christ’s kingdom.
That they might not be cast down by a view of their own unworthiness, he
exhorts them to consider the power of God; as if he had said, that their
regeneration was no ordinary work of God, but was an astonishing
exhibition of his power.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p32"></span>*According to the efficacy of the power
of his strength.* There are three words here, on which we may make a
passing remark. We may view *strength* as the root, — *power* as the
tree, — and *efficacy* as the fruit, or the stretching out of the Divine
arm which terminates in action.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>**20.** Which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set *him* at his own right hand in the
heavenly *places*,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**20.** Quam exeruit in Christo, dum illum
excitavit a mortuis, et sedere fecit in dextera sua, in coelestibus;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span>**21.** Far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only
in this world, but also in that which is to come;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**21.** Super omnem principatum, et
potestatem, et virtutem, et dominationem, et omne nomen quod nominatur,
non tantum in seculo hoc, sed etiam in futuro;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**22.** And hath put all *things* under his
feet, and gave him *to be* the head over all *things* to the church,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**22.** Et omnia subjecit pedibus ejus, et
ipsum posuit caput super omnia Ecclesiae,

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**23.** Which is his body, the fullness of
him that filleth all in all.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p9"></span>**23.** Quae est corpus ejus et
complementum ejus, qui omnia in omnibus adimplet.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.v-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p12"></span>**20.** *Which he wrought in Christ.* The
Greek verb is ἐνέργησεν, from which ἐνέργεια is derived. It might run
thus, *According to* *the efficacy which he effected*. But the
translation which I have given conveys the same meaning, and is less
harsh.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p13"></span>With the greatest propriety does he enjoin
us to contemplate this power in Christ; for in us it is hitherto
concealed. “My strength,” says he, “is made perfect in weakness.” (<span
id="iv.ii.v-p13.1"></span>[2Co
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.v-p13.1"></span>..md)
In what do we excel the children of the world but in this, that our
condition appears to be somewhat worse than theirs? Though sin does not
reign, it continues to dwell in us, and death is still strong. Our
blessedness, which lies in hope, is not perceived by the world. The
power of the Spirit is a thing unknown to flesh and blood. A thousand
distresses, to which we are daily liable, render us more despised than
other men.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p14"></span>Christ alone, therefore, is the mirror in
which we can contemplate that which the weakness of the cross hinders
from being clearly seen in ourselves. When our minds rise to a confident
anticipation of righteousness, salvation, and glory, let us learn to
turn them to Christ. We still lie under the power of death; but he,
raised from the dead by heavenly power, has the dominion of life. We
labor under the bondage of sin, and, surrounded by endless vexations,
are engaged in a hard warfare, (<span id="iv.ii.v-p14.1"></span>[1Ti
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.v-p14.1"></span>;.md)
but he, sitting at the right hand of the Father, exercises the highest
government in heaven and earth, and triumphs gloriously over the enemies
whom he has subdued and vanquished. We lie here mean and despised; but
to him has been “given a name” (<span id="iv.ii.v-p14.2"></span>[Php
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.v-p14.2"></span>,.md)
which angels and men regard with reverence, and devils and wicked men
with dread. We are pressed down here by the scantiness of all our
comforts: but he has been appointed by the Father to be the sole
dispenser of all blessings. For these reasons, we shall find our
advantage in directing our views to Christ, that in him, as in a mirror,
we may see the glorious treasures of Divine grace, and the unmeasurable
greatness of that power, which has not yet been manifested in ourselves.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p15"></span>*And set him at his own right hand.* This
passage shews plainly, if any one does, what is meant by *the right hand
of God*. It does not mean any particular place, but the power which the
Father has bestowed on Christ, that he may administer in his name the
government of heaven and earth. It is idle, therefore, to inquire why
Stephen *saw him standing,* (<span id="iv.ii.v-p15.1"></span>[Ac
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)<span id="iv.ii.v-p15.1"></span>,.md)
while Paul describes him as *sitting* at God’s right hand. The
expression does not refer to any bodily posture, but denotes the highest
royal power with which Christ has been invested. This is intimated by
what immediately follows, *far above all principality and power:* for
the whole of this description is added for the purpose of explaining
what is meant by *the right hand.*

<span id="iv.ii.v-p16"></span>God the Father is said to have raised
Christ to “his right hand,” because he has made him to share in his
government, because by him he exerts all his power; the metaphor being
borrowed from earthly princes, who confer the honor of sitting along
with themselves on those whom they have clothed with the highest
authority. As the right hand of God fills heaven and earth, it follows
that the kingdom and power of Christ are equally extensive. It is in
vain, therefore, to attempt to prove that, because Christ sitteth at the
right hand of God, he dwells in heaven alone. His human nature, it is
true, resides in heaven, and not in earth; but that argument is foreign
to the purpose. The expression which follows, *in heavenly places,* does
not at all imply that the right hand of God is confined to heaven, but
directs us to contemplate the heavenly glory amidst which our Lord Jesus
dwells, the blessed immortality which he enjoys, and the dominion over
angels to which he has been exalted.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p17"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p18"></span>**21.** *Far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion.* All these names, there can be no doubt,
are applied to angels, who are so denominated, because, by means of
them, God exercises his power, and might, and dominion. He permits them
to share, as far as is competent to creatures, what belongs to himself,
and even gives to them his own name; for we find that they are called
<span id="iv.ii.v-p18.1"></span>םיהלא, (*elohim,*) *gods*. From the
diversity of names we conclude that there are various orders of angels;
but to attempt to settle these with exactness, to fix their number, or
determine their ranks, would not merely discover foolish curiosity, but
would be rash, wicked, and dangerous.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p19"></span>But why did he not simply call them
Angels? I answer, it was to convey exalted views of the glory of Christ
that Paul employed those lofty titles. As if he had said, “There is
nothing so elevated or excellent, by whatever name it may be named, that
is not subject to the majesty of Christ.” There was an ancient
superstition, prevalent both among Jews and Gentiles, falsely
attributing to angels many things, in order to draw away their minds
from God himself, and from the true Mediator. Paul constantly labors to
prevent this imaginary lustre of angels from dazzling the eyes of men,
or obscuring the brightness of Christ; and yet his utmost exertions
could not prevent “the wiles of the devil”(<span
id="iv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>[Eph
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>.md)
from succeeding in this matter. Thus we see how the world, through a
superstitious dread of angels, departed from Christ. It was indeed the
unavoidable consequence of the false opinions entertained respecting
angels, that the pure knowledge of Christ disappeared.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p20"></span>*Above every name that is named.* *Name*
is here taken for largeness, or excellence; and *to be named* means to
enjoy celebrity and praise. *The age that is to come* is expressly
mentioned, to point out that the exalted rank of Christ is not temporal,
but eternal; and that it is not limited to this world, but shines
illustriously in the kingdom of God. For this reason, too, Isaiah calls
him, (<span id="iv.ii.v-p20.1"></span>[Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.v-p20.1"></span>,.md)
*The Father of the future age*. In short, the glories of men and angels
are made to hold an inferior place, that the glory of Christ, unequalled
and unapproached, may shine above them all.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p21"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p22"></span>**22.** *And gave him to be the head.* He
was made the head of the Church, on the condition that he should have
the administration of all things. The apostle shews that it was not a
mere honorary title, but was accompanied by the entire command and
government of the universe. The metaphor of a *head* denotes the highest
authority. I am unwilling to dispute about a name, but we are driven to
it by the base conduct of those who flatter the Romish idol. Since
Christ alone is called “the head,” all others, whether angels or men,
must rank as members; so that he who holds the highest place among his
fellows is still one of the members of the same body. And yet they are
not ashamed to make an open avowal that the Church will be ἀκέφαλον,
*without a head*, if it has not another head on earth besides Christ. So
small is the respect which they pay to Christ, that, if he obtain
undivided that honor which his Father has bestowed upon him, the Church
is supposed to be disfigured. This is the basest sacrilege. But let us
listen to the Apostle, who declares that the Church is His body, and,
consequently, that those who refuse to submit to Him are unworthy of its
communion; for on Him alone the unity of the Church depends.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p23"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p24"></span>**23.** *The fullness of him that filleth
all in all.* This is the highest honor of the Church, that, until He is
united to us, the Son of God reckons himself in some measure imperfect.
What consolation is it for us to learn, that, not until we are along
with him, does he possess all his parts, or wish to be regarded as
complete! Hence, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, \[<span
id="iv.ii.v-p24.1"></span>[1Co
12:12-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.v-p24.1"></span>\] when the apostle discusses largely the
metaphor of a human body, he includes under the single name of Christ
the whole Church.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p25"></span>*That filleth all in all.* This is added
to guard against the supposition that any real defect would exist in
Christ, if he were separated from us. His wish to be filled, and, in
some respects, made perfect in us, arises from no want or necessity; for
all that is good in ourselves, or in any of the creatures, is the gift
of his hand; and his goodness appears the more remarkably in raising us
out of nothing, that he, in like manner, may dwell and live in us. There
is no impropriety in limiting the word *all* to its application to this
passage; for, though all things are regulated by the will and power of
Christ, yet the subject of which Paul particularly speaks is the
spiritual government of the Church. There is nothing, indeed, to hinder
us from viewing it as referring to the universal government of the
world; but to limit it to the case in hand is the more probable
interpretation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc41013.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p21"></span> “As to the accumulation of cognate terms
in <span id="iv.ii.i-p21.1"></span>εὐλογητὸς εὐλογήσας and <span
id="iv.ii.i-p21.2"></span>εὐλογία, it may be observed, that in
composition such was by the ancients, especially the early writers,
rather sought after as a beauty than avoided as a blemish.” —
Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc41013.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p40"></span> “This could not have been obtained by our
own strength, had he not by his eternal decree, adopted us into the
right and privilege of children, and that by Jesus Christ, to whom he
hath so closely united us by faith and love, that we have become his
members, and are one with him, and obtain (by communication with him)
what was not due to our own merits.” — Erasmus.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc41013.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p42"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.i-p42.1"></span>Il nous
a rendu agreables.” “He hath made us acceptable.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc41013.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p43"></span> “The original word, <span
id="iv.ii.i-p43.1"></span>ἐχαρίτωσεν, ‘he hath made us accepted,’ is not
used by any profane authors; however, the sense of it is plain. It is
used in the angel’s salutation to the Virgin Mary, ‘Hail, thou that art
highly favored;’ and that the word there is rightly rendered, is plain
from the reason which the angel himself gives, ‘Thou hast found favor
with God.’ (<span id="iv.ii.i-p43.2"></span>[Luke
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#030)<span id="iv.ii.i-p43.2"></span>.md)
So that the plain meaning of the word, and the true rendering of it in
the place before us, is, not as we have translated it, ‘made us
accepted,’ but ‘highly favored us.’” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc41013.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>Comme
si le sang de Christ sechoit et perdoit sa vigueur.” “As if the blood of
Christ were dried up, and lost its force.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc41013.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21"></span> <span id="iv.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>ἧς
ἐπερίσσευσεν — “<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21.2"></span>ἧς for <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p21.3"></span>ἧ, (by a common Grecism, in which the
relative is attracted by the antecedent,) if, at least, we take <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p21.4"></span>ἐπερίσσευσεν, with many modern expositors, in
a *neuter* sense, ‘in which he hath renewed his abundant goodness to
us;’ but if, with the ancient and some modern ones, in an active sense,
‘to make to abound,’ (as in <span id="iv.ii.ii-p21.5"></span>[2 Cor.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015.md), [2 Cor.
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21.5"></span>,.md)
the <span id="iv.ii.ii-p21.6"></span>ἧς will be for <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p21.7"></span>ἥν, meaning, ‘which he has bountifully
bestowed upon us.'“ — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc41013.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p28"></span> ‘<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>᾿Ανακεφαλαιώσασθαι “I have compared this word
with <span id="iv.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>συγκεφαλαιοῦσθαι in the writings
of Xenophon, so as to bring out this sense, that ‘to Christ, as the
Head, all things are subject.’ I am confirmed in this opinion by
Chrysostom, who explains it in this manner: <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p28.3"></span>μίαν κεφαλὴν ἅπασιν ἐπέθηκε τὸ κατὰ σάρκα
Χριστόν, ‘he hath given to all one head, Christ according to the flesh.’
Polybius. also uses <span id="iv.ii.ii-p28.4"></span>συγκεφαλαιοῦσθαι,
instead of <span id="iv.ii.ii-p28.5"></span>ἀνακεφαλαιοῦσθαι. So that it
is evident that those two words are employed indiscriminately.” —
Raphelius.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc41013.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span> “The original word <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>ἀρ᾿ῥαβών, seems properly to denote the first
part of the price that is paid in any contract, as an earnest and
security of the remainder, and which, therefore, is not taken back, but
kept till the residue is paid to complete the whole sum. And thus it
differs from a pledge, which is somewhat given for the security of a
contract, but redeemed and restored, when the contract is completed; but
it must be owned that the word is used to denote both an earnest and a
pledge, and in either sense it is very properly applied to the Holy
Spirit of promise.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc41013.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>*Louange* yci se prend comme ci devant pour
la publication et manifestation.” “Here, as formerly, ‘praise’ denotes
proclamation and manifestation.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc41013.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span> “‘Having heard of your faith in the Lord
Jesus.’ It is wrong to argue from this expression, with Olshausen and De
Wette, that the apostle had no personal knowledge of the persons whom he
addressed. This was an early surmise, for it is referred to by
Theodoret. Some, says he, have supposed that the apostle wrote to the
Ephesians, <span id="iv.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>ὡς μηδέπω θεασάμενος αὐτοὺς,
(as having never seen them.) But some years had elapsed since the
apostle had visited Ephesus, and seen the Ephesian Church; and might he
not refer to reports of their Christian steadfastness which had reached
him? Nay, his use of the word may signify that such intelligence had
been repeatedly brought to him.” — Eadie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc41014.md)
