[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc41015)  [Next](cc41017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** I therefore, the prisoner of the
Lord,) beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called,

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Obsecro itaque vos, ego vinctus in
Domino, ut digne ambuletis vocatione, ad quam vocati estis,

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span>**2.** With all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love;

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Cum omni humilitate et mansuetudine,
cum tolerantia sufferentes vos invicem in dilectione,

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>**3.** Endeavouring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Studentes servare unitatem Spiritus,
in vinculo pacis.

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>**4.** *There is* one body, and one Spirit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Unum corpus et unus spiritus;
quemadmodum vocati estis in una spe vocationis vestrae.

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>**5.** One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Unus Dominus, una fides, unum
baptisma.

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span>**6.** One God and Father of all, who *is*
above all, and through all, and in you all.

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span>**6.** Unus Deus et Pater omnium, qui est
super omnia, et per omnia, (*vel, super omnes et per omnes,*) et in
omnibus vobis.

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span>The three remaining chapters consist
entirely of practical exhortations. Mutual agreement is the first
subject, in the course of which a discussion is introduced respecting
the government of the church, as having been framed by our Lord for the
purpose of maintaining unity among Christians.

<span id="iv.v.i-p17"></span>**1.** *I therefore, the prisoner of the
Lord.* His imprisonment, which might have been supposed more likely to
render him despised, is appealed to, as we have already seen, for a
confirmation of his authority. It was the seal of that embassy with
which he had been honored. Whatever belongs to Christ, though in the
eyes of men it may be attended by ignominy, ought to be viewed by us
with the highest regard. The apostle’s prison is more truly venerable
than the splendid retinue or triumphal chariot of kings.

<span id="iv.v.i-p18"></span>*That ye may walk worthy.* This is a
general sentiment, a sort of preface, on which all the following
statements are founded. He had formerly illustrated *the calling with
which they were called,*  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) and
now reminds them that they must live in obedience to God, in order that
they may not be unworthy of such distinguished grace.

<span id="iv.v.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p21"></span>**2.** *With all humility*. He now descends
to particulars, and first of all he mentions *humility* The reason is,
that he was about to enter on the subject of Unity, to which humility is
the first step. This again produces *meekness,* which disposes us to
bear with our brethren, and thus to preserve that unity which would
otherwise be broken a hundred times in a day. Let us remember,
therefore, that, in cultivating brotherly kindness, we must begin with
humility. Whence come rudeness, pride, and disdainful language towards
brethren? Whence come quarrels, insults, and reproaches? Come they not
from this, that every one carries his love of himself, and his regard to
his own interests, to excess? By laying aside haughtiness and a desire
of pleasing ourselves, we shall become meek and gentle, and acquire that
moderation of temper which will overlook and forgive many things in the
conduct of our brethren. Let us carefully observe the order and
arrangement of these exhortations. It will be to no purpose that we
inculcate forbearance till the natural fierceness has been subdued, and
mildness acquired; and it will be equally vain to discourse of
*meekness,* till we have begun with *humility.*

<span id="iv.v.i-p22"></span>*Forbearing one another in love.* This
agrees with what is elsewhere taught, that “love suffereth long and is
kind.” (<span id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>[1Co
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>..md)
Where love is strong and prevalent, we shall perform many acts of mutual
forbearance.

<span id="iv.v.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p24"></span>**3.** *Endeavoring to keep the unity of
the Spirit.* With good reason does he recommend forbearance, as tending
to promote the unity of the Spirit. Innumerable offenses arise daily,
which might produce quarrels, particularly when we consider the extreme
bitterness of man’s natural temper. Some consider *the unity of the
Spirit* to mean that spiritual unity which is produced in us by the
Spirit of God. There can be no doubt that He alone makes us “of one
accord, of one mind,” (<span id="iv.v.i-p24.1"></span>[Php
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002)<span id="iv.v.i-p24.1"></span>,.md)
and thus makes us one; but I think it more natural to understand the
words as denoting harmony of views. This unity, he tells us, is
maintained by *the bond of peace;* for disputes frequently give rise to
hatred and resentment. We must live at peace, if we would wish that
brotherly kindness should be permanent amongst us.

<span id="iv.v.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p26"></span>**4.** *There is one body.*  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) He proceeds to show more fully in how
complete a manner Christians ought to be united. The union ought to be
such that we shall form *one body and one soul.* These words denote the
whole man. We ought to be united, not in part only, but in body and
soul. He supports this by a powerful argument, *as ye have been called
in one hope of your calling.* We are called to one inheritance and one
life; and hence it follows, that we cannot obtain eternal life without
living in mutual harmony in this world. One Divine invitation being
addressed to all, they ought to be united in the same profession of
faith, and to render every kind of assistance to each other. Oh, were
this thought deeply impressed upon our minds, that we are subject to a
law which no more permits the children of God to differ among themselves
than the kingdom of heaven to be divided, how earnestly should we
cultivate brotherly kindness! How should we dread every kind of
animosity, if we duly reflected that all who separate us from brethren,
estrange us from the kingdom of God! And yet, strangely enough, while we
forget the duties which brethren owe to each other, we go on boasting
that we are the sons of God. Let us learn from Paul, that none are at
all fit for that inheritance who are not one body and one spirit.

<span id="iv.v.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p29"></span>**5.** *One Lord.* In the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, he employs the word *Lord,* to denote simply the
government of God.

<span id="iv.v.i-p30"></span>“There are differences of administration,
but the same Lord.”  
(<span id="iv.v.i-p30.2"></span>[1Co
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.i-p30.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.v.i-p31"></span>In the present instance, as he shortly
afterwards makes express mention of the Father, he gives this
appellation strictly to Christ, who has been appointed by the Father to
be *our Lord,* and to whose government we cannot be subject, unless we
are of one mind. The frequent repetition of the word *one* is emphatic.
*Christ* cannot be divided. *Faith* cannot be rent. There are not
various *baptisms,* but one which is common to all. *God* cannot cease
to be *one,* and unchangeable. It cannot but be our duty to cherish holy
unity, which is bound by so many ties. Faith, and baptism, and God the
Father, and Christ, ought to unite us, so as almost to become one man.
All these arguments for unity deserve to be pondered, but cannot be
fully explained. I reckon it enough to take a rapid glance at the
apostle’s meaning, leaving the full illustration of it to the preachers
of the gospel. The unity of *faith,* which is here mentioned, depends on
the one, eternal truth of God, on which it is founded.

<span id="iv.v.i-p32"></span>*One baptism,* This does not mean that
Christian baptism is not to be administered more than once, but that one
baptism is common to all; so that, by means of it, we begin to form one
body and one soul. But if that argument has any force, a much stronger
one will be founded on the truth, that the Father, and Son, and Spirit,
are one God; for it is one baptism, which is celebrated in the name of
the Three Persons. What reply will the Arians or Sabellians make to this
argument? Baptism possesses such force as to make us one; and in
baptism, the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit, is
invoked. Will they deny that one Godhead is the foundation of this holy
and mysterious unity? We are compelled to acknowledge, that the
ordinance of baptism proves the existence of Three Persons in one Divine
essence.

<span id="iv.v.i-p33"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p34"></span>**6.** *One God and Father of all.* This is
the main argument, from which all the rest flow. How comes it that we
are united by faith, by baptism, or even by the government of Christ,
but because God the Father, extending to each of us his gracious
presence, employs these means for gathering us to himself? The two
phrases, ἐπὶ πάντων καὶ διὰ πάντων, may either mean, *above all and
through all* Things, or *above all* *and through all* Men. Either
meaning will apply sufficiently well, or rather, in both cases, the
meaning will be the same. Although God by his power upholds, and
maintains, and rules, all things, yet Paul is not now speaking of the
universal, but of the spiritual government which belongs to the church.
By the Spirit of sanctification, God spreads himself through all the
members of the church, embraces all in his government, and dwells in
all; but God is not inconsistent with himself, and therefore we cannot
but be united to him into one body.

<span id="iv.v.i-p35"></span>This spiritual unity is mentioned by our
Lord.

<span id="iv.v.i-p36"></span>“Holy Father, keep through thine own name
those whom thou hast, given me, that they may be one as we are.”  
(<span id="iv.v.i-p36.2"></span>[Joh
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011)<span id="iv.v.i-p36.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.v.i-p37"></span>This is true indeed, in a general sense,
not only of all men but of all creatures. “In him we live, and move, and
have our being.” (<span id="iv.v.i-p37.1"></span>[Ac
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iv.v.i-p37.1"></span>..md)
And again, “Do not I fill heaven and earth, saith the Lord?” (<span
id="iv.v.i-p37.2"></span>[Jer
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024)<span id="iv.v.i-p37.2"></span>..md)
But we must attend to the connection in which this passage stands. Paul
is now illustrating the mutual relation of believers, which has nothing
in common either with wicked men or with inferior animals. To this
relation we must limit what is said about God’s government and presence.
It is for this reason, also, that the apostle uses the word *Father,*
which applies only to the members of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**7.** But unto every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Unicuique autem nostrum data est
gratia; secundum mensuram donationis Christi.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Wherefore he saith, When he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Propterea dicit: Postquam ascendit
in altum, captivam duxit captivitatem, et dedit dona hominibus. (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ps
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)<span id="iv.v.ii-p5.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>**9.** (Now that he ascended, what is it
but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Illud autem Ascendit, quid est, nisi
quod etiam descenderat prius in inferiores partes terrae?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>**10.** He that descended is the same also
that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Qui descendit, ipse est etiam qui
ascendit super omnes coelos, ut impleret omnia.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ii-p11"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p12"></span>**7.** *But to every one.* He now
describes the manner in which God establishes and preserves among us a
mutual relation. No member of the body of Christ is endowed with such
perfection as to be able, without the assistance of others, to supply
his own necessities. A certain proportion is allotted to each; and it is
only by communicating with each other, that all enjoy what is sufficient
for maintaining their respective places in the body. The diversity of
gifts is discussed in another Epistle, and very nearly with the same
object.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p13"></span>“There are diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit”  
(<span id="iv.v.ii-p13.2"></span>[1Co
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)<span id="iv.v.ii-p13.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p14"></span>Such a diversity, we are there taught, is
so far from injuring, that it tends to promote and strengthen, the
harmony of believers.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p15"></span>The meaning of this verse may be thus
summed up. “On no one has God bestowed all things. Each has received a
certain measure. Being thus dependent on each other, they find it
necessary to throw their individual gifts into the common stock, and
thus to render mutual aid.” The words *grace* and *gift* remind us that,
whatever may be our attainments, we ought not to be proud of them,
because they lay us under deeper obligations to God. These blessings are
said to be *the gift of Christ;* for, as the apostle, first of all,
mentioned the Father, so his aim, as we shall see, is to represent all
that we are, and all that we have, as gathered together in Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *Therefore he saith.* To serve the
purpose of his argument, Paul has departed not a little from the true
meaning of this quotation. Wicked men charge him with having made an
unfair use of Scripture. The Jews go still farther, and, for the sake of
giving to their accusations a greater air of plausibility, maliciously
pervert the natural meaning of this passage. What is said of God, is
applied by them to David or to the people. “David, or the people,” they
say, “ascended on high, when, in consequence of many victories, they
rose superior to their enemies.” But a careful examination of the Psalm
will convince any reader that the words, *he ascended up on high,* are
applied strictly to God alone.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p18"></span>The whole Psalm may be regarded as an
ἐπίνικιον, a song of triumph, which David sings to God on account of the
victories which he had obtained; but, taking occasion from the narrative
of his own exploits, he makes a passing survey of the astonishing
deliverances which the Lord had formerly wrought for his people. His
object is to shew, that we ought to contemplate in the history of the
Church the glorious power and goodness of God; and among other things he
says, *Thou hast ascended on high.* (<span id="iv.v.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p18.1"></span>.) The flesh is apt to imagine that God
remains idle and asleep, when he does not openly execute his judgments.
To the view of men, when the Church is oppressed, God is in some manner
humbled; but, when he stretches out his avenging arm for her
deliverance, he then appears to rouse himself, and to ascend his throne
of judgment.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p19"></span>“Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep,
and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. And he smote his
enemies in the hinder parts; he put them to a perpetual reproach.”  
(<span id="iv.v.ii-p19.2"></span>[Ps.
78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065.md),
[66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066)<span id="iv.v.ii-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p20"></span>This mode of expression is sufficiently
common and familiar; and, in short, the deliverance of the Church is
here called the *ascension* of God.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p21"></span>Perceiving that it is a song of triumph,
in which David celebrates all the victories which God had wrought for
the salvation of his Church, Paul very properly quoted the account given
of God’s ascension, and applied it to the person of Christ. The noblest
triumph which God ever gained was when Christ, after subduing sin,
conquering death, and putting Satan to flight, rose majestically to
heaven, that he might exercise his glorious reign over the Church.
Hitherto there is no ground for the objection, that Paul has applied
this quotation in a manner inconsistent with the design of the Psalmist.
The continued existence of the Church is represented by David to be a
manifestation of the Divine glory. But no ascension of God more
triumphant or memorable will ever occur, than that which took place when
Christ was carried up to the right hand of the Father, that he might
rule over all authorities and powers, and might become the everlasting
guardian and protector of his people.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p22"></span>*He led captivity captive.* *Captivity* is
a collective noun for *captive enemies;* and the plain meaning is, that
God reduced his enemies to subjection, which was more fully accomplished
in Christ than in any other way. He has not only gained a complete
victory over the devil, and sin, and death, and all the power of hell, —
but out of rebels he forms every day “a willing people,” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p22.1"></span>[Ps
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p22.1"></span>,) when he subdues by his word the obstinacy
of our flesh. On the other hand, his enemies — to which class all wicked
men belong — are held bound by chains of iron, and are restrained by his
power from exerting their fury beyond the limits which he shall assign.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p23"></span>*And gave gifts to men.* There is rather
more difficulty in this clause; for the words of the Psalm are, “thou
hast *received* gifts for men,” while the apostle changes this
expression into *gave gifts,* and thus appears to exhibit an opposite
meaning. Still there is no absurdity here; for Paul does not always
quote the exact words of Scripture, but, after referring to the passage,
satisfies himself with conveying the substance of it in his own
language. Now, it is clear that the *gifts* which David mentions were
not *received* by God for himself, but for his people; and accordingly
we are told, in an earlier part of the Psalm, that “the spoil” had been
“divided” among the families of Israel. (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p23.1"></span>[Ps
68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p23.1"></span>.) Since therefore the intention of
*receiving* was to *give* gifts, Paul can hardly be said to have
departed from the substance, whatever alteration there may be in the
words.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p24"></span>At the same time, I am inclined to a
different opinion, that Paul purposely changed the word, and employed
it, not as taken out of the Psalm, but as an expression of his own,
adapted to the present occasion. Having quoted from the Psalm a few
words descriptive of Christ’s ascension, he adds, in his own language,
*and gave gifts,* — for the purpose of drawing a comparison between the
greater and the less. Paul intends to shew, that this ascension of God
in the person of Christ was far more illustrious than the ancient
triumphs of the Church; because it is a more honorable distinction for a
conqueror to dispense his bounty largely to all classes, than to gather
spoils from the vanquished.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p25"></span>The interpretation given by some, that
Christ received from the Father what he would distribute to us, is
forced, and utterly at variance with the apostle’s purpose. No solution
of the difficulty, in my opinion, is more natural than this. Having made
a brief quotation from the Psalm, Paul took the liberty of adding a
statement, which, though not contained in the Psalm, is true in
reference to Christ — a statement, too, by which the ascension of Christ
is proved to be more illustrious, and more worthy of admiration, than
those ancient manifestations of the Divine glory which David enumerates.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p26"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p27"></span>**9.** *Now that he ascended.* Here again
the slanderers exclaim, that Paul’s reasoning is trifling and childish.
“Why does he attempt to make those words apply to a real ascension of
Christ, which were figuratively spoken about a manifestation of the
Divine glory? Who does not know that the word *ascend* is metaphorical?
The conclusion, *that he also descended first,* has therefore no
weight.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p28"></span>I answer, Paul does not here reason in the
manner of a logician, as to what necessarily follows, or may be
inferred, from the words of the prophet. He knew that what David spake
about God’s ascension was metaphorical. But neither can it be denied,
that the expression bears a reference to some kind of humiliation on the
part of God which had previously existed. It is this humiliation which
Paul justly infers from the declaration that God had ascended. And at
what time did God descend lower than when Christ *emptied himself?* (
᾿Αλλ ᾿ ἑαυτὸν ἐκένωσε, <span id="iv.v.ii-p28.1"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.v.ii-p28.1"></span>..md)
If ever there was a time when, after appearing to lay aside the
brightness of his power, God ascended gloriously, it was when Christ was
raised from our lowest condition on earth, and received into heavenly
glory.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p29"></span>Besides, it is not necessary to inquire
very carefully into the literal exposition of the Psalm, since Paul
merely alludes to the prophet’s words, in the same manner as, on another
occasion, he accommodates to his own subject a passage taken from the
writings of Moses. “The righteousness which is of faith speaketh in this
manner, Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is,
to bring Christ down from above;) or, who shall descend into the deep
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.”) (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p29.1"></span>[Rom. 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.v.ii-p29.1"></span>
<span id="iv.v.ii-p29.2"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p29.2"></span>.) But the appropriateness of the application
which Paul makes of the passage to the person of Christ is not the only
ground on which it must be defended. Sufficient evidence is afforded by
the Psalm itself, that this ascription of praise relates to Christ’s
kingdom. Not to mention other reasons which might be urged, it contains
a distinct prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p30"></span>*Into the lower parts of the earth.*
 <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) These words mean nothing more
than the condition of the present life. To torture them so as to make
them mean purgatory or hell, is exceedingly foolish. The argument taken
from the comparative degree, “the *lower* parts,” is quite untenable. A
comparison is drawn, not between one part of the earth and another, but
between the whole earth and heaven; as if he had said, that from that
lofty habitation Christ descended into our deep gulf.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p32"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p33"></span>**10.** *That ascended up far above all
heavens;* that is, beyond this created world. When Christ is said to be
in heaven, we must not view him as dwelling among the spheres and
numbering the stars. Heaven denotes a place higher than all the spheres,
which was assigned to the Son of God after his resurrection.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) Not that it is literally a place
beyond the world, but we cannot speak of the kingdom of God without
using our ordinary language. Others, again, considering that the
expressions, *above all heavens,* and *ascension into heaven,* are of
the same import, conclude that Christ is not separated from us by
distance of place. But one point they have overlooked. When Christ is
placed above the heavens, or in the heavens, all that surrounds the
earth — all that lies beneath the sun and stars, beneath the whole frame
of the visible world — is excluded.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p35"></span>*That he might fill all things.* *To fill*
often signifies to Finish, and it might have that meaning here; for, by
his ascension into heaven, Christ entered into the possession of the
authority given to him by the Father, that he might rule and govern all
things. But a more beautiful view, in my opinion, will be obtained by
connecting two meanings which, though apparently contradictory, are
perfectly consistent. When we hear of the ascension of Christ, it
instantly strikes our minds that he is removed to a great distance from
us; and so he actually is, with respect to his body and human presence.
But Paul reminds us, that, while he is removed from us in bodily
presence, he *fills all things* by the power of his Spirit. Wherever the
right hand of God, which embraces heaven and earth, is displayed, Christ
is spiritually present by his boundless power; although, as respects his
body, the saying of Peter holds true, that

<span id="iv.v.ii-p36"></span>“the heaven must receive him until the
times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth
of all his holy prophets since the world began.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p36.1"></span>[Ac
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)<span id="iv.v.ii-p36.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p37"></span>By alluding to the seeming contradiction,
the apostle has added not a little beauty to his language. *He
ascended;* but it was that he, who was formerly bounded by a little
space, *might fill all things* But did he not fill them before? In his
divine nature, I own, he did; but the power of his Spirit was not so
exerted, nor his presence so manifested, as after he had entered into
the possession of his kingdom.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p38"></span>“The Holy Ghost was not yet given,  
because Jesus was not yet glorified.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p38.2"></span>[Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="iv.v.ii-p38.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p39"></span>And again,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p40"></span>“It is expedient for you that I go away;
for, if I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p40.1"></span>[Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="iv.v.ii-p40.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p41"></span>In a word, when he began to sit at the
right hand of the Father, he began also to fill all things.  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md)

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>**11.** And he gave some, apostles; and
some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Et ipse dedit alios quidem
apostolos, alios autem prophetas, alios vero evangelistas, alios
pastores et doctores,

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span>**12.** For the perfecting of the saints,
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Ad instaurationem sanctorum, in
opus ministerii, in aedificationem corporis Christi,

<span id="iv.v.iii-p6"></span>**13.** Till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Usquedum occurramus omnes in
unitatem fidei, et cognitionis Filii Dei, in virum perfectum, in
mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi;

<span id="iv.v.iii-p8"></span>**14.** That we *henceforth* be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, *and* cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p9"></span>**14.** Ne amplius simus pueri, qui
fluctuemur, et circumferamur quovis vento doctrinae, per aestum hominum,
per versutiam ad circumventionem imposturae.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iii-p11"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p12"></span>He returns to explain the distribution of
gifts, and illustrates at greater length what he had slightly hinted,
that out of this variety arises unity in the church, as the various
tones in music produce sweet melody. The meaning may be thus summed up.
“The external ministry of the word is also commended, on account of the
advantages which it yields. Certain men appointed to that office, are
employed in preaching the gospel. This is the arrangement by which the
Lord is pleased to govern his church, to maintain its existence, and
ultimately to secure its highest perfection.”

<span id="iv.v.iii-p13"></span>It may excite surprise, that, when the
gifts of the Holy Spirit form the subject of discussion, Paul should
enumerate offices instead of gifts. I reply, when men are called by God,
gifts are necessarily connected with offices. God does not confer on men
the mere name of Apostles or Pastors, but also endows them with gifts,
without which they cannot properly discharge their office. He whom God
has appointed to be an apostle does not bear an empty and useless title;
for the divine command, and the ability to perform it, go together. Let
us now examine the words in detail.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p14"></span>**11.** *And he gave.* The government of
the church, by the preaching of the word, is first of all declared to be
no human contrivance, but a most sacred ordinance of Christ. The
apostles did not appoint themselves, but were chosen by Christ; and, at
the present day, true pastors do not rashly thrust themselves forward by
their own judgment, but are raised up by the Lord. In short, the
government of the church, by the ministry of the word, is not a
contrivance of men, but an appointment made by the Son of God. As his
own unalterable law, it demands our assent. They who reject or despise
this ministry offer insult and rebellion to Christ its Author. It is
himself who *gave* them; for, if he does not raise them up, there will
be none. Another inference is, that no man will be fit or qualified for
so distinguished an office who has not been formed and moulded by the
hand of Christ himself. To Christ we owe it that we have ministers of
the gospel, that they abound in necessary qualifications, that they
execute the trust committed to them. All, all is his *gift.*

<span id="iv.v.iii-p15"></span>*Some, apostles.* The different names and
offices assigned to different persons take their rise from that
diversity of the members which goes to form the completeness of the
whole body, — every ground of emulation, and envy, and ambition, being
thus removed. If every person shall display a selfish character, shall
strive to outshine his neighbor, and shall disregard all concerns but
his own, — or, if more eminent persons shall be the object of envy to
those who occupy a lower place, — in each, and in all of these cases,
gifts are not applied to their proper use. He therefore reminds them,
that the gifts bestowed on individuals are intended, not to be held for
their personal and separate interests, but to be employed for the
benefit of the whole. Of the offices which are here enumerated, we have
already spoken at considerable length,  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) and shall now say nothing more than
the exposition of the passage seems to demand. Five classes of
office-bearers are mentioned, though on this point, I am aware, there is
a diversity of opinion; for some consider the two last to make but one
office. Leaving out of view the opinions of others, I shall proceed to
state my own.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p17"></span>I take the word *apostles* not in that
general sense which the derivation of the term might warrant, but in its
own peculiar signification, for those highly favored persons whom Christ
exalted to the highest honor. Such were the twelve, to whose number Paul
was afterwards added. Their office was to spread the doctrine of the
gospel throughout the whole world, to plant churches, and to erect the
kingdom of Christ. They had not churches of their own committed to them;
but the injunction given to all of them was, to preach the gospel
wherever they went.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p18"></span>Next to them come the *Evangelists,* who
were closely allied in the nature of their office, but held an inferior
rank. To this class belonged Timothy and others; for, while Paul
mentions them along with himself in the salutations of his epistles, he
does not speak of them as his companions in the apostleship, but claims
this name as peculiarly his own. The services in which the Lord employed
them were auxiliary to those of the apostles, to whom they were next in
rank.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p19"></span>To these two classes the apostle adds
*Prophets.* By this name some understand those persons who possessed the
gift of predicting future events, among whom was Agabus. (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p19.1"></span>[Acts
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md), [Acts
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p19.1"></span>.) But, for my own part, as doctrine is the
present subject, I would rather define the word *prophets,* as on a
former occasion,  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) to mean
distinguished interpreters of prophecies, who, by a remarkable gift of
revelation, applied them to the subjects which they had occasion to
handle; not excluding, however, the gift of prophecy, by which their
doctrinal instruction was usually accompanied.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p21"></span>*Pastors and Teachers* are supposed by
some to denote one office, because the apostle does not, as in the other
parts of the verse, say, *and some, pastors; and some, teachers;* but,
τοὺς δὲ, ποιμένας καὶ διδασκάλους, *and some, pastors and teachers*
Chrysostom and Augustine are of this opinion; not to mention the
commentaries of Ambrose, whose observations on the subject are truly
childish and unworthy of himself. I partly agree with them, that Paul
speaks indiscriminately of pastors and teachers as belonging to one and
the same class, and that the name *teacher* does, to some extent, apply
to all *pastors.* But this does not appear to me a sufficient reason why
two offices, which I find to differ from each other, should be
confounded. Teaching is, no doubt, the duty of all pastors; but to
maintain sound doctrine requires a talent for interpreting Scripture,
and a man may be a *teacher* who is not qualified to preach.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p22"></span>*Pastors,* in my opinion, are those who
have the charge of a particular flock; though I have no objection to
their receiving the name of *teachers,* if it be understood that there
is a distinct class of *teachers,* who preside both in the education of
pastors and in the instruction of the whole church. It may sometimes
happen, that the same person is both a pastor and a teacher, but the
duties to be performed are entirely different.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p23"></span>It deserves attention, also, that, of the
five offices which are here enumerated, not more than the last two are
intended to be perpetual. Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets were
bestowed on the church for a limited time only, — except in those cases
where religion has fallen into decay, and evangelists are raised up in
an extraordinary manner, to restore the pure doctrine which had been
lost. But without Pastors and Teachers there can be no government of the
church.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p24"></span>Papists have some reason to complain,
that their primacy, of which they boast so much, is openly insulted in
this passage. The subject of discussion is the unity of the church. Paul
inquires into the means by which its continuance is secured, and the
outward expressions by which it is promoted, and comes at length to the
government of the church. If he knew a primacy which had a fixed
residence, was it not his duty, for the benefit of the whole church, to
exhibit one ministerial head placed over all the members, under whose
government we are collected into one body? We must either charge Paul
with inexcusable neglect and foolishness, in leaving out the most
appropriate and powerful argument, or we must acknowledge that this
primacy is at variance with the appointment of Christ. In truth, he
plainly rejects it as without foundation, when he ascribes superiority
to Christ alone, and represents the apostles, and all the pastors, as
indeed inferior to Him, but associated on an equal level with each
other. There is no passage of Scripture by which that tyrannical
hierarchy, regulated by one earthly head, is more completely overturned.
Paul has been followed by Cyprian, who gives a short and clear
definition of what forms the only lawful monarchy in the church. There
is, he says, one *bishoprick,* which unites the various parts into one
whole. This *bishoprick* he claims for Christ alone, leaving the
administration of it to individuals, but in a united capacity, no one
being permitted to exalt himself above others.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p25"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p26"></span>**12.** *For the renewing of the saints.*
In this version I follow Erasmus, not because I prefer his view, but to
allow the reader an opportunity of comparing his version with the
Vulgate and with mine, and then choosing for himself. The old
translation was, (<span id="iv.v.iii-p26.1"></span>*ad*
*consummationem,*) *for the completeness.* The Greek word employed by
Paul is καταρτισμός, which signifies literally the *adaptation* of
things possessing symmetry and proportion; just as, in the human body,
the members are united in a proper and regular manner; so that the word
comes to signify *perfection.* But as Paul intended to express here a
just and orderly arrangement, I prefer the word (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p26.2"></span>*constitutio*) *settlement* or
*constitution,* taking it in that sense in which a commonwealth, or
kingdom, or province, is said to be *settled,* when confusion gives
place to the regular administration of law.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p27"></span>*For the work of the ministry.* God might
himself have performed this work, if he had chosen; but he has committed
it to the *ministry* of men. This is intended to anticipate an
objection. “Cannot the church be constituted and properly arranged,
without the instrumentality of men?” Paul asserts that a *ministry* is
required, because such is the will of God.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p28"></span>*For the edifying of the body of Christ.*
This is the same thing with what he had formerly denominated the
*settlement* or *perfecting of the saints.* Our true completeness and
perfection consist in our being united in the one body of Christ. No
language more highly commendatory of the ministry of the word could have
been employed, than to ascribe to it this effect. What is more excellent
than to produce the true and complete perfection of the church? And yet
this work, so admirable and divine, is here declared by the apostle to
be accomplished by the external ministry of the word. That those who
neglect this instrument should hope to become perfect in Christ is utter
madness. Yet such are the fanatics, on the one hand, who pretend to be
favored with secret revelations of the Spirit, — and proud men, on the
other, who imagine that to them the private reading of the Scriptures is
enough, and that they have no need of the ordinary ministry of the
church.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p29"></span>If the edification of the church proceeds
from Christ alone, he has surely a right to prescribe in what manner it
shall be edified. But Paul expressly states, that, according to the
command of Christ, no real union or perfection is attained, but by the
outward preaching. We must allow ourselves to be ruled and taught by
men. This is the universal rule, which extends equally to the highest
and to the lowest. The church is the common mother of all the godly,
which bears, nourishes, and brings up children to God, kings and
peasants alike; and this is done by the ministry. Those who neglect or
despise this order choose to be wiser than Christ. Woe to the pride of
such men! It is, no doubt, a thing in itself possible that divine
influence alone should make us perfect without human assistance. But the
present inquiry is not what the power of God can accomplish, but what is
the will of God and the appointment of Christ. In employing human
instruments for accomplishing their salvation, God has conferred on men
no ordinary favor. Nor can any exercise be found better adapted to
promote unity than to gather around the common doctrine — the standard
of our General.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p31"></span>**13.** *Till we all come.* Paul had
already said, that by the ministry of men the church is regulated and
governed, so as to attain the highest perfection. But his commendation
of the ministry is now carried farther. The necessity for which he had
pleaded is not confined to a single day, but continues to the end. Or,
to speak more plainly, he reminds his readers that the use of the
ministry is not temporal, like that of a school for children,
(παιδαγωγία, <span id="iv.v.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ga
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p31.1"></span>,) but constant, so long as we remain in the
world. Enthusiasts dream that the use of the ministry ceases as soon as
we have been led to Christ. Proud men, who carry their desire of
knowledge beyond what is proper, look down with contempt on the
elementary instruction of childhood. But Paul maintains that we must
persevere in this course till all our deficiencies are supplied; that we
must make progress till death, under the teaching of Christ alone; and
that we must not be ashamed to be the scholars of the church, to which
Christ has committed our education.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p32"></span>*In the unity of the faith.* But ought
not the unity of the faith to reign among us from the very commencement?
It does reign, I acknowledge, among the sons of God, but not so
perfectly as to make them *come* *together.* Such is the weakness of our
nature, that it is enough if every day brings some nearer to others, and
all nearer to Christ. The expression, *coming together,* denotes that
closest union to which we still aspire, and which we shall never reach,
until this garment of the flesh, which is always accompanied by some
remains of ignorance and weakness, shall have been laid aside.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p33"></span>*And of the knowledge of the Son of God.*
This clause appears to be added for the sake of explanation. It was the
apostle’s intention to explain what is the nature of true faith, and in
what it consists; that is, when the Son of God is known. To the Son of
God alone faith ought to look; on him it relies; in him it rests and
terminates. If it proceed farther, it will disappear, and will no longer
be faith, but a delusion. Let us remember, that true faith confines its
view so entirely to Christ, that it neither knows, nor desires to know,
anything else.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p34"></span>*Into a perfect man.* This must be read
in immediate connection with what goes before; as if he had said, “What
is the highest perfection of Christians? How is that perfection
attained?” Full manhood is found in Christ; for foolish men do not, in a
proper manner, seek their perfection in Christ. It ought to be held as a
fixed principle among us, that all that is out of Christ is hurtful and
destructive. Whoever is a man in Christ, is, in every respect, a perfect
man.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p35"></span>*The AGE of fullness* means — full or
mature age. No mention is made of old age, for in the Christian progress
no place for it is found. Whatever becomes old has a tendency to decay;
but the vigor of this spiritual life is continually advancing.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p36"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p37"></span>**14.** *That we may be no more
children.* Having spoken of that perfect manhood, towards which we are
proceeding throughout the whole course of our life, he reminds us that,
during such a progress, we ought not to resemble children. An
intervening period is thus pointed out between childhood and man’s
estate. Those are “children” who have not yet advanced a step in the way
of the Lord, but who still hesitate, — who have not yet determined what
road they ought to choose, but move sometimes in one direction and
sometimes in another, always doubtful, always wavering. Those, again,
who are thoroughly founded in the doctrine of Christ, though not yet
perfect, have so much wisdom and vigor as to choose properly, and
proceed steadily, in the right course. Thus we find that the life of
believers, marked by a constant desire and progress towards those
attainments which they shall ultimately reach, bears a resemblance to
youth. At no period of this life are we men. But let not such a
statement be carried to the other extreme, as if there were no progress
beyond childhood. After being born to Christ, we ought to grow, so as
“not to be children in understanding.” (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p37.2"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p37.2"></span>.) Hence it appears what kind of Christianity
the Popish system must be, when the pastors labor, to the utmost of
their power, to keep the people in absolute infancy.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p38"></span>*Tossed to and fro, and carried about.*
The distressing hesitation of those who do not place absolute reliance
on the word of the Lord, is illustrated by two striking metaphors. The
first is taken from small ships, exposed to the fury of the billows in
the open sea, holding no fixed course, guided neither by skill nor
design, but hurried along by the violence of the tempest. The next is
taken from straws, or other light substances, which are carried hither
and thither as the wind drives them, and often in opposite directions.
Such must be the changeable and unsteady character of all who do not
rest on the foundation of God’s eternal truth. It is their just
punishment for looking, not to God, but to men. Paul declares, on the
other hand, that faith, which rests on the word of God, stands unshaken
against all the attacks of Satan.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p39"></span>*By every wind of doctrine.* By a
beautiful metaphor, all the doctrines of men, by which we are drawn away
from the simplicity of the gospel, are called *winds* God gave us his
word, by which we might have placed ourselves beyond the possibility of
being moved; but, giving way to the contrivances of men, we are carried
about in all directions.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p40"></span>*By the cunning of men.* There will
always be impostors, who make insidious attacks upon our faith; but, if
we are fortified by the truth of God, their efforts will be unavailing.
Both parts of this statement deserve our careful attention. When new
sects, or wicked tenets, spring up, many persons become alarmed. But the
attempts of Satan to darken, by his falsehoods, the pure doctrine of
Christ, are at no time interrupted; and it is the will of God that these
struggles should be the trial of our faith. When we are informed, on the
other hand, that the best and readiest defense against every kind of
error is to bring forward that doctrine which we have learned from
Christ and his apostles, this surely is no ordinary consolation.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p41"></span>With what awful wickedness, then, are
Papists chargeable, who take away from the word of God everything like
certainty, and maintain that there is no steadiness of faith, but what
depends on the authority of men! If a man entertain any doubt, it is in
vain to bid him consult the word of God: he must abide by their decrees.
But we have embraced the law, the prophets, and the gospel. Let us
therefore confidently expect that we shall reap the advantage which is
here promised, — that all the impostures of men will do us no harm. They
will attack us, indeed, but they will not prevail. We are entitled, I
acknowledge, to look for the dispensation of sound doctrine from the
church, for God has committed it to her charge; but when Papists avail
themselves of the disguise of the church for burying doctrine, they give
sufficient proof that they have a diabolical synagogue.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p42"></span>The Greek word κυβεία, which I have
translated *cunning,* is taken from players at dice, who are accustomed
to practice many arts of deception. The words, ἐν πανουργίᾳ, *by
craftiness,* intimate that the ministers of Satan are deeply skilled in
imposture; and it is added, that they keep watch, in order to insnare,
(πρὸς τὴν μεθοδείαν τὢς πλάνης.) All this should rouse and sharpen our
minds to profit by the word of God. If we neglect to do so, we may fall
into the snares of our enemies, and endure the severe punishment of our
sloth.

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>**15.** But, speaking the truth in love,
may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, *even* Christ:

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Veritatem autem sectantes in
charitate, crescamus in eum per omnia, qui est caput, nempe Christum;

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span>**16.** From whom the whole body fitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh
increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in love.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Ex quo totum corpus compositum et
compactum per omnem juncturam subministrationis, secundum efficaciam in
mensura uniuscujusque partis, incrementum corporis facit in
aedificationem sui, in charitate.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iv-p7"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p8"></span>**15.** *But, speaking the truth.* Having
already said that we ought not to be children, destitute of reason and
judgment, he now enjoins us to *grow up in the truth.*  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) Though we have not arrived at man’s
estate, we ought at least, as we have already said, to be advanced
children. The truth of God ought to have such a firm hold of us, that
all the contrivances and attacks of Satan shall not draw us from our
course; and yet, as we have not hitherto attained full and complete
strength, we must make progress until death.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p10"></span>He points out the design of this progress,
that Christ may be *the head*, “that in all things he may have the
pre-eminence,” (<span id="iv.v.iv-p10.1"></span>[Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="iv.v.iv-p10.1"></span>,.md)
and that in him alone we may grow in vigor or in stature. Again, we see
that no man is excepted; all are enjoined to be subject, and to take
their own places in the body.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p11"></span>What aspect then does Popery present, but
that of a crooked, deformed person? Is not the whole symmetry of the
church destroyed, when one man, acting in opposition to the head,
refuses to be reckoned one of the members? The Papists deny this, and
allege that the Pope is nothing more than a ministerial head. But such
cavils do them no service. The tyranny of their idol must be
acknowledged to be altogether inconsistent with that order which Paul
here recommends. In a word, a healthful condition of the church requires
that Christ alone “must increase,” and all others “must decrease.”
(<span id="iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>[Joh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>..md)
Whatever increase we obtain must be regulated in such a manner, that we
shall remain in our own place, and contribute to exalt the head.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p12"></span>When he bids us give heed to the truth *in
love,* he uses the preposition *in*, (ἐν,) like the corresponding Hebrew
preposition <span id="iv.v.iv-p12.1"></span>ב, (*beth*,) as signifying
*with*, — *speaking the truth With love*  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) If each individual, instead of
attending exclusively to his own concerns, shall desire mutual
intercourse, there will be agreeable and general progress. Such, the
Apostle assures us, must be the nature of this harmony, that men shall
not be suffered to forget the claims of truth, or, disregarding them, to
frame an agreement according to their own views. This proves the
wickedness of the Papists, who lay aside the word of God, and labor to
force our compliance with their decisions.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p14"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p15"></span>**16.** *From whom the whole body.* All
our increase should tend to exalt more highly the glory of Christ. This
is now proved by the best possible reason. It is he who supplies all our
wants, and without whose protection we cannot be safe. As the root
conveys sap to the whole tree, so all the vigor which we possess must
flow to us from Christ. There are three things here which deserve our
attention. The first is what has now been stated. All the life or health
which is diffused through the members flows from the head; so that the
members occupy a subordinate rank. The second is, that, by the
distribution made, the limited share of each renders the communication
between all the members absolutely necessary. The third is, that,
without mutual love, the health of the body cannot be maintained.
Through the members, as canals, is conveyed from the head all that is
necessary for the nourishment of the body. While this connection is
upheld, the body is alive and healthy. Each member, too, has its own
proper share, — *according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part.*

<span id="iv.v.iv-p16"></span>Lastly, he shows that by love the church
is edified, — *to the edifying of itself in love.* This means that no
increase is advantageous, which does not bear a just proportion to the
whole body. That man is mistaken who desires his own separate growth. If
a leg or arm should grow to a prodigious size, or the mouth be more
fully distended, would the undue enlargement of those parts be otherwise
than injurious to the whole frame? In like manner, if we wish to be
considered members of Christ, let no man be anything for himself, but
let us all be whatever we are for the benefit of each other. This is
accomplished by love; and where it does not reign, there is no
“edification,” but an absolute scattering of the church.

<span id="iv.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p2"></span>**17.** This I say therefore, and testify in
the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the
vanity of their mind;

<span id="iv.v.v-p3"></span>**17.** Hoc ergo dico et testificor in
Domino, ne ambuletis amplius, quemadmodum et gentes reliquae ambulant,

<span id="iv.v.v-p4"></span>**18.** Having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart:

<span id="iv.v.v-p5"></span>**18.** In vanitate mentis suae, excaecatae
in intelligentia, alienatae a vita Dei propter ignorantiam, quae in
illis est, propter caecitatem cordis earum;

<span id="iv.v.v-p6"></span>**19.** Who, being past feeling, have given
themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness.

<span id="iv.v.v-p7"></span>**19.** Quae postquam dolore tangi
desierunt, seipsas tradiderunt lasciviae, ad perpetrandam omnem
immunditiam cum aviditate.

<span id="iv.v.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.v-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p10"></span>**17.** *This I say therefore.* That
government which Christ has appointed for the edification of his church
has now been considered. He next inquires what fruits the doctrine of
the gospel ought to yield in the lives of Christians; or, if you prefer
it, he begins to explain minutely the nature of that edification by
which doctrine ought to be followed.

<span id="iv.v.v-p11"></span>*That ye henceforth walk not in vanity.* He
first exhorts them to renounce the *vanity* of unbelievers, arguing from
its inconsistency with their present views. That those who have been
taught in the school of Christ, and enlightened by the doctrine of
salvation, should follow vanity, and in no respect differ from those
unbelieving and blind nations on whom no light of truth has ever shone,
would be singularly foolish. On this ground he very properly calls upon
them to demonstrate, by their life, that they had gained some advantage
by becoming the disciples of Christ. To impart to his exhortation the
greater earnestness, he beseeches them by the name of God, — *this I say
and testify in the Lord,*  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) —
reminding them, that, if they despised this instruction, they must one
day give an account.

<span id="iv.v.v-p13"></span>*As other Gentiles walk.* He means those
who had not yet been converted to Christ. But, at the same time, he
reminds the Ephesians how necessary it was that they should repent,
since by nature they resembled lost and condemned men. The miserable and
shocking condition of other nations is held out as the motive to a
change of disposition. He asserts that believers differ from
unbelievers; and points out, as we shall see, the causes of this
difference. With regard to the former, he accuses their mind of
*vanity:* and let us remember, that he speaks generally of all who have
not been renewed by the Spirit of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.v-p14"></span>*In the vanity of their mind.* Now, *the
mind* holds the highest rank in the human constitution, is the seat of
reason, presides over the will, and restrains sinful desires; so that
our theologians of the *Sorbonne* are in the habit of calling her the
Queen. But, Paul makes the *mind* to consist of nothing else than
vanity; and, as if he had not expressed his meaning strongly enough, he
gives no better title to her daughter, *the understanding.* Such is my
interpretation of the word διανοία; for, though it signifies the
thought, yet, as it is in the singular number, it refers to the thinking
faculty. Plato, about the close of his Sixth Book on a Republic, assigns
to διανοία an intermediate place between νόησις and πίστις but his
observations are so entirely confined to geometrical subjects, as not to
admit of application to this passage. Having formerly asserted that men
see nothing, Paul now adds, that they are blind in reasoning, even on
the most important subjects.

<span id="iv.v.v-p15"></span>Let men now go and be proud of free-will,
whose guidance is here marked by so deep disgrace. But experience, we
shall be told, is openly at variance with this opinion; for men are not
so blind as to be incapable of seeing anything, nor so vain as to be
incapable of forming any judgment. I answer, with respect to the kingdom
of God, and all that relates to the spiritual life, the light of human
reason differs little from darkness; for, before it has pointed out the
road, it is extinguished; and its power of perception is little else
than blindness, for ere it has reached the fruit, it is gone. The true
principles held by the human mind resemble sparks;  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) but these are choked by the depravity
of our nature, before they have been applied to their proper use. All
men know, for instance, that there is a God, and that it is our duty to
worship him; but such is the power of sin and ignorance, that from this
confused knowledge we pass all at once to an idol, and worship it in the
place of God. And even in the worship of God, it leads to great errors,
particularly in the first table of the law.

<span id="iv.v.v-p17"></span>As to the second objection, our judgment
does indeed agree with the law of God in regard to the mere outward
actions; but sinful desire, which is the source of everything evil,
escapes our notice. Besides, Paul does not speak merely of the natural
blindness which we brought with us from the womb, but refers also to a
still grosser blindness, by which, as we shall afterwards see, God
punishes former transgressions. We conclude with observing, that the
reason and understanding which men naturally possess, make them in the
sight of God without excuse; but, so long as they allow themselves to
live according to their natural disposition, they can only wander, and
fall, and stumble in their purposes and actions. Hence it appears in
what estimation and value false worship must appear in the sight of God,
when it proceeds from the gulf of vanity and the maze of ignorance.

<span id="iv.v.v-p18"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p19"></span>**18.** *Being alienated from the life of
God.* *The life of God* may either mean what is accounted life in the
sight of God, as in that passage,

<span id="iv.v.v-p20"></span>“they loved the praise of men more than
*the praise of God*,”  
(<span id="iv.v.v-p20.2"></span>[Joh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span id="iv.v.v-p20.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="iv.v.v-p21"></span>or, that life which God bestows on his
elect by the Spirit of regeneration. In both cases the meaning is the
same. Our ordinary life, as men, is nothing more than an empty image of
life, not only because it quickly passes, but also because, while we
live, our souls, not keeping close to God, are dead. There are three
kinds of life in this world. The first is animal life, which consists
only of motion and the bodily senses, and which we have in common with
the brutes; the second is human life, which we have as the children of
Adam; and the third is that supernatural life, which believers alone
obtain. And all of them are from God, so that each of them may be called
*the life of God.* As to the first, Paul, in his sermon at Athens, says,
(<span id="iv.v.v-p21.1"></span>[Ac
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iv.v.v-p21.1"></span>,.md)
“In him we live, and move, and have our being;” and the Psalmist says,

<span id="iv.v.v-p22"></span>“Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be
created; and thou wilt renew the face of the earth.” (<span
id="iv.v.v-p22.1"></span>[Ps
104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.v.v-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.v-p23"></span>Of the second Job says,

<span id="iv.v.v-p24"></span>“Thou hast granted me life, and thy
visitation hath preserved my spirit.” (<span
id="iv.v.v-p24.1"></span>[Job
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012)<span id="iv.v.v-p24.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.v-p25"></span>But the regeneration of believers is here
called, by way of eminence, *the life of God,* because then does God
truly live in us, and we enjoy his life, when he governs us by his
Spirit. Of this life all men who are not new creatures in Christ are
declared by Paul to be destitute. So long, then, as we remain in the
flesh, that is, in ourselves, how wretched must be our condition! We may
now form a judgment of all the moral virtues, as they are called; for
what sort of actions will that life produce which, Paul affirms, is not
the life of God? Before anything good can begin to proceed from us, we
must first be renewed by the grace of Christ. This will be the
commencement of a true, and, as the phrase is, a *vital* life.

<span id="iv.v.v-p26"></span>*On account of the ignorance that is in
them.* We ought to attend to the reason which is here assigned; for, as
the knowledge of God is the true life of the soul, so, on the contrary,
ignorance is the death of it. And lest we should adopt the opinion of
philosophers, that ignorance, which leads us into mistakes, is only an
incidental evil, Paul shews that it has its root *in the blindness of
their heart,* by which he intimates that it dwells in their very nature.
The first blindness, therefore, which covers the minds of men, is the
punishment of original sin; because Adam, after his revolt, was deprived
of the true light of God, in the absence of which there is nothing but
fearful darkness.

<span id="iv.v.v-p27"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p28"></span>**19.** *Who being past feeling.* The
account which had been given of natural depravity is followed by a
description of the worst of all evils, brought upon men by their own
sinful conduct. Having destroyed the sensibilities of the heart, and
allayed the stings of remorse, they abandon themselves to all manner of
iniquity. We are by nature corrupt and prone to evil; nay, we are wholly
inclined to evil. Those who are destitute of the Spirit of Christ give
loose reins to self-indulgence, till fresh offenses, producing others in
constant succession, bring down upon them the wrath of God. The voice of
God, proclaimed by an accusing conscience, still continues to be heard;
but, instead of producing its proper effects, appears rather to harden
them against all admonition. On account of such obstinacy, they deserve
to be altogether forsaken by God.

<span id="iv.v.v-p29"></span>The usual symptom of their having been thus
forsaken is — the insensibility to pain, which is here described —
*being past feeling*. Unmoved by the approaching judgment of God, whom
they offend, they go on at their ease, and fearlessly indulge without
restraint in the pleasures of sin. No shame is felt, no regard to
character is maintained. The gnawing of a guilty conscience, tormented
by the dread of the Divine judgment, may be compared to the porch of
hell; but such hardened security as this — is a whirlpool which swallows
up and destroys. As Solomon says,

<span id="iv.v.v-p30"></span>“When the wicked is come to the deep, he
despiseth it.”  
(<span id="iv.v.v-p30.2"></span>[Pr
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="iv.v.v-p30.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.v-p31"></span>Most properly, therefore, does Paul exhibit
that dreadful example of Divine vengeance, in which men forsaken by God
— having laid conscience to sleep, and destroyed all fear of the Divine
judgment, — in a word, *being past feeling,* — surrender themselves with
brutal violence to all wickedness. This is not universally the case.
Many even of the reprobate are restrained by God, whose infinite
goodness prevents the absolute confusion in which the world would
otherwise be involved. The consequence is, that such open lust, such
unrestrained intemperance, does not appear in all. It is enough that the
lives of some present such a mirror, fitted to awaken our alarm lest
anything similar should happen to ourselves.

<span id="iv.v.v-p32"></span>*Lasciviousness* (ἀσελγείᾳ) appears to me
to denote that wantonness with which the flesh indulges in intemperance
and licentiousness, when not restrained by the Spirit of God.
*Uncleanness* is put for scandalous enormities of every description. It
is added, *with greediness*. The Greek word πλεονεξία, which is so
translated, often signifies covetousness, (<span
id="iv.v.v-p32.1"></span>[Lu
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.v.v-p32.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.v.v-p32.2"></span>[2Pe
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.v-p32.2"></span>,.md)
and is so explained by some in this passage; but I cannot adopt that
view. Depraved and wicked desires being insatiable, Paul represents them
as attended and followed by *greediness*, which is the contrary of
moderation.

<span id="iv.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p2"></span>**20**. But ye have not so learned Christ;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p3"></span>**20.** Vos autem non ita didicistis
Christum;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p4"></span>**21.** If so be that ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:

<span id="iv.v.vi-p5"></span>**21.** Si quidem ipsum audistis, et in
ipso estis edocti, quemadmodum est veritas in Iesu;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p6"></span>**22.** That ye put off, concerning the
former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p7"></span>**22.** Ut deponatis, secundum pristinam
conversationem, Veterem hominem, qui corrumpitur secundum
concupiscentias erroris;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p8"></span>**23.** And be renewed in the spirit of
your mind;

<span id="iv.v.vi-p9"></span>**23.** Renovemini autem spiritu mentis
vestrae,

<span id="iv.v.vi-p10"></span>**24.** And that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p11"></span>**24.** Et induatis Novum hominem, qui
secundum Deum creatus est, in justitia et sanctitate veritatis.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.vi-p13"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p14"></span>**20.** *But ye have not.* He now draws a
contrast of a Christian life, so as to make it evident how utterly
inconsistent it is with the character of a godly man to defile himself
regardlessly with the abominations of the Gentiles. Because the Gentiles
walk in darkness, therefore they do not distinguish between right and
wrong; but those on whom the truth of God shines ought to live in a
different manner. That those to whom the vanity of the senses is a rule
of life, should yield themselves up to base lusts, is not surprising;
but the doctrine of Christ teaches us to renounce our natural
dispositions. He whose life differs not from that of unbelievers, has
learned nothing of Christ; for the knowledge of Christ cannot be
separated from the mortification of the flesh.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p16"></span>**21.** *If ye have heard him.* To excite
their attention and earnestness the more, he not only tells them that
they had *heard Christ,* but employs a still stronger expression, *ye
have been taught in him,* as if he had said, that this doctrine had not
been slightly pointed out, but faithfully delivered and explained.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p17"></span>*As the truth is in Jesus.* This contains
a reproof of that superficial knowledge of the gospel, by which many are
elated, who are wholly unacquainted with newness of life. They think
that they are exceedingly wise, but the apostle pronounces it to be a
false and mistaken opinion. There is a twofold knowledge of Christ, —
one, which is true and genuine, — and another, which is counterfeit and
spurious. Not that, strictly speaking, there are two kinds; but most men
falsely imagine that they know Christ, while they know nothing but what
is carnal. In another Epistle he says,

<span id="iv.v.vi-p18"></span>“If any man be in Christ, let him be a new
creature.”  
(<span id="iv.v.vi-p18.2"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.vi-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.vi-p19"></span>So here he affirms that any knowledge of
Christ, which is not accompanied by mortification of the flesh, is not
true and sincere.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p20"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p21"></span>**22.** *That ye put off.* He demands from
a Christian man repentance, or a new life, which he makes to consist of
self-denial and the regeneration of the Holy Spirit. Beginning with the
first, he enjoins us to lay aside, or *put off* the old man, employing
the metaphor of garments, which we have already had occasion to explain.
*The old man,* — as we have repeatedly stated, in expounding the sixth
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and other passages where it
occurs, — means the natural disposition which we bring with us from our
mother’s womb. In two persons, Adam and Christ, he describes to us what
may be called two natures. As we are first born of Adam, the depravity
of nature which we derive from him is called the *Old* man; and as we
are born again in Christ, the amendment of this sinful nature is called
the *New* man. In a word, he who desires to put off the old man must
renounce his nature. To suppose that the words *Old* and *New* contain
an allusion to the Old and New Testaments, is exceedingly
unphilosophical.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p22"></span>*Concerning the former conversation.* To
make it more evident that this exhortation to the Ephesians was not
unnecessary, he reminds them of their former life. “Before Christ
revealed himself to your minds, the old man reigned in you; and
therefore, if you desire to lay him aside, you must renounce your former
life.” *Which is corrupted.* He describes the old man from the fruits,
that is, from the wicked desires, which allure men to destruction; for
the word, *corrupt,* alludes to old age, which is closely allied to
corruption. Let us beware of considering *the deceitful lusts,* as the
Papists do, to mean nothing more than the gross and visible lusts, which
are generally acknowledged to be base. The word includes also those
dispositions which, instead of being censured, are sometimes applauded,
— such as ambition, cunning, and everything that proceeds either from
self-love or from want of confidence in God.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p23"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p24"></span>**23.** *And be renewed.* The second part
of the rule for a devout and holy life is to live, not in our own
spirit, but in the Spirit of Christ. But what is meant by — *the spirit
of your mind?* I understand it simply to mean, — *Be renewed,* not only
with respect to the inferior appetites or desires, which are manifestly
sinful, but with respect also to that part of the soul which is reckoned
most noble and excellent. And here again, he brings forward to view that
Queen which philosophers are accustomed almost to adore. There is an
implied contrast between *the spirit of our mind* and the Divine and
heavenly Spirit, who produces in us another and a new mind. How much
there is in us that is sound or uncorrupted may be easily gathered from
this passage, which enjoins us to correct chiefly the reason or *mind,*
in which we are apt to imagine that there is nothing but what is
virtuous and deserves commendation.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p25"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p26"></span>**24.** *And that ye put on the new man.*
All that is meant is, “Be renewed in the spirit, or, be renewed *within*
or *completely,* — beginning with the mind, which appears to be the part
most free from all taint of sin.” What is added about the creation, may
refer either to the first creation of man, or to the second creation,
which is effected by the grace of Christ. Both expositions will be true.
Adam was at first created after the image of God, and reflected, as in a
mirror, the Divine righteousness; but that image, having been defaced by
sin, must now be restored in Christ. The regeneration of the godly is
indeed — as we have formerly explained  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) — nothing else than the formation anew
of the image of God in them. There is, no doubt, a far more rich and
powerful manifestation of Divine grace in this second creation than in
the first; but our highest perfection is uniformly represented in
Scripture as consisting in our conformity and resemblance to God. Adam
lost the image which he had originally received, and therefore it
becomes necessary that it shall be restored to us by Christ. The design
contemplated by regeneration is to recall us from our wanderings to that
end for which we were created.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p28"></span>*In righteousness.* If *righteousness* be
taken as a general term for uprightness, *holiness* will be something
higher, or that purity which lies in being devoted to the service of
God. I am rather inclined to consider *holiness* as referring to the
first table, and *righteousness* to the second table, of the law, as in
the song of Zacharias,

<span id="iv.v.vi-p29"></span>“That we may serve him in *holiness and
righteousness*, all the days of our life.” (<span
id="iv.v.vi-p29.1"></span>[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074.md),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="iv.v.vi-p29.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.vi-p30"></span>Plato lays down the distinction correctly,
that *holiness* (ὁσιότης) lies in the worship of God, and that the other
part, *righteousness,* (δικαιοσύνη,) bears a reference to men. The
genitive, *of truth*, (τὢς αληθείας,) is put in the place of an
adjective, and refers to both terms; so that, while it literally runs,
*in righteousness and holiness of truth,* the meaning is, *in true
righteousness and* *holiness.* He warns us that both ought to be
sincere; because we have to do with God, whom it is impossible to
deceive.

<span id="iv.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p2"></span>**25.** Wherefore, putting away lying,
speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we are members one of
another.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p3"></span>**25.** Quare, deposito mendacio,
loquimini veritatem unusquisque cum proximo suo; quia sumus vicissim
inter nos membra.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p4"></span>**26.** Be ye angry, and sin not: let not
the sun go down upon your wrath:

<span id="iv.v.vii-p5"></span>**26.** Irascimini, et ne peccetis. (<span
id="iv.v.vii-p5.1"></span>[Ps 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.v.vii-p5.1"></span>.) Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram:

<span id="iv.v.vii-p6"></span>**27.** Neither give place to the devil.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p7"></span>**27.** Et ne detis locum diabolo.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p8"></span>**28.** Let him that stole steal no more:
but rather let him labor, working with *his* hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p9"></span>**28.** Qui furabatur, jam non furetur;
magis autem laboret, operando quod bonum est manibus, ut habeat quod
eroget opus habenti.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.vii-p11"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p12"></span>**25.** *Wherefore, putting away lying.*
From this head of doctrine, that is, from the righteousness of the new
man, all godly exhortations flow, like streams from a fountain; for if
all the precepts which relate to life were collected, yet, without this
principle, they would be of little value. Philosophers take a different
method; but, in the doctrine of godliness, there is no other way than
this for regulating the life. Now, therefore, he comes to lay down
particular exhortations, drawn from the general doctrine. Having
concluded from the truth of the gospel, that righteousness and holiness
ought to be true, he now argues from the general statement to a
particular instance, that *every man should speak truth with his
neighbour. Lying* is here put for every kind of deceit, hypocrisy, or
cunning; and *truth* for honest dealing. He demands that every kind of
communication between them shall be sincere; and enforces it by this
consideration, *for we are members one of another*. That *members*
should not agree among themselves, — that they should act in a deceitful
manner towards each other, is prodigious wickedness.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p13"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p14"></span>**26.** *Be ye angry, and sin not.*
Whether or not the apostle had in his eye a part of the fourth Psalm is
uncertain. The words used by him (᾿Οργίζεσθε καὶ υὴ ἁμαρτάνετε) occur in
the Greek translation, though the word ὀργίζεσθε, which is translated,
*be ye angry,* is considered by some to mean *tremble.*  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) The Hebrew verb <span
id="iv.v.vii-p15.2"></span>זגר (*ragaz*) signifies either to be agitated
by anger, or, to tremble. As to the passage of the Psalm, the idea of
*trembling* will be quite appropriate. “Do not choose to resemble
madmen, who rush fearlessly in any direction, but let the dread of being
accounted foolhardy keep you in awe.” The word sometimes signifies to
*strive* or *quarrel*, as, in that instance, (<span
id="iv.v.vii-p15.3"></span>[Ge
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.v.vii-p15.3"></span>,) “See that ye *fall not out* by the way;”
and accordingly, the Psalmist adds, “Commune with your own heart, and be
still,” — abstain from furious encounters.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p16"></span>In my opinion, Paul merely alludes to the
passage with the following view. There are three faults by which we
offend God in being angry. The first is, when our anger arises from
slight causes, and often from no cause whatever, or at least from
private injuries or offenses. The second is, when we go beyond the
proper bounds, and are hurried into intemperate excesses. The third is,
when our anger, which ought to have been directed against ourselves or
against sins, is turned against our brethren. Most appropriately,
therefore, did Paul, when he wished to describe the proper limitation of
anger, employ the well-known passage*, Be ye angry, and sin not.* We
comply with this injunction, if the objects of our anger are sought, not
in others, but in ourselves, — if we pour out our indignation against
our own faults. With respect to others, we ought to be angry, not at
their persons, but at their faults; nor ought we to be excited to anger
by private offenses, but by zeal for the glory of the Lord. Lastly, our
anger, after a reasonable time, ought to be allowed to subside, without
mixing itself with the violence of carnal passions.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p17"></span>*Let not the sun go down.* It is scarcely
possible, however, but that we shall sometimes give way to improper and
sinful passion, — so strong is the tendency of the human mind to what is
evil. Paul therefore suggests a second remedy, that we shall quickly
suppress our anger, and not suffer it to gather strength by continuance.
The first remedy was, *Be ye angry, and sin not;* but, as the great
weakness of human nature renders this exceedingly difficult, the next is
— not to cherish wrath too long in our minds, or allow it sufficient
time to become strong. He enjoins accordingly, *let not the sun go down
upon your wrath.* If at any time we happen to be angry, let us endeavor
to be appeased before the sun has set.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p18"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p19"></span>**27.** *Neither give place* (τῷ διαβόλῳ)
*to the devil.* I am aware of the interpretation which some give of this
passage. Erasmus, who translates it, “neither give place to the
Slanderer,” (<span id="iv.v.vii-p19.1"></span>*calumniatori,*) shews
plainly that he understood it as referring to malicious men. But I have
no doubt, Paul’s intention was, to guard us against allowing Satan to
take possession of our minds, and, by keeping in his hands this citadel,
to do whatever he pleases. We feel every day how impossible, or, at
least, how difficult it is to cure long-continued hatred. What is the
cause of this, but that, instead of resisting the devil, we yield up to
him the possession of our heart? Before the poison of hatred has found
its way into the heart, anger must be thoroughly dislodged.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p20"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p21"></span>**28.** *Let him that stole steal no
more.* This includes not merely the grosser thefts which are punished by
human laws, but those of a more concealed nature, which do not fall
under the cognizance of men, — every kind of depredation by which we
seize the property of others. But he does not simply forbid us to take
that property in an unjust or unlawful manner. He enjoins us to assist
our brethren, as far as lies in our power.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p22"></span>*That he may have to give to him that
needeth.* “Thou who formerly stolest must not only obtain thy
subsistence by lawful and harmless toil, but must give assistance to
others.” He is first required *to labor, working with his hands,* that
he may not supply his wants at the expense of his brethren, but may
support life by honorable labor. But the love which we owe to our
neighbor carries us much farther. No one must live to himself alone, and
neglect others. All must labor to supply each other’s necessities.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p23"></span>But a question arises, does Paul oblige
all men to labor with their hands? This would be excessively hard. I
reply, the meaning is plain, if it be duly considered. Every man is
forbidden to steal. But many people are in the habit of pleading want,
and that excuse is obviated by enjoining them *rather to labor* (μᾶλλον
δε κοπιάτω) with their hands. As if he had said, “No condition, however
hard or disagreeable, can entitle any man to do injury to another, or
even to refrain from contributing to the necessities of his brethren.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p24"></span>*The thing which is good.* This latter
clause, which contains an argument from the greater to the less, gives
no small additional strength to the exhortation. As there are many
occupations which do little to promote the lawful enjoyments of men, he
recommends to them to choose those employments which yield the greatest
advantage to their neighbors. We need not wonder at this. If those
trades which can have no other effect than to lead men into immorality,
were denounced by heathens — and Cicero among the number — as highly
disgraceful, would an apostle of Christ reckon them among the lawful
callings of God?

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span>**29.** Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p3"></span>**29.** Omnis sermo spurcus ex ore vestro
non procedat; sed si quis est bonus ad edificationem usus, ut det
gratiam audientibus.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p4"></span>**30.** And grieve not the Holy Spirit of
God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p5"></span>**30.** Et ne contristetis Spiritum
Sanctum Dei, quo obsignati estis in diem redemptionis.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p6"></span>**31.** Let all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all
malice.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p7"></span>**31.** Omnis amarulentia, et indignatio,
et ira, et clamor, et maledicentia, removeatur a vobis cum omni malitia.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.viii-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p10"></span>**29.** *No filthy speech.* He first
forbids believers to use any *filthy* language, including under this
name all those expressions which are wont to be employed for the purpose
of inflaming lust. Not satisfied with the removal of the vice, he
enjoins them to frame their discourse for edification. In another
Epistle he says, “Let your speech be seasoned with salt.” (<span
id="iv.v.viii-p10.1"></span>[Col
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p10.1"></span>.) Here a different phrase is employed, *if
any* (speech) *be good to the use of edifying,* which means simply, *if
it be useful.* The genitive, *of use,* may no doubt be viewed, according
to the Hebrew idiom, as put for an adjective, so that *for the
edification of use* (πρὸς οἰκοδομὴν τὢς χρείας) may mean *for useful
edification;* but when I consider how frequently, and in how extensive a
meaning, the metaphor of *edifying* occurs in Paul’s writings, I prefer
the former exposition. *The edification of use* will thus mean the
progress of our edification, for to edify is to carry forward. To
explain the manner in which this is done, he adds, *that it may impart
grace to the hearers,* meaning by the word *grace,* comfort, advice, and
everything that aids the salvation of the soul.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p11"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p12"></span>**30.** *And grieve not.* As the Holy
Spirit dwells in us, to him every part of our soul and of our body ought
to be devoted. But if we give ourselves up to aught that is impure, we
may be said to drive him away from making his abode with us; and, to
express this still more familiarly, human affections, such as joy and
grief, are ascribed to the Holy Spirit.  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) Endeavour that the Holy Spirit may
dwell cheerfully with you, as in a pleasant and joyful dwelling, and
give him no occasion for grief. Some take a different view of it, that
we grieve the Holy Spirit in others, when we offend by filthy language,
or, in any other way, godly brethren, who are led by the Spirit of God.
(<span id="iv.v.viii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p13.1"></span>.) Whatever is contrary to godliness is not
only disrelished by godly ears, but is no sooner heard than it produces
in them deep grief and pain. But that Paul’s meaning was different
appears from what follows.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p14"></span>*By whom ye are sealed.* As God has
sealed us by his Spirit, we grieve him when we do not follow his
guidance, but pollute ourselves by wicked passions. No language can
adequately express this solemn truth, that the Holy Spirit rejoices and
is glad on our account, when we are obedient to him in all things, and
neither think nor speak anything, but what is pure and holy; and, on the
other hand, is grieved, when we admit anything into our minds that is
unworthy of our calling. Now, let any man reflect what shocking
wickedness there must be in grieving the Holy Spirit to such a degree as
to compel him to withdraw from us. The same mode of speaking is used by
the prophet Isaiah, but in a different sense; for he merely says, that
they “vexed his Holy Spirit,” (<span id="iv.v.viii-p14.1"></span>[Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p14.1"></span>.) in the same sense in which we are
accustomed to speak of vexing the mind of a man. *By whom ye are
sealed.* The Spirit of God is the seal, by which we are distinguished
from the wicked, and which is impressed on our hearts as a sure evidence
of adoption.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p15"></span>*Unto the day of redemption,* — that is,
till God conduct us into the possession of the promised inheritance.
That day is usually called *the day of redemption,* because we shall
then be at length delivered out of all our afflictions. It is
unnecessary to make any observations on this phrase, in addition to what
have already been made in expounding <span
id="iv.v.viii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p15.1"></span>, and <span id="iv.v.viii-p15.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p15.2"></span>. In this passage, the word *sealed* may
have a different meaning from that which it usually bears, — that God
has impressed his Spirit as his mark upon us, that he may recognize as
his children those whom he perceives to bear that mark.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p16"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p17"></span>**31.** *Let all bitterness.* He again
condemns anger; but, on the present occasion, views in connection with
it those offenses by which it is usually accompanied, such as noisy
disputes and reproaches. Between *wrath and anger* (Θυμὸν καὶ ὀργὴν)
there is little difference, except that the former denotes the power,
and the latter the act; but here, the only difference is, that *anger*
is a more sudden attack. The correction of all the rest will be greatly
aided by the removal of *malice.* By this term he expresses that
depravity of mind which is opposed to humanity and justice, and which is
usually called *malignity.*

<span id="iv.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p2"></span>**32.** And be ye kind one to another,
tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake
hath forgiven you.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p3"></span>**32.** Sitis autem mutuo comes,
misericordes, condonantes vobis inter vos, quemadmodum et Deus vobis in
Christo condonavit.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p6"></span>**32.** *And be ye kind one to another.*
With *bitterness* he contrasts *kindness,* or gentleness of countenance,
language, and manners. And as this virtue will never reign in us, unless
attended by *compassion,* (ουμπάθεια,) he recommends to us to be
*tender-hearted* This will lead us not only to sympathize with the
distresses of our brethren, as if they were our own, but to cultivate
that true humanity which is affected by everything that happens to them,
in the same manner as if we were in their situation. The contrary of
this is the cruelty of those iron-hearted, barbarous men, by whom the
sufferings of others are beheld without any concern whatever.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p7"></span>*Forgiving one another.* The Greek word
here rendered *forgiving,* (χαριζόμενοι ἑαυτοῖς,) is supposed by to mean
beneficence. Erasmus, accordingly, renders it (<span
id="iv.v.ix-p7.1"></span>*largientes*) *bountiful.* Though the word
admits of that meaning, yet the context induces me to prefer the other
view, that we should be ready to *forgive* It may sometimes happen, that
men are *kind* and *tender-hearted,* and yet, when they receive improper
treatment, do not so easily forgive injuries. That those whose kindness
of heart in other respects disposes them to acts of humanity, may not
fail in their duty through the ingratitude of men, he exhorts them to
discover a readiness to lay aside resentment. To give his exhortation
the greater weight, he holds out the example of God, who has forgiven to
us, through Christ, far more than any mortal man can forgive to his
brethren.  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc41016.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="iv.v.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p19"></span> <span id="iv.v.i-p19.1"></span>Τὢς κλήσεως
ἧς ἐκλήθητε “Arrian, Epict. page 122, 1. 3, says, <span
id="iv.v.i-p19.2"></span>καταισχύνειν τὴν κλὢσιν ἣν κέκληκεν, ‘to
disgrace the calling with which he has called thee.’ He is speaking of a
person, who, when summoned to give his testimony, utters what is
contrary to that which was demanded or expected from him.” — Raphelius.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc41016.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iv.v.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p27"></span> “There are ancient medals now extant,
which have the figure of Diana on them, with this inscription, <span
id="iv.v.i-p27.1"></span>κοινὸν τὢς ᾿Ασίας, denoting that the cities of
Asia were one body or commonwealth. Thus also were all Christians of all
nations, Jews and Gentiles, under Christ.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc41016.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p31"></span> For ‘the lower parts of the earth,’ they
may possibly signify no more than the place beneath; as when our Savior
said, (<span id="iv.v.ii-p31.1"></span>[Joh
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023)<span id="iv.v.ii-p31.1"></span>,.md)
‘Ye are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of
this world;’ or as God spake by the prophet, ‘I will shew wonders in
heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath.’ Nay, they may well refer
to his incarnation, according to that of David, (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.2"></span>[Ps
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.2"></span>,) or to his burial. (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.3"></span>[Ps
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.3"></span>.)” — Pearson.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc41016.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p34"></span> “This was the place of which our Savior
spake to his disciples, ‘What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend
up where he was before?’ Had he been there before in body, it had been
no such wonder that he should have ascended thither again; but that his
body should ascend unto that place where the majesty of God was most
resplendent; that the flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, should
be seated far above all angels and archangels, all principalities and
powers, even at the right hand of God; this was that which Christ
propounded as worthy of their greatest admiration. Whatsoever heaven
there is higher than all the rest that are called heavens; whatsoever
sanctuary is holier than all which are called holies; whatsoever place
is of greatest dignity in all those courts above, into that place did he
ascend, where, in the splendor of his Deity, he was before he took upon
him our humanity.” — Pearson.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc41016.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p42"></span> “The deepest humiliation is followed by
the highest exaltation. From the highest heaven, than which nothing can
be higher, Christ descended to hell, than which nothing can be lower.
And on that account he deserved that he should be again carried up
beyond the boundaries of all the heavens, withdrawing from us the
presence of his body in such a manner, that from on high he might fill
all things with heavenly gifts, and, in a different manner, might now be
present with us more effectually than he was present while he dwelt with
us on earth.” — Erasmus.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc41016.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p16"></span> See Calvin on Corinthians, vol. 1 p.
401.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc41016.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p20"></span> See Calvin on Corinthians, vol. 1 p.
415.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc41016.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iv-p9.1"></span>
᾿Αληθεύοντες does not seem properly to denote so much ‘speaking the
truth,’ as ‘embracing and adhering to it;’ and, to render the Christian
perfect, he must add to this regard to truth, love, or universal
affection and benevolence. It was a noble saying of Pythagoras,
agreeable to this sentiment of our apostle, ‘These are the two loveliest
gifts of the gods to men, <span id="iv.v.iv-p9.2"></span>τό τε ἀληθεύειν
καὶ τὸ εὐεργετεῖν, to embrace the truth, and be beneficent.’ AElian. 1.
12, c. 58.)” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc41016.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iv-p13.1"></span>
᾿Αλγθεύοντες ἐν ἀγάπη, means much more than ‘*speaking* the truth in
love;’ it signifies thinking, feeling, acting under the influence of
‘the truth, which worketh by love.’” — Brown.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc41016.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p12"></span> “<span id="iv.v.v-p12.1"></span>Μαρτύρομαι
ἐν κυρίῳ — In this sense <span id="iv.v.v-p12.2"></span>μαρτύρομαι is
obviously used by Polybius: <span id="iv.v.v-p12.3"></span>συνδαραμόντων
δὲ τῶν ἐγχωρίων καὶ μαρτυρομένων τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐπανάγειν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχήν,
when the inhabitants had run together and besought to bring the men to
the magistrates. It is more customary to use <span
id="iv.v.v-p12.4"></span>διαμαρτύρομαι in this sense. <span
id="iv.v.v-p12.5"></span>Πολλὰ γὰρ τῶν κυβερνητῶν διαμαρτυρομένων μὴ
πλεῖν παρὰ τὴν ἔξω πλευρὰν τὢς Σικελίας, because the pilots earnestly
implored them not to sail along the opposite coast of Sicily.” —
Raphelius.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc41016.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iv.v.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.v.v-p16.1"></span>Il y a
bien en l’esprit de l’homme des principes et maximes veritables, qui
sont commes estincelles.” “There are, in the mind of man, many true
principles and maxims, which resemble sparks.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc41016.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iv.v.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p27"></span> See Calvin’s Commentary on Corinthians,
vol. 2 p. 187.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc41016.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iv.v.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p15"></span> “Stand in awe,” <span
id="iv.v.vii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.vii-p15.1"></span>.
(English Version)

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc41016.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p13"></span> “According to our view, the verse is a
summation of the argument — the climax of appeal. If Christians shall
persist in falsehood and deviation from the truth — if they shall
indulge in fitful rage, or cherish sullen and malignant dislikes — if
they shall be characterized by dishonesty, or insipid and corrupt
language, then do they grieve the Holy Spirit of God; for all this
perverse insubordination is in utter antagonism to the essence and
operations of Him who is the Spirit of truth; and inspires the love of
it; who assumed, as a fitting symbol, the form of a dove, and creates
meekness and forbearance; and who, as the Spirit of holiness, leads to
the appreciation of all that is just in action, noble in sentiment, and
healthful and edifying in speech.” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc41016.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p8"></span> See Calvin's Commentary on Philippians,
Colossians, etc., page 213.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc41017.md)
