[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc41005)  [Next](cc41007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then, fourteen years after, I went
up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with *me* also.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Deinde post annos quatuordecim
ascendi rursus Hierosolymam una cum Barnaba, assumpto simul et Tito.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And I went up by revelation, and
communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles,
but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I
should run, or had run, in vain.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ascendi autem secundum
revelationera, et contuli cum illis evangelium, quod praedico inter
Gentes; privatim vero cum iis qui in pretio erant, ne quo mode in vahum
currerem, aut cucurrssem,

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** But neither Titus, who was with me,
being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Sed neque Titus, qui mecum erat,
quum esset Graecus, compulsus fuit circumcidi;

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And that because of false brethren
unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we
have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Propter subingresses falsos
fratres, qui subintroierant ad explorandum libertatem nostram, quam
habemus in Christo Iesu; quo nos in servitutem adigerent;

<span id="iii.iv.i-p10"></span>**5.** To whom we gave place by
subjection, no, not for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might
continue with you.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quibus ne ad heram quidem cessimus
per subjectionem, ut veri tas evangelii maneret apud vos.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p14"></span>**1.** *Fourteen years after.* This
cannot with certainty be affirmed to be the same journey mentioned by
Luke. (<span id="iii.iv.i-p14.1"></span>[Ac
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.1"></span>.) The connection of the history leads us
rather to an opposite conclusion. We find that Paul performed four
journeys to Jerusalem. Of the first we have already spoken. The second
took place when, in company with Barnabas, he brought the charitable
contributions of the Greek and Asiatic Churches. (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.2"></span>[Ac
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.2"></span>.) My belief that this second journey is
referred to in the present passage rests on various grounds. On any
other supposition, the statements of Paul and Luke cannot be reconciled.
Besides, there is ground for conjecturing that the rebuke was
administered to Peter at Antioch while Paul was residing there. Now,
this happened before he was sent to Jerusalem by the Churches to settle
the dispute which had arisen about ceremonial observances. (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.3"></span>[Ac
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.3"></span>.) It is not reasonable to suppose that Peter
would have used such dissimulation, if that controversy had been settled
and the decree of the Apostles published. But Paul writes that he came
to Jerusalem, and afterwards adds that he had rebuked Peter for an act
of dissimulation, an act which Peter certainly would not have committed
except in matters that were doubtful.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p16"></span>Besides, he would scarcely have alluded,
at any time, to that journey  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md)
undertaken with the consent of all the believers, without mentioning the
occasion of it, and the memorable decision which was passed. It is not
even certain at what time the Epistle was written, only that the Greeks
conjecture that it was sent from Rome, and the Latins from Ephesus. For
my own part, I think that it was written, not only before Paul had seen
Rome, but before that consultation had been held, and the decision of
the Apostles given about ceremonial observances. While his opponents
were falsely pleading the name of the apostles, and earnestly striving
to ruin the reputation of Paul, what carelessness would it have angered
in him to pass by the decree universally circulated among them, which
struck at those very persons!  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md)
Undoubtedly, this one word would have shut their mouth: “You bring
against me the authority of the apostles, but who does not know their
decision? and therefore I hold you convicted of unblushing falsehood. In
their name, you oblige the Gentiles to keep the law, but I appeal to
their own writing, which sets the consciences of men at liberty.”

<span id="iii.iv.i-p19"></span>We may likewise observe, that, in the
commencement of the Epistle, he reproved the Galatians for having so
soon revolted from the gospel which had been delivered to them. But we
may readily conclude, that, after they had been brought to believe the
gospel, some time must have elapsed before that dispute about the
ceremonial law arose. I consider, therefore, that the fourteen years are
to be reckoned, not from one journey to another, but from Paul’s
conversion. The space of time between the two journeys was eleven years.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p20"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p21"></span>**2.** *And I went up according to
revelation.*  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) He now proceeds to
prove his apostleship and his doctrine, not only by works, but also by a
Divine revelation. Since God directed that journey, which had for its
object the confirmation of his doctrine, the doctrine was confirmed, not
by the concurrence of men only, but likewise by the authority of God.
This ought to have been more than enough to overcome the obstinacy of
those who blamed Paul by holding up the names of the apostles. For
although, up to this time, there had been some room for debate, the
communication of the mind of God put an end to all discussion.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p23"></span>*I communicated to them.* The word
*communicated* claims our first attention; for the apostles do not
describe to him what he ought to teach, but, after listening to his own
account of his doctrine, express their concurrence and approbation. But,
as his opponents might allege that, by cunning dissimulation on many
points, he had gained the favor of the apostles, he expressly states
that he “communicated to them that doctrine which he preacheth among the
Gentiles;” which removes all suspicion of hypocrisy or imposture. We
shall see what followed; for the apostles did not take it amiss that he
had not waited to obtain their sanction. On the contrary, without
dispute or expostulation, they approved of his labors; and did so by the
direction of the same Spirit, under whose guidance Paul had performed
his journey to Jerusalem. Thus, he was not made an apostle by them, but
acknowledged to be an apostle. But this point will be treated more fully
afterwards.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p24"></span>*Lest by any means.* What then? Shall the
word of God fall, when it is unsupported by the testimony of men? Though
the whole world were unbelieving, yet the word of God remains firm and
unshaken: and they who preach the gospel by the command of God are not
uselessly employed, even when no fruit is produced by their labors. This
is not Paul’s meaning; but, as the consciences of men, so long as they
doubt and hesitate, derive no benefit from the ministry of the word, so
a preacher is said, so far as men is concerned, to *run in vain*, when
his labors are ineffectual, and unaccompanied by proper edification.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p25"></span>It was, therefore, a formidable weapon
for shaking weak consciences, when the doctrine which Paul preached was
falsely declared by impostors to be at variance with the doctrine of the
apostles. Multitudes in this manner fell away. The certainty of faith,
indeed, does not depend on the agreement of human opinions; but, on the
contrary, it is our duty to rest in the naked truth of God, so that
neither men nor all the angels together, could shake our faith. Yet
ignorant persons, who have imperfectly understood, and never have
cordially embraced, sound doctrine, feel the temptation to be almost
irresistible, while teachers of acknowledged eminence are found to
entertain opposite views. Nay, strong believers are sometimes powerfully
affected by this stratagem of Satan, when he holds out to their view the
“strife and divisions” (<span id="iii.iv.i-p25.1"></span>[1Co
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv.i-p25.1"></span>.md)
of those who ought to have been

<span id="iii.iv.i-p26"></span>“perfectly joined together in the same
mind and in the same judgment.” (<span id="iii.iv.i-p26.1"></span>[1Co
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p27"></span>It is hard to tell how many were driven
from the gospel, how many had their faith shaken, by the mournful
controversy about the bodily presence of Christ in the Lord’s Supper,
because, on a question of the highest moment, very distinguished men
were observed to take opposite sides.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p28"></span>On the other hand, the agreement of all
who teach in the Church is a powerful aid for the confirmation of faith.
Since, therefore, Satan was laboring so insidiously to hinder the
progress of the gospel, Paul resolved to meet him. When he had succeeded
in demonstrating that he held the same views with all the apostles,
every hinderance was removed. Weak disciples were no longer perplexed by
the inquiry, whom they ought to follow. His meaning may be thus summed
up: “That my former labors might not be thrown away and rendered
useless, I have set at rest the question which disturbed many minds,
whether I or Peter deserved your confidence; for in all that I had ever
taught we were perfectly at one.” If many teachers in our own day were
as heartily desirous as Paul was to edify the Church, they would take
more pains to be agreed among themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p30"></span>**3.** *But neither Titus*. This is an
additional argument to prove that the Apostles held the same views with
himself; for he had brought to them an uncircumcised man, whom they did
not hesitate to acknowledge as a brother. The reason is assigned why he
was not circumcised; for circumcision, being a matter of indifference,
might be neglected or practiced as edification required. Our invariable
rule of action is, that, if “all things are lawful for us,” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p30.1"></span>[1Co
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p30.1"></span>) we ought to inquire what is expedient. He
circumcises Timothy, (<span id="iii.iv.i-p30.2"></span>[Ac
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p30.2"></span>,) in order to take away a ground of offense
from weak minds; for he was at that time dealing with weak minds, which
it was his duty to treat with tenderness. And he would gladly have done
the same thing with Titus, for he was unwearied in his endeavors to
“support (<span id="iii.iv.i-p30.3"></span>[Ac
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p30.3"></span>) the weak;” but the case was different. For
some false brethren were watching for an opportunity of slandering his
doctrine, and would immediately have spread the report: “See how the
valiant champion of liberty, when he comes into the presence of the
apostles, lays aside the bold and fierce aspect which he is wont to
assume among the ignorant!” Now, as it is our duty to “bear the
infirmities of the weak,” (<span id="iii.iv.i-p30.4"></span>[Ro
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p30.4"></span>,) so concealed foes, who purposely watch for
our liberty, must, be vigorously resisted. The duties of love to our
neighbor ought never to be injurious to faith; and therefore, in matters
of indifference, the love of our neighbour will be our best guide,
provided that faith shall always receive our first regard.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p31"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p32"></span>**4.** *And that because of false
brethren*. This may mean either that false brethren made it the subject
of wicked accusation, and endeavored to compel him; or that Paul
purposely did not circumcise him, because he saw that they would
immediately make it an occasion of slander. They had insinuated
themselves into Paul’s company with the hope of gaining one of two
objects. Either he would treat with open scorn the ceremonial law, and
then they would rouse the indignation of the Jews against him; or he
would refrain entirely from the exercise of his liberty, and in that
case they would exult over him among the Gentiles as one who,
overwhelmed with shame, had retracted his doctrine.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p33"></span>I prefer the second interpretation, that
Paul, having discovered the snares laid for him, determined not to
circumcise Titus. When he says that he was not “compelled,” the reader
is led to understand that circumcision is not condemned as a bad thing
in itself, but that the obligation to observe it was the subject of
dispute. As if he had said, “I would have been prepared to circumcise
Titus if higher matters had not been involved.” Their intention was to
lay down a law; and to such compulsion he would not yield.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p34"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p35"></span>**5***. To whom we gave place by
subjection, no, not for an hour*. This steadiness was the seal of Paul’s
doctrine. For when false brethren, who wished nothing more than a ground
of accusation against him, exerted themselves to the utmost, and he
stood firm, there could no longer be any room for doubt. It cannot now
be insinuated that he deceived the apostles. He asserts that he did not
for a moment *give place* to them *by subjection*, that is, by such a
mode of yielding as would have implied that his liberty had been
crushed. In every other respect, he was prepared, to the very close of
his life, to exercise mildness and forbearance toward all men.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p36"></span>*That the truth of the gospel*. There was
no danger that Paul would be deprived of his liberty even by yielding to
them; but the example would have done harm to others, and therefore he
prudently inquired what was expedient. This shows us how far offenses
must be avoided, and points us to edification as the object which ought
to be kept in view in all matters of indifference. The amount, is this:
“We are the servants of the brethren, but still keeping in view that we
all serve the Lord, and that the liberty of our conscience shall remain
unimpaired.” When false brethren wished to bring the saints in to
bondage, it was their duty not to yield to them.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p37"></span>*The truth of the gospel* denotes its
genuine purity, or, which means the same thing, its pure and entire
doctrine. For the false apostles did not altogether set aside the
gospel, but mixed up with it their own notions, so as to give it a false
and disguised aspect, which it always has when we make the smallest
departure “from the simplicity that is in Christ.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p37.1"></span>[2Co
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p38"></span>With what effrontery then will the
Papists boast that they possess the gospel, which is not only corrupted
by many inventions, but more than adulterated by many wicked doctrines?
Let us remember that it is not enough to retain the name of the gospel,
and some kind of summary of its doctrines, if its solid purity do not
remain untouched. Where are the men who, by pretended moderation,
endeavor to bring about a reconciliation between us and the Papists? as
if the doctrine of religion, like a matter affecting money or property,
could be compromised. With what abhorrence would such a transaction have
been regarded by Paul, who affirms that it is not the true gospel, if it
is not pure!

<span id="iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
2:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** But of those who seemed to be
somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me: God
accepteth no man’s person:) for they who seemed *to be somewhat* in
conference added nothing to me:

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Ab iis autem qui videbantur
aliquid esse, quales aliquando fuerint, nihil mea refert (personam
hominis Deus non accipit, <span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>[Deut.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017.md), [2 Chr.
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>[Job
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.3"></span>[Wis.
6:8](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#008.md), [Sir.
35:15](../../../bib/apo/sir035.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p3.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.4"></span>[Ac
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p3.4"></span>; <span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.5"></span>[Ro
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.5"></span>;
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.6"></span>[Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.6"></span>;
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.7"></span>[Col
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.7"></span>;
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.8"></span>[1Pe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3.8"></span>.md)
nam mihi, qui videbantur esse in pretio nihil contulerunt

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p4"></span>**7.** But contrariwise, when they saw
that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as *the
gospel* of the circumcision *was* unto Peter;

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Imo contra, quum vidissent mihi
concreditum fuisse evangelium praeprputii, quemadmodum Petro
Circumcisionis;

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p6"></span>**8.** (For he that wrought effectually
in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in
me toward the Gentiles:)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p7"></span>**8.** (Nam qui efficax fuit in Petro ad
apostolatum Circumcisionis efficax fuit et in me erga Gentes);

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8"></span>**9.** And when James, Cephas, and John,
who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me,
they gave to me and Barnabas right hands of fellowship; that we *should
go* unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Quumque cognovissent gratiam mihi
datam Iaeobus et Cephas et Ioannes, qui videbantur columnae esse,
dextras dederunt mihi ac Barnabae societatis, ut nos inter Gentes, ipsi
vore in Circumcisionem, apestolatu fungerenur.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>**10.** Only *they would* that we should
remember the poor; the same which I also was forward to do.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Tanturn ut pauperurn memores
essenms, in quo et diligens fui, ut hoc ipsum facerem.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p13"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *Of those who seemed to be
somewhat.*  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) Paul is not yet
satisfied, without making the Galatians understand that he had learned
nothing from Peter and the apostles. Hence Porphyry and Julian  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) accuse the holy man of pride, because he
claims so much for himself that he cannot endure to learn anything from
others; because he boasts of having become a teacher without any
instruction or assistance; and because he labors so hard not to appear
in an inferior character. But any one who will consider how necessary
that boasting was, will acknowledge that it was holy boasting, and
worthy of the highest praise; for, if he had yielded this point to his
opponents, that he had profited under the apostles, he would have
furnished them with two charges against him. They would immediately have
said, “And so you made some progress; you corrected your past errors,
and did not repeat your former rashness.” Thus, in the first place, the
whole doctrine which he had hitherto taught would have fallen under
suspicion; and, secondly, he would ever afterwards have possessed less
authority, because he would have been reckoned but an ordinary disciple.
We find, therefore, that it was not on his own account, but by the
necessity under which he lay to establish the doctrine, that he was led
to this holy boasting. The controversy has no reference to individuals,
and therefore cannot be a struggle of ambition; but Paul’s determination
was that no man, however eminent, should throw into the shade his
apostleship, on which the authority of his doctrine depended. If this be
not enough to silence those dogs, their barking is sufficiently
answered.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p17"></span>*Whatsoever they were*. These words must
be read as a separate clause; for the parenthesis was intended to assure
his opponents that he did not concern himself with the opinions of men.
This passage has been variously interpreted. Ambrose thinks that it is a
passing reference to the folly of attempting to lower Paul by holding up
the apostles; and represents him as saying; “As if I were not equally at
liberty to object that they were poor, illiterate men, while I, from my
early years, enjoyed a liberal education under the care of Gamaliel. But
I pass over all this, because I know that there is no respect of persons
with God.” Chrysostom and Jerome take a harsher view of the words, as an
indirect threatening of the most distinguished apostles. “Whatsoever
they may be, if they swerve from duty, they shall not escape the
judgment of God; neither the dignity of their office, nor the estimation
of men, shall protect them.” But another interpretation appears to me
more simple, and more agreeable to Paul’s design. He admits that they
were first in the order of time, but contends that this did not prevent
him from being their equal in rank. He does not say that it is of no
consequence to him what they are at present; but he is speaking of a
period now past, when they were already apostles, and when he was
opposed to the faith of Christ. In short, he does not choose that what
is past shall decide the matter; and refuses to admit the proverb, that
he who comes first has the best right.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p18"></span>*No man’s person*. Besides the
interpretations which I have mentioned, a third is not unworthy of
notice, — that in the government of the world distinctions of rank are
admitted, but in the spiritual kingdom of Christ they can have no place.
There is plausibility in the statement, but it is in reference to
worldly government, that it is said,

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p19"></span>“Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment,.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.ii-p19.2"></span>[De
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p20"></span>But I do not enter into that argument,
for it does not affect this passage. Paul simply means, that the
honorable rank which the apostles had attained did not prevent him from
being called by God, and raised, all at once, from the lowest condition
to be their equal. The difference between them, though great, is of no
value in the sight of God, who does not accept persons, and whose
calling is not influenced by any prejudices. But this view may likewise
appear liable to objection; for, granting it to be true, and a truth
which must be carefully maintained, that in our intercourse with God
there is no respect of persons, how does this apply to Peter and his
fellow-apostles, who were venerable, not merely for their rank, but for
true holiness and spiritual gifts?

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p21"></span>The word *person* is contrasted with the
fear of God and a good conscience; and this is its ordinary acceptation
in Scripture. (<span id="iii.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>[Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p21.1"></span>
<span id="iii.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>[1Pe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p21.2"></span>.) But piety, zeal, holiness, and other
similar graces, were the principal grounds of the esteem and respect in
which the apostles were held; while Paul speaks contemptuously of them,
as if they had possessed nothing but the outward forms.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p22"></span>I reply: Paul is not discussing the real
worth of the apostles, but the idle boasting of his adversaries. In
order to support their own unfounded pretensions, they talked in lofty
terms of Peter, and James, and John, and took advantage of the
veneration with which they were regarded by the Church, for
accomplishing their earnest desire of degrading Paul. His object is not
to inquire what the apostles are, or what opinion must be formed
respecting them when controversy is laid aside, but to tear off the
disguises which the false apostles wore. As in a subsequent part of the
Epistle he treats of circumcision, not in its real character, but in the
false and impious notion attached to it by those impostors, so he now
declares that the apostles were in the sight of God disguises, by which
those persons attempted to shine in the world; and this is evident from
the words. Why did they prefer them to Paul? because they were his
predecessors in office. This was a mere disguise. In any other point of
view, they would have been highly esteemed, and the gifts of God
manifested in them would have been warmly admired by one so singularly
modest as the apostle Paul, who elsewhere acknowledges that he was “the
least of the apostles,” and unworthy to occupy so exalted a station.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p23"></span>“I am the least of the apostles, and not
worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the Church of
God.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.ii-p23.2"></span>[1Co
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p24"></span>*They communicated nothing to me.* It
might also be rendered, “they communicated nothing with me;” for it is
the same word which he formerly used twice.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) But the meaning is the same. When the
apostles had heard Paul’s gospel, they did not on the other side bring
forward their own, (as is commonly done when something better and more
perfect is desired,) but were satisfied with his explanation, and simply
and unhesitatingly embraced his doctrine, so that not even on the most
doubtful point did a single word of debate pass between them. Nor are we
to suppose that Paul, presuming on his superiority, took the lead in the
discussion, and dictated to his brethren. On the contrary, his faith,
about which unfavourable rumors had been spread, was fully explained by
him, and sanctioned by their appropation.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p26"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p27"></span>**7.** *But, on the contrary.* They
immediately *gave him the right hand of fellowship*. (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ga
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>.) Consequently they gave their testimony to
his doctrine, and without any exception; for they produced nothing on
the other side, as is commonly done on debated points, but acknowledged
that he held the same gospel in common with them, and was therefore
entitled to the honors and rank of an associate. Now, one condition of
this *fellowship* was, that they distributed the provinces among
themselves. They were therefore equal, and there was no subjection on
the part of Paul. To “give the right hands of fellowship” means here, to
have a partnership settled by mutual agreement.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p28"></span>*When they saw that the gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed to me.* He asserts that he was not indebted
to the apostles for the favor of being made an apostle by their consent
and approbation, but that, in conceding to him the apostleship, they
only refused to take away what God had given. He constantly urges that
he was made an apostle by the gift and appointment of God, but adds here
that he was acknowledged as such by the apostles themselves. Hence it
followed, that those unprincipled men were attempting, what the apostles
durst not have attempted, to oppose the election of God.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p29"></span>And here he begins to claim what
belonged to himself in preference to others, the apostleship of the
uncircumcision. For Paul and Barnabas differed from the rest in this
respect, that they had been appointed to be apostles of the Gentiles.
(<span id="iii.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>[Ac
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>.) That had been done by a Divine
revelation, which the apostles not only did not oppose, but determined
to ratify, because not to obey it, would have been impious. This shows
us in what manner they arranged their respective duties, in compliance
with a Divine revelation, namely, that Paul and Barnabas should be the
apostles of the Gentiles, and that the others should be the apostles of
the Jews.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p30"></span>But this appears to be at variance with
the command of Christ, which enjoins that the twelve shall

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p31"></span>“go unto all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.” (<span id="iii.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p32"></span>I reply, that command was not intended
to apply specifically to each individual, but describes in general terms
the design of the apostolic office, which was, that salvation must be
proclaimed to all nations by the doctrine of the gospel. For the
apostles evidently did not travel over the whole world; nay, it is
probable that not one of the twelve ever passed into Europe. What they
allege about Peter may, for aught I know, be fabulous, and is, at all
events, quite uncertain.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p33"></span>All of them, it will be objected, had
still a commission both to Gentiles and to Jews. I own they had, as
occasion offered. Each apostle, I grant, was entrusted with the
publication of the gospel both among Gentiles and Jews; for the
distribution was not of such a nature as to assign them fixed
boundaries, like those of kingdoms, principalities, and provinces, which
could not lawfully be passed. We see that Paul, wherever he went,
uniformly offered his labors and services, in the first instance, to the
Jews. As he had a right, while living among the Gentiles, to offer
himself as an apostle and teacher to the Jews; so the others were at
liberty, wherever they had it in their power, to bring Gentiles to
Christ; and we find Peter exercising this privilege with regard to
Cornelius and others. (<span id="iii.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>[Ac
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>.) But as there were other apostles in that
district, which was almost wholly inhabited by Jews, Paul traveled
through Asia, Greece, and other distant parts, and on this occasion was
specially ordained to be an apostle to the Gentiles. Nay, when the Lord
first commanded him to be set apart, he directed him to leave Antioch
and Syria, and perform voyages to distant countries for the sake of the
Gentiles. On ordinary occasions, therefore, he was the apostle of the
Gentiles, and on extraordinary occasions, he was the apostle of the
Jews. The other apostles, again, took the Jews for their own department,
but with the understanding that, when an opportunity occurred, they
would be at liberty to direct their ministrations to the Gentiles; this
last, however, being in their case an extraordinary service.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p34"></span>But if Peter’s apostleship had a
peculiar reference to the Jews, let the Romanists see on what ground
they derive from him their succession to the primacy. If the Pope of
Rome claims the primacy because he is Peter’s successor, he ought to
exercise it over the Jews. Paul is here declared to be the chief apostle
of the Gentiles, yet they affirm that he was not bishop of Rome; and,
therefore, if the Pope would establish any claim to his primacy, let him
gather churches from among the Jews. He who by a decree of the Holy
Spirit, and by the consent of the whole apostolic college, has been
solemnly declared to be one of the apostles, cannot but be acknowledged
by us in that character. Those who would transfer that right to Peter
set aside all ordination, both human and divine. It is unnecessary to
explain here the well-known metaphor in the words *circumcision* and
*uncircumcision*, as applied to Jews and Gentiles.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p35"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p36"></span>**8.** *He that wrought effectually*.
That the province which had been assigned to him was truly his own, is
proved by the exertion of divine power during his ministry. Now, this
manifestation of divine energy, as we have frequently seen, is the seal
by which his doctrine was attested, and his office as a teacher
sanctioned. Whether Paul refers God’s *effectual working* to the success
of his preaching, or to the graces of the Holy Spirit which were then
bestowed on believers, is doubtful. I do not understand it as denoting
the mere success, but the spiritual power and efficacy,  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) which he has elsewhere mentioned. (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p37.2"></span>[1Co
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p37.2"></span>.) The amount of the whole is, that it was
no idle bargain which the apostles had made among themselves, but a
decision which God had sealed.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p38"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p39"></span>**9.** *And when they perceived the
grace.* They who treated with contempt the grace of God, by which the
most eminent apostles had been led to admire and reverence Paul, are
charged with hateful and proud disdain. If they should allege that they
were ignorant of that which the apostles knew from the beginning, the
hypocritical pretense was not to be endured. This admonishes us to yield
to the grace of God, wherever it is perceived, unless we choose to
contend with the Holy Spirit, whose will it is that his gifts shall not
remain unemployed. The grace which the apostles perceived to have been
given to Paul and Barnabas, induced them to sanction their ministry by
receiving them as their associates.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p40"></span>*James and Cephas*. I have already
stated, that James was the son of Alpheus. He could not be “the brother
of John” who had been lately put to death by Herod, (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>[Ac
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>,) and to suppose that one of the disciples
had been placed above the apostles would be absurd. That he held the
highest rank among the apostles, is made evident by Luke, who ascribes
to him the summing up and decision of the cause in the council, (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.2"></span>[Ac
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.2"></span>,) and afterwards mentions his having
assembled “all the elders” of the church of Jerusalem. (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.3"></span>[Ac
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p40.3"></span>.) When he says, that they *seemed to be
pillars*, he does not speak contemptuously, but quotes the general
opinion, arguing from it, that what was done by such men ought not to be
lightly set aside. In a question relating to diversity of rank, it is
surprising that James should be mentioned before Peter; but the reason
perhaps is, that he presided over the church at Jerusalem. As to the
word *pillar*, we know that, from the nature of things, those who excel
in ability, prudence, or other gifts, possess greater authority. And
even in the Church of God, he who enjoys a larger measure of grace
ought, on that account, to receive the higher honor. It argues
ingratitude, nay impiety, not to worship the Spirit of God wherever he
appears in his gifts; and as a people cannot want a pastor, so the
assemblies of pastors require a moderator. But in all cases let the rule
be followed,

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p41"></span>“He that is greatest among you shall be
your servant”  
(<span id="iii.iv.ii-p41.2"></span>[Mt
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p41.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p42"></span><span id="iii.iv.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p43"></span>**10.** *That we should remember the
poor.* It is evident that the brethren who were in Judea labored under
extreme poverty: otherwise they would not have burdened other churches.
That might arise both from the various calamities which befell the whole
nation, and from the cruel rage of their own countrymen, by which they
were every day stript of their possessions. It was proper that they
should receive assistance from the Gentiles, who owed to them the
inestimable benefit of the gospel. Paul says, that he was *forward to
do*, that he faithfully performed, what the apostles had requested from
him, and thus he takes away from his adversaries a pretext which they
were desirous to seize.

<span id="iii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
2:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p2"></span>**11.** But when Peter was come to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Quum autem venisset Petrus
Antiochiam, palam ei restiti, eo quod reprehensione dignus esset.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p4"></span>**12.** For, before that certain came
from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he
withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which were of the
circumcision.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Nam antequam venissent quidam ab
Iacobo, una cum Gentibus sumebat cibum; quum autem venissent, subduxit
ac separavit se ab illis, metuens eos qui erant ex Circumcisione.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p6"></span>**13.** And the other Jews dissembled
likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with
their dissimulation.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Acts simulabant una cum illo
caeteri quoque Iudeai, adeo ut Barnabas simul abduceretur in illorum
simulationem.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p8"></span>**14.** But when I saw that they walked
not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter
before *them* all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of
Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews?

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p9"></span>**14.** Verum ubi vidissem, quod non
recto pede incederent ad veritatem evangelii, dixi Petro coram omnibus:
Si tu, quum sis Iudaeus, Gentiliter vivis, et non Iudaice; cur cogis
Gentes Iudaizare?

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p10"></span>**15.** We *who are* Jews by nature,
and not sinners of the Gentiles,

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p11"></span>**15.** Nos natura Iudaei, et non ex
Gentibus peccatores,

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p12"></span>**16.** Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ,
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of
the law shall no flesh be justified.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p13"></span>**16.** Cognito, non justificari
hominem ex operibus legis, nisi per fidem Iesu Christi, et nos in Iesum
Christum credidimus, ut justificaremur ex fide Christi, et non ex
operibus legis; propterea quod non justificabitur ex operibus legis
onmis care.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p15"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p16"></span>**11.** *When Peter was come*. Whoever
will carefully examine all the circumstances, will, I trust, agree with
me in thinking, that this happened before the apostles had decided that
the Gentiles should receive no annoyance about ceremonial observances.
(<span id="iii.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>[Ac
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>.) For Peter would have entertained no
dread of offending James, or those sent by him, after that decision had
been passed: but such was the dissimulation of Peter, that, in opposing
it, Paul was driven to assert “the truth of the gospel.” At first he
said, that the certainty of his gospel does not in any degree depend on
Peter and the apostles, so as to stand or fall by their judgment.
Secondly, he said, that it had been approved by all without any
exception or contradiction, and particularly by those who were
universally admitted to hold the highest place. Now, as I have said, he
goes further, and asserts that he had blamed Peter for leaning to the
other side; and he proceeds to explain the cause of the dispute. It was
no ordinary proof of the strength of his doctrine, that he not only
obtained their cordial approbation, but firmly maintained it in a debate
with Peter, and came off victorious. What reason could there now be for
hesitating to receive it as certain and undoubted truth?

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p17"></span>At the same time, this is a reply to
another calumny, that Paul was but an ordinary disciple, far below the
rank of an apostle: for the reproof which he administered was an
evidence that the parties were on an equal footing. The highest, I
acknowledge, are sometimes properly reproved by the lowest, for this
liberty on the part of inferiors towards their superiors is permitted by
God; and so it does not follow, that he who reproves another must be his
equal. But the nature of the reproof deserves notice. Paul did not
simply reprove Peter, as a Christian might reprove a Christian, but he
did it officially, as the phrase is; that is, in the exercise of the
apostolic character which he sustained.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p18"></span>This is another thunderbolt which
strikes the Papacy of Rome. It exposes the impudent pretensions of the
Roman Antichrist, who boasts that he is not bound to assign a reason,
and sets at defiance the judgment of the whole Church. Without rashness,
without undue boldness, but in the exercise of the power granted him by
God, this single individual chastises Peter, in the presence of the
whole Church; and Peter submissively bows to the chastisement. Nay, the
whole debate on those two points was nothing less than a manifest
overthrow of that tyrannical primacy, which the Romanists foolishly
enough allege to be founded on divine right. If they wish to have God
appearing on their side, a new Bible must be manufactured; if they do
not wish to have him for an open enemy, those two chapters of the Holy
Scriptures must be expunged.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p19"></span>*Because he was worthy of blame.* The
Greek participle, κατεγνωσμένος, signifies Blamed, so that the words
run, “because he was blamed;” but I have no doubt whatever, that the
word was intended to express, “one who deserves just blame.” Chrysostom
makes the meaning to be, that others had previously indulged in
complaint and accusation; but this is really trifling. It was customary
with the Greeks to give to their participles the signification of nouns,
which, every person must see, is applicable to this passage. This will
enable us to perceive the absurdity of the interpretation given by
Jerome and Chrysostom, who represent the whole transaction as a feigned
debate, which the apostles had previously arranged to take place in
presence of the people. They are not even supported by the phrase, “I
withstood him *to the face*, κατὰ πρόσωπον, which means that “to the
face,” or “being present,” Peter was chastised and struck dumb. The
observation of Chrysostom, that, for the sake of avoiding scandal, they
would have talked in private if they had any difference, is frivolous.
The less important must be disregarded in comparison of the most
dangerous of all scandals, that the Church would be rent, that Christian
liberty was in danger, that the doctrine of the grace of Christ was
overthrown; and therefore this public offense must be publicly
corrected.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p20"></span>The chief argument on which Jerome
rests is excessively trifling. “Why should Paul,” says he, “condemn in
another what he takes praise for in himself? for he boasts that ‘to the
Jews he became as a Jew.’” (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>[1Co
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>.) I reply, that what Peter did is totally
different. Paul accommodated himself to the Jews no farther than was
consistent with the doctrine of liberty; and therefore he refused to
circumcise Titus, that the truth of the gospel might remain unimpaired.
But Peter Judaized in such a manner as to “compel the Gentiles” to
suffer bondage, and at the same time to create a prejudice against
Paul’s doctrine. He did not, therefore, observe the proper limit; for he
was more desirous to please than to edify, and more solicitous to
inquire what would gratify the Jews than what would be expedient for the
whole body. Augustine is therefore right in asserting, that this was no
previously arranged plan, but that Paul, out of Christian zeal, opposed
the sinful and unseasonable dissimulation of Peter, because he saw that
it would be injurious to the Church.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p21"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p22"></span>**12.** *For before that certain
persons came.* The state of the case is here laid down. For the sake of
the Jews, Peter had withdrawn himself from the Gentiles, in order to
drive them from the communion of the Church, unless they would
relinquish the liberty of the Gospel, and submit to the yoke of the Law.
If Paul had been silent here, his whole doctrine fell; all the
edification obtained by his ministry was ruined. It was therefore
necessary that he should rise manfully, and fight with courage. This
shews us how cautiously we ought to guard against giving way to the
opinions of men, lest an immoderate desire to please, or an undue dread
of giving offense, should turn us aside from the right path. If this
might happen to Peter, how much more easily may it happen to us, if we
are not duly careful!

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p23"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p24"></span>**14.** *But when I saw that they
walked not uprightly*. Some apply these words to the Gentiles, who,
perplexed by Peter’s example, were beginning to give way; but it is more
natural to understand them as referring to Peter and Barnabas, and their
followers. The proper road to the truth of the gospel was, to unite the
Gentiles with the Jews in such a manner that the true doctrine should
not be injured. But to bind the consciences of godly men by an
obligation to keep the law, and to bury in silence the doctrine of
liberty, was to purchase unity at an exorbitant price.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p25"></span>*The truth of the gospel* is here used,
by Paul, in the same sense as before, and is contrasted with those
disguises by which Peter and others concealed its beauty. In such a
case, the struggle which Paul had to maintain must unquestionably have
been serious. They were perfectly agreed about doctrine;  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) but since, laying doctrine out of view,
Peter yielded too submissively to the Jews, he is accused of halting.
There are some who apologize for Peter on another ground, because, being
the apostle of the circumcision, he was bound to take a particular
concern in the salvation of the Jews; while they at the same time admit
that Paul did right in pleading the cause of the Gentiles. But it is
foolish to defend what the Holy Spirit by the mouth of Paul has
condemned. This was no affair of men, but involved the purity of the
gospel, which was in danger of being contaminated by Jewish leaven.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p27"></span>*Before them all*. This example
instructs us, that those who have sinned publicly must be publicly
chastised, so far as concerns the Church. The intention is, that their
sin may not, by remaining unpunished, form a dangerous example; and Paul
elsewhere (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>[1Ti
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>) lays down this rule expressly, to be
observed in the case of elders,

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p28"></span>“Them that sin rebuke before all, that
others also may fear;”

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p29"></span>because the station which they hold
renders their example more pernicious. It was particularly advantageous,
that the good cause, in which all had an interest, should be openly
defended in presence of the people, that Paul might have a better
opportunity of shewing that he did not shrink from the broad light of
day.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p30"></span>*If thou, being a Jew*. Paul’s address
to Peter consists of two parts. In the first, he expostulates with him
for his injustice toward the Gentiles, in compelling them to keep the
law, from the obligations of which he wished himself to be exempted.
For, not to mention that every man is bound to keep the law which he
lays down for others, his conduct was greatly aggravated by compelling
the Gentiles to observe Jewish ceremonies, while he, being a Jew, left
himself at liberty. The law was given to Jews, not to Gentiles; so that
he argues from the less to the greater.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p31"></span>Next, it is argued, that, in a harsh
and violent manner, he *compelled the Gentiles*, by withdrawing from
their communion, unless they chose to submit to the yoke of the law; and
thus imposed on them an unjust condition. And, indeed, the whole force
of the reproof lies in this word, which neither Chrysostom nor Jerome
has remarked. The use of ceremonies was free for the purposes of
edification, provided that believers were not deprived of their liberty,
or laid under any restraint from which the gospel sets them free.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p32"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p33"></span>**15.** *We who are Jews by nature*.
Some, I am aware, think that this is stated in the form of an objection,
(ἀνθυποφορὰ,) anticipating what might be urged on the other side, that
the Jews possessed higher privileges; not that they would boast of
exemption from the law, (for it would have been highly absurd, that they
to whom the Law was given should make this their boast,) but that there
was a propriety in retaining some points of distinction between them and
the Gentiles. I do not entirely reject, and yet, as will afterwards
appear, I do not altogether adopt this view. Some, again, consider that
it is Paul himself who uses this argument, “If you were to lay upon the
Jews the burden of the law, it would be more reasonable, because it is
theirs by inheritance.” But neither do I approve of this view.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p34"></span>He is now proceeding to the second part
of his speech, which commences with an anticipation. The Gentiles
differed from them in this respect, that they were “unholy and profane,”
(<span id="iii.iv.iii-p34.1"></span>[1Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p34.1"></span>;) while the Jews, being holy, so far as
God had chosen them for his people, might contend for this superiority.
Skilfully anticipating the objection, Paul turns it to the opposite
conclusion. Since the Jews themselves, with all their advantages, were
forced to betake themselves to the faith of Christ, how much more
necessary was it that the Gentiles should look for salvation through
faith? Paul’s meaning therefore is: “We, who appear to excel others, —
we, who, by means of the covenant, have always enjoyed the privilege of
being nigh to God, (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p34.2"></span>[De
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p34.2"></span>,) have found no method of obtaining
salvation, but by believing in Christ: why, then, should we prescribe
another method to the Gentiles? For, if the law were necessary or
advantageous for salvation to those who observed its enactments, it must
have been most of all advantageous to us to whom it was given; but if we
relinquished it, and betook ourselves to Christ, much less ought
compliance with it to be urged upon the Gentiles.”

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p35"></span>The word *sinner*, signifies here, as
in many other places, a “profane person,” (<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p35.1"></span>[Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p35.1"></span>,) or one who is lost and alienated from
God. Such were the Gentiles, who had no intercourse with God; while the
Jews were, by adoption, the children of God, and therefore set apart to
holiness. *By nature*, does not mean that they were naturally free from
the corruption of the human race; for David, who was a descendant of
Abraham, acknowledges,

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p36"></span>“Behold, I was shapen in iniquity,  
and in sin did my mother conceive me,” (<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p36.2"></span>[Ps
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p36.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p37"></span>but the corruption of nature, to which
they were liable, had been met by the remedy of sanctifying grace. Now,
as the promise made the blessing hereditary, so this benefit is called
natural; just as, in the Epistle to the Romans, he says, that they were
sprung from a “holy root.” (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p37.1"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p38"></span>When he says, *we are Jews by nature,*
his meaning is, “We are born holy: not certainly by our own merit, but
because God hath chosen us to be his people.” Well, then, we who were by
nature Jews, what have we done? “We have believed in Jesus Christ.” What
was the design of our believing? “That we might be justified by the
faith of Christ.” For what reason? Because we “know that a man is not
justified by the works of the law.” From the nature and effect of faith,
he reasons that the Jews are in no degree justified by the law. For, as
they who

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p39"></span>“go about to establish their own
righteousness have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God,” (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p39.1"></span>[Ro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p39.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p40"></span>so, on the contrary, they who believe
in Christ, confess that they are sinners, and renounce justification by
works. This involves the main question, or rather, in this single
proposition nearly the whole controversy is embodied. It is the more
necessary to bestow some care on the examination of this passage.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p41"></span>The first thing to be noticed is, that
we must seek justification by the faith of Christ, because we cannot be
justified by works. Now, the question is, what is meant by *the works of
the law*? The Papists, misled by Origen and Jerome, are of opinion, and
lay it down as certain, that the dispute relates to shadows; and
accordingly assert, that by “the works of the law” are meant ceremonies.
As if Paul were not reasoning about the free justification which is
bestowed on us by Christ. For they see no absurdity in maintaining that
“no man is justified by the works of the law,” and yet that, by the
merit of works, we are accounted righteous in the sight of God. In
short, they hold that no mention is here made of the works of the moral
law. But the context clearly proves that the moral law is also
comprehended in these words; for almost everything which Paul afterwards
advances belongs more properly to the moral than to the ceremonial law;
and he is continually employed in contrasting the righteousness of the
law with the free acceptance which God is pleased to bestow.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p42"></span>It is objected by our opponents, that
the term “works” must have been employed without any addition, if Paul
had not intended to limit it to a particular class. But I reply, there
is the best of all reasons for this mode of expression; for, though a
man were to excel all the angels in holiness, no reward is due to works,
but on the footing of a Divine promise. Perfect obedience to the law is
righteousness, and has a promise of eternal life annexed to it; but it
derives this character from God, who declares that “they who have
fulfilled them shall live.” (<span id="iii.iv.iii-p42.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii-p42.1"></span>.) On this point we shall afterwards treat
more fully in its own place.  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md)
Besides, the controversy with the Jews was about the law. Paul,
therefore, chose rather to bring the matter to an issue, by meeting them
at once on their own ground, than to adopt a more circuitous route,
which might wear the aspect of evading the subject, or distrusting his
cause. Accordingly he resolves to have a close debate about the law.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p44"></span>Their second objection is, that the
whole question raised was about ceremonies, which we readily allow. Why
then, say they, would the apostle pass suddenly from a particular
department to the whole subject? This was the sole cause of the mistake
into which Origen and Jerome were betrayed; for they did not think it
natural that, while the false apostles were contending about ceremonies
alone, Paul should take in a larger field. But they did not consider
that the very reason for disputing so keenly was, that the doctrine led
to more serious consequences than at first view appeared. It would not
have given so much uneasiness to Paul that ceremonies should be
observed, as that the confident hope and the glory of salvation should
be made to rest on works; just as, in the dispute about forbidding flesh
on certain days, we do not look so much to the importance of the
prohibition itself, as to the snare which is laid for the consciences of
men. Paul, therefore, does not wander from the subject, when he enters
into a controversy about the whole law, although the arguments of the
false apostles were confined wholly to ceremonies. Their object in
pressing ceremonies was, that men might seek salvation by obedience to
the law, which, they falsely maintained, was meritorious; and
accordingly, Paul meets them, not with the moral law, but with the grace
of Christ alone. And yet this extended discussion does not occupy the
whole of the Epistle; he comes at length to the specific question of
ceremonies: but as the most serious difficulty was, whether
justification is to be obtained by works or by faith, it was proper that
this should be first settled. As the Papists of the present day are
uneasy when we extort from them the acknowledgment that men are
justified by faith alone, they reluctantly admit that “the works of the
law” include those of a moral nature. Many of them, however, by quoting
Jerome’s gloss, imagine that they have made a good defense; but the
context will show that the words relate also to the moral law.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p46"></span><span id="iii.iv.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p47"></span>**16.** *But by the faith of Jesus
Christ*. He does not merely state that ceremonies, or works of any kind,
are insufficient without the assistance of faith, but meets their denial
by a statement admitting of no exception, as if he had said, “Not by
works, but by the Gift of Christ alone.” In any other point of view, the
sentiment would have been trivial and foreign to the purpose; for the
false apostles did not reject Christ nor faith, but demanded that
ceremonies should be joined with them. If Paul had admitted this claim,
they would have been perfectly at one, and he would have been under no
necessity to agitate the church by this unpleasant debate. Let it
therefore remain settled, that the proposition is so framed as to admit
of no exception, “that we are justified in no other way than by faith,”
or, “that we are not justified but by faith,” or, which amounts to the
same thing, “that we are justified by faith alone.”

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p48"></span>Hence it appears with what silly
trifling the Papists of our day dispute with us about the word, as if it
had been a word of our contrivance. But Paul was unacquainted with the
theology of the Papists, who declare that a man is justified by faith,
and yet make a part of justification to consist in works. Of such
half-justification Paul knew nothing. For, when he instructs us that we
are justified by faith, because we cannot be justified by works, he
takes for granted what is true, that we cannot be justified through the
righteousness of Christ, unless we are poor and destitute of a
righteousness of our own.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md)
Consequently, either nothing or all must be ascribed to faith or to
works. As to the word justification, and the manner in which faith is
the cause of it, we shall afterwards see.

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p50"></span>*By the works of the law shall no flesh
be justified*. He had already appealed to the consciences of Peter and
others, and now confirms it more fully by affirming that such is the
actual truth, that by the works of the law no mortal will obtain
justification. This is the foundation of a freely bestowed
righteousness, when we are stripped of a righteousness of our own.
Besides, when he asserts that no mortal is justified by the
righteousness of the law, the assertion amounts to this, that from such
a mode of justification all mortals are excluded, and that none can
possibly reach it.

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
2:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>**17.** But if, while we seek to be
justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, *is* therefore
Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>**17.** Porro si quaerentes justificari
in Christo, inventi sumus ipsi quoque peccatores, ergo Christus peceati
minister est? absit.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span>**18.** For if I build again the things
which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span>**18.** Nam si quae destruxi haec rursum
aedifieo, praevaricatorem me ipsum constituo.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>**19.** For I through the law am dead to
the law, that I might live unto God.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>**19.** Ego enim per Legem Legi mortuus
sum. Ut Deo viverem,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>**20.** I am crucified with Christ:
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life
which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>**20.** Cum Christo sum crucifixus; vivo
autem non amplius ego, sed vivit in me Christus; quod autem nunc vivo in
carne, in fide vivo Filii Dei, qui dilexit me, et tradidit se ipsum pro
me.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>**21.** I do not frustrate the grace of
God: for if righteousness *come* by the law, then Christ is dead in
vain.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>**21.** Non abjicio gratiam Dei; si enim
per Legem justitia, ergo Christus gratis mortuus est.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p13"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14"></span>**17.** *If, while we seek to be
justified*. He now returns to the Galatians. We must take care not to
connect this verse with the preceding one, as if it were a part of the
speech addressed to Peter: for what had Peter to do with this argument?
It certainly has very little, if anything, to do with the speech; but
let every one form his own opinion.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>Chrysostom, and some other commentators,
make the whole passage to be an affirmation, and interpret it thus: “If,
while we seek to be justified by Christ, we are not yet perfectly
righteous, but still unholy, and if, consequently, Christ is not
sufficient for our righteousness, it follows that Christ is the minister
of the doctrine which leaves men in sin:” supposing that, by this absurd
proposition, Paul insinuates a charge of blasphemy against those who
attribute a part of justification to the law. But as the expression of
indignant abhorrence immediately follows, which Paul is never accustomed
to employ but in answer to questions, I am rather inclined to think that
the statement is made for the purpose of setting aside an absurd
conclusion which his doctrine appeared to warrant. He puts a question,
in his usual manner, into the mouth of his antagonists. “If, in
consequence of the righteousness of faith, we, who are Jews and were
‘sanctified from the womb,’ (<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>[Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>[Ga
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>,) are reckoned guilty and polluted, shall
we say that Christ makes sin to be powerful in his own people, and that
he is therefore the author of sin?”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p16"></span>This suspicion arose from his having
said that Jews, by believing in Christ, renounce the righteousness of
the law; for, while they are still at a distance from Christ, Jews,
separated from the ordinary pollution of the Gentiles, appear to be in
some respects exempted from the appellation of sinners. The grace of
Christ places them on a level with the Gentiles; and the remedy, which
is common to both, shews that both had labored under the same disease.
This is the force of the particle also, — *we ourselves also*, — meaning
not any description of men, but the Jews, who stood highest.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p17"></span>*Far from it.* He properly rejects that
inference. Christ, who discovers the sin which lay concealed, is not
therefore the minister of sin; as if, by depriving us of righteousness,
he opened the gate to sin, or strengthened its dominion.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) The Jews were mistaken in claiming any
holiness for themselves apart from Christ, while they had none. Hence
arose the complaint: “Did Christ come to take from us the righteousness
of the law, to change saints into polluted men, to subject us to sin and
guilt?” Paul denies it, and repels the blasphemy with abhorrence. Christ
did not bring sin, but unveiled it; he did not take away righteousness,
but stripped the Jews of a false disguise.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p19"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p20"></span>**18.** *For if I build again*. The
reply consists of two parts. This is the first part, and informs us that
the supposition now made is at variance with his whole doctrine, since
he had preached the faith of Christ in such a manner as to connect with
it the ruin and destruction of sin. For, as we are taught by John, that
Christ came not to build up the kingdom of sin, but “that he might
destroy the works of the devil,” (<span id="iii.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>[1Jo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>,) so Paul declares, that, in preaching the
gospel, he had restoreth true righteousness, in order that sin might be
destroyed. It was, therefore, in the highest degree improbable, that the
same person who destroyed sin should renew its power; and, by stating
the absurdity, he repels the calumny.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p21"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p22"></span>**19.** *For I through the law*. Now
follows the direct reply, that we must not ascribe to Christ that work
which properly belongs to the law. It was not necessary that Christ
should destroy the righteousness of the law, for the law itself slays
its disciples. As if he had said, “You deceive wretched men by the false
notion, that they must live by the law; and, under that pretext, you
keep them in the law. And yet you bring it as a charge against the
Gospel, that it annihilates the righteousness which we have by the law.
But it is the law which forces us to die to itself; for it threatens our
destruction, leaves us nothing but despair, and thus drives us away from
trusting to the law.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p23"></span>This passage will be better understood
by comparing it with <span id="iii.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ro
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>.
There Paul describes beautifully, that no man lives to the law, but he
to whom the law is dead, that is, has lost all power and efficacy; for,
as soon as the law begins to live in us, it inflicts a fatal wound by
which we die, and at the same time breathes life into the man who is
already dead to sin. Those who live to the law, therefore, have never
felt the power of the law, or properly understood what the law means;
for the law, when truly perceived, makes us die to itself, and it is
from this source, and not from Christ, that sin proceeds.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p24"></span>*To die to the law,* may either mean
that we renounce it, and are delivered from its dominion, so that we
have no confidence in it, and, on the other hand, that it does not hold
us captives under the yoke of slavery; or it may mean, that, as it
allures us all to destruction, we find in it no life. The latter view
appears to be preferable. It is not to Christ, he tells us, that it is
owing that the law is more hurtful than beneficial; but the law carries
within itself the curse which slays us. Hence it follows, that the death
which is brought on by the law is truly deadly. With this is contrasted
another kind of death, in the life-giving fellowship of the cross of
Christ. He says, that he is crucified together with Christ, that he
might live unto God. The ordinary punctuation of this passage obscures
the true meaning. It is this: “I through the law am dead to the law,
that I might live to God.” But the context will read more smoothly thus:
“I through the law am dead to the law;” then, in a separate sentence,
“That I might live to God, I am crucified with Christ.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p25"></span>*That I might live to God*. He shews
that the kind of death, on which the false apostles seized as a ground
of quarrel, is a proper object of desire; for he declares that we are
dead to the law, not by any means that we may live to sin, but that we
may live to God. *To live to God,* sometimes means to regulate our life
according to his will, so as to study nothing else in our whole life but
to gain his approbation; but here it means to live, if we may be allowed
the expression, the life of God. In this way the various points of the
contrast are preserved; for in whatever sense we are said to die to sin,
in the same sense do we live to God. In short, Paul informs us that this
death is not mortal, but is the cause of a better life; because God
snatches us from the shipwreck of the law, and by his grace raises us up
to another life. I say nothing of other interpretations; but this
appears to be the apostle’s real meaning.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p26"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p27"></span>**20.** *I am crucified with Christ*.
This explains the manner in which we, who are dead to the law, live to
God. Ingrafted into the death of Christ, we derive from it a secret
energy, as the twig does from the root. Again, the handwriting of the
law,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p28"></span>“which was contrary to us, Christ has
nailed to his cross.” (<span id="iii.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p29"></span>Being then crucified with him, we are
freed from all the curse and guilt of the law. He who endeavors to set
aside that deliverance makes void the cross of Christ. But let us
remember, that we are delivered from the yoke of the law, only by
becoming one with Christ, as the twig draws its sap from the root, only
by growing into one nature.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30"></span>*Nevertheless I live*. To the feelings
of man, the word Death is always unpleasant. Having said that we are
“crucified with Christ,” he therefore adds, “that this makes us alive.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p31"></span>*Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me*.
This explains what he meant by “living to God.” He does not live by his
own life, but is animated by the secret power of Christ; so that Christ
may be said to live and grow in him; for, as the soul enlivens the body,
so Christ imparts life to his members. It is a remarkable sentiment,
that believers live out of themselves, that is, they live in Christ;
which can only be accomplished by holding real and actual communication
with him. Christ lives in us in two ways. The one life consists in
governing us by his Spirit, and directing all our actions; the other, in
making us partakers of his righteousness; so that, while we can do
nothing of ourselves, we are accepted in the sight of God. The first
relates to regeneration, the second to justification by free grace. This
passage may be understood in the latter sense; but if it is thought
better to apply it to both, I will cheerfully adopt that view.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p32"></span>*And the life which I now live in the
flesh*. There is hardly a sentence here which has not been torn by a
variety of interpretations. Some understand by the word *flesh*, the
depravity of sinful nature; but Paul means by it simply the bodily life,
and it is to this that the objection applies. “You live a bodily life;
but while this corruptible body performs its functions, — while it is
supported by eating and drinking, this is not the heavenly life of
Christ. It is therefore an unreasonable paradox to assert, that, while
you are openly living after the ordinary manner of men, your life is not
your own.”

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p33"></span>Paul replies, that it consists in faith;
which intimates that it is a secret hidden from the senses of man. The
life, therefore, which we attain by faith is not visible to the bodily
eye, but is inwardly perceived in the conscience by the power of the
Spirit; so that the bodily life does not prevent us from enjoying, by
faith, a heavenly life.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p34"></span>“He hath made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” (<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>[Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p35"></span>Again,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p36"></span>“You are fellow-citizens with the saints
and of the  
household of God.” (<span id="iii.iv.iv-p36.2"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p37"></span>And again,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p38"></span>“Our conversation is in heaven.” (<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>[Php
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p39"></span>Paul’s writings are full of similar
assertions, that, while we live in the world, we at the same time live
in heaven; not only because our Head is there, but because, in virtue of
union, we enjoy a life in common with him. (<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>[Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p40"></span>*Who loved me*. This is added to express
the power of faith; for it would immediately occur to any one, — whence
does faith derive such power as to convey into our souls the life of
Christ? He accordingly informs us, that the love of Christ, and his
death, are the objects on which faith rests; for it is in this manner
that the effect of faith must be judged. How comes it that we live by
the faith of Christ? Because “he loved us, and gave himself for us.” The
love of Christ led him to unite himself to us, and he completed the
union by his death. By giving himself for us, he suffered in our own
person; as, on the other hand, faith makes us partakers of every thing
which it finds in Christ. The mention of love is in accordance with the
saying of the apostle John,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p41"></span>“Not that we loved God, but he
anticipated us by his love.”  
(<span id="iii.iv.iv-p41.2"></span>[1Jo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p41.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p42"></span>For if any merit of ours had moved him
to redeem us, this reason would have been stated; but now Paul ascribes
the whole to love: it is therefore of free grace. Let us observe the
order: “He loved us, and gave himself for us.” As if he had said, “He
had no other reason for dying, but because he loved us,” and that “when
we were enemies,” (<span id="iii.iv.iv-p42.1"></span>[Ro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p42.1"></span>,) as he argues in another Epistle.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p43"></span>*He gave himself.* No words can properly
express what this means; for who can find language to declare the
excellency of the Son of God? Yet he it is who gave himself as a price
for our redemption. Atonement, cleansing, satisfaction, and all the
benefits which we derive from the death of Christ, are here represented.
 <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) The words *for me*, are very
emphatic. It will not be enough for any man to contemplate Christ as
having died for the salvation of the world, unless he has experienced
the consequences of this death, and is enabled to claim it as his own.
 <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p46"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p47"></span>**21.** *I do not reject.* There is
great emphasis in this expression; for how dreadful is the ingratitude
manifested in despising the grace of God, so invaluable in itself, and
obtained at such a price! Yet this heinous offense is charged against
the false apostles, who were not satisfied with having Christ alone, but
introduced some other aids towards obtaining salvation. For, if we do
not renounce all other hopes, and embrace Christ alone, we reject the
grace of God. And what resource is left to the man, who “puts from him”
the grace of God, “and judges himself unworthy of everlasting life?”
(<span id="iii.iv.iv-p47.1"></span>[Ac
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p47.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p48"></span>*Christ is dead in vain*  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) There would then have been no value in
the death of Christ; or, Christ would have died without any reward; for
the reward of his death is, that he has reconciled us to the Father by
making an atonement for our sins. Hence it follows, that we are
justified by his grace, and, therefore, not by works. The Papists
explain this in reference to the ceremonial law; but who does not see
that it applies to the whole law? If we could produce a righteousness of
our own, then Christ has suffered in vain; for the intention of his
sufferings was to procure it for us, and what need was there that a work
which we could accomplish for ourselves should be obtained from another?
If the death of Christ be our redemption, then we were captives; if it
be satisfaction, we were debtors; if it be atonement, we were guilty; if
it be cleansing, we were unclean. On the contrary, he who ascribes to
works his sanctification, pardon, atonement, righteousness, or
deliverance, makes void the death of Christ.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p51"></span>This argument, we shall perhaps be told,
is of no weight against those who propose to unite the grace of Christ
with works; which, it is universally admitted, was done by the false
apostles. The two doctrines, it is alleged, stand together, that
righteousness is by the law, and that we are redeemed by the death of
Christ. True; supposing it were granted that a part of our righteousness
is obtained by works, and a part comes from grace. But such theology, it
may easily be proved, was unknown to Paul. His argument with his
opponents is either conclusive or inconclusive. If any blasphemer shall
dare to accuse him of bad reasoning, a powerful defense is at hand; for
that justification in the sight of God of which he treats, is not what
men may imagine to be sufficient, but what is absolutely perfect.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p52"></span>But we are not now called to plead in
behalf of Paul against blasphemers, who venture to speak in reproachful
language of the Holy Spirit himself. Our present business is with the
Papists. They ridicule us, when we argue with Paul that, if
righteousness come by works, Christ is dead in vain. They imagine it to
be a beautiful reply, with which their sophists furnish them, that
Christ merited for us the first grace, that is, the opportunity of
meriting; and that the merit of his death concurs with the satisfactions
of works for the daily pardon of sins. Let them ridicule Paul, whose
language we quote. They must refute him before they can refute us. We
know that he had to deal with men, who did not entirely reject the grace
of Christ, but ascribed the half of salvation to works. In opposition to
them he argues, that “if righteousness is by the law, then Christ is
dead in vain;” and by so doing, he certainly does not allow to works one
drop of righteousness. Between those men and the Papists there is no
difference; and therefore, in refuting them, we are at liberty to employ
Paul’s argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc41006.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p15.1"></span>Sinon
les choses estant douteuses et non resolues encore.” “Except in matters
that were doubtful and not yet settled.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc41006.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p17.1"></span>Ce
voyage-la qui est escrit au quinzieme chapitre“ “That journey which is
recorded in the fifteenth chapter” (of the Acts of the Apostles.)

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc41006.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p18.1"></span>De la
quelle il eust au assez pour les vaincre du tout.” “Which would have
been sufficient for gaining a complete victory over them.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc41006.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p22.1"></span>Et y
montai par revelation.” “And I went up thither by revelation.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc41006.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.ii-p15.1"></span>Τῶν
δοκούντων εἶναί τι, the men ‘who appeared to be somewhat,’ that is,
persons of highest character and estimation. For though this word
signifies to ‘appear,’ or ‘seem,’ yet it is not always used in a
diminutive or disparaging sense, but to denote what they really are, and
what others think them to be. Thus, <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p15.2"></span>τῶν <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p15.3"></span>᾿Ελλήνων δοκοῦντες<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p15.4"></span> διαφέρειν (AElian) are persons esteemed as
the principal men of Greece; and Aristotle is said <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p15.5"></span>σόφος ἄνηρ καὶ ὦν καὶ εἶναι δοκῶν, both to
be, and to be esteemed as a wise man.’ “Chandler.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc41006.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p15.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p16"></span> Porphyry, (<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p16.1"></span>Πορφύριος.) a Greek philosopher, (whose
original name was Malchus,) and Julian, the Roman emperor, (commonly
called “the apostate,”) were able and virulent opponents of
Christianity. Their writings drew forth powerful defences, by which all
their arguments were triumphantly confuted. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc41006.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p25"></span> “<span
id="iii.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>ἀνεθέμην αὐτοῖς”, <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>[Ga
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc41006.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>La
vertu et efficace spiriluelle.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc41006.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p26"></span> “From this portion of sacred history,
we are not at liberty to conclude that either of those two apostles had
fallen into error in faith; or that they differed from each other about
doctrine. Unquestionably, so far as relates to doctrine, Peter was of
the same opinion with Paul on this subject, that it was lawful for a Jew
to live on terms of friendship with believing Gentiles. — The whole of
this controversy related, not to the doctrine of Christian liberty, but
to the exercise of it at different times and places; and on this point
the rules of prudence were better understood by Paul than by Peter.” —
Witsius.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc41006.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p43"></span> See p. 90.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc41006.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p45"></span> “The Papists will readily acknowledge
that we are justified by faith; but they add that it is in part. Now
this gloss spoils all; for they are convinced that we cannot be
righteous before God, unless it be accomplished by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and unless we rely on that salvation which he has procured for
us. The Papists see this very well; and therefore, with a careless air,
they will say, We are justified by faith. But by faith alone? No. On
this point they give battle, and this is the chief article on which we
differ from them.” — Calvin’s Sermons.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc41006.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii-p49"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii-p49.1"></span>Sinon en nous recognoissant despourveus et
du tout desnuez de justice propre a nons.” “Unless by acknowledging that
we are poor and utterly destitute of any righteousness of our own.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc41006.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p18"></span> <span id="iii.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>Εἰ
παράβασις τιῦτο νεν́ομισται ὅτι τὸν νόμον καταλιπόντες ἐν Χριστῷ ζητοῦμεν
δικαιωθὢναι, ἡ αἰτία εἰς αὐτὸν Χριστὸν χωρήσει. “If this be reckoned an
offence, that we have forsaken the law, and seek to be justified through
Christ, the blame will fall on Christ himself.” — Theodoret.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc41006.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p44"></span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p44.1"></span>Χριστός ἐστι πάντα ἐν ὑμῖν καὶ κρατῶν καὶ
δεσπόζων· Καὶ τὸ μὲν ἡμέτερον θέλημα νεκρόν ἐστι. Τὸ δὲ ἐκείνου ζὣ καὶ
κυθερνᾷ τὴν ζωὴν ἡμῶν. “It is Christ who does and rules and governs all
in you; and our will is dead, but his will lives and directs our life.”
— Theophylact.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc41006.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p45"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.iv-p45.1"></span>Car
cene seroit point assez de considerer que Christ est mort pour le salut
du monde, si avec cela un chaeun n’applique particulierement a sa
personne l’efficace et jouissance de ceste grace.” “For it would not be
enough to consider that Christ died for the salvation of the world,
unless each individual specially apply to his own person the efficacy
and enjoyment of that grace.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc41006.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p49"></span> “<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p49.1"></span>Δωρεὰν ἀπέθανε does not mean ‘in vain,’
‘uselessly,’ ‘ineffectually,’ but ‘without just cause;’ for if
righteousness be by the law, there was no reason why he should die.” —
Tittmann.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p50"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p50.1"></span>Εἰ γὰρ
ἀπέθανεν ὁ Χριστός εὔδηλον ὅτι διὰ τὸ μὴ ἰσχύειν τὸν νόμον ἡμᾶς
δικαιοῦν· εἰ δ ᾿ ὁ νόμος δικαιοῖ περιττὸς ὁ τοῦ Χριστοῦ θάνατος. “For if
Christ died, it is very evident that it was because the law was unable
to justify us; and if the law justifies us, the death of Christ was
superfluous.” — Chrysostom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc41007.md)
