[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41008)  [Next](cc41010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="iii.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)<span id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Stand fast therefore in the
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** In libertate igitur, qua Christus
nos liberavit, state; et ne rursum jugo servitutis implicemini.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Behold, I Paul say unto you, that
if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ecee, ego Paulus denuncio vobis,
quod, si circumcidamini, Christus vobis nihil proderit.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For I testify again to every man
that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Testificor enim rursum cuivis
homini, qui circumciditur, quod debitor sit totius Legis faciendae.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Christ is become of no effect unto
you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from
grace.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Exinaniti estis a Christo,
quicunque per Legem justificamini, a gratia excidistis.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p10"></span>**5.** For we through the Spirit wait
for the hope of righteousness by faith.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Nos enim Spiritu, ex fide, spem
justitiae expectamus.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p12"></span>**6.** For in Jesus Christ neither
circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which
worketh by love.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Nam in Christo Iesu neque
Circumcisio quicquam valet, neque Praeputium; sed fides per dilectionero
operans.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.i-p15"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p16"></span>**1.** *Stand fast therefore*. After
having told them that they are the *children of the free woman,* he now
reminds them that they ought not lightly to despise a freedom so
precious. And certainly it is an invaluable blessing, in defense of
which it is our duty to fight, even to death; since not only the highest
temporal considerations, but our eternal interests also, animate us to
the contest.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) Many persons, having
never viewed the subject in this light, charge us with excessive zeal,
when they see us so warmly and earnestly contending for freedom of faith
as to outward matters, in opposition to the tyranny of the Pope. Under
this cloak, our adversaries raise a prejudice against us among ignorant
people, as if the whole object of our pursuit were licentiousness, which
is the relaxation of all discipline. But wise and skillful persons are
aware that this is one of the most important doctrines connected with
salvation. This is not a question whether you shall eat this or that
food, — whether you shall observe or neglect a particular day, (which is
the foolish notion entertained by many, and the slander uttered by
some,) but what is your positive duty before God, what is necessary to
salvation, and what cannot be omitted without sin. In short, the
controversy relates to the liberty of conscience, when placed before the
tribunal of God.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p18"></span>The *liberty* of which Paul speaks is
exemption from the ceremonies of the law, the observance of which was
demanded by the false apostles as necessary. But let the reader, at the
same time, remember, that such liberty is only a part of that which
Christ has procured for us: for how small a matter would it be, if he
had only freed us from ceremonies? This is but a stream, which must be
traced to a higher source. It is because

<span id="iii.vii.i-p19"></span>“Christ was made a curse, that he might
redeem us  
from the curse of the law,” (<span id="iii.vii.i-p19.2"></span>[Ga
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p19.2"></span>;)

<span id="iii.vii.i-p20"></span>because he has revolted the power of the
law” so far as it held us liable to the judgment of God under the
penalty of eternal death; because, in a word, he has rescued us from the
tyranny of sin, Satan, and death. Thus, under one department is included
the whole class; but on this subject we shall speak more fully on the
Epistle to the Colossians.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p21"></span>This *liberty* was procured for us by
Christ on the cross: the fruit and possession of it are bestowed upon us
through the Gospel. Well does Paul, then, warn the Galatians, *not to be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage*, — that is, not to allow a
snare to be laid for their consciences. For if men lay upon our
shoulders an unjust burden, it may be borne; but if they endeavor to
bring our consciences into bondage, we must resist valiantly, even to
death. If men be permitted to bind our consciences, we shall be deprived
of an invaluable blessing, and an insult will be, at the same time,
offered to Christ, the Author of our freedom. But what is the force of
the word *again*, in the exhortation, “and be not entangled *again* with
the yoke of bondage?” for the Galatians had never lived under the law.
It simply means that they were not to be entangled, as if they had not
been redeemed by the grace of Christ. Although the law was given to
Jews, not to Gentiles, yet, apart from Christ, neither the one nor the
other enjoys any freedom, but absolute bondage.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p22"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p23"></span>**2.** *Behold, I Paul*. He could not
have pronounced a severer threatening than that it would exclude them
entirely from the grace of Christ. But what is the meaning of this, that
Christ will *profit nothing* to all who are circumcised? Did Christ
*profit nothing* to Abraham? Nay, it was in order that Christ might
profit him that he received circumcision. If we say that it was in force
till the coming of Christ, what reply shall we make to the case of
Timothy? We must observe, that Paul’s reasoning is directed not so
properly against the outward rite or ceremony, as against the wicked
doctrine of the false apostles, who pretended that it was a necessary
part of the worship of God, and at the same time made it a ground of
confidence as a meritorious work. These diabolical contrivances made
Christ to *profit nothing*; not that the false apostles denied Christ,
or wished him to be entirely set aside, but that they made such a
division between his grace and the works of the law as to leave not more
than the half of salvation due to Christ. The apostle contends that
Christ cannot be divided in this way, and that he “profiteth nothing,”
unless he is wholly embraced.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p24"></span>And what else do our modern Papists but
thrust upon us, in place of circumcision, trifles of their own
invention? The tendency of their whole doctrine is to blend the grace of
Christ with the merit of works, which is impossible. Whoever wishes to
have the half of Christ, loses the whole. And yet the Papists think
themselves exceedingly acute when they tell us that they ascribe nothing
to works, except through the influence of the grace of Christ, as if
this were a different error from what was charged on the Galatians. They
did not believe that they had departed from Christ, or relinquished his
grace; and yet they lost Christ entirely, when that important part of
evangelical doctrine was corrupted.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p25"></span>The expression *Behold, I Paul*, is very
emphatic; for he places himself before them, and gives his name, to
remove all appearance of hesitation. And though his authority had begun
to be less regarded among the Galatians, he asserts that it is
sufficient to put down every adversary.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p26"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p27"></span>**3.** *For I testify again*. What he
now advances is proved by the contradiction involved in the opposite
statement. He who is *a debtor to do the whole law*  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) will never escape death, but will always
continue to be held as guilty; for no man will ever be found who
satisfies the law.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) Such being the
obligation, the man must unavoidably be condemned, and Christ can render
him no service. We see then the contradictory nature of the two
propositions, that we are partakers of the grace of Christ, and yet that
we are bound to fulfill the whole law. But will it not then follow, that
none of the fathers were saved? Will it not also follow that Timothy was
ruined, since Paul caused him to be circumcised? (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p29.2"></span>[Ac
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p29.2"></span>.) Wo to us then, till we have been
emancipated from the law, for subjection is inseparable from
circumcision!

<span id="iii.vii.i-p30"></span>It ought to be observed that Paul is
accustomed to view circumcision in two different aspects, as every
person who has best, owed a moderate degree of attention on his writings
will easily perceive. In the Epistle to the Romans, (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p30.1"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p30.1"></span>,) he calls it “a seal of the righteousness
of faith;” and there, under circumcision, he includes Christ and the
free promise of salvation. But here he contrasts it with Christ, and
faith, and the gospel, and grace, — viewing it simply as a legal
covenant, founded on the merit of works.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p31"></span>The consequence is, as we have already
said, that he does not always speak about circumcision in the same way;
but the reason of the difference must be taken into account. When he
views circumcision in its own nature, he properly makes it to be a
symbol of grace, because such was the appointment of God. But when he is
dealing with the false apostles, who abused circumcision by making it an
instrument for destroying the Gospel, he does not there consider the
purpose for which it was appointed by the Lord, but attacks the
corruption which has proceeded from men.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p32"></span>A very striking example occurs in this
passage. When Abraham had received a promise concerning Christ, and
justification by free grace, and eternal salvation, circumcision was
added, in order to confirm the promise; and thus it became, by the
appointment of God, a sacrament, which was subservient to faith. Next
come the false apostles, who pretend that it is a meritorious work, and
recommend the observance of the law, making a profession of obedience to
it to be signified by circumcision as an initiatory rite. Paul makes no
reference here to the appointment of God, but attacks the unscriptural
views of the false apostles.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p33"></span>It will be objected, that the abuses,
whatever they may be, which wicked men commit, do not at all impair the
sacred ordinances of God. I reply, the Divine appointment of
circumcision was only for a time. After the coming of Christ, it ceased
to be a Divine institution, because baptism had suceeeded in its room.
Why, then, was Timothy circumcised? Not certainly on his own account,
but for the sake of weak brethren, to whom that point was yielded. To
show more fully the agreement between the doctrine of the Papists and
that which Paul opposes, it must be observed, that the sacraments, when
we partake of them in a sincere manner, are not the works of men, but of
God. In baptism or the Lord’s supper, we do nothing but present
ourselves to God, in order to receive his grace. Baptism, viewed in
regard to us, is a passive work: we bring nothing to it but faith; and
all that belongs to it is laid up in Christ. But what are the views of
the Papists? They contrive the *opus operatum*,  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) by which men merit the grace of God; and
what is this, but to extinguish utterly the truth of the sacrament?
Baptism and the Lord’s supper are retained by us, because it was the
will of Christ that the use of them should be perpetual; but those
wicked and foolish notions are rejected by us with the strong abhorrence
which they deserve.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p35"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p36"></span>**4.** *Christ has become of no effect
unto you*. “If ye seek any part of righteousness in the works of the
law, Christ has no concern with you, and *ye are fallen from grace*.”
They were not so grossly mistaken as to believe that by the observance
of the law alone they were justified, but attempted to mix Christ with
the law. In any other point of view, Paul’s threatenings would have
utterly failed to produce alarm. “What are you doing? You deprive
yourselves of every advantage from Christ, and treat his grace as if it
were of no value whatever.” We see then that the smallest part of
justification cannot be attributed to the law without renouncing Christ
and his grace.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p37"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p38"></span>**5.** *For we through the Spirit*. He
now anticipates an objection that, might readily occur. “Will
circumcision then be of no use?” *In Jesus Christ*, he replies, it
*availeth* nothing. *Righteousness*, therefore, depends on faith, and is
obtained, through the Spirit, without ceremonies. To *wait for the hope
of righteousness*, is to place our confidence in this or that object,
or, to decide from what quarter righteousness is to be expected; though
the words probably contain the exhortation, “Let us continue steadfastly
in the hope of righteousness which we obtain by faith.” When he says
that we obtain righteousness by faith, this applies equally to us and to
our fathers. All of them, as Scripture testifies, (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p38.1"></span>[Heb
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p38.1"></span>,) “pleased God;” but their faith was
concealed by the veil of ceremonies, and therefore he distinguishes us
from them by the word *Spirit*, which is contrasted with outward
shadows. His meaning therefore is, that all that is now necessary for
obtaining righteousness is a simple faith, which declines the aid of
splendid ceremonies, and is satisfied with the spiritual worship of God.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p39"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p40"></span>**6.** *For in Jesus Christ*. The reason
why believers now wait for the hope of righteousness through the Spirit
is, that in Christ, that is, in the kingdom of Christ, or in the
Christian church, circumcision with its appendages is abolished; for, by
a figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole, the word
Circumcision is put for ceremonies. While he declares that they no
longer possess any influence, he does not admit that they were always
useless; for he does not maintain that they were repealed till after the
revelation of Christ. This enables us to answer another question, Why
does he here speak so contemptuously of circumcision, as if it had been
of no advantage? The rank which circumcision once held as a sacrament is
not now considered. The question is not what was its value before it had
been abolished. But under the kingdom of Christ, he pronounces it to be
on a level with uncircumcision, because the coming of Christ has put an
end to legal ceremonies.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p41"></span>*But faith, which worketh by love.* The
contrast here introduced, between ceremonies and the exercise of love,
was intended to prevent the Jews from thinking too highly of themselves,
and imagining that they were entitled to some superiority; for towards
the close of the Epistle, instead of this clause, he uses the words, *a
new creature*. (<span id="iii.vii.i-p41.1"></span>[Ga
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p41.1"></span>.) As if he had said, Ceremonies are no
longer enjoined by Divine authority; and, if we abound in the exercise
of love, all is well. Meanwhile, this does not set aside our sacraments,
which are aids to faith but is merely a short announcement of what he
had formerly taught as to the spiritual worship of God.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p42"></span>There would be no difficulty in this
passage, were it not for the dishonest manner in which it has been
tortured by the Papists to uphold the righteousness of works. When they
attempt to refute our doctrine, that we are justified by faith alone,
they take this line of argument. If the faith which justifies us be that
“which worketh by love,” then faith alone does not justify. I answer,
they do not comprehend their own silly talk; still less do they
comprehend our statements. It is not our doctrine that the faith which
justifies is alone; we maintain that it is invariably accompanied by
good works; only we contend that faith alone is sufficient for
justification. The Papists themselves are accustomed to tear faith after
a murderous fashion, sometimes presenting it out of all shape and
unaccompanied by love, and at other times, in its true character. We,
again, refuse to admit that, in any case, faith can be separated from
the Spirit of regeneration; but when the question comes to be in what
manner we are justified, we then set aside all works.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p43"></span>With respect to the present passage,
Paul enters into no dispute whether love cooperates with faith in
justification; but, in order to avoid the appearance of representing
Christians as idle and as resembling blocks of wood, he points out what
are the true exercises of believers. When you are engaged in discussing
the question of justification, beware of allowing any mention to be made
of love or of works, but resolutely adhere to the exclusive particle.
Paul does not here treat of justification, or assign any part of the
praise of it to love. Had he done so, the same argument would prove that
circumcision and ceremonies, at a former period, had some share in
justifying a sinner. As in Christ Jesus he commends faith accompanied by
love, so before the coming of Christ ceremonies were required. But this
has nothing to do with obtaining righteousness, as the Papists
themselves allow; and neither must it be supposed that love possesses
any such influence.

<span id="iii.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
5:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Ye did run well; who did hinder
you that ye should not obey the truth?

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Currebatis bene. Quis vos
impedivit, ne obediretis veritati?

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p4"></span>**8.** This persuasion *cometh* not of
him that calleth you.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Persuasio non est ex eo qui
vocavit vos.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p6"></span>**9.** A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Modicum fermentum totam massam
fermentat.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p8"></span>**10.** I have confidence in you through
the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth
you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Ego persuasus sum Deuteronomy
vobis in Domino, quod non aliud sitis sensuri: qui autem turbat vos,
portabit judicium, quisquis sit.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p10"></span>**11.** And I, brethren, if I yet
preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the
offence of the cross ceased.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11"></span>**11.** Ego autem, fratres, si
circumcisionem adhuc praedicem, quid adhuc persequutionem patior?
exinanitum est scandalurn crucis.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p12"></span>**12.** I would they were even cut off
which trouble you.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p13"></span>**12.** Utinam etiam abscindantur, qui
vos conturbant.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p16"></span>**7.** *Ye did run well*. The censure
which the apostle administers for their present departure from the truth
is mingled with approbation of their former course, for the express
purpose that, by being brought to a sense of shame, they may return more
speedily to the right path. The astonishment conveyed in the question,
*who hindered you?* was intended to produce a blush. I have chosen to
translate the Greek word πείθσθαι, *obey*, rather than *believe*,
because, having once embraced the purity of the gospel, they had been
led away from a course of obedience.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p17"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p18"></span>**8.** *This persuasion cometh not*.
Having formerly combated them by arguments, he at length pronounces,
with a voice of authority, that their *persuasion* came not from God.
Such an admonition would not be entitled to much regard, were it not
supported by the authority of the speaker. But Paul, to whom the
Galatians had been indebted for the announcement of their Divine
calling, was well entitled to address them in this confident language.
This is the reason why he does not directly say, *from God*, but
expresses it by a circumlocution, *him that hath called you*  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) As if he had said, “God is never
inconsistent with himself, and he it is who by my preaching called you
to salvation. This new persuasion then has come from some other quarter;
and if you wish to have it thought that your calling is from God, beware
of lending an ear to those who thrust upon you their new inventions.”
Though the Greek participle καλοῦντος, I acknowledge, is in the present
tense, I have preferred translating, *who hath called you*, in order to
remove the ambiguity.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p21"></span>**9.** *A little leaven*. This refers,
I think, to doctrine, not to men. It guards them against the mischievous
consequences which arise from corruption of doctrine, and warns them not
to consider it, as is commonly done, to be a matter attended by little
or no danger. Satan’s stratagem is, that he does not attempt an avowed
destruction of the whole gospel, but he taints its purity by introducing
false and corrupt opinions. Many persons are thus led to overlook the
seriousness of the injury done, and therefore make a less determined
resistance. The apostle proclaims aloud that, after the truth of God has
been corrupted, we are no longer safe. He employs the metaphor of
*leaven*, which, however small in quantity, communicates its sourness to
the whole mass. We must exercise the utmost caution lest we allow any
counterfeit to be substituted for the pure doctrine of the gospel.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *I have confidence in you*. All
his fierceness is again directed against the false apostles. To them the
evil is traced, and on them the punishment is threatened. Good hopes are
expressed regarding the Galatians, that they will quickly and readily
return to a sincere belief. It gives us courage to learn that good hopes
are entertained about us; for we reckon it shameful to disappoint those
whose feelings towards us are kind and friendly. But to bring back the
Galatians to the pure doctrine of faith, from which they had turned
aside, was the work of God. The apostle says that he has confidence in
them, ἐν Κυρίῳ, *through the Lord*, by which he reminds them that
repentance is a heavenly gift, and that they must ask it from God.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p24"></span>*He that troubleth you*  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) The sentiment which he had just delivered
is confirmed by thus indirectly imputing the greater part of the blame
to those impostors by whom the Galatians had been deceived. From the
punishment denounced against *them*, the Galatians are very nearly
exempted. Let all who introduce confusion into churches, who break the
unity of faith, who destroy their harmony, lend an ear to this; and if
they have any right feeling, let them tremble at this word. God
declares, by the mouth of Paul, that none “through whom such offenses
come” (<span id="iii.vii.ii-p25.3"></span>[Lu
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p25.3"></span>) will pass unpunished. The phrase,
*whosoever he be*, is emphatic; for the high sounding language of the
false apostles had terrified the ignorant multitude. It became necessary
for Paul to defend his doctrine with corresponding warmth and energy,
and not to spare any one who dared to raise his voice against it,
however eminent or however distinguished.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p26"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p27"></span>**11.** *And I, brethren*. This
argument, is drawn from the final cause. “It would be completely in my
power,” he says, “to avoid the displeasure of men, and every kind of
danger and persecution, were I only to mix ceremonies with Christ. The
earnestness with which I oppose them is not on my own account, nor for
my own advantage.” But does it therefore follow that his doctrine is
true? I answer, proper feelings and pure conscience, when manifested by
a teacher, have no small share in obtaining confidence. Besides, it
cannot be believed that any man would be so mad as to take measures, of
his own accord, for bringing distress upon himself. Lastly, he throws
upon his adversaries the suspicion, that, in preaching circumcision,
they were more disposed to consult their own ease than to be faithful in
the service of Christ. In short, Paul was at the farthest remove from
ambition, covetousness, or regard to personal interest, since he
despised favor and applause, and exposed himself to the persecutions and
fury of the multitude rather than swerve a hair’s-breadth from the
purity of the gospel.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p28"></span>*Then is the offense of the cross
ceased*. Willingly does Paul, in speaking of the gospel, call it the
cross, or the preaching of the cross, when he wishes to bring its poor,
simple style, into contrast with the “great swelling words” (<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Jude
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>) of human wisdom or righteousness. For the
Jews, puffed up with an ill-founded confidence in their righteousness,
and the Greeks, with a foolish belief of their wisdom, despised the
meanness of the gospel. When therefore he says that now, If the
preaching of circumcision be admitted, the offense of the cross will no
longer exist, he means that the gospel will meet with no annoyance from
the Jews, but will be taught with their entire concurrence. And why?
Because they will no longer take offense at a pretended and spurious
gospel, gathered out of Moses and out of Christ, but will look with
greater indulgence on that mixture which will leave them in possession
of their former superiority.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p29"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p30"></span>**12.** *Would that they were even cut
off*. His indignation proceeds still farther, and he prays for
destruction on those impostors by whom the Galatians had been deceived.
The word, “cut off,” appears to be employed in allusion to the
circumcision which they pressed. “They tear the church for the sake of
circumcision: I wish they were entirely cut off.” Chrysostom favors this
opinion. But how can such an imprecation be reconciled with the mildness
of an apostle, who ought to wish that all should be saved, and that not
a single person should perish? So far as men are concerned, I admit the
force of this argument; for it is the will of God that we should seek
the salvation of all men without exception, as Christ suffered for the
sins of the whole world. But devout minds are sometimes carried beyond
the consideration of men, and led to fix their eye on the glory of God,
and the kingdom of Christ. The glory of God, which is in itself more
excellent than the salvation of men, ought to receive from us a higher
degree of esteem and regard. Believers earnestly desirous that the glory
of God should be promoted, forget men, and forget the world, and would
rather choose that the whole world should perish, than that the smallest
portion of the glory of God should be withdrawn.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p31"></span>Let us remember, however, that such a
prayer as this proceeds from leaving men wholly out of view, and fixing
our attention on God alone. Paul cannot be accused of cruelty, as if he
were opposed to the law of love. Besides, if a single man or a few
persons be brought into comparison, how immensely must the church
preponderate! It is a cruel kind of mercy which prefers a single man to
the whole church. “On one side, I see the flock of God in danger; on the
other, I see a wolf “seeking,” like Satan, “whom he may devour.” (<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p31.1"></span>[1Pe
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p31.1"></span>.) Ought not my care of the church to
swallow up all my thoughts, and lead me to desire that its salvation
should be purchased by the destruction of the wolf? And yet I would not
wish that a single individual should perish in this way; but my love of
the church and my anxiety about her interests carry me away into a sort
of ecstasy, so that I can think of nothing else.” With such zeal as
this, every true pastor of the church will burn. The Greek word
translated “who *trouble* you,” signifies to remove from a certain rank
or station. By using the word καὶ, *even*, he expresses more strongly
his desire that the impostors should not merely be degraded, but
entirely separated and cut off.  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

<span id="iii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
5:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p2"></span>**13.** For, brethren, ye have been
called unto liberty; only *use* not liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, but by love serve one another.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p3"></span>**13.** Vos enim in libertatem vocati
estis, fratres; tantum ne libertatem in occasionem detis carni, sed per
charitatem servite vobis invicem.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p4"></span>**14.** For all the law is fulfilled in
one word, *even* in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Nam tota Lex in uno verbo
completur, nempe hoc: Diliges proximum tuum sicut to ipsum.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p6"></span>**15.** But if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p7"></span>**15.** Quodsi alius alium vicissim
mordetis et devoratis, videte, ne vicissim alius ab alio consumamini.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p8"></span>**16.** *This* I say then, Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p9"></span>**16.** Dico autem: Spiritu ambulate;
et concupiscentiam carnis non perficietis.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p10"></span>**17.** For the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the
one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p11"></span>**17.** Nam care concupiscit adversus
Spiritum; Spiritus antem adversus carnem; haec mutuo inter se
adversantur; ut non, qnaecunqne volueritis, eadem faciails.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p12"></span>**18.** But if ye be led by the
Spirit, ye are not under the law.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p13"></span>**18.** Quod si Spiritu ducimini, non
estis sub Lege.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p15"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p16"></span>**13.** *Ye have been called to
liberty*. He now proceeds to show in what way liberty must be used. In
the course of expounding the First Epistle to the Corinthians, we have
pointed out that liberty is one thing, and that the use of it is another
thing. Liberty lies in the conscience, and looks to God; the use of it
lies in outward matters, and deals not with God only, but with men.
Having exhorted the Galatians to suffer no diminution of their liberty,
he now enjoins them to be moderate in the use of it, and lays down as a
rule for the lawful use, that it shall not be turned into pretext or
occasion for licentiousness. Liberty is not granted to the flesh, which
ought rather to be held captive under the yoke, but is a spiritual
benefit, which none but pious minds are capable of enjoying.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p17"></span>*But by love*. The method here
explained of restraining liberty from breaking out into wide and
licentious abuse is, to have it regulated *by love*. Let us always
remember that the present question is not, in what manner we are free
before God, but in what manner we may use our liberty in our intercourse
with men. A good conscience submits to no slavery; but to practice
outward slavery, or to abstain from the use of liberty, is attended by
no danger. In a word, if “by love we serve one another,” we shall always
have regard to edification, so that we shall not grow wanton, but use
the grace of God for his honor and the salvation of our neighbors.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p19"></span>**14.** *For all the law*. There is a
contrast in this verse, though not plainly stated, yet evidently to be
understood, between Paul’s exhortation and the doctrine of the false
apostles. While they insisted on ceremonies alone, Paul takes a passing
glance of the actual duties and exercises of Christians. The present
commendation of love is intended to inform the Galatians, that love
forms the chief part of Christian perfection. But we must inquire in to
the reason why all the precepts of the law are included under *love*.
The law consists of two tables, the first of which instructs us
concerning the worship of God and the duties of piety, and the second
instructs us concerning the love of our neighbor; for it is ridiculous
to make a part the same with the whole. Some avoid this difficulty by
reminding us that the first table contains nothing more than to love God
with our whole heart. But Paul makes express mention of love to our
neighbor, and therefore a more satisfactory solution must be sought.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p20"></span>Piety to God, I acknowledge, ranks
higher than love of the brethren; and therefore the observance of the
first table is more valuable in the sight of God than the observance of
the second. But as God himself is invisible, so piety is a thing hidden
from the eyes of men; and, though the manifestation of it was the
purpose for which ceremonies were appointed, they are not certain proofs
of its existence. It frequently happens, that none are more zealous and
regular in observing ceremonies than hypocrites. God therefore chooses
to make trial of our love to himself by that love of our brother, which
he enjoins us to cultivate. This is the reason why, not here only, but
in the Epistle to the Romans, (<span id="iii.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>[Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008), [Rom.
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>,) love is called “the fulfilling of the
law;” not that it excels, but that it proves the worship of God to be
real. God, I have said, is invisible; but he represents himself to us in
the brethren, and in their persons demands what is due to himself. Love
to men springs only from the fear and love of God; and therefore we need
not wonder if, by a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the
whole, the effect include under it the cause of which it is the sign.
But it would be wrong in any person to attempt to separate our love of
God from our love of men.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p21"></span>*Thou shalt love thy neighbor*. He who
loves will render to every man his right, will do injury or harm to no
man, will do good, as far as lies in his power, to all; for what else is
included in the whole of the second table? This, too, is the argument
employed by Paul in his Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>.) The word, *neighbor*, includes all men
living; for we are linked together by a common nature, as Isaiah reminds
us, “that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh” (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p21.2"></span>[Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p21.2"></span>.) The image of God ought to be
particularly regarded as a sacred bond of union; but, for that very
reason, no distinction is here made between friend and foe, nor can the
wickedness of men set aside the right of nature.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p22"></span>“*Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself*”. The love which men naturally cherish toward themselves ought
to regulate our love of our neighbor. All the doctors of the Sorbonne
 <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) are in the habit of arguing that,
as the rule is superior to what it directs, the love of ourselves must
always hold the first rank. This is not to interpret, but to subvert our
Lord’s words. They are asses, and have not even a spark of the love of
their neighhour; for if the love of ourselves were the rule, it would
follow that it is proper and holy, and is the object of the divine
approbation. But we shall never love our neighbors with sincerity,
according to our Lord’s intention, till we have corrected the love of
ourselves. The two affections are opposite and contradictory; for the
love of ourselves leads us to neglect and despise others, — produces
cruelty, covetousness, violence, deceit, and all kindred vices, — drives
us to impatience, and arms us with the desire of revenge. Our Lord
therefore enjoins that it be changed into the love of our neighbor.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p24"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p25"></span>**15.** *But if ye bite and devour one
another*. From the nature of the subject, as well as from the language
employed, we may conjecture that the Galatians had disputes among
themselves; for they differed about doctrine. The apostle now
demonstrates, from the result, how destructive such proceedings in the
church must ultimately prove to be. False doctrine was probably a
judgment from heaven upon their ambition, pride, and other offenses.
This may be concluded from what frequently happens in the divine
dispensations, as well as from an express declaration by the hand of
Moses.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p26"></span>“Thou shalt not hearken unto the words
of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God
proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul.” (<span id="iii.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p27"></span>By *biting and devouring*  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) he means, I think, slanders, accusations,
reproaches, and every other kind of offensive language, as well as acts
of injustice arising either from fraud or violence. And what is the end
of them? To be *consumed*, while the tendency of brotherly love is to
produce mutual protection and kindness. I wish we could always remember,
when the devil tempts us to disputes, that the disagreement of members
within the church can lead to nothing else than the ruin and consumption
of the whole body. How distressing, how mad is it, that we, who are
members of the same body, should be leagued together, of our own accord,
for mutual destruction!

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p29"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p30"></span>**16.** *This I say then*. Now follows
the remedy. The ruin of the church is no light evil, and whatever
threatens it must be opposed with the most determined resistance. But
how is this to be accomplished? By not permitting the flesh to rule in
us, and by yielding ourselves to the direction of the Spirit of God. The
Galatians are indirectly told, that they are carnal, destitute of the
Spirit of God, and that the life which they lead is unworthy of
Christians; for whence did their violent conduct towards each other
proceed, but from their being guided by the lust of the flesh? This, he
tells them, is an evidence that they do not walk according to the
Spirit.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p31"></span>*Ye shall not fulfill*. We ought to
mark the word *fulfill*; by which he means, that, though the sons of
God, so long as they groan under the burden of the flesh, are liable to
commit sin, they are not its subjects or slaves, but make habitual
opposition to its power. The spiritual man may be frequently assaulted
by the lusts of the flesh, but *fulfill* them, — he does not permit them
to reign over him. — On this subject, it will be proper to consult <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ro
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p32"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p33"></span>**17.** *For the flesh lusteth*. The
spiritual life maintained without a struggle. We are here informed of
the nature of the difficulty, which arises from our natural inclinations
being opposed to the Spirit. The word *flesh*, as we had occasion to
observe, in expounding the Epistle to the Romans, denotes the nature of
man; for the limited application of it, which the sophists make to the
lower senses, as they are called, is refuted by various passages; and
the contrast between the two words puts an end to all doubt. *The
Spirit* denotes the renewed nature, or the grace of regeneration; and
what else does the *flesh* mean, but “the old man?” (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p33.1"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p33.1"></span> <span id="iii.vii.iii-p33.2"></span>[Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p33.2"></span> <span id="iii.vii.iii-p33.3"></span>[Col
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p33.3"></span>.) Disobedience and rebellion against the
Spirit of God pervade the whole nature of man. If we would obey the
Spirit, we must labor, and fight, and apply our utmost energy; and we
must begin with self-denial. The compliment paid by our Lord to the
natural inclinations of men, amounts to this, — that there is no greater
agreement between them and righteousness, than between fire and water.
Where, then, shall we find a drop of goodness in man’s free will? unless
we pronounce that to be good which is contrary to the Spirit of God;

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p34"></span>“because the carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be.”  
(<span id="iii.vii.iii-p34.2"></span>[Ro
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p35"></span>All the thoughts of the flesh are acts
of enmity against God.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p36"></span>*So that ye cannot do the things that
ye would*. This refers, unquestionably, to the regenerate. Carnal men
have no battle with depraved lusts, no proper desire to attain to the
righteousness of God. Paul is addressing believers. *The things that ye
would* must mean, not our natural inclinations, but the holy affections
which God bestows upon us by his grace. Paul therefore declares, that
believers, so long as they are in this life, whatever may be the
earnestness of their endeavors, do not obtain such a measure of success
as to serve God in a perfect manner. The highest result does not
correspond to their wishes and desires. I must again refer the reader,
for a more extended view of my sentiments on this subject, to the
Exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, (See Calvin on <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p36.1"></span>[Ro
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p36.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p37"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p38"></span>**18.** *But if ye be led by the
Spirit*. In the way of the Lord believers are apt to stumble. But let
them not be discouraged, because they are unable to satisfy the demands
of the law. Let them listen to the consolatory declaration of the
apostle, which is also found in other parts of his writings, (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p38.1"></span>[Ro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p38.1"></span>,) *ye are not under the law*. Hence it
follows, that the performance of their duties is not rejected on account
of their present defects, but is accepted in the sight of God, as if it
had been in every respect perfect and complete. Paul is still pursuing
the controversy about freedom. The Spirit is elsewhere (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p38.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p38.2"></span>) denominated by him, “the Spirit of
adoption;” and when the Spirit makes men free, he emancipates them from
the yoke of the law. As if he had said, “Is it your desire instantly to
terminate the controversies in which you are now engaged? Walk according
to the Spirit. You will then be free from the dominion of the law, which
will act only in the capacity of a kind adviser, and will no longer lay
a restraint upon your consciences.” Besides, when the condemnation of
the law is removed, freedom from ceremonies follows as a necessary
consequence; for ceremonies mark the condition of a slave.

<span id="iii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p2"></span>**19.** Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are *these*; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness,

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p3"></span>**19.** Manifesta vero sunt opera
carnis, quae sunt adulterium, scortatio, immunditia, lascivia,

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p4"></span>**20.** Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p5"></span>**20.** Idololatria, veneficium,
inimicitiae, contentio, aemulationes, irae, concertationes, seditiones,
haereses,

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p6"></span>**21.** Envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have
also told *you* in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p7"></span>**21.** Invidiae, homicidia, ebrietates,
comissationes, et his similia; Deuteronomy quibus praedico vobis,
quemadmodum et praedixi, quod qui talia agunt regnum Dei haereditate non
possidebunt.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p10"></span>**19.** *Now the works of the flesh are
manifest*. To obey the spirit and to oppose the flesh, are two great
objects which have been set before Christians, and for the attainment of
which they have been urged to make the most strenuous exertions. In
accordance with these views, he now draws a picture both of the flesh
and of the spirit. If men knew themselves, they would not need this
inspired declaration, for they are nothing but flesh; but such is the
hypocrisy belonging to our natural state, we never perceive our
depravity till the tree has been fully made known by its fruits. (<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p10.1"></span>[Mt
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p10.1"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.iv-p10.2"></span>[Lu
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#044)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p11"></span>The apostle therefore now points out to
us those sins against which we must fight, in order that we may not live
according to the flesh. He does not indeed enumerate them all, and so he
himself states at the conclusion of the list; but from those brought
forward, the character of the remainder may be easily ascertained.
*Adultery* and *fornication* are placed first, and next follows
*uncleanness*, which extends to every species of unchastity.
*Lasciviousness* appears to be a subsidiary term, for the Greek word
ασέλγεια, which is thus translated, is applied to those who lead wanton
and dissolute lives. These four denote sins forbidden by the seventh
commandment. The next mentioned is *idolatry*, which is here employed as
a general term for services grossly superstitious and openly practiced.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p12"></span>Seven classes which immediately follow,
are closely allied, and another two are afterwards added. *Anger* and
*hatred* differ chiefly in this, that anger is short, and hatred is
lasting. *Emulations* and *envyings* are the occasions of hatred; and
the following distinction between them is stated by Aristotle, in his
second book on Rhetoric: — He who *emulates* is grieved that another
should excel him, not because the virtue or worth of that person, in
itself considered, gives him uneasiness, but because he would wish to be
superior. The *envious* man has no desire to excel, but is grieved at
the excellence of other men. None, therefore, he tells us, but low and
mean persons indulge in envy, while emulation dwells in lofty and heroic
minds. Paul declares both to be diseases of the *flesh*. From anger and
hatred arise *variance, strife, seditions*; and he even traces the
consequences so far as to mention *murders* and *witchcraft*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) By revellings,  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) he means a dissolute life, and every kind
of intemperance in the gratification of the palate. It deserves notice,
that heresies are enumerated among the works of the flesh; for it shows
clearly that the word *flesh* is not confined, as the sophists imagine,
to sensuality. What produces heresies but ambition, which deals not with
the lower senses, but with the highest faculties of the mind? He says
that these works are *manifest*, so that no man may think that he will
gain anything by evading the question;  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) for what avails it to deny that the flesh
reigns in us, if the fruit betrays the quality of the tree?

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p16"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p17"></span>**21.** *Of which I tell you before*.
By this awful threatening he intended not only to alarm the Galatians,
but likewise to glance indirectly at the false apostles, who had laid
aside the far more valuable instruction, and spent their time in
disputing about ceremonies. He instructs us, by his example, to press
those exhortations and threatenings, agreeably to the words of the
prophet,

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p18"></span>“Cry aloud, spare not; proclaim to my
people their sins.”  
(<span id="iii.vii.iv-p18.2"></span>[Isa
58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p19"></span>What can be conceived more dreadful
than that men should walk after the flesh, and shut themselves out from
the kingdom of God? Who will dare to treat lightly the “abominable
things which God hates?” (<span id="iii.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>[Jer
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#004)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p20"></span>But in this way, we shall be told, all
are cut off from the hope of salvation; for who is there that is not
chargeable with some of those sins? I reply, Paul does not threaten that
all who have sinned, but that all who remain impenitent, shall be
excluded from the kingdom of God. The saints themselves often fall into
grievous sins, but they return to the path of righteousness, “that which
they do they allow not,” (<span id="iii.vii.iv-p20.1"></span>[Ro
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p20.1"></span>,) and therefore they are not included in
this catalogue. All threatenings of the judgments of God call us to
repentance. They are accompanied by a promise that those who repent will
obtain forgiveness; but if we continue obstinate, they remain as a
testimony from heaven against us.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p21"></span>*They who do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God*. The word κληρονομεῖν signifies to possess
by hereditary right; for by no right but that of adoption, as we have
seen in other passages, do we obtain eternal life.

<span id="iii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
5:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p2"></span>**22.** But the fruit of the Spirit is
love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,

<span id="iii.vii.v-p3"></span>**22.** Fructus vero Spiritus est
charitas, gaudium, pax, tolerantia, comitas, benignitas, fides,

<span id="iii.vii.v-p4"></span>**23.** Meekness, temperance: against
such there is no law.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p5"></span>**23.** Mansuetudo, temperantia: adversus
ejusmodi non est Lex.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p6"></span>**24.** And they that are Christ’s have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p7"></span>**24.** Qui autem Christi sunt carnem
crucifixerunt cum affectibus et concupiscentiis.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p8"></span>**25.** If we live in the Spirit, let us
also walk in the Spirit.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p9"></span>**25.** Si vivimus Spiritu, etiam Spiritu
ambulemus.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p10"></span>**26.** Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, provoking one another, envying one another.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p11"></span>**26.** Ne sinms inanis gloriae cupidi,
invicem provocantes, invicem invidentes.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.v-p13"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p14"></span>**22.** *But the fruit*  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) *of the Spirit*. In the former part of
the description he condemned the whole nature of man as producing
nothing but evil and worthless fruits. He now informs us that all
virtues, all proper and well regulated affections, proceed from the
Spirit, that is, from the grace of God, and the renewed nature which we
derive from Christ. As if he had said, “Nothing but what is evil comes
from man; nothing good comes but from the Holy Spirit.” There have often
appeared in unrenewed men remarkable instances of gentleness, integrity,
temperance, and generosity; but it is certain that all were but specious
disguises. Curius and Fabrieius were distinguished for courage, Cato for
temperance, Scipio for kindness and generosity, Fabius for patience; but
it was only in the sight of men, and as members of civil society, that
they were so distinguished. In the sight of God nothing is pure but what
proceeds from the fountain of all purity.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p16"></span>*Joy* does not here, I think, denote
that “joy in the Holy Ghost” (<span id="iii.vii.v-p16.1"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p16.1"></span>,) of which he speaks elsewhere, but that
cheerful behavior towards our fellow-men which is the opposite of
moroseness. *Faith* means truth, and is contrasted with cunning, deceit,
and falsehood, as *peace* is with quarrels and contentions.
*Long-suffering* is gentleness of mind, which disposes us to take
everything in good part, and not to be easily offended. The other terms
require no explanation, for the dispositions of the mind must be learned
from the outward conduct.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p17"></span>But if spiritual men are known by their
works, what judgment, it will be asked, shall we form of wicked men and
idolaters, who exhibited an illustrious resemblance of all the virtues?
for it is evident from their works that they were spiritual. I reply, as
all the works of the flesh do not appear openly in a carnal man, but his
carnaltry is discovered by one or another vice, so a single virtue will
not entitle us to conclude that a man is spiritual. Sometimes it will be
made evident, by other vices, that sin reigns in him; and this
observation may be easily applied to all the cases which I have
enumerated.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p18"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p19"></span>**23.** *Against such there is no law*.
Some understand these words as meaning simply that the law is not
directed against good works, “from evil manners have sprung good laws.”
But Paul’s real meaning is deeper and less obvious; namely, that, where
the Spirit reigns, the law has no longer any dominion. By moulding our
hearts to his own righteousness, the Lord delivers us from the severity
of the law, so that our intercourse with himself is not regulated by its
covenant, nor our consciences bound by its sentence of condemnation. Yet
the law continues to teach and exhort, and thus performs its own office;
but our subjection to it is withdrawn by the Spirit of adoption. He thus
ridicules the false apostles, who, while they enforced subjection to the
law, were not less eager to release themselves from its yoke. The only
way, he tells us, in which this is accomplished, is, when the Spirit of
God obtains dominion, from which we are led to conclude that they had no
proper regard to spiritual righteousness.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p21"></span>**24.** *And they that are Christ’s*. He
adds this, in order to show that all Christians have renounced the
flesh, and therefore enjoy freedom. While he makes this statement, the
apostle reminds the Galatians what true Christianity is, so far as
relates to the life, and thus guards them against a false profession of
Christianity. The word *crucified* is employed to point out that the
mortification of the flesh is the effect of the cross of Christ. This
work does not belong to man. By the grace of Christ

<span id="iii.vii.v-p22"></span>“we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death” (<span id="iii.vii.v-p22.1"></span>[Ro
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p22.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vii.v-p23"></span>that we no longer might live unto
ourselves. If we are buried with Christ, by true self-denial, and by the
destruction of the old man, we shall then enjoy the privilege of the
sons of God. The flesh is not yet indeed entirely destroyed; but it has
no right to exercise dominion, and ought to yield to the Spirit. The
*flesh* and its *lusts* are a figure of speech of exactly the same
import with the *tree* and its *fruits*. The *flesh* itself is the
depravity of corrupt nature, from which all evil actions proceed. (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p23.1"></span>[Mt
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p23.1"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.v-p23.2"></span>[Mr
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p23.2"></span>.) Hence it follows, that the members of
Christ have cause to complain, if they are still held to be in bondage
to the law, from which all who have been regenerated by his Spirit are
set free.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p24"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p25"></span>**25.** *If we live in the Spirit.*
According to his usual custom, the apostle draws from the doctrine a
practical exhortation. The death of the flesh is the life of the Spirit.
If the Spirit of God lives in us, let him govern our actions. There will
always be many persons daring enough to make a false boast of living in
the Spirit, but the apostle challenges them to a proof of the fact. As
the soul does not remain idle in the body, but gives motion and rigour
to every member and part, so the Spirit of God cannot dwell in us
without manifesting himself by the outward effects. By the *life* is
here meant the inward power, and by the *walk* the outward actions. The
metaphorical use of the word *walk*, which frequently occurs, describes
works as evidences of the spiritual life.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p26"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p27"></span>**26.** *Let us not be desirous of
vain-glory*, The special exhortations which were addressed to the
Galatians were not more necessary for them than they are adapted to our
own time. Of many evils existing in society at large, and particularly
in the church, ambition is the mother. Paul therefore directs us to
guard against it, for the *vain-glory* (κενοδοξία) of which he speaks is
nothing else than *ambition*, (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p27.1"></span>filimia,) or the desire of honor, by which
every one desires to excel all others. The heathen philosophers do not
condemn every desire of glory; but among Christians, whoever is desirous
of glory departs from true glory, and therefore is justly charged with
idle and foolish ambition. It is not lawful for us to glow but in God
alone. Every other kind of glorying is pure vanity. Mutual
*provocations* and *envyings* are the daughters of ambition. He who
aspires to the highest rank must of necessity envy all others, and
disrespectful, biting, stinging language is the unavoidable consequence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc41009.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.i-p17.1"></span>Car
il n’est pas yci seulement question du monde et des eommoditez de ceste
vie, mais aussi des choses sainctes et qui eoncernent le service de
Dieu.” “For the present subject comprehends not merely the world and the
benefits of this life, but also holy things, and those which relate to
the worship of God.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc41009.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p28"></span> “If Judaism is the road to salvation,
the whole of Judaism must be observed. You must not cull and throw away
whatever part of it you think fit.” — Grotius.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc41009.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.i-p29.1"></span>Car
il ne s’en trouvera jamais un seul, qui satisfait entierement a la Loy.”
“For never will there be found a single individual who entirely
satisfies the law.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc41009.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p34"></span> ‘Thus the Council of Trent has decreed:
“If any man shall say that the sacraments of the new law do not contain
the grace which they signify, or do not confer grace upon those who do
not oppose an obstacle to it, as if external signs of grace or
righteousness received by faith, let him be accursed.” — Sessio 7. <span
id="iii.vii.i-p34.1"></span>*De Sacramentis in genere*, Canon vi. Again,
“If any man shall say, that grace is not confered by the sacraments of
the new law themselves, <span id="iii.vii.i-p34.2"></span>*ex opere
operato*, but that faith alone in the divine promise is sufficient to
obtain grace, let him be accursed. — Sessio vii. <span
id="iii.vii.i-p34.3"></span>*De Sacramentis in genere*, Canon viii. The
translator subjoins a few observations, by the late Rev. Dr. Dick, on a
phrase which appears to defy translation. “This barbarous phrase <span
id="iii.vii.i-p34.4"></span>*opus operatum*, which is utterly
unintelligible without an explanation, signifies the external
celebration of the sacraments. It has been defined by Popish writers to
be the performance of the external work without any internal motion; and
sacraments have been said to confer grace <span
id="iii.vii.i-p34.5"></span>*ex opere operato*, because, besides the
exhibition and application of the sign, no good motion is necessary in
the receiver. All that is required is, that no obstacle shall be opposed
to the reception of grace, and the only obstacle is mortal sin.” —
Lectares on Theology, volume 4.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc41009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p19"></span> “The apostle’s statement seems to be,
‘This persuasion to which you have yielded is not from Christ. It comes
from a very different quarter. The men who have employed it are not
moved by *his* spirit. They have no divine authority; and you ought not
to yield to them, no, not for an hour.’“ — Brown.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc41009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p25"></span> “However, he ‘that troubleth you,’ or
rather, ‘perplexes and unsettles you;’ as if this was *all* he could do,
— not *teach* them. So Galen, cited by Wetstein; <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>ταράττοντες μόνον τοὺς μανθάνοντας,
διδάσκοντες δὲ οὐδέν, ‘only troubling the scholars, and teaching them
nothing.’ The use of the singular will not prove that there was no more
than *one* false teacher; since it may be used collectively. Yet the
apostle seems to glance at one, the principal of them; and by <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p25.2"></span>ὅστις ἄν ᾖ, ‘whosoever he be,’ we may infer
that he was a person of some consequence.” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc41009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p32"></span> “But I am so far from inculcating on
you the necessity of circumcision, I would even wish that all those,
without exception, who endeavour thus to subvert your faith, were wholly
cut off from the communion of the Christian church. — I wish that,
instead of having hearkened to these seducing teachers, they had been
cut off by you, excluded from the church, and disowned as brethren.’
(See <span id="iii.vii.ii-p32.1"></span>[1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p32.1"></span>.) And where he here expresses his wish,
that the troublers of the Galatians were cut off, it is only putting
them in mind what would have been both their prudence and their duty to
have done; not to have hearkened to them, but to have disowned, and
refused society with them as Christians. This being the plain and
natural sense of the apostle’s words, they cannot be charged with any
ill-natured or unfriendly wish.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc41009.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p23"></span> The College of the *Sorbonne*, in
Paris, takes its name from *Robert de Serbonne*, who founded it in the
middle of the thirteenth century. Its reputation for theological
learning, philosophy, classical literature, and all that formerly
constituted a liberal education, was deservedly high. In the Doctors of
the Sorbonne the Reformation found powerful adversaries. The very name
of this university, to which the greatest scholars in Europe were
accustomed to pay deference, would be regarded by the multitude with
blind veneration. If such men as Calvin, Beza, Melanchthon, and Luther,
were prepared by talents and acquirements of the first order to brave
the terrors of that name, they must have frequently lamented its
influence on many of their hearers. Yet our author meets undaunted this
formidable array, and enters the field with the full assurance of
victory. Despising, as we naturally do, the weak superstitions and
absurd tenets held by the Church of Rome, we are apt to underrate our
obligations to the early champions of the Reformed faith, who
encountered, with success, those veteran warriors, and ‘contended
earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the saints.’ (<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p23.2"></span>[Jude
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p23.2"></span>.)” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc41009.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p28"></span> <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p28.1"></span>Ταῖς λέξεσι δὲ ἐμφαντικῶς ἐχρήσατο· Οὐ γὰρ
εἶπε δάκνετε, μόνον ὅπερ ἐστὶ φυμονμένου ἀλλὰ καὶ κατεσθίετε ὅπερ ἔστιν
ἐμμένοντος τὣ πονηρίᾳ· ὁ μὲν γὰρ δάκνων ὀργὢς ἐπλήρωσε πάθος ὁ δὲ
κατεσθίων θηριωδίας ἐσχάτης παρέσχεν ἀπόδειξιν·. “These words are used
by him emphatically; for he did not merely say ‘Bite,’ which denotes an
angry person, but likewise, ‘Devour,’ which denotes one who persists in
wickedness. He who ‘bites’ has exhausted his angry passion, but he who
‘devours’ has given a demonstration of extreme cruelty.” — Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc41009.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p13"></span> “The original word <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p13.1"></span>φαρμακεία sometimes denotes ‘poisonings,’
which were frequently practised among the heathens. Sometimes it
signifies incantations or magic arts, or witchcraft, by which impostors
and cheats endeavoured to impose on ignorant and credulous people, and
which were carried on by poisonous intoxicating draughts and ointments,
by which they did great mischief to the bodies of men. As it is here
immediately placed after idolatry, I should imagine that the apostle
intended those cursed arts of incantations and charms, those various
methods of imposture and cheats, which were made use of by the heathen
priests, to promote the idolatrous reverence and worship of their false
gods. (See <span id="iii.vii.iv-p13.2"></span>[Re
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p13.2"></span>.)” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc41009.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p14"></span> By <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p14.1"></span>κῶμοι are denoted those nocturnal
revellings usually attendant on an evening of debauchery, consisting of
licentious singing, dancing, and parading the streets with drunken
riotings.” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc41009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.iv-p15.1"></span>En
volant nier, et usant de tergiversation.” “By wishing to deny it, and by
shuffling.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc41009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p15"></span> “In the service of *sin* the toil is so
great that, in comparison thereof, the benefit is as nothing; in the
service of *God* the benefit is so great that, in comparison thereof,
the labour is as nothing. Where the flesh rules all, the ‘work’ exceeds
the ‘fruit;’ and therefore, without even mentioning the ‘work,’ it is
called the ‘fruit’ of the Spirit. (See <span
id="iii.vii.v-p15.1"></span>[Eph. 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p15.1"></span>.)” — Bishop Sanderson.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc41010)
