[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc41017)  [Next](cc41019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="iv.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Children, obey your parents in the
Lord: for this is right.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Filii, obedite parentibus vestris
in Domino; hoc enim est justum.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Honor thy father and mother, (which
is the first commandment with promise,)

<span id="iv.vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Honora patrem tuum et matrem; (quod
est mandatum primum cum promissione:)

<span id="iv.vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** That it may be well with thee, and
thou mayest live long on the earth.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ut bene tibi sit, et sis longaevus
super terram.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And, ye fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Vos etiam, patres, ne ad iram
provocetis filios vestros; sed educate eos in disciplina et correptione
Domini.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p12"></span>**1.** *Children, obey.* Why does the
apostle use the word *obey* instead of *honor,*  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) which has a greater extent of meaning?
It is because *Obedience* is the evidence of that *honor* which children
owe to their parents, and is therefore more earnestly enforced. It is
likewise more difficult; for the human mind recoils from the idea of
subjection, and with difficulty allows itself to be placed under the
control of another. Experience shews how rare this virtue is; for do we
find one among a thousand that is obedient to his parents? By a figure
of speech, a part is here put for the whole, but it is the most
important part, and is necessarily accompanied by all the others.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p14"></span>*In the Lord.* Besides the law of nature,
which is acknowledged by all nations, the obedience of children is
enforced by the authority of God. Hence it follows, that parents are to
be obeyed, so far only as is consistent with piety to God, which comes
first in order. If the command of God is the rule by which the
submission of children is to be regulated, it would be foolish to
suppose that the performance of this duty could lead away from God
himself.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p15"></span>*For this is right.* This is added in
order to restrain the fierceness which, we have already said, appears to
be natural to almost all men. He proves it to be *right,* because God
has commanded it; for we are not at liberty to dispute, or call in
question, the appointment of him whose will is the unerring rule of
goodness and righteousness. That *honor* should be represented as
including *obedience* is not surprising; for mere ceremony is of no
value in the sight of God. The precept, *honor thy father and mother,*
comprehends all the duties by which the sincere affection and respect of
children to their parents can be expressed.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p17"></span>**2.** *Which is the first commandment
with promise.* The promises annexed to the commandments are intended to
excite our hopes, and to impart a greater cheerfulness to our obedience;
and therefore Paul uses this as a kind of seasoning to render the
submission, which he enjoins on children, more pleasant and agreeable.
He does not merely say, that God has offered a reward to him who obeys
his father and mother, but that such an offer is peculiar to this
commandment. If each of the commandments had its own promises, there
would have been no ground for the commendation bestowed in the present
instance. But this is *the first commandment,* Paul tells us, which God
has been pleased, as it were, to seal by a remarkable promise. There is
some difficulty here; for the second commandment likewise contains a
promise,

<span id="iv.vii.i-p18"></span>“I am the Lord thy God, who shew mercy
unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.”  
(<span id="iv.vii.i-p18.2"></span>[Exod.
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii.i-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.vii.i-p19"></span>But this is universal, applying
indiscriminately to the whole law, and cannot be said to be annexed to
that commandment. Paul’s assertion still holds true, that no other
commandment but that which enjoins the obedience due by children to
their parents is distinguished by a promise.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p21"></span>**3.** *That it may be well with thee*.
The promise is — a long life; from which we are led to understand that
the present life is not to be overlooked among the gifts of God. On this
and other kindred subjects I must refer my reader to the *Institutes of
the Christian* *Religion;*  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md)
satisfying myself at present with saying, in a few words, that the
reward promised to the obedience of children is highly appropriate.
Those who shew kindness to their parents from whom they derived life,
are assured by God, that in this life it will *be well with them.*

<span id="iv.vii.i-p23"></span>*And that thou mayest live long on the
earth.* Moses expressly mentions the land of Canaan,

<span id="iv.vii.i-p24"></span>“that thy days may be long upon the land
which  
the Lord thy God giveth thee.” (<span id="iv.vii.i-p24.2"></span>[Ex
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.vii.i-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vii.i-p25"></span>Beyond this the Jews could not conceive
of any life more happy or desirable. But as the same divine blessing is
extended to the whole world, Paul has properly left out the mention of a
place, the peculiar distinction of which lasted only till the coming of
Christ.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p27"></span>**4.** *And, ye fathers.* Parents, on the
other hand, are exhorted not to irritate their children by unreasonable
severity. This would excite hatred, and would lead them to throw off the
yoke altogether. Accordingly, in writing to the Colossians, he adds,
“lest they be discouraged.” (<span id="iv.vii.i-p27.1"></span>[Col
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.vii.i-p27.1"></span>.) Kind and liberal treatment has rather a
tendency to cherish reverence for their parents, and to increase the
cheerfulness and activity of their obedience, while a harsh and unkind
manner rouses them to obstinacy, and destroys the natural affections.
But Paul goes on to say, “let them be fondly cherished;” for the Greek
word, (ἐκτρέφετε,) which is translated *bring up,* unquestionably
conveys the idea of gentleness and forbearance. To guard them, however,
against the opposite and frequent evil of excessive indulgence, he again
draws the rein which he had slackened, and adds, *in the instruction and
reproof of the Lord.* It is not the will of God that parents, in the
exercise of kindness, shall spare and corrupt their children. Let their
conduct towards their children be at once mild and considerate, so as to
guide them in the fear of the Lord, and correct them also when they go
astray. That age is so apt to become wanton, that it requires frequent
admonition and restraint.

<span id="iv.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
6:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Servants, be obedient to them that
are *your* masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Servi, obedite dominis secundum
carnem, cum timore et tremore in simplicitate cordis vestri, tanquam
Christo;

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p4"></span>**6.** Not with eye-service, as
men-pleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart;

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Non quasi ad oculum servientes,
tanquam hominibus studentes placere, sed tanquam servi Christi,
facientes voluntatem Dei ex animo,

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** With good will doing service, as
to the Lord, and not to men:

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Cum benevolentia, servientes
Domino, et non hominibus;

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** Knowing, that whatsoever good
thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether *he
be* bond or free.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Scientes quod unusquisque quicquid
boni fecerit, recipiet a Domino, sive servus, sive liber.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p10"></span>**9.** And, ye masters, do the same
things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also
is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Et vos, domini, mutuum officium
praestate erga illos, remittentes minas; scientes quod illorum et vester
Dominus est in coelis; et non est apud eum personarum acceptio.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p14"></span>**5.** *Servants, be obedient.* His
exhortation to servants is so much the more earnest, on account of the
hardship and bitterness of their condition, which renders it more
difficult to be endured. And he does not speak merely of outward
obedience, but says more about *fear* willingly rendered; for it is a
very rare occurrence to find one who willingly yields himself to the
control of another. The *servants* (δοῦλοι) whom he immediately
addresses were not hired servants, like those of the present day, but
*slaves,* such as were in ancient times, whose *slavery* was perpetual,
unless, through the favor of their masters, they obtained freedom, —
whom their masters bought with money, that they might impose upon them
the most degrading employments, and might, with the full protection of
the law, exercise over them the power of life and death. To such he
says, *obey your masters,* lest they should vainly imagine that carnal
freedom had been procured for them by the gospel.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15"></span>But as some of the worst men were
compelled by the dread of punishment, he distinguishes between Christian
and ungodly servants, by the feelings which they cherished. *With fear
and trembling;* that is, with the careful respect which springs from an
honest purpose. It can hardly be expected, however, that so much
deference will be paid to a mere man, unless a higher authority shall
enforce the obligation; and therefore he adds, *as doing the will of
God.* (Ver. 6.) Hence it follows, that it is not enough if their
obedience satisfy the eyes of men; for God requires truth and sincerity
of heart. When they serve their masters faithfully, they obey God. As if
he had said, “Do not suppose that by the judgment of men you were thrown
into slavery. It is God who has laid upon you this burden, who has
placed you in the power of your masters. He who conscientiously
endeavors to render what he owes to his master, performs his duty not to
man only, but to God.”

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p17"></span>*With good will doing service.* (Ver.
7.) This is contrasted with the suppressed indignation which swells the
bosom of slaves. Though they dare not openly break out or give signs of
obstinacy, their dislike of the authority exercised over them is so
strong, that it is with the greatest unwillingness and reluctance that
they obey their masters.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p18"></span>Whoever reads the accounts of the
dispositions and conduct of slaves, which are scattered through the
writings of the ancients, will be at no loss to perceive that the number
of injunctions here given does not exceed that of the diseases which
prevailed among this class, and which it was of importance to cure. But
the same instruction applies to male and female servants of our own
times. It is God who appoints and regulates all the arrangements of
society. As the condition of servants is much more agreeable than that
of slaves in ancient times, they ought to consider themselves far less
excusable, if they do not endeavor, in every way, to comply with Paul’s
injunctions.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p19"></span>*Masters according to the flesh.* (Ver.
5.) This expression is used to soften the harsh aspect of slavery. He
reminds them that their spiritual freedom, which was by far the most
desirable, remained untouched.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p20"></span>*Eye-service* (ὀφθαλμοδουλεία) is
mentioned; because almost all servants are addicted to flattery, but, as
soon as their master’s back is turned, indulge freely in contempt, or
perhaps in ridicule. Paul therefore enjoins godly persons to keep at the
greatest distance from such deceitful pretences.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p21"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p22"></span>**8.** *Knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man doeth.* What a powerful consolation! However unworthy,
however ungrateful or cruel, their masters may be, God will accept their
services as rendered to himself. When servants take into account the
pride and arrogance of their masters, they often become more indolent
from the thought that their labor is thrown away. But Paul informs them
that their reward is laid up with God for services which appear to be
ill bestowed on unfeeling men; and that there is no reason, therefore,
why they should be led aside from the path of duty. He adds, *whether
bond or free* No distinction is made between a slave and a free man. The
world is wont to set little value on the labors of slaves; but God
esteems them as highly as the duties of kings. In his estimate, the
outward station is thrown aside, and each is judged according to the
uprightness of his heart.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24"></span>**9.** *And ye masters.* In the
treatment of their slaves, the laws granted to masters a vast amount of
power. Whatever had thus been sanctioned by the civil code was regarded
by many as in itself lawful. To such an extent did their cruelty in some
instances proceed, that the Roman emperors were forced to restrain their
tyranny. But though no royal edicts had ever been issued for the
protection of slaves, God allows to masters no power over them beyond
what is consistent with the law of love. When philosophers attempt to
give to the principles of equity their full effect in restraining the
excess of severity to slaves, they inculcate that masters ought to treat
them in the same manner as hired servants. But they never look beyond
utility; and, in judging even of that, they inquire only what is
advantageous to the head of the family, or conducive to good order. The
Apostle proceeds on a very different principle. He lays down what is
lawful according to the Divine appointment, and how far they, too, are
debtors to their servants.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p25"></span>*Do the same things to them.* “Perform
the duty which on your part you owe to them.” What he calls in another
Epistle, (τὸ δίκαιον καὶ τὴν ἰσότητα) *that which is just and equal,*
 <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) is precisely what, in this
passage, he calls *the same things,* (τὰ αὐτὰ.) And what is this but the
law of analogy? Masters and servants are not indeed on the same level;
but there is a mutual law which binds them. By this law, servants are
placed under the authority of their masters; and, by the same law, due
regard being had to the difference of their station, masters lie under
certain obligations to their servants. This analogy is greatly
misunderstood; because men do not try it by the law of love, which is
the only true standard. Such is the import of Paul’s phrase, *the same
things;* for we are all ready enough to demand what is due to ourselves;
but, when our own duty comes to be performed, every one attempts to
plead exemption. It is chiefly, however, among persons of authority and
rank that injustice of this sort prevails.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p27"></span>*Forbearing threatenings.* Every
expression of disdain, arising from the pride of masters, is included in
the single word, *threatenings.* They are charged not to assume a lordly
air or a terrific attitude, as if they were constantly threatening some
evil against their servants, when they have occasion to address them.
Threatenings, and every kind of barbarity, originate in this, that
masters look upon their servants as if they had been born for their sake
alone, and treat them as if they were of no more value than cattle.
Under this one description, Paul forbids every kind of disdainful and
barbarous treatment.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p28"></span>*Their Master and yours.* A very
necessary warning. What is there which we will not dare to attempt
against our inferiors, if they have no ability to resist, and no means
of obtaining redress, — if no avenger, no protector appears, none who
will be moved by compassion to listen to their complaints? It happens
here, in short, according to the common proverb, that Impunity is the
mother of Licentiousness. But Paul here reminds them, that, while
masters possess authority over their servants, they have themselves the
same Master in heaven, to whom they must render an account.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p29"></span>*And there is no respect of persons with
him.* A regard to *persons* blinds our eyes, so as to leave no room for
law or justice; but Paul affirms that it is of no value in the sight of
God. By *person* is meant anything about a man which does not belong to
the real question, and which we take into account in forming a judgment.
Relationship, beauty, rank, wealth, friendship, and everything of this
sort, gain our favor; while the opposite qualities produce contempt and
sometimes hatred. As those absurd feelings arising from the sight of a
*person* have the greatest possible influence on human judgments, those
who are invested with power are apt to flatter themselves, as if God
would countenance such corruptions. “Who is he that God should regard
him, or defend his interest against mine?” Paul, on the contrary,
informs masters that they are mistaken if they suppose that their
servants will be of little or no account before God, because they are so
before men. “God is no respecter of persons,” (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Ac
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>,) and the cause of the meanest man will not
be a whit less regarded by him than that of the loftiest monarch.

<span id="iv.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Finally, my brethren, be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Quod superest, fratres mei,
sitis fortes in Domino, et in robore potentiae ipsius.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** Put on the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Induite totam armaturam Dei, ut
possitis stare adversus insidias Diaboli.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
high *places*

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Quia non est nobis lucta
adversus carnem et sanguinem, sed adversus principatus, adversus
potestates, adversus mundanos principes tenebrarum saeculi hujus,
adversus spirituales malitias in coelestibus.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** Wherefore take unto you the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day,
and having done all, to stand.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Quapropter assumite totam
armaturam Dei, ut possitis resistere in die malo, et omnibus peractis
stare.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p11"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p12"></span>**10.** *Finally.* Resuming his general
exhortations, he again enjoins them to *be strong,* — to summon up
courage and vigor; for there is always much to enfeeble us, and we are
ill fitted to resist. But when our weakness is considered, an
exhortation like this would have no effect, unless *the Lord* were
present, and stretched out his hand to render assistance, or rather,
unless he supplied us with all the power. Paul therefore adds, *in the
Lord*. As if he had said, “‘You have no right to reply, that you have
not the ability; for all that I require of you is, *be strong in the
Lord.*” To explain his meaning more fully, he adds, *in the power of his
might,* which tends greatly to increase our confidence, particularly as
it shews the remarkable assistance which God usually bestows upon
believers. If the Lord aids us by *his mighty power,* we have no reason
to shrink from the combat. But it will be asked, What purpose did it
serve to enjoin the Ephesians to be strong in the Lord’s mighty power,
which they could not of themselves accomplish? I answer, there are two
clauses here which must be considered. He exhorts them to be courageous,
but at the same time reminds them to ask from God a supply of their own
deficiencies, and promises that, in answer to their prayers, the power
of God will be displayed.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p13"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p14"></span>**11.** *Put on the whole armor.* God
has furnished us with various defensive weapons, provided we do not
indolently refuse what is offered. But we are almost all chargeable with
carelessness and hesitation in using the offered grace; just as if a
soldier, about to meet the enemy, should take his helmet, and neglect
his shield. To correct this security, or, we should rather say, this
indolence, Paul borrows a comparison from the military art, and bids us
*put on the whole armor of God.* We ought to be prepared on all sides,
so as to want nothing. The Lord offers to us arms for repelling every
kind of attack. It remains for us to apply them to use, and not leave
them hanging on the wall. To quicken our vigilance, he reminds us that
we must not only engage in open warfare, but that we have a crafty and
insidious foe to encounter, who frequently lies in ambush; for such is
the import of the apostle’s phrase, THE WILES  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) (τὰς μεθοδείας.md) *of the devil*

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p17"></span>**12.** *For we wrestle*  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) *not.* To impress them still more
deeply with their danger, he points out the nature of the enemy, which
he illustrates by a comparative statement, *Not against flesh and
blood.* The meaning is, that our difficulties are far greater than if we
had to fight with men. There we resist human strength, sword is opposed
to sword, man contends with man, force is met by force, and skill by
skill; but here the case is widely different. All amounts to this, that
our enemies are such as no human power can withstand. By *flesh and
blood* the apostle denotes men, who are so denominated in order to
contrast them with spiritual assailants. This is no bodily struggle.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p19"></span>Let us remember this when the injurious
treatment of others provokes us to revenge. Our natural disposition
would lead us to direct all our exertions against the men themselves;
but this foolish desire will be restrained by the consideration that the
men who annoy us are nothing more than darts thrown by the hand of
Satan. While we are employed in destroying those darts, we lay ourselves
open to be wounded on all sides. To *wrestle with flesh and blood* will
not only be useless, but highly pernicious. We must go straight to the
enemy, who attacks and wounds us from his concealment, — who slays
before he appears.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p20"></span>But to return to Paul. He describes our
enemy as formidable, not to overwhelm us with fear, but to quicken our
diligence and earnestness; for there is a middle course to be observed.
When the enemy is neglected, he does his utmost to oppress us with
sloth, and afterwards disarms us by terror; so that, ere the engagement
has commenced, we are vanquished. By speaking of the power of the enemy,
Paul labors to keep us more on the alert. He had already called him *the
devil,* but now employs a variety of epithets, to make the reader
understand that this is not an enemy who may be safely despised.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p21"></span>*Against principalities, against
powers.* Still, his object in producing alarm is not to fill us with
dismay, but to excite us to caution. He calls them κοσμοκράτορας, that
is, *princes of the* *world;* but he explains himself more fully by
adding — *of the darkness of the world.* The devil reigns in the world,
because the world is nothing else than darkness. Hence it follows, that
the corruption of the world gives way to the kingdom of the devil; for
he could not reside in a pure and upright creature of God, but all
arises from the sinfulness of men. By *darkness,* it is almost
unnecessary to say, are meant unbelief and ignorance of God, with the
consequences to which they lead. As the whole world is covered with
darkness, the devil is called “the prince of this world.” (<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>[Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p22"></span>By calling it *wickedness,* he denotes
the malignity and cruelty of the devil, and, at the same time, reminds
us that the utmost caution is necessary to prevent him from gaining an
advantage. For the same reason, the epithet *spiritual* is applied; for,
when the enemy is invisible, our danger is greater. There is emphasis,
too, in the phrase, *in heavenly* places; for the elevated station from
which the attack is made gives us greater trouble and difficulty.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p23"></span>An argument drawn from this passage by
the *Manicheans,* to support their wild notion of two principles, is
easily refuted. They supposed the devil to be (ἀντίθεον) an *antagonist
deity,* whom the righteous God would not subdue without great exertion.
For Paul does not ascribe to devils a *principality,* which they seize
without the consent, and maintain in spite of the opposition, of the
Divine Being, — but a *principality* which, as Scripture everywhere
asserts, God, in righteous judgment, yields to them over the wicked. The
inquiry is, not what power they have in opposition to God, but how far
they ought to excite our alarm, and keep us on our guard. Nor is any
countenance here given to the belief, that the devil has formed, and
keeps for himself, the middle region of the air. Paul does not assign to
them a fixed territory, which they can call their own, but merely
intimates that they are engaged in hostility, and occupy an elevated
station.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p24"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p25"></span>**13.** *Wherefore take unto you.*
Though our enemy is so powerful, Paul does not infer that we must throw
away our spears, but that we must prepare our minds for the battle. A
promise of victory is, indeed, involved in the exhortation, *that ye may
be able.* If we only *put on the whole armor of God,* and fight
valiantly to the end, we shall certainly *stand.* On any other
supposition, we would be discouraged by the number and variety of the
contests; and therefore he adds, *in the evil day.* By this expression
he rouses them from security, bids them prepare themselves for hard,
painful, and dangerous conflicts, and, at the same time, animates them
with the hope of victory; for amidst the greatest dangers they will be
safe. *And having done all.* They are thus directed to cherish
confidence through the whole course of life. There will be no danger
which may not be successfully met by the power of God; nor will any who,
with this assistance, fight against Satan, fail in the day of battle.

<span id="iv.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
6:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Stand therefore, having your
loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of
righteousness;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p3"></span>**14.** State igitur succincti lumbos
veritate, et induti thoracem justitiae,

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p4"></span>**15.** And your feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Et calceati pedes praeparatione
evangelii pacis;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** Above all, taking the shield of
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p7"></span>**16.** In omnibus assumpto scuto fidei,
quo possitis omnia tela maligni ignita exstinguere.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p8"></span>**17.** And take the helmet of salvation,
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p9"></span>**17.** Et galeam salutaris accipite, et
gladium Spiritus, qui est verbum Dei;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** Praying always with all prayer
and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all saints;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p11"></span>**18.** Per omnem precationem et
orationem omni tempore precantes in Spiritu, et in hoc ipsum vigilantes,
cum omni assiduitate et deprecatione pro omnibus sanctis;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p12"></span>**19.** And for me, that utterance may
be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the
mystery of the gospel,

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p13"></span>**19.** Et pro me, ut mihi detur sermo
in apertione oris mei cum fiducia, ut patefaciam mysterium evangelii;

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p14"></span>**20.** For which I am an ambassador in
bonds; that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p15"></span>**20.** Pro quo legatione fungor in
catena; ut confidenter me geram in eo, quemadmodum oportet me loqui.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p16"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p17"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p18"></span>**14.** *Stand therefore.* Now follows a
description of the arms which they were enjoined to wear. We must not,
however, inquire very minutely into the meaning of each word; for an
allusion to military customs is all that was intended. Nothing can be
more idle than the extraordinary pains which some have taken to discover
the reason why *righteousness* is made a *breastplate,* instead of a
*girdle.* Paul’s design was to touch briefly on the most important
points required in a Christian, and to adapt them to the comparison
which he had already used.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p19"></span>*Truth,* which means sincerity of mind,
is compared to a *girdle.* Now, a girdle was, in ancient times, one of
the most important parts of military armor. Our attention is thus
directed to the fountain of sincerity; for the purity of the gospel
ought to remove from our minds all guile, and from our hearts all
hypocrisy. Secondly, he recommends *righteousness,* and desires that it
should be a *breastplate* for protecting the breast. Some imagine that
this refers to a freely bestowed righteousness, or the imputation of
righteousness, by which pardon of sin is obtained. But such matters
ought not, I think, to have been mentioned on the present occasion; for
the subject now under discussion is a blameless life. He enjoins us to
be adorned, first, with integrity, and next with a devout and holy life.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p20"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p21"></span>**15.** *And your feet shod.* The
allusion, if I mistake not, is to the military *greaves;* for they were
always reckoned a part of the armor, and were even used for domestic
purposes. As soldiers covered their legs and feet to protect them
against cold and other injuries, so we must be shod *with the gospel,*
if we would pass unhurt through the world. It is *the gospel of peace,*
and it is so called, as every reader must perceive, from its effects;
for it is the message of our reconciliation to God, and nothing else
gives peace to the conscience. But what is the meaning of the word
*preparation?* Some explain it as an injunction to be *prepared* for the
gospel; but it is the effect of the gospel which I consider to be
likewise expressed by this term. We are enjoined to lay aside every
hinderance, and to be prepared both for journey and for war. By nature
we dislike exertion, and want agility. A rough road and many other
obstacles retard our progress, and we are discouraged by the smallest
annoyance. On these accounts, Paul holds out the gospel as the fittest
means for undertaking and performing the expedition. Erasmus proposes a
circumlocution, (<span id="iv.vii.iv-p21.1"></span>*ut sitis parati*,)
*that ye may be* *prepared;* but this does not appear to convey the true
meaning.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p22"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p23"></span>**16.** *Taking the shield of faith.*
Though *faith* and *the* *word of God* are one, yet Paul assigns to them
two distinct offices. I call them one, because the word is the object of
faith, and cannot be applied to our use but by faith; as faith again is
nothing, and can do nothing, without the word. But Paul, neglecting so
subtle a distinction, allowed himself to expatiate at large on the
military armor. In the first Epistle to the Thessalonians he gives both
to faith and to love the name of a *breastplate,* — “putting on the
breastplate of faith and love,” (<span id="iv.vii.iv-p23.1"></span>[1Th
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p23.1"></span>.) All that was intended, therefore, was
obviously this, — “He who possesses the excellencies of character which
are here described is protected on every hand.”

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p24"></span>And yet it is not without reason that
the most necessary instruments of warfare — a sword and a shield — are
compared to faith, and to the word of God. In the spiritual combat,
these two hold the highest rank. By faith we repel all the attacks of
the devil, and by the word of God the enemy himself is slain. If the
word of God shall have its efficacy upon us through faith, we shall be
more than sufficiently armed both for opposing the enemy and for putting
him to flight. And what shall we say of those who take from a Christian
people the word of God? Do they not rob them of the necessary armor, and
leave them to perish without a struggle? There is no man of any rank who
is not bound to be a soldier of Christ. But if we enter the field
unarmed, if we want our sword, how shall we sustain that character?

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p25"></span>*Wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the darts.* But *quench* appears not to be the proper word. Why did
he not use, instead of it, *ward off* or *shake off,* or some such word?
*Quench* is far more expressive; for it is adapted to the epithet
applied to *darts* *The darts* of Satan are not only sharp and
penetrating, but — what makes them more destructive — they are *fiery*
Faith will be found capable, not only of blunting their edge, but of
*quenching* their heat.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p26"></span>“This,” says John, “is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith.” (<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p26.1"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p27"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p28"></span>**17.** *And take the helmet of
salvation.* In a passage already quoted, (<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p28.1"></span>[1Th
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p28.1"></span>,) “the *hope* of salvation” is said to be a
*helmet,* which I consider to be in the same sense as this passage. The
head is protected by the best *helmet,* when, elevated by *hope,* we
look up towards heaven to that *salvation* which is promised. It is only
therefore by becoming the object of *hope* that *salvation* is a
*helmet.*

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p29"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p30"></span>**18.** *Praying always with all
prayer.* Having instructed the Ephesians to put on their armor, he now
enjoins them to fight by prayer. This is the true method. To call upon
God is the chief exercise of faith and hope; and it is in this way that
we obtain from God every blessing. *Prayer* and *supplication* are not
greatly different from each other, except that *supplication* is only
one branch of *prayer*

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p31"></span>*With all perseverance.* We are exhorted
to persevere in prayer. Every tendency to weariness must be counteracted
by a cheerful performance of the duty. With unabated ardor we must
continue our prayers, though we do not immediately obtain what we
desire. If, instead of *with all perseverance,* some would render it,
*with all* Earnestness, I would have no objection to the change.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p32"></span>But what is the meaning of *always?*
Having already spoken of continued application, does he twice repeat the
same thing? I think not. When everything flows on prosperously, — when
we are easy and cheerful, we seldom feel any strong excitement to
prayer, — or rather, we never flee to God, but when we are driven by
some kind of distress. Paul therefore desires us to allow no opportunity
to pass, — on no occasion to neglect prayer; so that *praying always* is
the same thing with praying both in prosperity and in adversity.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p33"></span>*For all saints.* There is not a moment
of our life at which the duty of prayer may not be urged by our own
wants. But unremitting prayer may likewise be enforced by the
consideration, that the necessities of our brethren ought to move our
sympathy. And when is it that some members of the church are not
suffering distress, and needing our assistance? If, at any time, we are
colder or more indifferent about prayer than we ought to be, because we
do not feel the pressure of immediate necessity, — let us instantly
reflect how many of our brethren are worn out by varied and heavy
afflictions, — are weighed down by sore perplexity, or are reduced to
the lowest distress. If reflections like these do not rouse us from our
lethargy, we must have hearts of stone. But are we to pray for believers
only? Though the apostle states the claims of the godly, he does not
exclude others. And yet in prayer, as in all other kind offices, our
first care unquestionably is due to the saints.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p34"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p35"></span>**19.** *And for me.* For himself, in a
particular manner, he enjoins the Ephesians to pray. Hence we infer that
there is no man so richly endowed with gifts as not to need this kind of
assistance from his brethren, so long as he remains in this world. Who
will ever be better entitled to plead exemption from this necessity than
Paul? Yet he entreats the prayers of his brethren, and not
hypocritically, but from an earnest desire of their aid. And what does
he wish that they should ask for him? *That utterance may be given to
me.* What then? Was he habitually dumb, or did fear restrain him from
making an open profession of the gospel? By no means; but there was
reason to fear lest his splendid commencement should not be sustained by
his future progress. Besides, his zeal for proclaiming the gospel was so
ardent that he was never satisfied with his exertions. And indeed, if we
consider the weight and importance of the subject, we shall all
acknowledge that we are very far from being able to handle it in a
proper manner. Accordingly he adds,

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p36"></span><span id="iv.vii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p37"></span>**20.** *As I ought to speak;* meaning,
that to proclaim the truth of the gospel as it ought to be proclaimed,
is a high and rare attainment. Every word here deserves to be carefully
weighed. Twice he uses the expression *boldly,* — “that I may open my
mouth *boldly,*” “that therein I may speak *boldly.*” Fear hinders us
from preaching Christ openly and fearlessly, while the absence of all
restraint and disguise in confessing Christ is demanded from his
ministers. Paul does not ask for himself the powers of an acute debater,
or, I should rather say, of a dexterous sophist, that he might shield
himself from his enemies by false pretences. It is, *that I may open my
mouth,* to make a clear and strong confession; for when the mouth is
half shut, the sounds which it utters are doubtful and confused. *To
open the mouth,* therefore, is to speak with perfect freedom, without
the smallest dread.

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p38"></span>But does not Paul discover unbelief,
when he entertains doubts as to his own stedfastness, and implores the
intercession of others? No. He does not, like unbelievers, seek a remedy
which is contrary to the will of God, or inconsistent with his word. The
only aids on which he relies are those which he knows to be sanctioned
by the Divine promise and approbation. It is the command of God, that
believers shall pray for one another. How consoling then must it be to
each of them to learn that the care of his salvation is enjoined on all
the rest, and to be informed by God himself that the prayers of others
on his behalf are not poured out in vain! Would it be lawful to refuse
what the Lord himself has offered? Each believer, no doubt, ought to
have been satisfied with the Divine assurance, that as often as he
prayed he would be heard. But if, in addition to all the other
manifestations of his kindness, God were pleased to declare that he will
listen to the prayers of others in our behalf, would it be proper that
this bounty should be slighted, or rather, ought we not to embrace it
with open arms?

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p39"></span>Let us therefore remember that Paul,
when he resorted to the intercessions of his brethren, was influenced by
no distrust or hesitation. His eagerness to obtain them arose from his
resolution that no privilege which the Lord had given him should be
overlooked. How absurdly then do Papists conclude from Paul’s example,
that we ought to pray to the dead! Paul was writing to the Ephesians, to
whom he had it in his power to communicate his sentintents. But what
intercourse have we with the dead? As well might they argue that we
ought to invite angels to our feasts and entertainments, because among
men friendship is promoted by such kind offices.

<span id="iv.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
6:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p2"></span>**21.** But that ye also may know my
affairs, *and* how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful
minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things:

<span id="iv.vii.v-p3"></span>**21.** Ut autem sciatis vos etiam quae
circa me aguntur, quid faciam, omnia vobis patefaciet Tychicus, dilectus
frater et fidelis minister in Domino;

<span id="iv.vii.v-p4"></span>**22.** Whom I have sent unto you for the
same purpose, that ye might know our affairs, and *that* he might
comfort your hearts.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p5"></span>**22.** Quem misi ad vos in eum finem, ut
statum meum cognosceretis, et consolaretur corda vestra.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p6"></span>**23.** Peace *be* to the brethren, and
love with faith, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ

<span id="iv.vii.v-p7"></span>**23.** Pax fratribus, et dilectio cum
fide a Deo Patre et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p8"></span>**24.** Grace *be* with all them that love
our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p9"></span>**24.** Gratia cum omnibus, qui diligunt
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum in sinceritate. Amen.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vii.v-p11"></span><span id="iv.vii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p12"></span>**21.** *But that, ye also may know.*
Uncertain or false reports frequently produce uneasiness, chiefly, no
doubt, in weak minds, but sometimes also in thoughtful and steady
persons. To prevent this danger, Paul sends Tychicus, from whom the
Ephesians would receive full information. The holy solicitude which Paul
felt about the interests of religion, or, to use his own language, “the
care of all the churches,” (<span id="iv.vii.v-p12.1"></span>[2Co
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.vii.v-p12.1"></span>,) was thus strikingly evinced. When death
stood constantly before his eyes, neither the dread of death, nor
anxiety about himself, prevented him from making provision for the most
distant churches. Another man would have said, “My own affairs require
all the attention I can give. It would be more reasonable that all
should run to my assistance, than that they should expect from me the
smallest relief.” But Paul acts a different part, and sends in every
direction to strengthen the churches which he had founded.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p13"></span>Tychicus is commended, that his
statements may be more fully believed. *A faithful minister in the
Lord.* It is not easy to say, whether this refers to the public ministry
of the church, or to the private attentions which Paul had received from
Tychicus. This uncertainty arises from these two expressions being
connected, *a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord.* The
former refers to Paul, to whom the second may be supposed also to apply.
I am more inclined, however, to understand it as denoting the public
ministry; for I do not think it probable that Paul would have sent any
man who did not hold such a rank in the church, as would secure the
respectful attention of the Ephesians.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p14"></span><span id="iv.vii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p15"></span>**23.** *Peace be to the brethren.* I
consider the word *peace,* as in the salutations of the Epistles, to
mean *prosperity.* Yet if the reader shall prefer to view it as
signifying *harmony,* because, immediately afterwards, Paul mentions
*love,* I do not object to that interpretation, or rather, it agrees
better with the context. He wishes the Ephesians to be peaceable and
quiet among themselves; and this, he presently adds, may be obtained by
brotherly *love* and by agreement in *faith* From this prayer we learn
that *faith* and *love,* as well as *peace* itself, are gifts of God
bestowed upon us through Christ, — that they come equally *from God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.*

<span id="iv.vii.v-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v-p17"></span>**24.** *Grace be with all.* The meaning
is, “May God continue to bestow his favor on all who love Jesus Christ
with a pure conscience!” The Greek word, which I follow Erasmus in
translating *sincerity,* (ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ,) signifies literally
*uncorruptedness,* which deserves attention on account of the beauty of
the metaphor. Paul intended to state indirectly, that, when the heart of
man is free from all hypocrisy, it will be free from all corruption.
This prayer conveys to us the instruction, that the only way of enjoying
the light of the Divine countenance is to love *sincerely* God’s own
Son, in whom his love toward us has been declared and confirmed. But let
there be no hypocrisy; for most men, while they are not unwilling to
make some professions of religion, entertain exceedingly low notions of
Christ, and worship him with pretended homage. I wish there were not so
many instances in the present day to prove that Paul’s admonition, to
*love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity* is as necessary as ever.

<span id="iv.vii.v-p18"></span>END OF THE COMMENTARIES ON THE EPISTLE TO
THE EPHESIANS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc41018.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.vii.i-p13.1"></span>Τιμᾷν
properly signifies, ‘to perform one’s duty to any one;’ and here
*reverence* must comprehend the cognate offices of affection, care, and
support. The same complexity of sense is observable in the classical
phrase <span id="iv.vii.i-p13.2"></span>τιμᾷν τὸν ἰατρόν \[to reverence
the physician.\] — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc41018.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p22"></span> See volume 1 page 468.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc41018.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p26"></span> See <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Col
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc41018.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15"></span> “Plutarch tells us, (Symp. l. 2., page
638,) that wrestling was the most artful and subtle of all the ancient
games, and that the name of it (<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15.1"></span>πάλη)
was derived from a word, which signifies to throw a man down by deceit
and craft. And it is certain that persons who understand this exercise
have many fetches, and turns, and changes of posture, which they make
use of to supplant and trip up their adversaries. And it is with great
justice, that a state of persecution is compared with it; since many are
the arts, arising from the terrors of worldly evil on the one hand, and
the natural love which men have to life, liberty, plenty, and the
pleasures of life, on the other, that the devil makes use of to
circumvent and foil them.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc41018.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p18"></span> “<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>Πάλη is properly a gymnastic term; but the
Apostle often unites military with agonistic metaphors; and here the
agonistic is not less suitable than the military. So in a similar
passage of Max. Tyr. Diss. Version 9, volume 1 page 79, ed. Reisk, we
have mention of Socrates wrestling with *Melitus,* with bonds and
poison; next, the philosopher Plato wrestling with a tyrant’s anger, a
rough sea, and the greatest dangers; then, Xenophon struggling with the
prejudices of Tissaphernes, the snares of Ariaeus, the treachery of
Meno, and royal machinations; and, lastly, Diogenes struggling with
adversaries even more formidable, namely, poverty, infamy, hunger, and
cold.” — Bloomfield.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Translation of Calvin's Version of The Epistle To The
Galatians](cc41019.md)
