[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc41014)  [Next](cc41016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner
of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Hujus rei gratia ego Paulus, vinctus
Iesu Christi, pro vobis Gentibus legatione fungor;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** (If ye have heard of the
dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you-ward:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Siquidem audistis dispensationem
gratiae Dei, mihi erga vos datae,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** How that by revelation he made known
unto me the mystery; as I wrote afore in few words;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quod per revelationem mihi
patefecerit arcanum, quemadmodum scripsi paulo ante.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Whereby, when ye read, ye may
understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ad quod potestis attendentes
intelligere cognitionem meam in mysterio Christi,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span>**5.** Which in other ages was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles
and prophets by the Spirit;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quod aliis saeculis non innotuit
filiis hominum, quemadmodum nunc revelatum est sanctis Apostolis ejus et
Prophetis per Spiritum,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>**6.** That the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in
Christ by the gospel.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Gentes esse cohaeredes, et
concorporeas, et consortes promissionis ejus in Christo per Evangelium.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span>**1.** *For this cause.* Paul’s
imprisonment, which ought to have been held as a confirmation of his
apostleship, was undoubtedly presented by his adversaries in an opposite
light. He therefore points out to the Ephesians that his chains served
to prove and to declare his calling; and that the only reason why he had
been imprisoned was, that he had preached the gospel to the Gentiles.
His unshaken firmness was no small additional proof that he had
discharged his office in a proper manner.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span>*The prisoner of Jesus Christ.*  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) To strengthen his authority still
more, he speaks in lofty terms of his prison. In the presence of the
world and of wicked men, this might have appeared to be foolish
boasting; but, in addressing godly persons, it was a dignified and
faithful manner. The glory of Christ not only overcomes the ignominy of
the chains, but converts what was in itself a reproach into the highest
honor. If he had merely said, “I am a prisoner,” this would not have
conveyed the idea of his being an ambassador. Imprisonment alone has no
claim to this honor, being usually the mark of wickedness and crime. But
the crowns and sceptres of kings, to say nothing of the imposing
splendor of an ambassador, are less honorable than the chains of a
prisoner of Jesus Christ. Men might think otherwise, but it is our duty
to judge of the reasons. So highly ought the name of Christ to be
revered by us, that what men consider to be the greatest reproach, ought
to be viewed by us as the greatest honour.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span>*For you Gentiles.* Another circumstance
greatly fitted to interest the Ephesians was, that the persecutions of
Paul were endured for the Gentiles, — that his troubles and dangers were
on their account.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span>**2.** *If ye have heard.* There is reason
to believe, that, while Paul was at Ephesus, he had said nothing on
these subjects, no necessity for doing so having arisen; for no
controversy had taken place among them about the calling of the
Gentiles. If he had made any mention of them in his discourses, he would
have reminded the Ephesians of his former statements, instead of
referring generally, as he now does, to common report and to his own
Epistle. He did not, of his own accord, raise unnecessary disputes. It
was only when the wickedness of his adversaries made it necessary, that
he reluctantly undertook the defense of his ministry. *Dispensation*
(οικονομια) means here a divine order or command, or, as it is generally
expressed, a *commission*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span>**3.** *That by revelation.* Some might
imagine, that, in attempting to discharge the office of an apostle, he
had acted rashly, and was now paying the penalty of his rashness. It was
this that made him so earnest in pleading the Divine authority for all
his transactions. The present instance, on account of its novelty, had
few supporters; and therefore he calls it a *mystery.* By this name he
endeavors to remove the prejudice which the general displeasure at the
event was fitted to excite. His own personal interest in the matter was
less regarded than that of the Ephesians, who were deeply concerned in
the information, that, through the settled purpose of God, they had been
called by Paul’s ministry. Lest what is little known should forthwith
become the object of suspicion, the word *mystery* places it in
opposition to the perverse judgments and opinions which were then
prevalent in the world.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span>*By revelation he made known to me the
mystery.* Paul draws the line of distinction between himself and those
fanatics, who ascribe to God and to the Holy Spirit their own idle
dreams. The false apostles boast of revelations, but it is a false
boast. Paul was persuaded that his revelation was true, could prove it
to others, and speaks of it as a fact of which no doubt could be
entertained.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p25"></span>*As I wrote a little before.* This refers
either to a rapid glance at the same subject in the second chapter, or —
which appears to be the general opinion — to another Epistle. If the
former exposition be adopted, it will be proper to translate, *as I
wrote before in few words;* for the subject had received nothing more
than a passing notice; but the latter being, as I have said, the
prevailing opinion, I prefer translating, *as I wrote a little before.*
The phrase, (ἐν ὀλίγῳ,) which Erasmus has translated *in a few words,*
appears rather to refer to time. On this supposition there would be an
implied comparison between the present and the former writings. But
nothing would be more unlike the fact, than to contrast them on the
score of brevity; for a more concise mode of expression than this
passing glance can hardly be imagined. The phrase, *a little before,*
seems purposely to be used as an appeal to their remembrance of a recent
occurrence, though I do not insist on this point. There is more
difficulty in the next verse.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p27"></span>**4.** *By attending to which, ye may
understand,* πρὸς ὃ δύνασθε ἀναγινώσκοντες νοὢσαι. Erasmus renders it,
“from which things, when ye read, ye may understand.” But to translate
ἀναγινώσκειν τι as signifying *to read* is, I think, at variance with
Greek syntax. I leave it as a subject of consideration, whether it does
not rather signify *to attend*. The participle would then be connected
with the preposition πρὸς, in the commencement of the verse, and the
clause would run thus, *to which when ye attend, ye may understand* If,
however, by viewing the verb ἀναγινώσκοντες, as disjoined from the
preposition, you make it signify *reading,* the meaning will still be,
“by reading you may understand according to what I have written;” taking
the phrase πρὸς ὃ, *to which,* as equivalent to καθ ᾿ ὃ, *according to
which;* but I suggest this merely as a doubtful conjecture.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p28"></span>If we adopt the view which is almost
universally approved, that the apostle had formerly written to the
Ephesians, this is not the only Epistle which we have lost. And yet
there is no room for the sneers of the ungodly, as if the Scriptures had
been mutilated, or in any part had become imperfect. If we duly consider
Paul’s earnestness, — his watchfulness and care, — his zeal and fervor,
— his kindness and readiness in assisting brethren, — we shall be led to
regard it as highly probable that he would write many epistles, both of
a public and private nature, to various places. Those which the Lord
judged to be necessary for his church have been selected by his
providence for everlasting remembrance. Let us rest assured, that what
is left is enough for us, and that the smallness of the remaining number
is not the result of accident; but that the body of Scripture, which is
in our possession, has been adjusted by the wonderful counsel of God.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p29"></span>*My knowledge.* The frequent mention of
this point shews the necessity that the calling of ministers should be
firmly believed both by themselves and by their people. But Paul looks
more to others than to himself. He had everywhere indeed given great
offense by preaching the gospel indiscriminately to Jews and Gentiles,
but his solicitude was not chiefly on his own account. There were not a
few who, overwhelmed by the slanders of wicked men, began to doubt of
his apostleship, and whose faith was consequently shaken. It was this
that induced him so frequently to remind the Ephesians that he knew the
will and command of God who called him to the office. — *In the mystery
of Christ,*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p30"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p31"></span>**5.** *Which in other ages was not made
known.* He had simply called it a *mystery,* but now calls it *a mystery
of Christ,* because it was necessary that it should remain hidden, until
it was revealed by his coming; just as the appellation of “prophecies of
Christ” may be given to those which relate to his kingdom. We must first
explain the word *mystery,* and then inquire why it is said to have
remained unknown in all ages. The *mystery* was,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p32"></span>“that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the
gospel.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.i-p32.2"></span>[Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.i-p32.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p33"></span>When this name is given to the gospel, it
has other meanings, which do not apply to the present passage. The
calling of the Gentiles, then, was a “mystery of Christ;” that is, it
was to be fulfilled under the reign of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p34"></span>But why does he affirm that it was not
known, when it had been the subject of so many predictions? The prophets
everywhere declare, that people shall come from every nation in the
world, to worship God; that an altar shall be erected both in Assyria
and in Egypt, and that all alike shall speak the language of Canaan.
(<span id="iv.iv.i-p34.1"></span>[Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.i-p34.1"></span>.) It is intimated by these words, that the
worship of the true God, and the same profession of faith, will be
everywhere diffused. Of the Messiah it is predicted, that he shall have
dominion from east to west, and that all nations shall serve him. (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p34.2"></span>[Ps. 72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.i-p34.2"></span>..md)
We see also, that many passages to this purpose are quoted by the
apostles, not only from the later prophets, but from Moses. How could
that be hidden which had been proclaimed by so many heralds? Why are all
without exception pronounced to have been in ignorance? Shall we say,
that the prophets spake what they did not understand, and uttered sounds
without meaning?

<span id="iv.iv.i-p35"></span>I answer, the words of Paul must not be
understood to mean that there had been no knowledge at all on these
subjects. There had always been some of the Jewish nation who
acknowledged that, at the advent of the Messiah, the grace of God would
be proclaimed throughout the whole world, and who looked forward to the
renovation of the human race. The prophets themselves, though they spoke
with the certainty of revelation, left the time and manner undetermined.
They knew that some communication of the grace of God would be made to
the Gentiles, but at what time, in what manner, and by what means it
should be accomplished, they had no information whatever. This ignorance
was exemplified in a remarkable way by the apostles. They had not only
been instructed by the predictions of the prophets, but had heard the
distinct statement of their Master, (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p35.1"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.i-p35.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p36"></span>“Other sheep I have which are not of this
fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice: and there
shall be one fold and one shepherd;”

<span id="iv.iv.i-p37"></span>and yet the novelty of the subject
prevented them from understanding it fully. Nay, after they had received
the injunction,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p38"></span>“Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature,” (<span id="iv.iv.i-p38.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.i-p38.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p39"></span>and,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p40"></span>“Ye shall be witnesses to me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and to the uttermost part
of the earth,” (<span id="iv.iv.i-p40.1"></span>[Ac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.i-p40.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p41"></span>they dreaded and recoiled from the calling
of the Gentiles as a proposal absolutely monstrous, because the manner
of its accomplishment was still unknown. Before the actual event
arrived, they had dark and confused apprehensions of our Savior’s words;
for ceremonies were

<span id="iv.iv.i-p42"></span>“a vail over their face, that they could
not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished.” (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p42.1"></span>[2Co
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.i-p42.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p43"></span>With unquestionable propriety, therefore,
does Paul call this a *mystery,* and say, that it had been hidden; for
the repeal of the ceremonial law, which admitted them within the vail,
was not understood.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p44"></span>*As it is now revealed.* To lay claim to
information which none of the patriarchs, prophets, or holy kings, had
possessed, might wear the aspect of arrogance. To guard against this
imputation, Paul reminds them, first, that in this respect he was not
alone, but shared the *revelation* with the most eminent teachers of the
church; and, secondly, that it was the gift of the Holy Spirit, who has
a right to bestow it on whom he pleases; for there is no other limit of
our knowledge but that which he assigns to us.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p45"></span>These few words, *as it is now revealed,*
throw additional light on the admission of the Gentiles to be the people
of God. It is on the condition that they shall be placed on a level with
the Jews, and form one body. That the novelty might give no offense, he
states that this must be accomplished *by the gospel.* (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p45.1"></span>[Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.i-p45.1"></span>..md)
Now, the gospel was itself a novelty; for it had never till now been
heard of, and yet was acknowledged by all the godly to have come from
heaven. Where, then, was the wonder, if, in renewing the world, God
should follow an unwonted method?

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**7.** Whereof I was made a minister,
according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the effectual
working of his power.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Cujus factus sum minister, secundum
donum gratiae Dei, quod mihi datum est secundum efficaciam potentiae
ejus.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Unto me, who am less than the least
of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ;

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Mihi omnium sanctorum minimo data
est gratia haec, ut evangelizem in Gentibus impervestigabiles divitias
Christi;

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>**9.** And to make all *men* see what *is*
the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world
hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Et omnibus conspicuum faciam, quae
sit communio mysterii, quod absconditum fuit a saeculis in Deo, qui
omnia creavit per Iesum Christum;

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>**10.** To the intent that now, unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly *places*, might be known by the
church the manifold wisdom of God,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Ut nunc patefieret principatibus
et potestatibus in coelestibus per ecclesiam varie multiplex sapientia
Dei,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>**11.** According to the eternal purpose
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>**11.** Secundum propositum aeternum,
quod statuit in Christo Iesu Domino nostro,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span>**12.** In whom we have boldness and
access with confidence by the faith of him.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>**12.** Perquem habemus audaciam, et
aditum in fiducia, per fidem ejus.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span>**13.** Wherefore I desire that ye faint
not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span>**13.** Quare peto, ne deficiatis in
afflictionibus meis pro vobis, quae est gloria vestra.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span>**7.** *Of which I was made a minister.*
Having declared the gospel to be the instrument employed in
communicating grace to the Gentiles, he now adds, that he *was made a
minister* of the Gospel; and thus applies to himself the general
statements which had been made. But, to avoid claiming for himself more
than is proper, he affirms that it is *the gift of the grace of God,*
and that this gift was an exhibition of divine *power.* As if he had
said, “Inquire not what I have deserved; for in the free exercise of
kindness, the Lord made me an apostle of the Gentiles, not for any
excellence of mine, but by his own grace. Inquire not what I formerly
was; for it is the Lord’s prerogative to ‘exalt them of low degree.’”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>[Lu
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>.) To produce something great out of nothing,
shews *the effectual working of his power.*

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span>**8.** *To me, who am the least.* He
labors to exhibit himself, and everything that belongs to him, in as
humiliating a light as possible, in order that the grace of God may be
the more highly exalted. But this acknowledgment had the additional
effect of anticipating the objections which his adversaries might bring
against him. “Who is this man that God should have raised him above all
his brethren? What superior excellence did he possess that he should be
chosen in preference to all the others?” All such comparisons of
personal worth are set aside by the confession, that he was *the least
of all the saints.*

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span>This is no hypocritical declaration. Most
men are ready enough to make professions of feigned humility, while
their minds are swelled with pride, and in words to acknowledge
themselves inferior to every one else, while they wish to be regarded
with the highest esteem, and think themselves entitled to the highest
honor. Paul is perfectly sincere in admitting his unworthiness; nay, at
other times he speaks of himself in far more degrading language.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22"></span>“For I am the least of the apostles, and
am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church
of God.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22.2"></span>[1Co
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23"></span>“Christ Jesus came into the world to save
*sinners, of whom I am* *chief*”  
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23.2"></span>[1Ti
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24"></span>But let us observe, that, when he speaks
of himself as the meanest of all, he confines his attention to what he
was in himself, apart from the grace of God. As if he had said, that his
own worthlessness did not prevent him from being appointed, while others
were passed by, to be the apostle of the Gentiles. *The grace of God
given to me* is the expression used by him, to intimate that it was a
peculiar gift, as compared with what had been bestowed on others. Not
that he alone had been elected to discharge that office, but that he
held the highest rank among “the teachers of the Gentiles,” — a title
which he employs on another occasion as peculiar to himself.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25"></span>“I am ordained a preacher, and an
apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not,) a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and truth.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>[1Ti
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26"></span>By *the unsearchable riches of Christ*
are meant the astonishing and boundless treasures of grace, which God
had suddenly and unexpectedly bestowed on the Gentiles. The Ephesians
are thus reminded how eagerly the gospel ought to be embraced, and how
highly it ought to be esteemed. This subject has been treated in the
Exposition of the Epistle to the Galatians, (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>[Gal. 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016.md), [Gal.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26.1"></span>..md)
And certainly, while Paul held the office of apostleship in common with
others, it was an honor peculiar to himself to be appointed apostle of
the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p28"></span>**9.** *What is the fellowship of the
mystery.* The publication of the gospel is called a *fellowship,*
because it is the will of God that his purpose, which had formerly been
hidden, shall now be shared by men. There is an appropriate metaphor in
the words φωτίσαι πάντας, *to* *enlighten all men,* — conveying the
thought, that, in his apostleship, the grace of God shines with the
brightness of noon-day.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29"></span>*Which hath been hid in God.* This is
intended, as before, to obviate the prejudice of novelty, — to oppose
the rashness of men, who think it improper that they should remain in
ignorance of anything whatever. Who will question the right which God
has to keep his own purposes concealed, until he shall be pleased to
communicate them to men? What presumption, — yea, what madness is it,
not to admit that God is wiser than we! Let us remember, therefore, that
our rashness ought to receive a check, whenever the boundless height of
the Divine foreknowledge is presented to our view. This, too, is the
reason why he calls them *the unsearchable riches of Christ;* intimating
that this subject, though it exceeds our capacity, ought to be
contemplated with reverence and admiration.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30"></span>*Who created all things by Jesus Christ.*
This cannot so properly be understood of the first creation as of the
spiritual renewal. It is, no doubt, true, and is frequently declared in
Scripture, that by the Word of God all things were created; but the
connection of the passage lays us under the necessity of understanding
by it that renewal which is comprehended in the blessing of redemption.
But it may, perhaps, be thought that the apostle is illustrating this
renewal, by an argument drawn from the creation. “By Christ, as God, the
Father created (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>[Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>.md)
all things; and why, then, should we wonder, if by Christ, as Mediator,
all the Gentiles are now brought back to one body?” I have no objection
to this view. A similar argument is used by him in another Epistle.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31"></span>“For God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, is the same who hath shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31.2"></span>[2Co
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32"></span>From the creation of the world he
concludes, that it is the work of God to enlighten the darkness; but
what was visible in the former case is ascribed to the Spirit, when he
comes to speak of the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p34"></span>**10.** *That now to the principalities
and powers.* Some are of opinion that these words cannot apply to
angels, because such ignorance, as is here supposed, could not be found
in those who are permitted to behold the brightness of God’s
countenance. They choose rather to refer them to devils, but without due
reflection; for what could have been regarded as extraordinary in the
assertion, that, by the preaching of the gospel and the calling of the
Gentiles, information was, for the first time, conveyed to devils? There
can be no doubt that the apostle labors to place in the strongest light
the mercy of God toward the Gentiles, and the high value of the gospel.
For this purpose he declares, that the preaching of the gospel exhibits
the manifold grace of God, with which, till now, the heavenly angels
themselves were unacquainted. The wisdom of God, therefore, which was
manifested by uniting Jews and Gentiles in the fellowship of the gospel,
ought to be regarded by men with the highest admiration.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p35"></span> He calls it πολυποίκιλον σοφίαν,
*manifold wisdom,* because men are accustomed to try it by a false
standard, confining their view to a particular department, and thus
forming a most inadequate conception of the whole. The Jews thought, for
example, that the dispensation under the law, with which they were
acquainted and familiar, was the only form in which the wisdom of God
could be seen. But, by making the gospel to be proclaimed to all men
without exception, God has brought forth to view another instance and
proof of his wisdom. Not that it was new wisdom, but that it was so
large and *manifold,*  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) as to
transcend our limited capacity. Let us rest assured that the knowledge,
whatever it may be, which we have acquired, is, after all, but a slender
proportion. And if the calling of the Gentiles draws the attention, and
excites the reverence, of angels in heaven, how shameful that it should
be slighted or disdained by men upon earth!

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p37"></span>The inference which some draw from this
passage, that angels are present in our assemblies, and make progress
along with ourselves in knowledge, is a groundless speculation. We must
always keep in view the purposes for which God appointed the ministry of
his word. If angels, who are permitted to see the face of God, do not
walk in faith, neither do they need the outward administration of the
word. The preaching of the gospel, therefore, is of no service but to
human beings, among whom alone the practice exists. Paul’s meaning is
this: “The church, composed both of Jews and Gentiles, is a mirror, in
which angels behold the astonishing wisdom of God displayed in a manner
unknown to them before. They see a work which is new to them, and the
reason of which was hid in God. In this manner, and not by learning
anything from the lips of men, do they make progress.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39"></span>**11.** *According to the eternal
purpose.* How carefully does he guard against the objection, that the
purpose of God has been changed! A third time, he repeats that the
decree was eternal and unchangeable, but must be carried into effect by
*Christ Jesus our Lord,* because in him it was made. Thus he declares,
that the proper time for publishing this decree belongs to the kingdom
of Christ. Literally the words run, “according to the eternal purpose
(ἣν ἐποίησοεν) *which he* *made.*” But I consider the meaning to be,
*which he purposed;* because the present discussion does not relate
solely to the execution of the decree, but to the appointment itself,
which, though it took place before all ages, was known to God only —
till the manifestation of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41"></span>**12.** *Through whom we have boldness.*
The honor of reconciling the Father to the whole world must be given to
Christ. From the effects of this grace its excellence is demonstrated;
for *faith,* which is possessed by Gentiles in common with Jews, admits
them into the presence of God. When the words, *through Christ* and *by
the faith of him,* are used by Paul, in connection with the name of God,
there is always an implied contrast, which shuts up every other
approach, — which excludes every other method of obtaining Divine
fellowship. Most important and valuable instruction is here conveyed.
The true nature and power of faith, and the confidence which is
necessary for calling upon God, are beautifully expressed. That the
consequences of faith, and the duties which it performs, should be the
subject of much controversy between us and the Papists, is not
surprising. They do not properly understand the meaning of the word
*Faith,* which they might learn from this passage, if they were not
blinded by prejudice.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p42"></span>First, Paul denominates it *the faith of
Christ;* by which he intimates, that everything which faith ought to
contemplate is exhibited to us in Christ. Hence it follows, that an
empty and confused knowledge of Christ must not be mistaken for Faith,
but that knowledge which is directed to Christ, in order to seek God in
Christ; and this can only be done when the power and offices of Christ
are understood. *Faith* produces *confidence,* which again, in its turn,
produces *boldness.* There are three stages in our progress. First, we
believe the promises of God; next, by relying on them, we obtain that
*confidence,* which is accompanied by holiness and peace of mind; and,
last of all, comes *boldness,* which enables us to banish fear, and to
come with firmness and steadiness into the presence of God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p43"></span>To separate *faith* from *confidence*
would be an attempt to take away heat and light from the sun. I
acknowledge, indeed, that, in proportion to the measure of faith,
confidence is small in some and greater in others; but faith will never
be found unaccompanied by these effects or fruits. A trembling,
hesitating, doubting conscience, will always be a sure evidence of
unbelief; but a firm, steady faith, will prove to be invincible against
the gates of hell. To trust in Christ as Mediator, and to entertain a
firm conviction of our heavenly Father’s love, — to venture boldly to
promise to ourselves eternal life, and not to tremble at death or hell,
— is, to use a common phrase, a holy presumption.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44"></span>Observe the expression, *access with
confidence.* Wicked men seek rest in forgetfulness of God, and are never
at ease but when they remove to the greatest possible distance from God.
His own children differ from them in this respect, that they “have peace
with God,” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44.1"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44.1"></span>,.md)
and approach to him with cheerfulness and delight. We infer, likewise,
from this passage, that, in order to call on God in a proper manner,
*confidence* is necessary, and thus becomes the key that opens to us the
gate of heaven. Those who doubt and hesitate will never be heard.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p45"></span>“Let him ask in faith,” says James,
“nothing wavering: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven
with the wind and tossed. For let not that man think that he shall
receive anything of the Lord.” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p45.1"></span>[Jas.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p45.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p46"></span>The sophists of the *Sorbonne,*  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) when they enjoin men to hesitate, know
not what it is to call upon God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p48"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p49"></span>**13.** *Wherefore I desire.* His reason
for alluding formerly to his imprisonment is now manifest. It was to
prevent them from being discouraged when they heard of his persecution.
 <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) O heroic breast, which drew
from a prison, and from death itself, comfort to those who were not in
danger! He says that, he endured *tribulations for* the Ephesians,
because they tended to promote the edification of all the godly. How
powerfully is the faith of the people confirmed, when a pastor does not
hesitate to seal his doctrine by the surrender of his life! And
accordingly he adds, *which is your glory.* Such lustre was thrown
around his instructions, that all the churches among whom he had
labored, had good reason to glory, when they beheld their faith ratified
by the best of all pledges.

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
3:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**14.** For this cause I bow my knees
unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**14.** Hujus rei gratia flecto genua ad
Patrem Domini nostri Iesu Christi,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span>**15.** Of whom the whole family in
heaven and earth is named,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span>**15.** Ex quo omnis cognatio in coelis
et super terram nominatur,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>**16.** That he would grant you,
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by
his Spirit in the inner man;

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>**16.** Ut det vobis secundum divitias
gloriae suae, potentia roborari per Spiritum suum in hominem interiorem,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>**17.** That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>**17.** Ut inhabitet Christus per fidem
in cordibus vestris, ut sitis in charitate radicati atque fundati,

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span>**18.** May be able to comprehend with
all saints what *is* the breadth, and length, and depth, and height;

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span>**18.** Quo valeatis comprehendere cum
omnibus sanctis, quae sit latitudo, et longitudo, et profunditas, et
altitudo;

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span>**19.** And to know the love of Christ,
which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of
God.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span>**19.** Cognoscere, inquam, dilectionem
Christi, quae cognitionem exsuperat, ut completi sitis in omnem
plenitudinem Dei.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p15"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16"></span>**14.** *For this cause.* His prayers
for them are mentioned, not only to testify his regard for them, but
likewise to excite them to pray in the same manner; for the seed of the
word is scattered in vain, unless the Lord render it fruitful by his
blessing. Let pastors learn from Paul’s example, not only to admonish
and exhort their people, but to entreat the Lord to bless their labors,
that they may not be unfruitful. Nothing will be gained by their
industry and toil, — all their study and application will be to no
purpose, except so far as the Lord bestows his blessing. This ought not
to be regarded by them as an encouragement to sloth. It is their duty,
on the contrary, to labor earnestly in sowing and watering, provided
they, at the same time, ask and expect the increase from the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p17"></span>We are thus enabled to refute the
slanders of the Pelagians and Papists, who argue, that, if the grace of
the Holy Spirit performs the whole work of enlightening our minds, and
forming our hearts to obedience, all instruction will be superfluous.
The only effect of the enlightening and renewing influences of the Holy
Spirit is, to give to instruction its proper weight and efficacy, that
we may not be blind to the light of heaven, or deaf to the strains of
truth. While the Lord alone acts upon us, he acts by his own
instruments. It is therefore the duty of pastors diligently to teach, —
of the people, earnestly to receive instruction, — and of both, not to
weary themselves in unprofitable exertions, but to look up for Divine
aid.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18"></span>*I bow my knees.* The bodily attitude is
here put for the religious exercise itself. Not that prayer, in all
cases, requires the bending of the knees, but because this expression of
reverence is commonly employed, especially where it is not an incidental
petition, but a continued prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p20"></span>**15.** *Of whom the whole family.*
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) The relative, ἐξ οὗ, *of whom,*
may apply equally to the Father and to the Son. Erasmus restricts it
entirely to the Father. I do not approve of this; for readers ought to
have been allowed a liberty of choice; nay, the other interpretation
appears to be far more probable. The apostle alludes to that
relationship which the Jews had with each other, through their father
Abraham, to whom they trace their lineage. He proposes, on the contrary,
to remove the distinction between Jews and Gentiles; and tells them, not
only that all men have been brought into one family and one race through
Christ, but that they are enabled to claim kindred even with angels.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p22"></span>To apply it to God the Father would not
be equally defensible, being liable to this obvious exception, that God
formerly passed by the Gentiles, and adopted the Jews as his peculiar
people. But when we apply it to Christ, the whole of Paul’s statement
agrees with the facts; for all come and blend together, as one family,
and, related to one God the Father, are mutually brethren. Let us
therefore understand that, through the mediation of Christ, a
relationship has been constituted between Jews and Gentiles, because, by
reconciling us to the Father, he has made us all one. Jews have no
longer any reason to boast that they are the posterity of Abraham, or
that they belong to this or that tribe, — to despise others as profane,
and claim the exclusive honor of being a holy people. There is but one
relationship which ought to be reckoned, both in heaven and on earth,
both among angels and among men — a union to the body of Christ. Out of
him all will be found scattered. He alone is the bond by which we are
united.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p23"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p24"></span>**16.** *That he would give to you.*
Paul wishes that the Ephesians should be *strengthened;* and yet he had
already bestowed on their piety no mean commendation. But believers have
never advanced so far as not to need farther growth. The highest
perfection of the godly in this life is an earnest desire to make
progress. This *strengthening,* he tells us, is the work of the
*Spirit;* so that it does not proceed from man’s own ability. The
increase, as well as the commencement, of everything good in us, comes
from the Holy Spirit. That it is the gift of Divine grace, is evident
from the expression used, *that he would give to you* This the Papists
utterly deny. They maintain that the *second* grace is bestowed upon us,
according as we have individually deserved it, by making a proper use of
the *first* grace. But let us unite with Paul in acknowledging that it
is the “gift” of the grace of God, not only that we have begun to run
well, but that we advance; not only that we have been born again, but
that we grow from day to day.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25"></span>*According to the riches of his glory.*
These words are intended to express still more strongly the doctrine of
Divine grace. They may be explained in two ways: either, *according to
his glorious riches,* making the genitive, agreeably to the Hebrew
idiom, supply the place of an adjective, — or, *according to his rich
and abundant glory.* The word *glory* will thus be put for *mercy,* in
accordance with an expression which he had formerly used, “to the praise
of the glory of his grace.” (<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>[Eph
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>.md)
I prefer the latter view.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p26"></span>*In the inner man.* By *the inner man,*
Paul means the soul, and whatever relates to the spiritual life of the
soul; as the *outward* man denotes the body, with everything that
belongs to it, — health, honors, riches, vigor, beauty, and everything
of that nature. “Though our outward man perish, yet our inward man is
renewed day by day;” that is, if in worldly matters we decay, our
spiritual life becomes more and more vigorous. (<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>[2Co
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p26.1"></span>) The prayer of Paul, that the saints may be
*strengthened,* does not mean that they may be eminent and flourishing
in the world, but that, with respect to the kingdom of God, their minds
may be made strong by Divine power.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p28"></span>**17.** *That Christ may dwell.* He
explains what is meant by “the strength of the inner man.” As

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29"></span>“it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell,” (<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>[Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p30"></span>so he who has Christ dwelling in him can
want nothing. It is a mistake to imagine that the Spirit can be obtained
without obtaining Christ; and it is equally foolish and absurd to dream
that we can receive Christ without the Spirit. Both doctrines must be
believed. We are partakers of the Holy Spirit, in proportion to the
intercourse which we maintain with Christ; for the Spirit will be found
nowhere but in Christ, on whom he is said, on that account, to have
rested; for he himself says, by the prophet Isaiah, “The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me.” (<span id="iv.iv.iii-p30.1"></span>[Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p30.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.iii-p30.2"></span>[Lu
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p30.2"></span>.) But neither can Christ be separated from
his Spirit; for then he would be said to be dead, and to have lost all
his power.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p31"></span>Justly, therefore, does Paul affirm that
the persons who are endowed by God with spiritual vigor are those in
whom *Christ dwells.* He points to that part in which Christ peculiarly
dwells, *in your hearts,* — to show that it is not enough if the
knowledge of Christ dwell on the tongue or flutter in the brain.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32"></span>*May dwell through faith.* The method by
which so great a benefit is obtained is also expressed. What a
remarkable commendation is here bestowed on *faith,* that, by means of
it, the Son of God becomes our own, and “makes his abode with us!”
(<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>[Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>.) By faith we not only acknowledge that
Christ suffered and rose from the dead on our account, but, accepting
the offers which he makes of himself, we possess and enjoy him as our
Savior. This deserves our careful attention. Most people consider
fellowship with Christ, and believing in Christ, to be the same thing;
but the fellowship which we have with Christ is the consequence of
faith. In a word, faith is not a distant view, but a warm embrace, of
Christ, by which he dwells in us, and we are filled with the Divine
Spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p33"></span>*That ye may be rooted and grounded in
love.* Among the fruits of Christ’s dwelling in us the apostle
enumerates love and gratitude for the Divine grace and kindness
exhibited to us in Christ. Hence it follows, that this is true and solid
excellence; so that, whenever he treats of the perfection of the saints,
he views it as consisting of these two parts. The firmness and constancy
which our love ought to possess are pointed out by two metaphors. There
are many persons not wholly destitute of love; but it is easily removed
or shaken, because its roots are not deep. Paul desires that it should
be *rooted*  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) *and grounded,* —
thoroughly fixed in our minds, so as to resemble a well-founded building
or deeply-planted tree. The true meaning is, that our roots ought to be
so deeply planted, and our foundation so firmly laid in love, that
nothing will be able to shake us. It is idle to infer from these words,
that love is the foundation and root of our salvation. Paul does not
inquire here, as any one may perceive, on what our salvation is founded,
but with what firmness and constancy we ought to continue in the
exercise of love.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p35"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p36"></span>**18.** *May be able to comprehend.* The
second fruit is, that the Ephesians should perceive the greatness of
Christ’s love to men. Such an apprehension or knowledge springs from
faith. By desiring that they should comprehend it *with all saints,* he
shows that it is the most excellent blessing which they can obtain in
the present life; that it is the highest wisdom, to which all the
children of God aspire. What follows is sufficiently clear in itself,
but has hitherto been darkened by a variety of interpretations.
Augustine is quite delighted with his own acuteness, which throws no
light on the subject. Endeavouring to discover some kind of mysterious
allusion to the figure of the cross, he makes the *breadth* to be love,
— the *height,* hope, — the *length,* patience, and the *depth,*
humility. This is very ingenious and entertaining: but what has it to do
with Paul’s meaning? Not more, certainly, than the opinion of Ambrose,
that the allusion is to the figure of a sphere. Laying aside the views
of others, I shall state what will be universally acknowledged to be the
simple and true meaning.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p37"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p38"></span>**19.** *And to know the love of
Christ.* By those dimensions Paul means nothing else than the love of
Christ, of which he speaks afterwards. The meaning is, that he who
*knows* it fully and perfectly is in every respect a wise man. As if he
had said, “In whatever direction men may look, they will find nothing in
the doctrine of salvation that does not bear some relation to this
subject.” The love of Christ contains within itself the whole of wisdom,
so that the words may run thus: *that ye may be able to comprehend the
love of Christ, which is the length and breadth, and depth, and height,*
that is, the complete perfection of all wisdom. The metaphor is borrowed
from mathematicians, taking the parts as expressive of the whole. Almost
all men are infected with the disease of desiring to obtain useless
knowledge. It is of great importance that we should be told what is
necessary for us to know, and what the Lord desires us to contemplate,
above and below, on the right hand and on the left, before and behind.
The love of Christ is held out to us as the subject which ought to
occupy our daily and nightly meditations, and in which we ought to be
wholly plunged. He who is in possession of this alone has enough. Beyond
it there is nothing solid, nothing useful, — nothing, in short, that is
proper or sound. Though you survey the heaven and earth and sea, you
will never go beyond this without overstepping the lawful boundary of
wisdom.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p39"></span>*Which surpasseth knowledge.* A similar
expression occurs in another Epistle:

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40"></span>“the peace of God, which surpasseth all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.2"></span>[Php
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p40.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p41"></span>No man can approach to God without being
raised above himself and above the world. On this ground the sophists
refuse to admit that we can know with certainty that we enjoy the grace
of God; for they measure faith by the perception of the bodily senses.
But Paul justly contends that this wisdom exceeds all knowledge; for, if
the faculties of man could reach it, the prayer of Paul that God would
bestow it must have been unnecessary. Let us remember, therefore, that
the certainty of faith is knowledge, but is acquired by the teaching of
the Holy Spirit, not by the acuteness of our own intellect. If the
reader desire a more full discussion of this subject, he may consult the
“Institutes of the Christian Religion.”

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p42"></span>*That ye may be filled.* Paul now
expresses in one word what he meant by the various dimensions. He who
has Christ has everything necessary for being made perfect in God; for
this is the meaning of the phrase, *the fullness of God.* Men do
certainly imagine that they have entire completeness in themselves, but
it is only when their pride is swelled with empty trifles. It is a
foolish and wicked dream, that by *the fullness of God* is meant the
full Godhead, as if men were raised to an equality with God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
3:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>**20.** Now unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the
power that worketh in us,

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>**20.** Ei autem, qui potest cumulate
super omnia facere, quae petimus aut cogitamus, secundum potentiam in
nobis agentem,

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span>**21.** Unto him *be* glory in the church
by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span>**21.** Sit gloria in Ecclesia per Iesum
Christum, in omnes aetates seculi seculorum. Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span>**20.** *Now to him.* He now breaks out
into thanksgiving, which serves the additional purpose of exhorting the
Ephesians to maintain “good hope through grace,” (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>[2Th
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>,.md)
and to endeavor constantly to obtain more and more adequate conceptions
of the value of the grace of God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span>*Who is able.*  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) This refers to the future, and agrees
with what we are taught concerning hope; and indeed we cannot offer to
God proper or sincere thanksgivings for favors received, unless we are
convinced that his goodness to us will be without end. When he says that
God is *able,* he does not mean power viewed apart, as the phrase is,
from the act, but power which is exerted, and which we actually feel.
Believers ought always to connect it with the work, when the promises
made to them, and their own salvation, form the subject of inquiry.
Whatever God can do, he unquestionably will do, if he has promised it.
This the apostle proves both by former instances, and by the efficacy of
the Spirit, which was at this very time exerted on their own minds.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span>*According to the power that worketh in
us,* — according to what we feel within ourselves; for every benefit
which God bestows upon us is a manifestation of his grace, and love, and
power, in consequence of which we ought to cherish a stronger confidence
for the future*. Exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,*
is a remarkable expression, and bids us entertain no fear lest faith of
a proper kind should go to excess. Whatever expectations we form of
Divine blessings, the infinite goodness of God will exceed all our
wishes and all our thoughts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc41015.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span> “Know that for no other reason am I,
Paul, loaded with these chains. It was for no evil action, but for the
love which I bear to the Lord Jesus Christ.” — Erasmus.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc41015.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36"></span> “His manifold wisdom, which regulates
all things by amazing plans, through death bestowing life, through
ignominy conducting to glory, through abasement displaying the majesty
of God.” — Erasmus.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc41015.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p47"></span> See note, page 160.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc41015.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p50"></span> “The original word <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p50.1"></span>ἐκκακεῖν signifies ‘to behave like a coward,
and through fear to desert the post of battle.’” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc41015.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21"></span> “This seems to me plainly to allude,
and to be urged in opposition to Diana of Ephesus, who was the common
goddess of the Asiatic cities, in whose worship they were united, and by
whose common contributions her temple was built, which was the common
temple of those incorporated cities, so that all Asia (as we have it,
<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ac
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>) ‘worshipped her;’ which was therefore
strictly and properly her family, over which she presided as the common
mother and patroness; and there are models and ancient inscriptions
remaining to this day, that abundantly prove it. Now the apostle tells
these Ephesians, that, as Christians, they belonged to a nobler family,
which took its denomination from, and was immediately subject to, God as
a common Father; of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.”
— Chandler.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc41015.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p34"></span> “Meaning (by a continuation of the same
architectural metaphor) that ‘the love should be deep and sincere;’ and
though <span id="iv.iv.iii-p34.1"></span>ἐρ᾿ῥιζωμένοι be properly
applicable to *trees,* yet it was sometimes used of the foundations of
massy edifices; in which case, however, it is in the classical writers
almost always accompanied with some word which has reference to
buildings.”. — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc41015.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span> “Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. He that hungereth, let
him hunger more; and he that desireth, let him still more abundantly
desire; for all that he can desire he shall fully obtain.” — Bernard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc41016.md)
