[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs00)  [Next](lrs02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

PREFACE.

SINCE the days of Southey the romantic literature of Spain has not
received from English writers and critics the amount of study and
attention it undoubtedly deserves.  In no European country did the seeds
of Romance take root so readily or blossom so speedily and luxuriantly
as in Spain, which perhaps left the imprint of its national character
more deeply upon the literature of chivalry than did France or England. 
When we think of chivalry, do we not think first of Spain, of her
age-long struggle against the pagan invaders of Europe, her
sensitiveness to all that concerned personal and national honour, of the
names of the Cid Campeador, Gayferos, and Gonzalvo de Cordova, gigantic
shadows in harness, a pantheon of heroes, which the martial legends of
few lands can equal and none surpass.  The epic of our British Arthur,
the French *chansons de gestes*, are indebted almost as much to folklore
as to the imagination of the singers who first gave them literary
shape.  But in the romances of Spain we find that folklore plays an
inconsiderable part, and that her chivalric fictions are either the
offspring of historic happenings or of the brilliant and glowing
imagination which illumines the whole expanse of Peninsular literature.

I have given more space to the proofs of the connexion between the
French *chansons de gestes* and the Spanish *cantares de gesta* than
most of my predecessors who have written of Castilian romantic story. 
Indeed, with the exception of Mr. Fitzmaurice Kelly, whose admirable
work in the field of Spanish letters forms so happy an exception to our
national neglect of a great literature, \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

I am aware of no English writer who has concerned himself with this
subject.  My own opinion concerning the almost total lack of Moorish
influence upon the Spanish *romanceros* is in consonance with that of
critics much better qualified to pass judgment upon such a question. 
But for my classification of the ballad I am indebted to no one, and
this a long devotion to the study of ballad literature perhaps entitles
me to make.  I can claim too, that my translations are not mere
paraphrases, but provide renderings of tolerable accuracy.

I have made an earnest endeavor to provide English readers with a
conspectus of Spanish romantic literature as expressed in its *cantares
de gesta* , its chivalric novels, its *romanceros* or ballads, and some
of its lighter aspects.  The reader will find full accounts and
summaries of all the more important works under each of these heads,
many of which have never before been described in English.

If the perusal of this book leads to the more general study of the noble
and useful Castilian tongue on the part of but a handful of those who
read it, its making will have been justified.  The real brilliance and
beauty of these tales lie behind the curtains of a language unknown to
most British people, and can only be liberated by the spell of study. 
This book contains merely the poor shadows and reflected wonders of
screened and hidden marvels.

L.S.

EDINBURGH,  
*June*, 1920

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](lrs02.md)
