[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs02)  [Next](lrs04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

CHAPTER I:  
THE SOURCE OF SPANISH ROMANCE

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Romance, Romance, the song of France,<br />
The gestes of fair Britaine,<br />
The legends of the sword and the lance,<br />
That grew in Alemaine,<br />
Pale in thy rich inheritance,<br />
Thou splendor of old Spain!</p>
<em></em>
<p>Anon.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

IF, spent with journeying, a stranger should seat himself in some garden
in old Granada, and from beneath a tenting of citron and mulberry leaves
open his ears to the melody of the waters of the City of Pomegranates
and his spirit to the sorcery of its atmosphere, he will gladly believe
that in the days when its colours were less mellow and its delicious air
perhaps less reposeful the harps of its poets were the looms upon which
the webs of romance were woven.  Almost instinctively he will form the
impression that the Spaniard, having regained this paradise after
centuries of exile, and stirred by the enchanted echoes of Moorish music
which still lingered there, was roused into passionate song in praise of
those heroes of his race who had warred so ceaselessly and sacrificed so
much to redeem it.  But If he should climb the Siera del Sol and pass
through the enchanted chambers of the Alhambra as a child passes through
the courts of dream, he will say in his heart that the men who builded
these rooms from the rainbow and painted these walls from the palette of
the sunset raised also the invisible but not less gorgeous palace of
Spanish Romance.  
  
Or if one, walking in the carven shadows of Cordova,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

think on the mosque Maspura, whose doors of Andalusian brass opened to
generations of poets and astrologers, or on the palace of Azzahra, built
of rose and sea-colored marbles rifled from the Byzantine churches of
Ifrikia, will he not believe that in this city of shattered splendours
and irretrievable spells the passion-flower of Romance burst forth
full-blown?

But we cannot trace the first notes of the forgotten musics nor piece
together the mosaic of broken harmonies in the warm and sounding cities
of the Saracens, neither in "the mine of silk and silver," old Granada,
nor among the marble memories of Cordova, whose market-place overflowed
with the painted parchments of Moorish song and science. We must turn
our backs on the scarlet southern land and ascend to the bare heights of
Castile and Asturias, where Christian Spain, prisoned for half a
thousand years upon a harsh and arid plateau, and wrought to a high
passion of sacrifice and patriotism, burst into a glory of mortal song,
the echoes of which resound among its mountains like ghostly clarions on
a field of old encounter.

Isolation and devotion to a national cause are more powerful an
incentive to the making of romance than an atmosphere of Eastern
luxuriance. The breasts of these stern sierras were to give forth milk
sweeter than the wine of Almohaden, and song more moving if less
fantastic in Burgos and Carrión than ever inspired the guitars of
Granada. But the unending conflict of Arab and Spaniard brought with it
many interchanges between the sensuous spirit of the South and the more
rugged manliness of the North, so that at last Saracen gold damascened
the steel of Spanish song, and the nets of Eastern phantasy wound
themselves about the\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Spanish soul. In a later day an openly avowed admiration for the art and
culture of the Moslem leavened the ancient hate, and the Moorish
cavalier imitated the chivalry, if not the verse, of the Castilian
knight.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

 

The Cradle of Spanish Song

The homeland of Spanish tradition was indeed a fitting nursery for the
race which for centuries contested every acre of the Peninsula with an
enemy greatly more advanced in the art of warfare, if inferior in
resolution and the spirit of unity. Among the flinty wastes of the north
of Spain, which are now regarded as rich in mineral resources, are
situated at intervals luxuriant and fertile valleys sunk deep between
the knees of volcanic ridges, the lower slopes of which are covered with
thick forests of oak, chestnut, and pine. These depressions, sheltered
from the sword-like winds which sweep down from the Pyrenees, reproduce
in a measure the pleasant conditions of the southern land. Although
their distance one from another tended to isolation, it was in these
valleys that Christian Spain received the respite which enabled her to
collect her strength and school her spirit for the great struggle
against the Saracen.

In this age-long contest she was undoubtedly inspired by that subtle
sense of nationhood and the possession of a common tongue which have
proved the salvation of many races no less desperately situated, and
perhaps her determination to redeem the lost Eden of the South is the
best measure of the theory that, prior to the era of Saracen conquest,
the Castilian tongue was a mere

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

jargon, composed of the elements of the Roman *lingua* *rustica* and the
rude Gothic, and, according to some authorities, still lacking in
grammatical arrangement and fixity of idiom.  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) It is certainly clear that the final phases
in the evolution of the Castilian took place subsequently to the Arabic
invasion, but it is a straining of such scanty evidence as we possess to
impute to the form of Castilian speech current immediately before that
time the character of an undisciplined *patois*.

 

Roman and Visigoth

When in the early part of the fifth century the Visigoths, following in
the wake of the Vandal folk, entered Romanized Spain, they did not build
upon the ruins of its civilization, but retained the habits of their
northern homeland and for some generations seem to have been little
impressed with Roman culture. Nor did the Latin speech of the people
they had conquered at first find favour among them, although dwelling as
they had done on the very flanks of the Empire, they were certainly not
ignorant of it. They found the people of the Peninsula as little
inclined to relinquish the cultivated language in which their
compatriots Martila, Lucuan and Seneca had contributed to the triumph of
Roman letters. A military autocracy is not usually successful in
imposing its language upon a subject people unless it possesses the dual
advantages

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of ascendancy in arms and literary capacity, and the Visigoths, unable
to compete in this latter respect with the highly civilized colonists of
Hispania, fell, with the passing of the generations, into the easy
acceptance of the Roman tongue. Their illiteracy, however, was not the
sole reason for their partial defeat in the give-and-take of linguistic
strife, for, though powerful in military combination, they were greatly
outmatched in numbers. As invaders they had brought few women with them,
and had perforce to intermarry with native wives, who taught their
children the Roman tongue. The necessary intercourse between conqueror
and conquered in time produced a sort of pidgin-Latin, which stood in
much the same relation to the classic speech of Rome as the trade
language of the Pacific did to English.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

The use of Latin as a literary tongue in that part of Spain where the
Castilian speech was evolved considerably retarded its development from
the condition of a *patois* to a language proper. Nevertheless it
continued to advance. The processes by which it did so are surprisingly
obscure, but the circumstance of its literary fixity in the early
eleventh century is proof that it must have achieved colloquial
perfection at least before the era of the Moorish invasion. The Saracen
conquest, by forcing it into the bleak north-west, did it small
disservice, for there it had to contend with other dialects of the Roman
tongue, which enriched its vocabulary, and over which, ultimately, it
gained almost complete ascendancy as a literary language.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The Romance Tongues of Spain

Three Romance or Roman languages were spoken in that portion of Spain
which remained in Christian hands: in Catalonia and Aragon the
Provençal, Catalan, or Limousin; in Asturias, Old Castile, and Leon the
Castilian; and in Galicia the Gallego, whence the Portuguese had its
origin. The Catalan was almost entirely similar to the Provençal or
*langue d’oc* of Southern France, and the accession of Raymond Berenger,
Count of Barcelona, to the throne of Provence in 1092 united the
Catalonian and Provençal peoples under one common rule. Provençal, the
language of the Troubadours, was of French origin, and bears evidence of
its evolution from the Latin of Provincial Gaul. It appears to have been
brought into Catalonia by those Hispani who had fled the Provence from
Moorish rule, and who gradually drifted southward again as the more
northerly portions of Spain were freed from Arab aggression. The
political connexion of Catalonia with Provence naturally brought about a
similarity of custom as well as of speech, and indeed we find the people
of the Catalan coast and the province of Aragon deeply imbued with the
chivalry and gallantry of the more northerly home of the *Gai Saber* .

Throughout the whole Provençal-Catalan  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) tract were held those romantic courts of
love in which the erotic subtleties of its men and women of song were
debated with a seriousness which shows that the art of love had entered
into competition with the forces of law and

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

religion, and had, indeed, become the real business of life with the
upper classes of the country. Out of this glorification of the relations
of the sexes arose the allied science of chivalry, no less punctilious
or extravagant in its code and spirit. This spirit of Provençal chivalry
gradually found its way into Castile, heightened and quickened the
imagination of its people, and prepared the Spanish mind for the
acceptance and appreciation of Romantic literature. But at no time was
Castilian imagination passively receptive. It subjected every literary
force which invaded it to such a powerful alchemy of transmutation that
in time all foreign elements lost their alien character and emerged from
the crucible of Spanish thought as things almost wholly Castilian.

The perfection of rhyming verse was undoubtedly accomplished by the
Troubadour poets of Provence and Catalonia, and opened the way for a
lyric poetry which, if it never attained any loftiness of flight or
marked originality of expression, has seldom been surpassed in melody
and finish. But it is remarkable that this extensive body of verse, if a
few political satires be excepted, has but one constant theme—the
exaltation of love. A perusal of the poetry of the pleasant Provençal
tongue pleases the ear and appeals to the musical sense. The melody is
never at fault, and we can count upon the constancy of a pavane-like
stateliness, which proceeds, perhaps, as much from the genius of the
language as from the metrical excellences of its singers. But the
monotonous repetition of amatory sentiment, for the expression of which
the same conceptions and even the same phrases are again and again
compelled to do duty, the artificial spirit which inspires these uniform
cadences, and the lack of real human

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

warmth soon weary and disappoint the reader, who will gladly resign the
entire poetical kingdom of Provence to the specialist in prosody or the
literary antiquary in exchange for the freer and less formal beauties of
a music better suited to human needs and less obviously designed for the
uses of a literary caste. The poetry of Provence reminds us of those
tapestries in which the scheme is wholly decorative, where still,
brocaded flowers occupy regular intervals in the pattern and a
monotonous sameness of colour is the distinctive note. No episode of the
chase nor pastoral scene charms us by its liveliness or reality, nor do
we find the silken hues distributed in a natural and pleasing manner.
 <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

The Provençal and Catalan troubadours had, indeed, a certain influence
upon the fortunes of Castilian poetry and romance, and proofs of their
early intercourse with Castile are numerous. The thirteenth-century
*Book of Apollonius*, an anonymous poem, is full of Provençalisms, as is
the rather later *History of the Crusades*. During the persecution they
suffered at the period of the Albigensian wars numbers of them fled into
Spain where they found a refuge from their intolerant enemies. Thus
Aimeric de Bellinai fled to the Court of Alfonso IX,  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) and was later at the Court of Alfonso X, as
were Montagnagunt and Folquet de Lunel, as well as Raimon de Tours and
Bertrand Carbunel, who, with\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Riquier, either dedicated their works to that monarch or composed
elegies on the occasion of his death. King Alfonso himself wrote verses
of a decidedly Provençal cast, and even as late as 1433 the Marquis de
Villena, a kinsman of the famous Marquis de Santillana, whom we shall
encounter later, wrote a treatise upon the art of the Troubadours,
 <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) which, following the instinct of a
pedant, he desired to see resuscitated in Castile.  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

The Galician, a Romance language which sprang from the same root as the
Portuguese, is nearly allied to the Castilian. But it is not as rich in
guttural sounds, from which we may be correct in surmising that it has
less of the Teutonic in its composition than the sister tongue. Like
Portuguese, it possesses an abundance of hissing sounds, and a nasal
pronunciation not unlike the French, which was in all probability
introduced by the early establishment of a Burgundian dynasty upon the
throne. But Galician influence upon the Castilian literature ceased at
an early period, although the reverse was by no means the case.

 

The Rise of Castilian

The evolution of Castilian from the original Latin spoken by the Roman
colonists in Spain was complicated by many local circumstances. Thus in
constructing the vocables of the Roman tongue it did not omit the same
syllables as the Italian, nor did it give such brevity to

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

them as Provençal or Galician. Probably because of the greater admixture
of Gothic blood among those who spoke it, it is rich in aspirates, and
has a stronger framework than almost any of the Romance tongues. Thus
the Latin *f* is in Castilian frequently altered to *h*, as *hablar =
fabulari*, ‘to speak.’ The letter *j*, which is strongly aspirated, is
frequently substituted for the liquid *l*, so that *filius*, ‘a son,’
becomes *hijo* . Liquid *ll* in its turn takes the place of Latin *pl*,
and we find Latin *planus*, ‘smooth,’ appearing in Castilian as *llano*
(*pron.* lyáh-no). The Spanish *ch* supplies the place of the Latin
*ct*, as *facto = hecho*, *dictu = dicho*, and so on.

Other proofs of Teutonic association are not lacking. Thus, the *g*
before *c* and *i*, which in Gothic and German is guttural, has the same
character in Castilian. The Spanish conversion of *o* into *ue* also
resembles the similar change in German, if, for example, we compare the
Castilian *cuerpo* and *pueblo* with the German *Körper* and

Pöbel.

 

Southward Spread of Castilian

The rise of Castilian as a colloquial and literary tongue was achieved
by the ceaseless struggle of the hardy race who spoke it against the
Saracen occupation of their native land. As the Castilian warriors by
generations of hard fighting gradually regained city after city and
district by district rather than province by province, their language
encroached by degrees upon the area of that of their Arab enemies,
 <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) until at length the stronghold of the
Moors fell and left them not a foothold in the Peninsula. "It was indeed
a rude training

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

which our forefathers, mighty and hardy, had as a prelude to so many
glories and to the conquest of the world," says Martinez in his novel
*Isabel de Solis*.  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) "Weighed down by
their harness and with sword in hand, they slept at ease for no single
night for eight centuries."

From the period of the defeat of Roderic, "last of the Visigoths," at
the battle of Xerez de la Frontera in 711 until the fall of Granada in
1492, Spain was indeed a land of battles. Almost immediately after their
first defeat by Arab arms the armies of the Visigoths were pursued to
the north-western limits of the Peninsula, where they found a
rallying-place in the mountains of Biscay and Asturias. There, like the
Welsh after the Saxon invasion of Britain, they might have been
reconciled to the comparatively low area left to them, but the
circumstances of their virtual imprisonment served only to unite them
more closely in common nationality and a common resolve to win back
their original possessions.

For many generations their efforts were confined to border forays and
guerilla fighting, for the fiery courage of the Saracens would permit of
no mere defensive policy, and nearly every victory of which the
Castilians could boast were counterbalanced by reverses and losses which
their inferior numbers could ill sustain. But by degrees their valorous
obstinacy was rewarded, and ere a century had passed they had regained
the greater part of Old Castile. The very name of this province, meaning
as it does "the Land of the Castles," shows even when regained it was
held only by fortifying its every hill-top with strongholds, so that at
last this

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

castellated tract gave its name to the race which held it so dearly.
Before another twenty years had passed the Castilian warriors had
established a footing in New Castile, and from this time onward seem to
have been assured of ultimate success.

The fall of Toledo in 1085, after three centuries and a half of Saracen
occupation, marked a further epoch in the southern advance of the
Castilians, and by the taking of Saragossa in 1117 the tables were
turned upon the Arab invaders, who were now driven into a more confined
part of the country, to the south and south-west. This circumstance,
however, seems to have consolidated rather than weakened their powers,
and they had yet to be reckoned with for nearly four centuries ere, with
the fall of Granada, the Boabdil, or Abu-Abdallah, the last of the
Moorish kings, gave up its keys to Ferdinand of Castile, looked his last
upon the city, and crossed to Africa to fling away his life in battle.

In these circumstances of constant strife and unrest the Romantic
literature of Spain was born. It is by no means remarkable that its
development coincided with the clash of arms. Trumpets re-echo in its
every close. As it expresses the spirit of a martial race, it was also
the nursling of necessity, for from the songs and fables of mighty
heroes the knights of Castile drew a new courage and experienced an
emulous exhilaration which nerved them on the day of battle. Well might
the wandering knight of Castile chant, as in the old ballad:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="330">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Oh, the harness is my only wear,<br />
The battle is my play:<br />
My pallet is the desert hare,<br />
My lamp yon planet’s ray.  <span id="fr_10"></span><a href="#fn_10">11</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

Border warfare, with its frequent change of scene and constant alarms,
was a fitting introduction to errantry.

 

The Literal Development of Castilian

Castilian, although more than alien influence impinged upon it, evolved
a literary shape peculiarly its own, especially as regards its verse, as
will be seen when we come to deal separately with its several Romantic
forms. Thus it owed nothing to the literary methods of Provençal or
Catalan, though much to their spirit and outward manners. When the
courtly and rather pedantic poetic systems of the Troubadours
encountered the grave and vigorous Castilian, it was ill fitted to make
any prolonged resistance. As political causes had hastened their
encounter, so they quickened the victory of the Castilian. The ruling
power in Aragon had from an early period been connected with Castilian
royalty, and Ferdinand the Just, who came to the throne of Aragon in
1412, was a Castilian prince. The courts of Valencia and Burgos were,
therefore, practically open to the same political influences. If our
conclusions are correct, it was during the reigns of Ferdinand the Just
and Alfonso V (1412-58) that the influence of Castilian first invaded
the sphere of Catalan. We find it definitely recognized as a poetic
tongue on the occasion of a contest of song in honour of the Madonna
held at Valencia in 1474, the forty poems sung at which were afterwards
collected in the first book printed in Spain. Four of these are in the
Castilian tongue, which was thus evidently regarded as a literary medium
efficiently developed to be represented in such a contest. Valencia,
indeed, at first wholly Catalan in speech and art, seems to have
possessed a school of Castilian poets of its own

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

from 1470 to 1550, who did much to popularize their native tongue. But
the Catalonians were not minded that their language should lose the
literary hegemony of Spain so easily, and they made every endeavor to
sustain it by instituting colleges of professional troubadours and
vaunting its beauties at their great public contests of song. It was in
vain. They had encountered a language more vigorous, more ample in
vocabulary, more rich in idiomatic construction, and backed by a
stronger political power than their own.

 

The Poetical Courts of Castile

The evolution of Castilian as a literary language was also assiduously
fostered by the scholarly character of many of the rulers of Castile.
Alfonso the Wise was himself a poet, and cultivated his native tongue
with judiciousness and care, affording it purity and precision of
expression. Under his supervision the Scriptures were translated into
Castilian, and a *General Chronicle of Spain* as well as a history of
the first Crusade were undertaken at his instance. He made it the
language of the law courts, and attempted to infuse into its verse a
more exact spirit and poetical phraseology by the imitation of Provençal
models.

Alfonso XI composed a *General Chronicle* in the easy, flowing rhyme of
the native *redondillas*, instead of the stiff, monkish Alexandrines
then current in literary circles, and caused books to be written in
Castilian prose on the art of hunting and the genealogy of the
nobility. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) His relative Don Juan
Manuel did much to discipline Spanish imagination and give fixity to
Spanish prose in

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

his *Conde Lucanor*,  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) a volume of
ethical and political maxims, the morals of which are well pointed by
tales and fables drawn from history and historical literature. Juan II,
 <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) although a weak and idle monarch,
was a great patron of letters, wrote letters, associated with poets, and
caused a large collection of the best existing Spanish verse to be made
in 1449. But the spirit of his Court was a pedantic one; it strayed
after Italian models, and he himself affected the Provençal manner.
Despite such artificial barriers, however, Castilian speech continued to
advance upon its conquering way. It had definitely become the language
of Romance, and Romance, within a generation of this period, was to
become the most powerful literary form in the Peninsula.

 

The Rise of Romance

The development of Romance in Spain, its evolution and the phases
through which it passed, has not, as a theme, met with the painstaking
treatment at the hands of English writers on Spanish literature that
might have been expected at this late day, when the literary specialist
has to search diligently into the remotest corners of the earth if he
seek new treasures to assay. Its several phases are rather hinted at
than definitely laid down, not because of the poverty or dubiety of the
evidential material so much as through the laxity and want of
thoroughness which characterizes most Britannic efforts at epochal
fixation or attempts to elucidate the connexion between successive
literary phases. I can scarcely hope to succeed in a task which other
and better equipped authorities have neglected, perhaps for sound
reasons. But I had rather fail in an attempt to reduce the details

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of the evolution of Spanish to orderly sequence than place before the
reader an array of unrelated facts and isolated tags which, however
interesting, present no definite picture, permit of no reasonable
deduction, and are usually accompanied peradventure or so by way of
dubious enlightenment.

If we regard the literary map of Europe from the eleventh to the
thirteenth century we behold the light shining from two
quarters—Jewish-Arabic Spain and France. With the first we have, at the
moment, no concern. Its literature was at the time alien and inimical to
Christian Spain, which, as we shall see later, did not regard anything
Saracen with complacence until its sword no longer crossed with the
scimetar. But in France Castile had an illustrious exemplar, whose
lessons it construed in its own manner—a manner dictated both by
national pride and political necessity.

With the influence of Southern France we have already dealt. At the era
alluded to, Northern France, the country of the *langue d’oil*, although
in a measure disturbed by unrest, was yet in a much better case to
produce great literature than Castile, whose constant vendetta with the
Moslem left her best minds only a margin of leisure for the production
of pure literature—a margin, however, of which the fullest advantage was
taken. The rise of a caste of itinerary poets in France supplied the
popular demand for story-telling, and the *trouvères* of the twelfth
century recognized in the glorious era of Charlemagne a fitting and
abundant source of heroic fiction such as would appeal to medieval
audiences. The poems, or rather epics, which they based upon the history
of the Carlovingian

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

period were known as *chansons de gestes*, ‘songs of the deeds’ of the
great Frankish emperor and his invincible paladins, or, to the
*trouvères* themselves, as *matière de France*, as the Arthurian tales
were designated *matière de Bretagne*, and those based upon classical
history *matière de Rome*.

Until comparatively recent times these immense works, many of which
comprise six or seven thousand lines of verse, were practically unknown,
even to the generality of literary authorities.  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) As we now possess them they are
comparatively late in form, and have undergone much revisal, probably
for the worse. But they are the oldest examples of elaborate verse in
any modern language, with the exception of English and Norse, and
undoubtedly stand in an ancestral relation to all modern English
literature.

These *chansons* were intended to be sung in the common halls of feudal
dwellings by the itinerant *trouvères*, who composed or passed them on
to one another. Their subject-matter deals more with the clash of arms
than the human emotions, though these are at intervals depicted in a
masterly manner. The older examples of them are written in batches of
lines, varying from one to several score, each of which derives unity
from an assonant vowel-rhyme, and known as *laisses* or *tirades*.
Later, however, rhyme crept into the *chansons*, the entire *laisse*, or
batch, ending in a single rhyme-sound.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Castilian Opposition to the Chansons de Gestes

In these poems, which probably originated in the north of France, the
*genre* spreading southward as time progressed, Charlemagne is
represented as the great bulwark of Christianity against the Saracens of
Spain. Surrounded by his peers, Roland, Oliver, Naymes, Ogier, and
William of Orange, he wages constant warfare against the Moors or the
‘Saracens’ (pagans) of Saxony. Of these poems Gautier has published a
list of an hundred and ten, a moiety of which dates from the twelfth
century. A number of the later *chansons* are in Provençal, but all
attempts to refer the entire cycle in its original condition to that
literature have signally failed.

That this immense body of romantic material found its way into Castile
is positively certain. Whether it did so by way of Provence and
Catalonia is not clear, but it is not impossible that such was the case.
It might be thought that Christian Spain, in the throes of her struggle
with the Moors, took kindly to a literature so constant in its reference
to the discomfiture of her hereditary foes. At first she did so, and
accepted the *chanson* form. But two barriers to her undivided
appreciation of it presently appeared. In the first place, the Castilian
of the twelfth century seems to have been aware that if Charlemagne
invaded Spain at all, he encountered not only the Moor but the Spaniard
as well. This is not borne out, as some authorities imply, by a piece in
the popular poetry of the Basques known as the *Altobiskarko Cantar*, or
*Song of Altobiskar*, which tacitly asserts that the defeat of
Charlemagne’s rearguard at Roncesvalles was due not to Saracens, but to
Basques,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

who resented the passage of the Frankish army through their mountain
passes. The whole piece is an effusion written in Basque by a Basque
student named Duhalde, who translated it from the French of François
Goray de Montglave (c. 1833).  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) A
second battle of Roncesvalles took place in the reign of Louis le
Debonair in 824, when two Frankish counts returning from Spain were
again surprised and defeated by the Pyrenean mountaineers. But there
appears to have been a still earlier battle between Franks and Basques
in the Pyrenees in the reign of Dagobert I (631-638). The folk-memory of
these contests seems to have been kept alive, so that the Spaniard felt
that the Frank was somewhat of a traditional enemy. Archbishop Roderic
of Toledo inveighed against those Spanish *juglares* who sang the
battles of Charlemagne in Spain, and Alfonso the Learned belittles the
mythical successes of the Frankish emperor.

But this was not all. The idea that Charlemagne had entered Spain as a
conqueror, carrying all before him, was offensive to the highly wrought
pride and patriotism of the Castilians, who chose to interpret the
spirit of the *chansons de gestes* in their own way, and, instead of
copying them slavishly, raised an opposing body of song to their
detriment. Accepting as the national hero of the Carlovingian era an
imaginary knight, Bernaldo de Carpio, they hailed him as the champion of
Castile, and invented songs of their own in which he is spoken of as
slaying and defeating Roland at Roncesvalles at the head of a victorious
army composed not of Arabs or Basques, but Castilians.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

The Cantares de Gesta

But if the Castilians did not accept the manner of the *chansons* , they
assuredly adopted their form. Their revolt against the alien spirit and
politics of the *chansons* seems to have taken place at some time soon
after the diffusion of these throughout Spain. A Spanish priest of the
early twelfth century wrote the fabulus chronicle of Archbishop Turpin
of Rheims, which purported to be the work of that warlike cleric, but in
reality was intended to popularize the pilgrimage to Compostella to
which it had reference. Many Franks traveled to the shrine, among them
*trouvères*, who in all likelihood passed on to the Castilian singers
the spirit and metrical system of the *chansons* , so that later we hear
of Spanish *cantares de gesta*, most of which, however, unlike their
French models, are lost to us. The famous *Poema del Cid*, dealing with
the exploits of a great Castilian hero, is nothing but a *cantar de
gesta* in form and spirit, and we possess good evidence that many of the
late *romanceros* or ballads upon such heroes as Bernaldo de Carpio,
Gonzalvo de Cordova, and Gayferos are but ancient *cantares* ‘rubbed
down’ or in a state of atrition.

As in France, so in Spain, degeneration overtook the *cantares de gesta*
. In course of time they were forced into the market-place and the
scillions’ hall. Many of them were worked into the substance of
chronicles and histories; but the *juglares* who now sang them altered
them, when they passed out of fashion, into corrupt abridgements, or
broke them up into ballads to suit the taste of a more popular
audience. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

The Chronicles

But if the majority of the *cantares de gesta* are irreplaceable as
regards their original form, we find fragments of them in the ancient
chronicles of Spain. Thus the *General Chronicle of Spain* (c. 1252),
which, according to the latest research, is believed to have undergone
at least three specific alterations or rearrangements of its text, tells
of the stories of Bernaldo de Carpio, Ferrán Gonzáles, and the seven
children of Lara, and provides sketches of Charlemagne, while its latter
portion recounts the history of the Cid, and at times even appeals to
the *cantares* as its authority for such and such an episode. Many of
the passages in the chronicles, too, are obviously copied in their
entirety from certain *cantares*. So strongly, indeed, do they retain
the assonant verse-formation typical of the *cantares* that many of the
later balladeers seem easily to have cast them into verse again,
especially those relating to Bernaldo de Carpio and the Infantes de
Lara, and in this manner they appeared once more in the *cancioneros*,
or collections of folk-songs.

 

The Ballads.

The immortal ballads of Spain have been the subject of the sharpest
controversy, and their importance as Romantic material demands special
treatment in a separate chapter. Regarding the period to which they
belong, and their relations to the larger narrative poems and
chronicles, we must deal briefly with them here. Some authorities
ascribe them to an early age and insist upon their priority to such
poems as the *Poema del Cid* and such chronicles as that of Alfonso the
Learned, while

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

others are equally assured of the late date of the greater number. It
seems to me that the truth resides in both hypotheses, and that in this
case, as frequently in literary navigation, it is wise to steer a middle
course. In my view the ballads of Spain are of four fundamental types:
those which arose spontaneously in Northern Spain at some time
subsequent to the formation of the Castilian language, and which, if we
possess any remains of them at all, have probably come down to us in
such a form as would render them unrecognizable to those who first sang
them; ballads which are based on passes in *cantares de gesta* as
chronicles; folk-ballads of a later date, more or less altered; and,
lastly, the more modern productions of conscious art.

I also believe that the ballads or *romanceros* are again of two broad
classes: those of spontaneous folk-origin, owing nothing to literary
sources, and those which are mainly *cantares de gesta*, or chronicle
passages in a lyric state of attrition. With the great body of
authorities upon ancient Spanish literature I do not believe that the
*cantares* or chronicles owe anything to the ballads of any age, which
seem to me wholly of popular origin. Of course the two classes lastly
indicated do not include the more ‘poetic’ or sophisticated ballads
written after the ballads became an accepted form for experiments in
conscious versification, and it is plain that such efforts could belong
to neither category.

No definite proof exists as to the degree of sophistication and
alternation which the ballads underwent before their ultimate collection
and publication. It would be strange, however, if no ballads of
relatively early date had reached us, altered or otherwise, and it seems
to me merely a piece of critical affectation to deny antiquity

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

to a song solely because it found its way into print at a later period,
or because it is not encountered in ancient MSS., just as it would be to
throw doubt upon the antiquity of a legend or folk-custom current in our
own day—unless, indeed, such should display obvious marks of recent
manufacture. At the same time a few of those ballads seem to me to bear
the stamp of an antiquity more hoary than, for example, those of
Scotland or Denmark.

Few of the ballad systems of Europe are better worthy of study than that
of Spain. But in this place we are considering it merely from the point
of view of its bearings upon Romance. That it has a close affinity with
the Romantic literature of the Peninsula is evident from the name given
to these poems by the Spaniards, who call them *romanceros*.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) Some of them are, indeed, romances or
*cantares de gesta* in title, and in fact they deal with all the great
subjects sung of in the *cantares* or prosed upon in the chronicles,
such as the Cid, Bernaldo de Carpio, Count Alarcos and so forth. But
they seem to have little in common with the later romances proper, such
as *Amadis*, *Palmerin* or *Felixmarte*, for the good reason that by the
time these were in fashion the ballad had become the sole property of
the common people. As the Marquis de Santillana (1398-1458) himself a
poet of note, remarks in a letter famous for the light it throws on the
condition of Spanish literature in his day: "There are contemptible
poets who, without order, rule or rhythm, make those songs and romances
in which vulgar folk and menials

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

take delight." So might Lovelace or Drummond of Hawthornden have written
of our own balladeers.

The ballads thus relegated to the peasantry and lower classes, those of
the upper classes who found time for reading were accordingly thrown
back upon the chronicles and the few *cantares de gesta* which had been
reduced to writing. But on the destruction of the Moorish states in
Spain the increase in wealth and leisure among the upper classes, and
the introduction of printing, aroused a demand for books which would
provide amusement. A great spirit of invention was abroad. At first it
resuscitated the Romantic matter lying embedded and almost fossilized in
the chronicles. It is, indeed, but a step from some of these to the
romances proper. But Spain hungrily craved novelty, and the eyes of
romance-makers were once more turned to France, whose fictional wealth
began to be exploited by Spanish writers about the beginning of the
fifteenth century.

 

The Heyday of Romance

Perhaps the first literary notice we posses of the romance proper in
Spain is that of Ayala, Chancellor of Castile (d. 1407), who, in his
*Rimado de Palacio*, deplores the time he has wasted in reading such
"lying stuff" as *Amadis de Gaul*. He might have been much worse
occupied, but, be that as it may, in his dictum we scarcely have a
forecast of the manner in which this especial type of romance was to
seize so mightily upon the Castilian imagination, which, instead of
being content with mere servile copying from French models, was to
re-endow them with a spirit and genius peculiarly Spanish. Perhaps in no
other European country did

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the seed of Romance find a soil so fitting for its germination and
fruition, and certainly nowhere did it blossom and burgeon in such an
almost tropical luxuriance of fruit and flower.

Amadis had for sequel a long line of similar tales, all of which the
reader will encounter later in these pages. By general consent of
critics, from Cervantes onward, it is the best and most distinct of the
Spanish romances, and was translated into French, Italian, and indeed
into most European languages,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) a
special translation, it is said, even being made for Jewish readers. At
a stroke Peninsular romanticism had beaten French chivalric fiction upon
its own ground. But *Amadis* was not, as Cervantes seems to think, the
first book of chivalry printed in Spain, for this distinction belongs to
*Tirante the White* (1490) which, according to Southey, is lacking in
the spirit of chivalry. <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) Among other
figures it introduces that of Warwick the King-maker, who successfully
withstands an invasion of England by the King of the Canary Islands, and
ultimately slays the invader single-handed and routs his forces. But if
Cervantes errs in his bibliography, his barber’s summing-up of *Amadis*
as "the best of all books of its kind that has been written" is not far
from the truth.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) Tasso thought of
it "the most beautiful and perhaps the most profitable story of its kind
that can be read." Did he merely follow the tonsorial critic’s opinion,
as his language would tempt one to believe?

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Amadis was followed by a host of imitations. Its enormous success, from
a popular point of view, brought into being a whole literature of
similar stamp and intention, if not of equal quality. The first of such
efforts, in consequence if not in chronology, is that of *Palmerin de
Oliva,* the earliest known edition of which appeared at Seville in 1525,
and was followed, like the *Amadis,* by similar continuations,
*Primaleón, Platir,* and *Palmerin of England,* perhaps the best of the
series.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) Regarding the alleged
Portuguese origin of *Amadis* and *Palmerin* I have more to say
elsewhere, and will content myself here by observing that no Portuguese
original printed or manuscript, exists, although the priority of such
seems undoubted. But these romances became as Castilian as the Arthurian
series became English despite the latter's Brythonic or other origin,
and Spanish they have remained in the belief and imagination of all
Europe, popular as well as critical.

The *Palmerin* series only fed and increased the passion for romantic
fiction, so hungry was Spain for a literary diet which seemed so natural
and acceptable to her appetite that those who sought to provide her with
romantic reading could scarce cope with the call for it. The natural
result ensued. A perfect torrent of hastily written and inferior fiction
descended upon the public. Invention, at first bold, became shameless,
and in such absurdities of distorted imagination as *Belianis of Greece,
Olivante de Laura,* and *Felixmarte of Hyrcania* the summit of romantic
extravagance was reached. But ridiculous and insulting to human
intelligence and decent taste as most of these productions were, still
they found countless thousands of readers, and there is

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

every indication that publishing in the Spain of the late sixteenth and
the seventeenth centuries must have been extremely lucrative. These
preposterous and chimerical tales, lacking the beauty and true
imaginative skill and simplicity of the older romances, stood in much
the same relation to them as a host of imitative novels published in the
early years of the nineteenth century did to the romances of Scott.
Mexia, the sarcastic historian of Charles V, writing of romance in
1545**,** deplores the public credulity which battened on such feeble
stuff "For," he says, "there be men who think all these things really
happened, jus as they read or hear them, though the greater part of the
things themselves are absurd." So might a critic of our own day descant
upon the popular predilection for the cheap novel, or the whole desert
of sensation-fodder which pours from the all too rapid machines of the
Fiction Trusts.

Still another extravagant and more unpleasant manifestation of the
popular craze for romance arose in such religious tales as *The
Celestial Chivalry, The Knight of the Bright Star,* and others of little
worth, in which Biblical characters are endowed with the attributes of
chivalry and go on adventure bound. The time occupied by the appearance
of these varying types, and indeed in the whole latter-day evolution of
Spanish romance, was strikingly brief. But half a century elapsed
between the publication of *Amadis* and the most extreme of its
worthless imitations. But it is not difficult to account for the rapid
manufacture and dissemination of such a mass of literature, good and
bad, when we recall that Spain had been for ages the land of active
knighthood, that her imagination had been wrought to a high pitch

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of fervour in her long struggle with her pagan enemies, and that in the
tales of chivalry she now gazed upon with such admiration she saw the
reflection of her own courtly and heroic spirit—the most sensitive and
most fantastically chivalrous in Europe.

 

Possible Moorish Influence on Spanish Romance

There is indeed evidence—pressed down and flowing over—that the age-long
death-grapple with the Saracen powerfully affected Spanish romantic
fiction. But was this influence a direct one, arising out of the
contiguity and constant perusal of the body of Moorish fiction, or did
it proceed from the atmosphere of wonder which the Saracen left behind
him in Spain, the illusions of which were mightily assisted by the
marvels of his architecture and art? One can scarcely find a Spanish
romance that is not rich in reference to the Moor, who is usually
alluded to as a *caballero* and a worthy foe. But is it the real Moor
whom we encounter in these tall folios, which beside our modern volumes
seem as stately galleons might in the company of ocean-going tramps, or
is it the Saracen of romance, an Oriental of fiction, like the Turk of
Byronic literature? The question of the influence of Moorish literature
upon Spanish romance has been shrouded by the most unfortunate popular
misconceptions. Let us briefly examine the spirit of Arabic literary
invention, and see in how far it was capable of influencing Castilian
art and imagination.

The history of the development of the Arabic language from the dialect
of a wandering desert people to a tongue the poetic possibilities and
colloquial uses of which are perhaps unrivaled is in itself sufficient
to furnish a whole volume of romantic episode. The form in which it was
introduced into Spain in the early eighth century can scarcely fail to
arouse the admiration of the lover of literary perfection. As a literary
medium its development was rapid and effective. It is, indeed, as if the
tones of a harsh trumpet had by degrees become merged into those of a
silver clarion whose notes ring out ever more clearly, until at length
they arrive at a keenness so intense as to become almost intolerably
piercing. This eloquent language, the true speech of the literary
aristocrat, has through the difficulty of its acquirement and the
bewildering nature of its written characters remained almost unknown to
the great mass of Europeans—unknown, too, because the process of
translation is inadequate to the proper conveyance of its finer shades
and subtler intimation. Even in the greater number of the Arabs of Spain
the highly polished verse in which their literature was so rich was
unknown. How much more, then, was it a force removed from the Castilian
or the Catalan?

 

Arabic Poetry

The desert life of the Arabs while they were yet an uncultured people,
although it did not permit of the development of a high standard of
literary achievement, fostered the growth of a spirit of observation so
keen as to result in the creation of a wealth of synonyms, by means of
which the language became greatly enriched. Synonymous meaning and the
discovery of beautiful and striking comparisons are the very pillars of
poetry, and within a century of the era of Moslem ascendancy in the East
we find the brilliant dynasty of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the Abbassides (c. A.D. 750) the generous patrons of a poetic literature
which the language was so well prepared to express. Story-telling had
been a favourite amusement among the Arabs of the desert, and they now
found the time-honoured, spontaneous exercise of the imaginative faculty
stand them in good stead. The rapidity of the progress of Arabic
literature at this period is, indeed, difficult of realization. Poetry,
which we are now assured has ‘no market value,' was to the truly
enlightened upper classes of this people an art of the first importance,
more precious than those tales of the silks of Damascus, those gems of
Samarkand, or those perfumes of Syria the frequent allusion to which in
their legends encrust them, like the walls of the caverns of Ala-ed-din,
with fairy jewels. But words were jewels to the Arab. When Al-Mamoun,
the son of Haroun-al-Raschid, dictated terms of peace to the Greek
emperor Michael the Stammerer, the tribute which he demanded from his
conquered enemy was a collection of manuscripts of the most famous Greek
authors. A fitting indemnity to be demanded by the prince of a nation of
poets!

But conquered Spain was more especially the seat and center of Arabian
literature and learning. Cordova, Granada, Serville—indeed, all the
cities of the Peninsula occupied by the Saracens—rivalled one another in
the celebrity of their schools and colleges, their libraries, and other
places of resort for the scholar and man of letters. The seventy
libraries of Moorish Spain which flourished in the twelfth century put
to shame the dark ignorance of Europe, which in time rather from the
Arabic than from fallen Rome won back its enlightenment. Arabic became
not only the literary but the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

colloquial tongue of thousands of Spaniards who dwelt in the south under
Moorish rule. Even the canons of the Church were translated into Arabic,
about the middle of the eighth century, for the use of those numerous
Christians who knew no other language. The colleges and universities
founded by Abderahman and his successors were frequented by crowds of
European scholars. Thus the learning and the philosophy if not the
poetry of the Saracens were enabled to lay their imprint deeply upon
plastic Europe. If, however, we inquire more closely into the local
origin of this surprising enlightenment, we shall find it owing even
more to the native Jews of Spain than to the Moors themselves.

The phase of Arabian culture with which we are most nearly concerned is
its poetic achievement, and the ultimate influence which it brought to
bear upon Spanish literary composition. The poetry of this richly
endowed and imaginative people had at the period of their entrance into
Spain arrived, perhaps, at the apogee of splendour. Its warm and
luxuriant genius was wholly antagonistic to the more restrained and
disciplined verse of Greece and Rome, which it regarded as cold, formal,
and quite unworthy of translation. It surpassed in bold and extravagant
hyperbole, fantastic imagery, and emotional appeal. The Arab poet heaped
metaphor upon metaphor. He was incapable of seeing that that which was
intrinsically beautiful in itself might appear superfluous and lacking
in taste when combined with equally graceful but discordant elements.
Many critics hasten to reassure us regarding his judgment and
discrimination. But even a slight acquaintance with Arabic literature
will show that they have been carried

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

away by their prejudice in favour of the subject on which they wrote. In
the garden of the Arabian poet every flower is a jewel, every plot is a
silken carpet, tapestried with the intricate patterns of the weavers of
Persia, and every maiden is a houri, each of whose physical attributes
becomes in turn the subject of a glowing quatrain. The constant
employment of synonym and superlative, the extravagance of amorous
emotion, and the frequent absence of message, of that large utterance in
which the poets of the West have indicated to the generations they
served how it might best grapple with problems of mind and soul—these
were the weaknesses of the Arab singers. They made apophthegm take the
place of message. They were unaware that the fabric of poetry is not
only a palace of pleasure, but a great academy of the soul.

The true love of nature, too, seems to have been as much lacking in the
Arab as well as in the Greek and Roman. He enamelled his theme with the
meticulous care of a jeweller. Not content with painting the lily, he
burnished it until it seemed a product of the goldsmith’s art. To him
nature was a thing not only to be improved upon, but to be surpassed, a
mine of gem in the rough, to be patiently polished.

But it would be wrong to refuse to the imaginative literature of the
Arab a high place among the world’s achievements, and we must regret
that, for causes into which we cannot enter here, opportunities for
development and discipline were not vouchsafed it. As we read the
history of the Arabian states with their highly developed civilization,
their thronged academies, and their far-flung dominions, reaching from
Central Asia to the western gates of the Mediterranean, and

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

turn to-day to the scenes where such things flourished, we must indeed
be unimaginative if we fail to be impressed by the universal wreck and
ruin to which these regions have been exposed. The great, emulous, and
spirited race which conquered and governed them gathered the world to
its doors, and the rude peoples of Europe clustered about its knees to
listen to the magical tales of unfolding science which fell from its
lips. From the desert it came, and to the desert it has returned.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Djamshld, the palace is a lions’ lair<br />
Where ye held festival with houris fair;<br />
The desert ass bounds upon Barlaam’s tomb;<br />
Where are the pomps of yesterday, ah, where?</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

Moorish "Fashion" in Spanish Romance

Of Moorish grandeur of thought and luxuriance of emotion we find little
in Spanish literature, at least until the beginning of the fifteenth
century. Its note is distinctively, nay almost aggressively, *European*
, as will be readily understood from the circumstances of its origin.
 <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) But it would seem that with the
Castilian occupation of the Moorish parts of Spain the atmosphere which
the Saracen had left behind him powerfully affected the Spaniard, who
appears to have cast a halo of romance round the character of the
ancient foe, with whose civilization, as expressed in its outward
manifestations of architecture and artifact, he could scarcely failed to
be deeply impressed. If our conclusions are well founded it would appear
that about the era alluded to a Moorish

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

‘fashion’ set in in Spanish literature, just as did an Oriental craze in
the England of Byron and Moore, where English people began to travel in
the Levantine countries. But this fashion was in great measure
pseudo-Saracenic, unaffected by literary models and derived indirectly
more from atmosphere and art than directly from men or books. Long
before the fifteenth century, however, with its rather artificial mania
for everything Moresque, the Arab spirit had been at work upon Spanish
literature, although in a feeble and unconscious manner. Spanish
literary *forms*, whether in verse or prose, owe absolutely nothing to
it, and especially is this the case in regard to the assonance which
characterizes Castilian poetry, a prosodic device found in the verse of
all Romance tongues at an early period. The Moors, however, seem to have
sophisticated, if they did not write, the ballads of the Hispano-Moorish
frontiers, especially those which have reference to the loss of Alhamia.
In any case these are founded upon Moorish legends. Certain metrical
pedants, like the Marquis de Santillana, toyed with Arabic verse-forms
as Swinburne did with the French rondaeu or Dobson with the ballade, or
as the dry-as-dusts of our universities with Greek hexameters,
neglecting for the alien and recondite the infinite possibilities of
their mother tongue. These preciosities, to which many men of letters of
all ages have been addicted, had no more effect upon the main stream of
Castilian literature than such attempts ever have upon the literary
output of a country. Some of the popular *coplas*, or couplets, however,
seem to be direct translations from the Arabic, which is not surprising
when we remember the considerable number of half-breeds to be found in
the Peninsula until the middle of the seventeenth century. There can be
no

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

doubt, too, that Arabic was the spoken language of thousands of
Christians in Southern Spain. But that it had a determined opponent in
the native Spanish is becoming more and more clear—an opponent which it
found as merciless as the Moor found the Spaniard.  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

Perhaps the best measure of the decline of Arabic as a spoken language
in Spain is the fact that the authors of many romances declare them to
be mere translations of the Arabic—usually the writings of Moorish
magicians or astrologers. These pretensions are easily refuted by means
of internal evidence. But regarding the question broadly and sanely,
Spanish literature could no more remain unaffected by Arab influence
than could Spanish music, architecture and handicrafts. All such
influences, however, were undoubtedly late, and, as regards the
romances, were much more ‘spiritual’ than ‘material.’ Christian Spain
had held off the Saracen for eight hundred years, and when at last she
consented to drink out of the Saracen cup she filled it with her own
wine. But the strange liquor which had brimmed it before left behind it
the mysterious odours and scents of the Orient, faint, yet unmistakable.

 

The Type of Spanish Romance

The type of Spanish romance at its best is that in which the spirit of
wonder is mingled with the spirit of chivalry. Old Spain with her
glorious ideas of honour,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

her finely wrought sense of chivalry, and her birthright of imagination,
provided almost a natural crucible for the admixture of the elements of
romance. Every circumstance of climate and environment assisted and
fostered the illusions with which Spanish story teemed, and above all
there was a more practical interest in the life chivalric in Spain than,
perhaps, in any other country in Europe. The Spaniard carried the
insignia of chivalry more properly than Frenchman or Englishman. It was
his natural apparel, and he brought to its wearing a dignity, a gravity,
and a consciousness of fitness unsurpassed. If he degenerated into a
Quixote it was because of the whole-hearted seriousness with which he
had embraced the knightly life. He was certainly the first to laugh when
he found that his manners, like his mail, had become obsolete. But even
the sound of that laughter is knightly, and the book which aroused it
has surely won at least as many hearts for romanticism as ever it
disillusioned.

The history of Spanish conquest is a chronicle of champions, of warriors
almost superhuman in ambition and endurance, mighty carvers of kingdoms,
great remodellers of the world’s chart, who, backed by a handful of
lances, and whether in Valencia, Mexico, Italy, or Araucan, surpassed
the fabulous deeds of Amadis or Palmerin. In a later day the iron land
of Castile was to send forth iron men who were to carry her banners
across an immensity of ocean to the uttermost parts of the earth. What
inspired them to live and die in harness surrounded by dangers more
formidable than the enchantments of malevolent sorcerers or than ever
confronted knights-errant in the quest of mysterious castles? What
heartened them in an

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

existence of continuous strife, privation and menace? Can we doubt that
the hero-tales of their native land magically moved and inspired
them—that when going into battles the exploits of the heroes of romance
rang in their ears like a fanfare from the trumpets of heralds at a
tournament?

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>And as we gat us to the fight<br />
Our armour and our hearts seemed light<br />
Thinking on battle’s cheer,<br />
Of fierce Orlando’s high prowess,<br />
Of Felixmarte’s knightliness<br />
And the death of Oliver. <span id="fr_24"></span><a href="#fn_24">25</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[13:1](lrs03.htm#fr_0) The *moro latinado*, is a
prominent figure in later Spanish story.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[14:2](lrs03.htm#fr_1) Bishop Odor’s will (747)
shows the break-up of Hispanic Spain, and Charles the Bald in an edict
in 844 alludes to the *usitato vocabulo* of the Spaniards—their
"customary speech." On the Gothic period, see Peré Jules Taillham, in
the fourth volume of Cahier and Martin’s *Nouvaeux Mélanges d’
Archéologie, de Histoire, et de Littérature sur le Moyen Age* (1877).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[15:3](lrs03.htm#fr_2) This jargon owed much more
to the *lingua rustica* than to Gothic, which has left its mark more
deeply upon the pronunciation and syntax of Spanish than on its
vocabulary.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[16:4](lrs03.htm#fr_3) Catalan differed slightly
in a dialectic sense from Provençal. It was divided into *plá Catalá*
and *Lemosé*, the common speech and the literary tongue.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[18:5](lrs03.htm#fr_4) "On the whole," says
Professor Saintsbury, "the ease, accomplishments, and, within certain
strict limits, variety of form, are more remarkable than any intensity
or volume of passion or of thought." (*Flourishing of Romance and Rise
of Allegory,* pp. 368-369). He further states that the Provençal rule
"is a rule of ‘minor poetry,’ accomplished, scholarly, agreeable, but
rarely rising out of minority."

<span id="fn_5"></span>[18:6](lrs03.htm#fr_5) *D*. 1214.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[19:7](lrs03.htm#fr_6) It was entitled *El Arte
de Trobar*, and is badly abridged in Mayan’s *Origenes de la Lengua
Española* (Madrid, 1737).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[19:8](lrs03.htm#fr_7) On Provençal influence
upon Castilian literature see Manuel Milá y Fontanal, *Trovadores en
España* (Barcelona, 1887); and E. Baret, *Espagne et Provence* (1857),
on a lesser scale.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[20:9](lrs03.htm#fr_8) Still they found many
Spanish-speaking people in that area; and it was the Romance speech of
these which finally prevailed in Spain.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[21:10](lrs03.htm#fr_9) Madrid, 1839.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[22:11](lrs03.htm#fr_10) In the *Cancionero de
Romances* (Antwerp, 1555).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[24:12](lrs03.htm#fr_11) See the article on
Alfonso XI in N. Antonio, *Bibliotheca Hispana Vetus*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[25:13](lrs03.htm#fr_12) English translation by
James York.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[25:14](lrs03.htm#fr_13) Reigned 1407-54.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[27:15](lrs03.htm#fr_14) Gaston Paris, *La
Littèrature Française au Moyen Age* (Paris, 1888), and Lèon Gautier,
*Les Épopèes Française* (Paris, 1878-92), are the leading authorities
upon the *chansons de gestes*. Accounts of these in English can be found
in Ludlow’s *Popular Epics of the Middle Ages* (1865) and in my
*Dictionary of Medieval Romance* (1913).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[29:16](lrs03.htm#fr_15) See W. Wentworth
Webster, in the *Boletin* of the Academia de Historia for 1883.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[30:17](lrs03.htm#fr_16) See Manuel Milá y
Fontunal*, Poesíá heróico-popular Castellana* (Barcelona, 1874).

<span id="fn_17"></span>[33:18](lrs03.htm#fr_17) The term, first
employed by Count William of Poitiers, the earliest troubadour, at first
implied any work written in the vernacular Romance languages. Later in
Spain it was used as an equivalent for *cantar*, and finally indiciated
a lyrico-narrative poem in octosyllabic assonants.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[35:19](lrs03.htm#fr_18) In German it was known
from 1583, and in English from 1619, Southey’s translation (London,
1803) is (happily) an abridgement, and has been reprinted in the
"Library of Old Authors" (1872). I provide full bibliographical details
when dealing with the romance more fully.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[35:20](lrs03.htm#fr_19) *Omniana*, t. ii, p.
219 (London, 1812).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[35:21](lrs03.htm#fr_20) *Don Quixote*, Part I,
chap. vi.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[36:22](lrs03.htm#fr_21) English translation by
Southey, 4 vols. (1807).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[43:23](lrs03.htm#fr_22) In the chapter entitled
"Moorish Romances of Spain" the reader will find specimens of the
romantic fictions of that people, from which he can judge for himself of
their affinity or otherwise with the Spanish romances.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[45:24](lrs03.htm#fr_23) See Dozy, *History of
the Moors in Spain*, Eng. Trans., and *Recherches sur l’ Histoire
politique et littéraire de l’ Espagne* (1881); F.J. Simonet,
Introduction to his *Glosario de Voces iberias y latinas usadas entre
los Muzdrabes* (1888); Renan, *Averroës et Averröisme* (1866). Gayangos’
*Mohammedan Dynasties in Spain* (London, 1843) is somewhat obsolete, as
is Condé’s *Dominación de los Arabes*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[47:25](lrs03.htm#fr_24) "The Raid," an old
Spanish poem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The "Cantares de Gesta" and the "Poema del Cid"](lrs04)
