[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs04)  [Next](lrs06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

CHAPTER III:  
"AMADIS DE GAUL

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>There stands a castle on a magic height<br />
Whose spell-besetten pathways ye may climb<br />
If that ye love fair chivalry sublime.<br />
Come, its enchanted turrets yield the sight,<br />
As long ago to demuiselle and knight,<br />
Of many a satrapy of ancient rhyme,<br />
And in its carven corridors shall Time<br />
Display us trophies of a dead delight</p>
<p>The damascene of armour in the dusk,<br />
Shadows of banners torn from infidels,<br />
The fragments of an unremembered glory,<br />
Fragrant with faint, imperishable musk<br />
Of Moorish fantasy. Dissolve ye spells<br />
Open, ye portals of Castilian story!</p>
<p>L. S.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

MANY a casement in the grey castle of Spanish Romance opens upon vistas
of fantastic loveliness or gloomy grandeur, but none commands a prospect
so brilliant, so infinitely varied, or so rich in the colours of fantasy
as that aery embrasure overlooking the region of marvel and high
chivalry where is enacted the gallant and glorious history of Amadis de
Gaul. The window of which I speak is perched high in a turret of the
venerable fortalice, and displays such a landscape as was dear to the
weavers of ancient tapestries or the legend-loving painters of old
Florence. Beneath is spread a princely domain of noble meadow-land,
crossed and interlaced by the serpent-silver of narrow rivers and rising
northward to dim, castellated hills Far beyond these, remote and seeming
more of sky than of earth, soar the blue and jagged peaks of
dragon-haunted mountains. This scene of almost supernatural beauty
presents, at the first glance, an unbroken richness of colour and
radiance. The meadow-land is populous

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

with pavilions and the air is painted with pennons and gilded with the
blazonry of banners. The glitter of armour thrills the blood like the
challenge of martial music. Strange palaces of marble, white as
sculptured ice, rise at the verges of magic forests, or glitter on the
edges of the promontories, their gardens and terraces sloping to silent
and forlorn beaches. The scene is indeed "Beautiful as a wreck of
Paradise."

Such seems the book of *Amadis* when first we glance through its
rainbow-coloured pages. But when we gain a nearer view by the aid of the
romancer's magical glass we find that the radiant scene is deeply
shadowed in places. Ravines profound as night lie near the castled
hills, in which all manner of noxious things swarm and multiply. The
princely fortresses, the gay palaces, are often the haunts of desperate
outlaws or malignant sorcerers. Hideous giants dwell in the mountains,
or in the shadowy islands which rise from the pale sea, and dragons have
their lairs in fell and forest. But whether it breed light or gloom, the
atmosphere of *Amadis* is suffused with such a glamour that we come to
love the darker places; we feel that the horror they hold is but the
stronger wine of romance, a vintage which intoxicates.

And if we remain at our point of vantage until nightfall and watch the
illumination of this wondrous region by the necromancy of moonshine we
shall be granted an even more inspiring draught from the strange chalice
of romance. In the mystery of moonlight armour is silvered to an
unearthly whiteness, blood-red lights gleam from the turrets of the
magicians, and the sylph-like shapes of sorceresses flit from sea to
forest like living moonbeams. From the deserts between the hills and the
distant

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

mountains come the cries of ravening monsters, and all the fantastic
world of Faery is vivid with life.

What marvel then that when this surpassing picture was unveiled to the
eyes of a nation of knights it aroused such a fervour of applause and
appreciation as has been granted to few works in the history of literary
effort? The author of *Amadis* displayed to the chivalry of Spain such a
world as it had dreamed of. Every knight felt himself a possible Amadis
and every damsel deemed herself an Oriana. The philosophy and atmosphere
of the book took complete possession of the soul of Spain, banishing
grosser ideals and introducing a new code of manners and sentiment. The
main plot and the manifold incidents which arise from it were coherently
and skilfully arranged, and were not made up of isolated and
disconnected accounts of combats, or tedious descriptions of apparel,
appointments, or architecture, interspersed with the boastful bellowings
of rude paladins or vociferous kings, as the 'plots' of the *cantares de
gesta* had been. Moreover, the whole was powerfully infused with the
love-philosophy of chivalry, in which woman, instead of being the
chattel and plaything of man, found herself exalted to heights of
worship, and even of omnipotence, undreamed of by the ruder singers of
the

cantares.

Origin of the Amadis Romances

The first Peninsular version of *Amadis* appeared in a Portuguese dress,
and was the work of a Lusitanian knight, Joham de Lobeira (I26I\~J325),
who was born at Porto, fought at Aljubarrota, where he was knighted upon
the field by King Joham of happy memory, and died at Elvas. But
Southey's protestations notwithstanding, everything points to France as
being the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

original home of the romance, and there is even a reference in
Portuguese literature to the circumstance that a certain *Pedro* de
Lobeira translated *Amadis* from the French by order of the Infante Dom
Pedro, son of Joham I. The original French tale has vanished without
leaving a trace that it ever existed, save in the Peninsular versions to
which it gave birth, and we are no more fortunate as regards the
Portuguese rendering. A manuscript copy of Lobeira's romance was known
to exist at the close of the sixteenth century in the archives of the
Dukes of Arveiro at Lisbon, and appears to have been extant as late as
1750. After that period, however, it disappears from the sight of the
bibliophile, and all the evidence points to its having been destroyed at
the earthquake at Lisbon in 1755, along with the ducal palace in which
it was housed.

Its fame, as well as its matter, was, however, kept alive by the Spanish
version, and if we must regard Portugal as the original home of *Amadis*
in the Peninsula, it is to the genius of Castile that we owe not only
its preservation, but its possible improvement. At some time between
1492 and i508 Garcia Ordoflez de Montalvo, governor of the city of
Medina del Campo, addressed himself to the task of its translation and
adaptation. At what precise date it was first printed is obscure. Early
copies are lacking, but we learn that the Spanish conquerors of Mexico
remarked upon the resemblance of that city to the places of enchantment
spoken of in *Amadis.* This occurred in 1519, not 1549, as stated by
Southey. They may, perhaps, have referred to the Portuguese version, but
in any case an edition of *Amadis* is known to have been published in
that year, and another at Seville in 1547. Reference has already

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

been made to the numerous translations of the romance in all languages,
and to the equally manifold continuations of it by several hands, but it
is necessary to remark that only the first four books of *Amadis—*that
is, those which constitute the *Amadis* proper—were written by Montalvo,
the remainder being the independent and original work of imitators.
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)

Elisena and Perion

The action of the romance begins at an obscure and indefinite period,
described as following almost immediately upon the death of our
Redeemer, at which time, we are told, there flourished in Brittany a
Christian king named Garinter, who was blessed with two lovely
daughters. The elder, known as 'the Lady of the Garland,' because of her
fondness for wearing a coronel of flowers, had some years before the
period of the story's commencement been wed to King Languines (Angus) of
Scotland, and had two beautiful children, Agrayes and Mabilia. Elisena,
the younger daughter, was famed for her beauty throughout the lands of
Christendom, but though many powerful monarchs and princes had asked her
hand in marriage, she would wed with none, but gave herself up to a life
of holiness and good works. In the opinion of all the knights and ladies
of her father's realm, one so fair grievously transgressed the laws of
love by remaining

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

single, and it came to pass that the beautiful and saintly Elisena
earned from the more worldly of her gay critics the name of 'the Lost
Devotee.’

If Elisena was devoted to a life of austerity her royal father was
equally partial to the pleasures of the chase, and spent much of his
time in the green forest-land which occupied the greater part of Lesser
Britain in those remote days. On one of those occasions, as he rode
unattended in the greenwood, as was his wont, he chanced to hear the
clash of arms, and, riding to a clearing whence came the sounds of
combat, he saw two knights of Brittany attacking an armed stranger, whom
he guessed by his armour and bearing to be a person of rank and
distinction, and who bore himself with such courage and address that he
succeeded in slaying both his opponents. As the stranger was in the act
of sheathing his weapon he observed Garinter, and rode forward to meet
him, saluting him with a courteous mien. He complained that in a
Christian country an errant knight did not expect such treatment from
its inhabitants as had been meted out to him, to which the King sagely
replied that in all countries evilly disposed people were to be found as
well as good folk, and that the slain knights had been traitors to their
liege lord and well deserved their fate.

The stranger then proffered the information that he sought the King of
Brittany with tidings of a friend, and on learning this Garinter
revealed his identity. The knight then informed him that he was King
Perion of Gaul, who had long desired his friendship. Garinter insisted
that his brother monarch should accompany him to his palace, and Perion
consenting, they turned their horses' heads toward the city.

Arrived at the palace, they sat down to a rich banquet,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

which was graced by the Queen and the Princess Elisena. No sooner did
Elisena and Perion behold one another than they knew that a great and
deathless love had sprung up between them. When the Queen and Princess
had risen from the banquet Elisena divulged her love for Perion to her
damsel and confidante, Darioleta, and asked her to discover whether the
King of Gaul had pledged his troth to any other lady. Darioleta, who was
not easily abashed, went straight to Perion, who avowed his love for
Elisena in passionate terms and promised to take her to wife. He begged
the damsel to bring him to where Elisena was, that he might have the
happiness of expressing his love in person, and she returned to the
Princess with his message. So impatient was Elisena to hear from
Perion's own lips that he loved her, that, recking not of time or tide,
she sought the apartment in which he was lodged, where she remained
until dawn, detained by his protestations of affection and her own
devotion to the noble and knightly monarch who had so suddenly made her
regard her former mode of life as savourless and melancholy.

Ten days did Perion sojourn at the Court of Garinter. At the end of that
time it became necessary that he should depart, but before he took his
leave he plighted his troth to Elisena, and left her one of two
duplicate rings he wore, as a pledge of his faith. Search as he might,
however, he failed to find his good sword, a tried and trusty weapon,
and at last was forced to abandon the search for it.

The Birth and Casting Away of Amadis

When her lover had gone Elisena was plunged in the deepest grief, and
all the comfort which Darioleta could

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

bestow upon her failed to rouse her from the lethargy of sorrow into
which she had fallen. In her father's kingdom, as in modern Scotland, an
old law existed which provided that if two persons solemnly took each
other in marriage by oath no further ceremony was necessary to render
the union legal although it was usual to have it ratified later by both
Church and law. Perion and Elisena had taken these vows upon themselves,
but the Princess dreaded the wrath of her father, whom the lovers had
not consulted, and when a little son was born to her she was in great
fear of the consequences, for she knew her father to be both proud and
hasty and prone to act before he learned the truth of a matter. The
worldly and quick-witted Darioleta bad, however, no scruples regarding
the manner in which she resolved to save her mistress and herself from
the King's wrath, and despite the protestations of Elisena, who in her
weakness was unable to restrain her, she built a little ark of wood,
made it water-tight with pitch, and, regardless of the tears and
lamentations of her mistress, placed the new-born baby boy therein with
Perion's sword, which she had abstracted from his sleeping chamber. Then
she wrote upon a piece of parchment, "This is Amadis, son of a king,"
covered the writing with wax so that it might be preserved from
obliteration, and, securing it to the betrothal ring which Perion had
given to Elisena, fastened it by a silken cord round the infant's neck.
Then with the utmost caution, lest any one should observe her action,
she carried the tiny vessel to the river which ran at the foot of the
palace garden and launched it upon the swift, deep waters.

The little ark was rapidly carried out to sea, which was not more than
half a league distant, and it had scarcely

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

emerged upon the tossing billows when it was sighted by the mariners of
a Scottish vessel which bore a Caledonian knight, Gandales, back from
Gaul to his home in the North. At his orders the sailors launched a
boat, and having secured the tiny vessel, brought it to the ship, when
the wife of Gandales, delighted with the beauty of the infant it held,
decided to adopt him as her own. In a few days the vessel put into the
Scottish port of Antalia, <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md) and
Gandales carried the little Amadis to his castle, where he brought him
up with his own son, Gandalin.

Some years afterward, when Amadis was about five years old, Languines,
the King of Scotland, and his Queen, 'the Lady of the Garland,' and
sister to Elisena, paid a visit to the castle of Gandales, and were so
greatly attracted by the child's grace and beauty that they expressed a
desire to adopt him as their own. Gandales acquainted them with what he
knew of Amadis's history, and the royal pair promised to regard him as
their own son. Amadis, because of the circumstances of his strange
discovery, was known to every one as 'the Child of the Sea,' and indeed
this mysterious and poetic name cleaved to him until his identity had
been proven beyond cavil. He showed no reluctance to accompany his new
guardians, although he was grieved at having to part with his first
foster-parents, but the little Gandalin would in no wise be separated
from him, and begged so hard to be permitted to share his fortunes that
at last King Languines took both the boys under his protection.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Perion's Dream

Let us return to King Perion. Occupied once more with the affairs of his
kingdom, he still knew great heaviness of spirit because of a dream that
he had had while at the Court of Garinter. It seemed to him in his dream
that some one entered his sleeping-apartment, thrust a hand through his
side, and, taking out his heart, cast it into the river that flowed
through King Garinter's garden. Crying out in his anguish, he was
answered by a voice that another heart was still left to him. Troubled
by memory of the dream, which he could not unriddle, he called together
all the wise men of his realm and requested them to attempt its
solution. Only one of them could unravel the mystery, and the sage who
did so assured him that the heart which had been abstracted represented
a son which a noble lady had borne him, while the remaining heart
symbolized another son who would in some manner be taken away against
the will of her who had cast away the first.

As the King left the wise man's presence he encountered a mysterious
damsel, who saluted him and said: "Know, King Perion, that when thou
recoverest thy loss the kingdom of Ireland shall lose its flower"; and
ere the King could detain or question her she had gone.

In course of time King Garinter died, and Perion and Elisena were
formally wedded. But when Perion asked his wife if she had borne him a
son, so bitterly ashamed was she of the part she had been forced to play
in the matter of the child's disappearance that she denied everything.
Later, two beautiful children were born to them, a son and a daughter,
called Galaor and Melicia.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

When Galaor was hut two and a half years old, the King and Queen, at
that time sojourning at a town called Banzil, near the sea, were walking
in the gardens of the palace there, when suddenly a monstrous giant rose
out of the waves and, catching up the little Galaor, made off with him
before anyone could prevent him.

The monster, dashing into the water, clambered on board a ship and put
out to sea, crying out joyfully, as he did so "The damsel told me true
!" The parents were deeply afflicted at the loss of their son, and in
her grief Elisena admitted the casting away of Amadis. Then Perion knew
that what the wise man had told him regarding the loss of the two hearts
was the truth indeed.

Now the giant who had stolen the little Galaor was not of the race of
evil monsters, but was generous in disposition and gentle in demeanour.
Indeed, he took as much care of the child as if he had been one of his
own gigantic brood. He was a native of Lyonesse, was known as Gandalue,
and was the master of two castles in an island of the sea. He had
peopled this island with Christian folk, and gave the little Galaor into
the keeping of a holy hermit, with strict orders to educate him as a
brave and loyal knight. He told the hermit that a damsel—the same who
had addressed King Perion so strangely, and who was a powerful
sorceress—had assured him that only a son of Perion could conquer his
lifelong and ruthless enemy, the giant Albadan,  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37.md)

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

who had slain his father, and had taken from him the rock Galtares. And
so Galaor was left in the care of the hermit.

Oriana

About this time King Lisuarte of Britain chanced to put into a port of
Scotland, where he was honourably received by King Languines. With
Lisuarte was his wife Brisena, and his beautiful little daughter Oriana,
the fairest creature in the world. And because she suffered so much at
sea, her parents decided to leave her for a space at the Court of
Scotland. Amadis was now twelve years old, but seemed fifteen, so tall
and hardy was he, and the Queen bestowed him upon Oriana for her
service. Oriana said that, 'it pleased her,' and Amadis cherished those
words in his heart, so that they never faded from his memory. But he
knew not that Oriana loved him, and was greatly in awe of the lovely and
serious little maiden of ten, for whom he conceived a high and noble
affection. Very beautiful was the silent love of these children for one
another. But silent it remained, for Amadis was fearful of presumption
and Oriana the most modest of little damsels.

High thoughts of chivalry now began to stir in the heart of Amadis, so
that at last he requested King Languines to grant him the boon of
knighthood. Languines was greatly surprised that a mere boy should crave
such a heavy burden of honour, but approved his desire, and gave orders
that arms should be made for

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

him. He sent to Gandales, the knight who had found Amadis in the sea,
acquainting him with the lad's purpose, and Gandales dispatched a
messenger to Court with the sword, ring, and parchment which he had
found in the ark along with the sea-borne baby. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38.md)

These things were delivered to Amadis as belonging to him, and when he
showed them to Oriana she begged for the wax that contained the
parchment, not knowing it held anything of moment, and accordingly he
gave it to her. Shortly after this King Perion arrived on a visit to
Languines, to ask his help against King Abies of Ireland, who had
invaded Gaul with all the force of his kingdom. Amadis, knowing Perion's
great reputation as a warrior, much desired to be knighted by his hand,
and asked the Queen to crave the boon on his behalf. But she seemed sad
and distraught, and heeded him not. He inquired of Oriana the cause of
the Queen's sadness, and she replied: "Child of the Sea, this is the
first thing ye ever asked of me."

"Ah, lady," replied Amadis, "I am not worthy to ask anything from such
as you."

"What?" she exclaimed. "Is then your heart so feeble?"

"Aye, lady," he replied, "in all things toward you, save that it would
serve you like one who is not his own, but yours."

"Mine !" said Oriana, mystified; "since when?"

"Since it pleased you,'" replied Amadis, with a smile. "Do you not
remember your words when the Queen offered me for your service?"

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

"I am well pleased that it should be so," said Oriana shyly, and
beholding Amadis much overcome at her gracious answer, she slipped away
to ask the Queen the cause of her sorrow.

The Queen told her that she was deeply distressed because of her sister
Elisena, whose kingdom had been invaded, and, returning to Amadis,
Oriana explained to him why his royal mistress had left his appeals
unanswered. Amadis at once expressed a desire to proceed to Gaul to
fight against the Irish invaders, and Oriana applauded his intention.
"You shall go to the wars as my knight,'' she said, simply but
graciously. Amadis kissed her hand, and requested her to ask the
Princess Mabilia, Perion's daughter (and Amadis's sister) to bring it
about that her father should confer the honour of knighthood upon him.
The little damsel readily consented to do so, and King Perion joyfully
acquiesced in the young man's eager desire to embrace the profession of
arms. So, asking him to kneel, he bestowed upon him the accolade,
fastened the knightly spurs upon his heels, and girded the sword to his
side.

Amadis Goes on Adventure

Now Amadis resolved to set out for Gaul at once, so, taking a tender
leave of Oriana and accompanied by Gandalin, his foster-brother, he rode
off from the palace at nightfall. They had not gone far when they
encountered the mysterious sorceress who, as we have seen, took such an
interest in the fate of our hero, and whose name was Urganda. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[5](#fn_39.md)

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

The fay greeted Amadis in a most gracious manner, and presented him with
a lance, which she told him would, within three days, "preserve the
house from which he was descended from death." With her was another
damsel, and when Urganda had departed her companion remained and
announced to Amadis that she would journey with him for three days, and
that she was not a familiar of the sorceress, but had encountered her by
chance. They had not ridden far when they came to a castle, where they
heard a squire lamenting loudly that his master was beset therein by its
inmates. Amadis spurred his horse into the court yard, and beheld King
Perion fiercely attacked by two knights and a number of men-at-arms.
With a cry of defiance he fell upon the attackers, striking left and
right and dealing such terrific blows that the caitiff knights who had
assailed the King were slain and their retainers put to flight.

Perion at once recognized Amadis as the youth he had knighted not long
since. Leaving the castle, they came to a fork in the road, where they
parted, with mutual promises to meet in Gaul. The damsel who had so far
accompanied him now told Amadis that she was in reality a messenger from
Oriana, whereat Amadis trembled so with joy at hearing his lady's name
that had not Gandalin supported him he had fallen from the saddle. The
damsel then took her leave, saying that she would acquaint her mistress
of his welfare.

After several other adventures which it would be tedious to recount,
Amadis arrived with Gandalin at the Court of King Perion, in Gaul. They
had scarcely rested themselves when they heard the clarions of King
Abies of Ireland sound for an attack upon the city, and, mounting

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

their destriers, sallied forth, with Agrayes and other knights, to give
the men of Ireland battle. A stubborn contest ensued, in which Amadis
performed prodigies of valour. Perion came up with his men, but they
found themselves greatly outnumbered by the host of King Abies, and were
forced to give ground. However, the day was retrieved by Amadis, who
charged with such fury that neither horse nor man might withstand him,
and in the press he slew, among others, Daugavel, a favourite of Abies.
Hearing this, Abies grieved full sorely, and, encountering Amadis,
challenged him to a mortal combat on the following day. They met, and
after a fierce duel, which lasted several hours, Abies was slain, and
the war was thus ended at a blow.

Now Melicia, Perion's daughter, lost a ring which had been given her by
her father, the same indeed as that which the King had worn when first
he met Elisena, and the exact counterpart of the ring he had bestowed
upon her, and which she had tied to the neck of Amadis when be was cast
adrift. Rather than that her father should know of this loss, Amadis
gave Melicia his own ring. But the King himself recovered the lost
jewel, and made inquiries regarding the resemblance between the rings,
asking his daughter where she had procured its counterpart. Through her
explanation, and his recognition of the sword which Amadis wore, Perion
felt certain that Amadis could be no other than his long-lost son, and
when the young knight recounted the circumstances of his history, how
that he had been found in the sea, the last doubts of his parents
regarding his identity were quite dissipated, and they were overjoyed at
recovering him, publicly acknowledging him as prince of the realm.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

We must now follow the fortunes of Galaor, brother of Amadis, who had
been so suddenly snatched away in his infancy by the giant. In due time
he grew to be a youth of courage and address, and as he had heard that
at no Court did chivalry flourish so gallantly as at that of King
Lisuarte of Britain, he resolved to journey thither in the hope of
receiving the honour of knighthood. His giant foster-father accompanied
him, and they had travelled but two days when they came to the castle of
a felon knight, whom, with his retainers, they saw attacking a single
champion. Galaor spurred to the rescue, and by his aid the caitiff crew
were slain or routed. Galaor conceived such an affection for the
stranger that he requested knighthood at his hands. This was cheerfully
granted, and after Amadis—for the stranger knight was none other—had
taken his departure, Galaor, beholding a damsel close at hand, asked her
if she was aware of the name of the knight he had assisted. The damsel,
who was the sorceress Urganda, replied that his name was Amadis, and
that he was own brother to Galaor. On hearing this Galaor was overjoyed,
but his satisfaction was mingled with a deep regret that he had not
discovered their relationship ere they had taken leave of one another.

Not content with having enlightened Galaor, Urganda hastened after
Amadis, who was on his way to the Court of King Lisuarte at Windsor. She
told him that his rescuer was his brother Galaor, who had been stolen in
youth, whereat he was both overjoyed and sorrowful.

Greatly heartened by the strange encounter, Galaor still pressed on to
the goal of his adventure, the rock Galtares, which he hoped to free for
ever from the tyrannous rule of the monster who usurped it. A few

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

days' journey brought him to the fortalice, and at his defiance the
giant issued from his castle, armed at all points, mounted upon a
gigantic charger, and mouthing the most terrible threats imaginable. He
rode fiercely at the young knight, hoping to end the combat at a blow.
But, striking out wildly with his club, he smote down his own horse,
came thundering to the ground, and Galaor spurred his courser over his
prostrate body. In doing so, however, he fell from his charger, and
received a terrible buffet from the giant. Recovering himself, he drew
his sword and severed the monster's arm at the shoulder. This blow
practically ended the combat, for Galaor with another sweep of his good
blade beheaded his gigantic adversary.

Amadis, arriving at the Court of King Lisuarte, mingled with its
chivalry, and partook of its adventures with such zest that he came to
be known as one of the most illustrious knights in Christendom. His
adventures at the Court of Lisuarte would fill a goodly volume, and
included a war of extermination against the giants, the defeat of the
usurper Barsinan and the enchanter Archelaus, as well as a score of
other exploits, even a meagre account of which would overflow the pages
set apart for the description of this romance. His adventures are
intertwined with those of his brother Galaor, whom he even once meets in
fierce combat, neither recognizing the other because of his armour.

Lisuarte’s Vow

Now, while Lisuarte held court in London an aged knight entered and
displayed such a marvellously wrought crown and mantle that the King
eagerly offered him any price he might ask for them. The

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

knight declared that he would return on a certain day and claim his
reward, and the King agreed to keep the crown and mantle with all care,
upon pain of losing that which he loved best. The knight was an emissary
of the false enchanter Archelaus, and the gauds he had shown Lisuarte
were made by magic art, so that when the King desired to wear them and
unlocked the coffer in which they were kept he found they had vanished.
The aged knight returned, and demanded his recompense. Lisuarte was
forced to admit the loss of the crown and mantle, and the creature of
the cunning magician demanded the Princess Oriana in pledge of the
King's vow. In true romantic compliance with his promise, Lisuarte
weakly acquiesced, and the knight rode off with Oriana, whom he at once
placed in the power of Archelaus, and Lisuarte himself fell into a trap
set by the artful enchanter.

Learning of this treason while at some distance from the Court, Amadis
and Galaor hurried to Windsor, resolved to frustrate the necromancer's
wicked intention, which was to wed Oriana to the pretender to the
British throne, the false Barsinan, whom Amadis had already worsted.
Galaor speedily delivered Lisuarte from his enemies, and Amadis,
searching high and low for his lady, at last encountered her in a
forest, through which she was being carried by Archelaus. On beholding
the doughty champion, whose reputation was only too well known to him,
the enchanter hastily made off, leaving Oriana with her lover, who
conducted her back to Court.

The Firm Island

With the commencement of the Second Book we enter a strange and mystic
atmosphere. Indeed the book

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

may be called the *cor cordium* of romance, its mirror, its
quintessence. It introduces us to Apolidon, son of a King of Greece, who
is described as a valiant knight and powerful necromancer. Abandoning
his inheritance to a younger brother, he sailed from Greece into the
Great Sea, where he discovered an island inhabited by peasants only, and
ruled by a frightful giant, which was known as the Firm Island, fated to
be celebrated in the pages of romance along with many another insular
paradise.

Slaying the monstrous tyrant, Apolidon dwelt in the isle until, on the
death of his brother, he returned to sit upon the Grecian throne. But
ere he left the place he laid a potent enchantment upon it to the
purpose that no knight or lady might dwell there save such as were equal
in valour to himself or in beauty to his lady Grymenysa.

The wonders of this magical island well merit description, and as much
of the action of our romance centres there let us embark upon the fairy
galley which lies ever ready in the harbours of legend, sail thither,
and set foot upon its enchanted beaches. Perhaps it is only through the
rainbow lenses of poesy that we can view this wondrous region aright, so
I have essayed a description of the isle in verse.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>THE FIRM ISLAND</p>
<p>Prince Apolidon the Mage<br />
Raised a mystic hermitage<br />
On an island in a shipless sea<br />
By necromantic potency,<br />
Carving the granite gateways of its cliffs<br />
With interdicting seals and hieroglyphs,<br />
That his unequals might not habit there,<br />
Nor drink that island's consecrated air.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>White terraces o'erhung the black abyss,<br />
Fair as the gardens Queen Semiramis<br />
Piled above Babylon: the glittering height<br />
Seemed as the day empillared on the night.<br />
And from the ocean-green of myrtle's shadow<br />
Rose a pavilion, which from afar<br />
Seemed to the eyes of shipmen as a star<br />
Shattered on a distant meadow.<br />
Betwixt this palace and the shipless sea<br />
The wizard set an arch of glamourie,<br />
Byzantine, builded as from golden air.<br />
Its fretted alcove held an image rare,<br />
In whose uplifted hand there burned and shone<br />
The brazen brightness of a clarion.<br />
And should a lady or a knight,<br />
Lesser in beauty or in might<br />
Than wise Apolidon the wight<br />
Or Grymenysa fair<br />
Seek to traverse the magic vault,<br />
Or make the palace by assault,<br />
The brazen trump would blare,<br />
And vomit such a horrid blast<br />
That, fainting from the garden cast,<br />
The wretch would perish there.<br />
But, should a knight of equal fame<br />
Or lady of unblemished name<br />
Seek entrance by the port,<br />
The trumpet, with a high fanfare<br />
Of praise, would waken all the air<br />
Of that celestial court.<br />
Two crystal pillars marked the magic line;<br />
A tablature of jasper, serpentine,<br />
Surround' by arabesques like carven flame,<br />
On which would flash the lineage and name<br />
Of that illustrious paladin or dame,<br />
Gleamed in the Grecian pavement; who did pass<br />
Those pillars frozen in Phoenician glass<br />
Would see, 'mid splendour like reflecting ice,<br />
The lord and lady of that paradise<br />
Moulded in immortality of brass.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Still deeper in those labyrinths of pleasure<br />
A siege right perilous the Mage did make<br />
For Grymenysa's fair, mysterious sake,<br />
For glory of a love withouten measure,<br />
Setting nine seals of Babylonian doom<br />
Upon the entrance to her ivory room,<br />
That but the highest hearts the world had seen<br />
Might know the rapture of its air serene.<br />
And that no sordidness might pass therein<br />
He sentinelled the door with savage jinn,<br />
Invisible and with the flaming powers<br />
Of Sheol in their guarding scimetars.<br />
And all the webs of his weird soul were woven<br />
In mazy mystery of charm and spell,<br />
Around the shadows of that citadel,<br />
Where oft his wizard prowess had been proven.<br />
So did he leave the place of his delight<br />
To sinful spirits in a magic night,<br />
Calling on Siduri and Sabitu,<br />
And Baphomet, in syllables of might.<br />
And when the moon was in her thinnest phase<br />
He left that island in the shipless sea,<br />
No man knew how, nor evermore did he<br />
Return unto its labyrinthine ways.<br />
Still in the dawn's white fire the shepherd sees<br />
Shapes whiter than the dawn, and whisperings<br />
Sigh through the shadows of the myrtle-trees,<br />
Like to the mutterings of invisible kings<br />
Who speak of blessed, heart-remembered things.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Before he had quitted this marvellous island Prince Apolidon had placed
a governor over it, and had commanded that any who failed to pass the
Arch of Honour and still survived the dread blast of the trumpet should
without ceremony be cast out of the island, but that such as sustained
the ordeal were to be entertained and served with all honour. And he
willed that when the island should have another lord the enchantment
should cease.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Now the spell had been laid upon the island for about a hundred years
when Amadis, who had taken a fond farewell of Oriana, and was on
adventure bound, encountered a damsel who told him of the wonders of the
Firm Island, which, she said, was scarcely two days' sail from where he
then sojourned. Amadis replied that he could desire nothing better than
to essay such an adventure, and the damsel's father, a knight of large
estate, agreed to guide him there so that he might essay the perilous
adventure. When at last they came to the Firm Island they beheld the
pavilion, the walls of which were hung with the shields of those who had
tried the adventure but failed, for though several had passed the arch
none had penetrated to the pavilion. And when Amadis saw that so many
good knights had been undone his heart misgave him.

Amadis Passes the Archway

Amadis was accompanied by Agrayes, son of King Languines of Scotland,
who decided to attempt the passage of the arch at once. As he passed
through it the trumpet held by the image emitted sweet music, and he
entered the pavilion. Then Amadis approached the archway, and the
trumpet blew louder and more melodiously than it had ever done before.
Both knights approached the forbidden chamber. They saw the jasper slab,
on which they read: "This is Amadis of Gaul, the true lover, son of King
Perion." As they looked upon it Amadis's dwarf, Ardian, ran to his
master and told him that Galaor and Florestan, his brothers, who had
also accompanied him on the adventure, had attempted the passage of the
arch, but had been attacked on all sides by unseen hands, and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

were left for dead. Amadis and Agrayes at once retraced their steps, and
found the young knights lying as in a deep swoon. While Amadis was
giving his brothers such assistance as he could, Agrayes tried to enter
the forbidden chamber, but he too was struck senseless.

When Galaor and Florestan had somewhat recovered from the effects of the
blows they had received from invisible assailants, Amadis felt that for
the honour of his lady, Oriana, he must attempt the great adventure of
entering the forbidden chamber, into which no knight had yet penetrated.
Summoning all his courage to his aid, he crossed the line of the spell
between the pillars, and immediately felt himself assaulted by the
unseen warriors who had defeated his comrades. A terrific uproar of
voices arose, as if all the knights in the world were assailing him, and
the blows were doubled in force and violence. But, nothing daunted, and
strong in memory of his lady, he fought on. Sometimes he was beaten to
his knees, and once his sword fell from his hand, yet he struggled on
until he reached the door of the chamber, which opened as if to admit
him. A hand came forth and, seizing his, drew him in, and a voice
exclaimed: "Welcome is the knight who shall be lord here, because he
surpasses in prowess him who made the enchantment and who had no peer in
his time." The hand that led him was large and hard, like that of an old
man, and the arm was sleeved with green satin. As soon as he was in the
chamber it vanished, and Amadis felt his strength return to him.

When Florestan and Galaor and the people of the island heard that the
adventure had at last been achieved, they crowded into the now
disenchanted palace and gazed upon its wonders. It was full of the most
marvellous treasures

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

and works of art, but nothing more excellent was there than the statues
of Apolidon and Grymenysa.

Oriana’s Cruelty

At the time Amadis had left Britain and had said farewell to Oriana he
dispatched his dwarf, Ardian, back to the palace for the pieces of a
sword which a lady had given him in all good faith, asking him to avenge
her father's death on a cowardly murderer. Amadis, like a good knight,
had promised to keep the broken blade until he had avenged the dead man.
Oriana, seeing the dwarf return, asked him the reason, and Ardian told
her that Amadis had promised a lady ever to keep a certain sword, for
which he had been sent back. Then he fetched the blade and galloped off.
Oriana, putting a wrong construction upon the dwarf's words, and
suspecting Amadis of unfaithfulness to her, wrote him a cruel letter,
which she entrusted to a page with instructions to find him at all
costs. After much journeying he traced Amadis to the Firm Island, and
delivered the letter into his hands.

When Amadis had perused the cold and bitter words of his lady he seemed
to the messenger as a man distraught. The page told him that he was
forbidden to carry any reply to Oriana. Amadis in terrible grief called
for Ysanjo, the governor of the island, and requested him as a loyal
knight to keep secret all that he might see till after his brothers had
heard Mass on the morrow. Then he commanded Ysanjo to open the gate of
the palace privily so that he might withdraw his horse and arms
therefrom without being observed by anyone. Accompanied by the honest
Ysanjo, for whom he had formed a high esteem, he betook himself to a
chapel of

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the Virgin hard by. He prayed fervently that she would intercede with
her Divine Son to have mercy upon him, as he felt that his days would be
few. Then he rose and, taking an affectionate leave of the Governor,
mounted his horse and, without shield, spear, or helmet, rode off.

Now Gandalin, squire to Amadis, and son of the Scottish knight Gandales,
who throughout all these adventures had never left his master, took
counsel with Dunn, the messenger who had brought Oriana's cruel letter
to the Firm Island, and resolved to follow the distraught knight, lest
he should come to harm. They soon found him sleeping beside a fountain,
worn out with the violence of his sorrow, and mercifully allowed him to
slumber on. But when night had fallen Amadis awoke and, remembering his
wretchedness, broke into pitiful lamentations for his evil fate. The
youths concealed themselves, for they did not wish him to know of their
presence. But Amadis, catching sight of Gandalin, was angry with him for
having followed him. To arouse him from his lethargy Gandalin told him
that a knight, like himself abandoned by his lady, was in the
neighbourhood, threatening vengeance upon any whom he might encounter.
Amadis, minded to throw away his life, leapt on his horse at hearing
this, and accompanied Gandalin in search of the crazy challenger. They
soon came up with the unknown, and Amadis hurled a fierce defiance at
him. A stubborn combat ensued, and Amadis, by a desperate blow, struck
his opponent senseless. Leaving the wounded knight with Dunn, Amadis
rode on, still followed by the faithful Gandalin.

Galaor, Florestan, and Agrayes, hearing of Amadis's plight and his
hurried departure, resolved to follow him.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

Meanwhile the object of their search rode onward, allowing his horse to
choose its own path, and given over to weeping and lamentation. While
the anxious Gandalin slept, the crazed lover eluded him, and traversed
the wildest parts of the savage country which they had penetrated. Ere
long he came to a plain at the foot of a mountain, where he encountered
a hermit, and begged the holy man for leave to remain with him. The
hermit greeted him kindly and Amadis confided his history to the good
old man, who told him that he dwelt on a high rock full seven leagues
out at sea. And the hermit gave him the name Beltenebros, or ‘the Fair
Forlorn,' as he was at once so comely and so sore distracted.

The Poor Rock

In due time they reached the sea-shore, and, giving his horse to the
mariners, Amadis accompanied the hermit on board a vessel and sailed to
the Poor Rock, as the holy man had named his place of hermitage. And
here Amadis partook of the austerities of the hermit, "not for devotion
but for despair, forgetting his great renown in arms and hoping and
expecting death—all for the anger of a woman!"

Dunn, Oriana's messenger, journeyed back to the British Court and told
his mistress how Amadis had received her letter, and of the manner in
which her knight had achieved the adventure of the Firm Island. Then
Oriana knew that Amadis must have remained true to her. When she learned
that he had gone into the desert to die, her shame and anguish knew no
bounds, and she wrote a letter of deep contrition to her lover, and
dispatched it to him by one of her

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

women called 'the Damsel of Denmark,' a sister of Dunn.

After they had set out, the knight whom Amadis had vanquished on the
evening of the day on which he learned of Oriana's cruelty arrived at
the British Court, bringing with him the armour of Amadis, which he had
found, some time after his encounter with him, at the edge of a deep
fountain. And when she heard his story Oriana believed her lover to be
dead, and in great grief shut herself in her apartments, refusing all
comfort.

Meanwhile, calling to mind the great misery he had endured, Amadis made
this song in his passion:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Farewell to victory,<br />
To warlike glory and to knightly play.<br />
Ah, wherefore should I live to weep and sigh ?<br />
Far greater honour would it be to die !</p>
<p>With kindly death my wretchedness shall cease,<br />
And from my torments shall I find release.<br />
Love will be unremembered in the shade,<br />
The deep unkindness of a cruel maid,<br />
Who in her pride hath slain not me alone,<br />
But all the deeds for glory I have done !  <span id="fr_40"></span><a href="#fn_40">6</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

At this time the lady Corisanda, who loved Florestan, chanced to visit
the Poor Rock, and her damsels heard the story of Amadis, who told them
that his name was Beltenebros, but that the song had been made by one
Amadis, whom he had known. On her return to the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

British Court, Corisanda's maidens sang the song to Oriana as the
composition of Amadis. And she knew that Amadis and Beltenebros were one
and the same.

Now the Damsel of Denmark, who had been sent to search for Amadis, was
driven by tempest to the foot of the Poor Rock. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[7](#fn_41.md) Landing with Dunn and an attendant Enil,
she found Amadis praying in the chapel, and when he beheld the Damsel's
face he fainted away.

This extreme sensitiveness to love is characteristic of the late Middle
Ages, however absurd and overdrawn it may appear to us. That Amadis
fainted at the mere sight of one who had served his lady seems to us
ridiculous, and that he should imprison himself upon a barren rock for
the remainder of his life because she had been unkind to him is to the
modern reader more than a little grotesque.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Shall I, wasting in despair,<br />
Die because a woman's fair?<br />
</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

But we must deal gently with the ideas of the past, as with one of those
faded samplers of our greatgrandmothers, which, if we handle it
carelessly, is apt to fall to pieces. When we think of the manner in
which Dante and Petrarch had established the worship of woman, and how
the Courts of Love had completed the work they had begun, can we wonder
that men bred in this creed, and regarding the worship of womankind as
second to that of God alone, were apt to become

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

disconsolate and despairing if the object of their devotion condemned or
deserted them? Again, exalted and sensitive minds in all ages have been
peculiarly amenable to feminine criticism, as we can see in perusing the
biographies of such men as Goethe. Genius, too, which itself nearly
always abundantly partakes of the nature of the feminine, is prone to
adopt this ultrareverent attitude, as the sonnets of Shakespeare and the
poems of Lovelace and many another singer show. The rough, manly common
sense of the average male is too often denied it, and, man and woman in
itself, it must suffer the emotions of both sexes.

But, if maintained within rational bounds, this reverence for women in
general and for the best type of woman in particular must be regarded as
one of the great binding forces of humanity, a thing which has
accomplished perhaps more than aught else for the world's refinement and
advance. And here, even in a work of romance, which perhaps, after all,
is the fitting place for such an exhortation, I would appeal to the
younger generation of to-day to look backward with eyes of kindness upon
the tender beauty and infinite charm of a creed which, if it is not
entirely dead, is in a manner moribund. I do not ask our youths and
maidens to imitate its fantastic features or its extravagances. But I do
entreat them to regard its fine spirit, its considerate chivalry, and,
above all, the modest reserve and lofty intention which were its chief
characteristics. It is a good sign of the times that the sexes are
growing to know each other better. But we must be wary of the
familiarity that breeds contempt. Let us retain a little more of the
serious beauty of the old intercourse between man and woman, and learn
to beware of a flippancy of attitude and laxity of demeanour which in

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

later years we shall certainly look back upon with a good deal of
vexation and self-reproach.

When he had regained consciousness, the Damsel of Denmark gave Amadis
Oriana's letter, beseeching him to return to her and receive her
atonement for the wrong she had done him. He took leave of the good
hermit, and, embarking upon the ship in which the Damsel had arrived,
set sail for the Firm Island, where he rested, as he was yet too weak to
make the long journey to England. But at the end of ten days he took
Enil for his squire and, accompanied by Dunn and the Damsel, set out for
the English Court.

Oriana Repentant

Meanwhile Galaor, Florestan, and Agrayes, having searched in vain for
Amadis, arrived at London in a most disconsolate frame of mind. Oriana,
hearing of their want of success, betook her to the castle of
Miraflores, some leagues from the city. In its ancient garden she came
to feel that Amadis was still alive, and, full of remorse for the manner
in which she had dealt with him, she resolved that no further shadow
should fall upon their love. The description of Miraflores in the
romance is very beautiful, and the impression we receive of Oriana
walking in its quiet and umbrageous alleys may perhaps best be rendered
in verse.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Miraflores, fountain-girded,<br />
Where the trees are many-birded,<br />
And the orchard and the garden<br />
Of the forest seem a part<br />
In the stillness of thy meadows,<br />
In the solace of thy shadows,<br />
I await the blessed pardon<br />
That will ease a breaking heart.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>Miraflores, name of beauty<br />
May I learn a lover's duty,<br />
In the evening and the morning,<br />
In this fair and fragrant place;<br />
May I know the bliss of pardon<br />
In thy battlemented garden;<br />
Come to hate the hate of scorning,<br />
And to love the love of grace</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Now a herald came to King Lisuarte at Windsor giving him defiance in the
name of Famongomadan, the giant, Cartadaque, his nephew, giant of the
Defended Mountain, and Madanfaboul, giant of the Vermilion Tower; from
Quadragante, brother of King Abies of Ireland, and Archelaus the
Enchanter, all of whom were to join against Britain on behalf of King
Cildadan  <span id="fr_42"></span>[8](#fn_42.md) of Ireland, who had
quarrelled with Lisuarte. The knight, however, made one condition which
he said would ensure peace, and that degrading enough. For he announced
that, should Lisuarte give his daughter Oriana as damsel and servant to
Madasima, the daughter of Famongomadan, or in marriage to Basagante, his
son, the allied giants and kings would not advance against him, but
would remain in their own lands. Lisuarte rejected the proffered terms
with quiet dignity.

Now Amadis had slain King Abies long before, and it was revenge against
him the ill-assorted allies desired, and Florestan, who was present,
hearing this, challenged the ambassador to battle. This the knight,
whose name was Landin, promised him on the completion of the war, and
they exchanged gages of battle.

When the knight had departed, Lisuarte called for his little daughter
Leonora to come with her damsels and

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

dance before him, a thing he had not done since the news that Amadis was
lost. And he asked her to sing a song which Amadis, in sport, had made
for her. So the child and her companions made music and chanted this
little lay:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>White rosebud, Leonore,<br />
Unblemished flower,<br />
Pure as a morning in the fields of May,<br />
Thy perfume haunts my heart,<br />
Why dost thou bloom apart,<br />
Hid in the shadows of thy modesty?</p>
<p>Or, if thou mayst not be,<br />
Blossom of purity,<br />
Mine own to wear and cherish, as the leaves<br />
Embrace thee and enfold,<br />
Be not so white, so cold:<br />
Bloom also for the lonely heart that grieves !  <span id="fr_43"></span><a href="#fn_43">9</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Gandalin journeyed to Miraflores to acquaint Oriana with the news that
Corisanda had arrived at Court and had been reunited to Florestan.
Delighted as she was at this intelligence, she could not help comparing
the happy condition of the lovers with her own, and burst into tears.
But even as she wept the Damsel of Denmark was announced. Oriana
listened to her tidings with a beating heart, and when the Damsel gave
her a letter from Amadis, in which she found his ring enclosed, she all
but swooned with excess of joy.

Amadis lay in a distant nunnery, recovering from the wasting sorrow from
which he had suffered so long.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

When he felt stronger, he donned green armour, so that he might not be
known, and travelled toward London. On the eighth day of his journey he
encountered the giant knight Quadragante, he who among others had defied
King Lisuarte. Amadis unhorsed the gigantic warrior, who yielded himself
vanquished and promised to deliver himself up to Lisuarte.

Amadis Slays Famongomadan

Proceeding on his way, Amadis passed some tents pitched in a meadow
which were occupied by a party of knights and damsels in the service of
the Princess Leonora. The knights insisted upon his breaking a lance
with them. He unhorsed them all and rode on. While he was in the act of
drinking from a well not many miles farther on, he espied a wagon full
of captive knights and damsels in chains. Before it, on a huge black
horse, rode a giant so immense that he was terrible to behold, and
Amadis knew him for Famongomadan, who had sent his challenge to
Lisuarte. Amadis, who was much wearied by his recent encounter with the
knights, did not then desire to meet him, but when he saw that Leonora
was in the wagon along with the other damsels he leapt on his destrier
and, looking toward Miraflores, where Oriana was, awaited the giant's
onset.

Seeing him, Famongomadan thundered down upon him like a human avalanche.
His great boar-spear transfixed Amadis's horse, but the lance of the
paladin ran its way clean through the monster's carcass and broke off
short in his body. At this his son Basagante ran to the rescue, but
Amadis, disengaging himself from his fallen steed, drew his sword and
severed one of Basagante's

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

legs from the trunk. But his falchion snapped in twain with the violence
of the blow, and a fierce struggle for Basagante's axe ended in Amadis
wrenching it from his opponent's grasp and smiting off his head. Then he
slew Famongomadan with his own spear, and, releasing the knights in the
wagon, requested them to carry the bodies of the dead
[giants](errata.htm#0.md) to King Lisuarte and say that they were sent by a
strange knight, Beltenebros. And mounting the great black horse of
Famongomadan, he galloped off.

At long last Amadis came to Miraflores and met with Oriana, and great
was the love between them. Eight days he sojourned in the castle with
his lady; then he rode away to assist Lisuarte in his war against
Cildadan of Ireland, who, as we have seen, had challenged the King's
supremacy in Britain. Cildadan and his giant allies were vanquished and
the Irish king sorely wounded by Amadis.

Now Briolania, the lady from whom Amadis had received the broken sword,
visited Oriana, and told her in confidence that she was enamoured of
Amadis, who on his part had told her that he loved her not, whereat
Oriana was both relieved and not a little amused. And now the whole
Court knew that Beltenebros and Amadis were one and the same, and great
was the wonder at the puissance of his single arm.

But Amadis, who knew that adventure was the duty and lot of a knight,
desired once more to go in quest of it, and with him went ten knights,
his friends and kinsmen, greatly to the discontent of Lisuarte, whom
mischief-makers tried to incense against Amadis, for removing the best
and bravest of his Court.

Meanwhile Briolania had betaken herself to the Firm

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Island, where she was much disturbed by signs and portents of a very
terrible nature. She passed between the Arch of True Lovers. But when
she attempted to penetrate to the Forbidden Chamber she was violently
cast out. So, sad at heart, she returned to her own country. Shortly
after this Amadis arrived at the island, greatly to the joy of all
therein.

Here we learn something further regarding the topography and natural
history of the Firm Island, which was nine leagues long and seven wide,
full of villages and rich dwelling\~houses. Apolidon had built himself
four wonderful palaces in the isle. One was that of the Serpent and the
Lions, another that of the Hart and the Dogs. The third was called the
Whirling Palace, for three times a day, and as often in the night, it
whirled round, so that they who were in it thought it would be dashed to
pieces. The fourth was that of the Bull, because every day a wild bull
issued out of an old covered way and ran among the people as though he
would destroy them. Then he entered a tower, from which he emerged
ridden by an aged ape, which flogged him back to the place whence he had
come.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[10](#fn_44.md)

News reached the island that Gromadaza of the Boiling Lake, the wife of
Famongomadan, had sent her defiance to Lisuarte, who in consequence had
resolved to behead her daughter Madasima and other damsels of the race
of giants unless she gave up her castles and yielded her kingdom to him.
Amadis and his knights thought it

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

ill in Lisuarte to take such measures against women, and dispatched
twelve of their number to act as champions to the distressed giantesses.
This action naturally gave colour to the stories of the mischief makers
at Lisuarte's Court, who desired to put Amadis to shame. But Lisuarte
was of too noble a mind to listen to them, and on the arrival of the
knights he set the damsels free.

Amadis Quarrels with Lisuarte

But Fate and the counsels of wicked men are often stronger than the
nobility of kings. His advisers urged Lisuarte to attempt the siege of
the island of Mongaza, the last stronghold of the giants, and held only
by their womenkind. Amadis and his company conceived this proposal as
unchivalrous, and when Lisuarte heard of their opinion he grew wroth and
sent his defiance to Amadis in the Firm Island. Amadis replied that
Madasima, the daughter of Famongomadan having wed with Galvanes, a
friend of both Lisuarte and himself, the island could not be held as
sheltering the enemies of Lisuarte any longer, and that he would defend
it with his whole force. And he set sail for the island with a large and
well-equipped army. There they found a garrison which had taken
possession in the name of Lisuarte, and which they dispossessed.

Leaving a suitable force in the island, Amadis, who was becoming anxious
regarding Oriana, set sail for his own land of Gaul, and, putting in at
an island for supplies, chanced then to rescue his brother Galaor and
King Cildadan from the clutches of a tyrannous giant, who had entrapped
them. Arrived in Gaul, Amadis greeted his parents, whom he had not seen
for some years. In

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the meantime Lisuarte had himself landed in the Isle of Mongaza, and had
defeated the troops of Galvanes, its rightful lord, but he dealt
reasonably and kindly with his vanquished foes and contented himself
with making Galvanes, and Madasima, his wife, do homage to him.

For some time Amadis led a life of ease, hunting and feasting, and
contenting himself with such news of his lady as he could obtain. We are
told that by these means his great renown became obscured, although the
unbiased reader might think that he had already achieved sufficient fame
to last a lifetime. "Damsels who went to him to seek revenge for their
wrongs cursed him for forsaking arms in the best of his life."

But Amadis had strong reasons for acting as he did, for a letter from
Oriana had informed him that she had borne him a little son, and she
beseeched him not to leave Gaul until such time as he heard further from
her. She did not acquaint him with the circumstance that the infant had
been lost, but of this we shall hear more anon. Later Oriana wrote
desiring Amadis not to take arms against her father, and not to quit
Gaul, unless it were to take his part. So Amadis resolved to assist
Lisuarte against the Kings of the Isles, with whom he was about to do
battle, and who had invaded his kingdom.

Now the Damsel of Denmark had taken the little son of Amadis and Oriana
and had carried him by night through a gloomy forest, in order that her
mistress might not be disgraced. Left alone for a moment, the child had
been carried off by a lioness, from which it had been rescued by a
hermit, Nasciano, who had called him Esplandian, and educated him along
with his own

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

nephew. The good man brought the lads up as hunters, and not the least
strange thing about this remarkable child was the circumstance that a
lioness had affectionately attached herself to him, refusing to leave
him, either when at home or in the chase.

Meanwhile Amadis, calling himself ' Knight of the Green Sword,' had
resolved to do away with the ill reports of his unchivalrous sloth.
Taking only Ardian the dwarf with him, he entered Germany, where he
passed four years in adventure without word or message From Oriana.
Passing into Bohemia, he remained at its Court for a space.

One day Lisuarte, going to the chase with the Queen and his daughters,
came to the mountain where the hermit Nasciano dwelt, and encountering
Esplandian, resolved to adopt him, and the hermit showed him a letter,
written by Urganda, which had been tied to Esplandian's neck when
Nasciano found him. The letter was addressed to King Lisuarte himself,
and advised him to cherish the boy, who one day would deliver him from
the greatest danger. So Lisuarte resolved to attach Esplandian, and
Sargil, his foster-brother, to his service. And when the hermit told how
he had rescued Esplandian from the lioness Oriana knew him to be none
other than her own son, for she had heard that the infant left on the
threshold of the nunnery had been seized by a wild beast and carried
off.

In the course of his adventures, which were numerous and stirring,
Amadis was sorely wounded by a monster which he had slain, and was cured
of his hurt by a certain lady called Grasinda, to whom he was grateful.
For her kindness and assistance, and he promised to do her will in any
adventure she might choose for him.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

About the same time El Patin, Emperor of Rome, resolved to ask King
Lisuarte for the hand of Oriana. Hearing this, Queen Sardamira of
Sardinia, who loved El Patin, came to Britain along with the ambassadors
of the Roman Emperor, and, meeting Oriana, gave her some account of
Amadis, telling her how on one occasion he had conquered El Patin in
battle and how that emperor owed him a mortal grudge.

Galaor, who suspected the love of Amadis and Oriana, went to Lisuarte,
strongly advising him not to give Oriana in marriage to the Emperor, and
set out for Gaul, hoping to receive some news of Amadis. At the same
time Florestan betook himself to the Firm Island, to acquaint Agrayes of
the troubles besetting Oriana, and to carry him news of his lady
Mabilia, who longed to see him once more.

'\[he Greek Knight'

But, as fortune would have it, Amadis, now calling himself 'the Greek
Knight,' accompanied by the lady Grasinda, arrived in Britain. Amadis,
desiring to remain *incognito,,* gave explicit orders to all in his
train not to divulge his name. He learned that Oriana was about to be
given to the Emperor, and resolved to take his measures accordingly.
Grasinda, however, mindful of his vow to her to embark in any adventure
she might choose for him, sent a letter to King Lisuarte stating that
she held herself fairer than any lady at his Court, and that did any
knight deny this he must do battle with her champion, the Greek Knight.
The Roman ambassadors requested of Lisuarte that they might be permitted
to take up the challenge, and to this he acceded.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

The combat duly took place between Amadis and the knights of Rome, to
the entire discomfiture of the latter. But the day came on which
Lisuarte had promised the Emperor to send Oriana to him, and although
she swooned at the thought of being taken to Rome, her stubborn father
had her carried on board ship, said farewell to her, not unkindly, and
watched the Roman galley as it bore his daughter from the white shores
of Britain.

Amadis, hearing of the King's intention, went on board his own ship, and
lay in wait for the Roman vessel which was carrying off his adored lady.
Attacking the Italian craft with impetuosity, he quickly overcame those
on board, rescued Oriana, and at once set sail with her for the golden
shores of the Firm Island.

After a voyage of seven days the vessel of Amadis anchored in the haven
of the Firm Island. The lady Grasinda had by this time arrived there,
and now came out to welcome Oriana, whom of all ladies in the world she
most desired to see, because of her great renown, which was everywhere
spread abroad. And when she beheld Oriana "she could not believe that
such beauty was possible in any mortal creature."

Oriana and the other ladies were lodged in a tower of the palace wrought
by the magic skill of Apolidon, and by her request no knight was
permitted to enter this tower till some terms might be made with the
King, her father. Amadis was well aware that the defiance he had thrown
in the teeth of Lisuarte and the Emperor of Rome by his abduction of
Oriana must lead to serious consequences, so he dispatched messengers to
his many friends throughout the world asking that they would send
succour to him in his necessity.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The enmity which had arisen betwixt his two ancient enemies, Amadis and
King Lisuarte, presented an opportunity to the wily enchanter Archelaus
which he had no intention of letting slip. He therefore approached
several other spirits of discord and proposed to them that if strife
commenced between Amadis and the British King they with their forces
should conceal themselves in the neighbourhood of the engagement, and
when one side or the other had achieved victory, they should fall upon
the remnants of both armies and overwhelm them in a common ruin. This
dastardly plan commended itself to the malcontent lords and petty kings
to whom the wizard proposed it, and they resolved to carry it into
effect.

War with Lisuarte

Meanwhile Amadis had dispatched an embassy to the Court of Lisuarte,
requesting the hand of Oriana, but the stubborn old monarch gave a stern
refusal and sent him his defiance. El Patin, Emperor of Rome, had by
this time arrived in Britain, and was busy concerting measures against
Amadis. Soon a mighty host was gathered together, and marched to seek
the army of Amadis, who, taking time by the forelock, had invaded
Britain, and now advanced to meet the forces of Lisuarte and the
Emperor.

The friends of Amadis had not failed him. In the first place his father,
King Perion, was behind him with the whole force of Gaul. Ireland had
sent a large contingent, and his old friends, the King of Bohemia and
the Emperor of Constantinople, had furnished him with well-equipped
legions, all of which were under the skilled leadership of King Perion.
Moreover, the army

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

was accompanied by Oriana, Grasinda, and the other dames and princesses
who had come to the Firm Island, and their presence heartened the
champions to deeds of high emprise. Meanwhile Archelaus the enchanter
and his allies dogged the progress of Lisuarte's forces in the hope of
taking them at a disadvantage.

Presently the armies came within sight of one another. Their
meeting-place was a great plain, and for miles nothing was to be seen
but the blaze of armour and gay surcoats, the waving of plumes and
banners, and all the proud circumstance of chivalry. For two days the
armies lay in sight of one another. Then they advanced to the charge
with such a tumult of drums and cymbals, trumpets and clarions that it
could be heard many a league away. They met with a crash like thunder,
and the noise which arose from the clash of swords upon armour was like
that of a thousand hammers upon as many anvils.

Amadis led the van. Challenged by Gasquilan, the haughty King of Sweden,
he charged him, and dashed him from the saddle with such force that he
lay as dead. But in the encounter Amadis fell from his horse.
Quadragante, who was close to him, unhorsed a Roman knight and gave his
destrier to the steedless hero, who, followed by Gandalin and other
paladins, attacked the flank of the Romans with great fierceness.
Meanwhile Quadragante did fearful execution on their front, few of the
enemy being able to withstand his giant might for long.

The Roman army now showed signs of falling into confusion, but at that
moment the Emperor came up with a reinforcement of five thousand men. He
headed the charge in person, crying, " Rome! Rome!" and brandishing a
great sword in his hand. Encountering \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

Quadragante, he received such a buffet from the giant knight as made him
give back and seek shelter among his own men.

Now Amadis, surrounded by his bravest paladins, performed deeds of
valour which were a wonder in the eyes of both friends and enemies. The
Romans began to give ground before the terrific blows he dealt on all
sides, and at last broke and fled. So greatly had his forces suffered,
however, that he refrained from pursuing his beaten enemies, and as yet
the army of Lisuarte had taken no part in the fighting, so that he
thought it better to spare his own men, who must meet Lisuarte's force
anon.

On the following day King Lisuarte marshalled his army, and now King
Perion came up with his forces, which had been held in reserve. The
battle had not been long in progress, however, when Amadis encountered
the Roman Emperor, and with such a blow as even he had seldom delivered
ended his career. When the Romans and Britons saw that their leader was
slain they began to give way, and Lisuarte, observing this, sought to
withdraw his men in good order. Seeing that he retreated, and fearing
for Lisuarte's personal safety, Amadis took advantage of the darkness
which was now falling to withdraw his troops rather than pursue, so that
the King was able to effect an orderly retiral.

When the holy hermit Nasciano heard of the great discord between the
kings he resolved to make an endeavour to prevent further slaughter, and
although he was old and infirm he succeeded in making his way to the
camp of King Lisuarte. He did not arrive, however, until the two battles
which have just been described had been fought. Making himself known to
the King, he

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

revealed to him that Oriana had promised marriage to Amadis and that
Esplandian was their son. On hearing this the King was greatly troubled,
and blamed the lovers for their secrecy, remarking, with justice, that
many valuable lives would have been spared had they seen fit to trust
him. He requested the hermit to approach Amadis with a view to the
conclusion of peace between them, and this the good man was only too
pleased to do. Accompanied by Esplandian, he betook himself to the camp
of Amadis, where he was courteously received. The hermit first revealed
Esplandian's identity to the boy's father, and Amadis cordially embraced
his son. But he did not forget his pacific mission. Before he left
Amadis he had smoothed over all the differences between him and the
proud old King Lisuarte, and it was arranged that their ambassadors
should meet, with the object of cementing a generous and lasting peace.

The Treachery of Archelaus

Meanwhile the vindictive enchanter Archelaus, with his malcontent
associates, had been anxiously watching the trend of affairs, and when
their spies informed them that hostilities were at an end between
Lisuarte and Amadis they resolved to attack the old King's forces
without delay. But the sight of their army on the march was witnessed by
Esplandian as he was returning to Lisuarte's headquarters, and he
hastily retraced his steps to the camp of Amadis to warn him that
treachery was on foot. On learning his tidings Amadis and King Perion at
once set out to rescue Lisuarte's exhausted forces from the danger which
menaced them. But before Amadis and his knights could come up with

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the army of Archelaus, Lisuarte and his remaining squadrons had been
attacked by the troops of the wizard and his allies, who had inflicted
upon them a crushing defeat. The aged monarch was compelled to escape as
best he could from the stricken field, and, seeking refuge in a
neighbouring town, prepared for a last desperate defence against his
implacable enemies. The place was fiercely attacked by Archelaus, and as
fiercely defended by Lisuarte and such knights as remained to him. But
as the sorcerer was on the point of taking the town by storm Amadis and
his paladins appeared, and routed him after a sanguinary struggle.
Archelaus and his associates were bound in chains, and were rather
foolishly released upon giving security for their future good behaviour.

The meeting of Lisuarte and Amadis was cordial in the extreme, and it
was apparent that their old friendship would speedily be renewed.
Lisuarte summoned his barons and nobles together, and when they had all
assembled publicly announced the espousal of Amadis and Oriana.

Now the whole company, including Lisuarte, Perion, and their queens,
Florestan, Galaor, Agrayes, and many others, journeyed to the Firm
Island, where it was unanimously considered that the nuptials of Amadis
and Oriana might most appropriately take place. On their arrival at that
enchanted spot princely preparations were made to mark the event in a
manner befitting such an occasion, for not only were Amadis and Oriana
at last to be united, but numbers of their friends were to take upon
them the vows of marriage at the same time. In the midst of the
preparations the beneficent sorceress Urganda made her appearance,
riding

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

upon a great dragon, and was affectionately welcomed by those over whose
fortunes she had so diligently presided.

The Wedding of Amadis and Oriana

When all was ready and the day of the wedding had at last arrived, a
brilliant assembly mounted their palfreys and proceeded to the church,
where the hermit Nasciano  <span id="fr_45"></span>[11](#fn_45.md)
celebrated Mass. When the ceremony had duly been performed, Amadis asked
of Lisuarte that ere the revels began Oriana might be permitted to make
test of the adventure of the Arch of True Lovers, as the enchantment
still held good so far as ladies were concerned. To this the King gave
his consent. As Oriana approached the image raised its trumpet and blew
such a strain of sweetness as had never yet been heard in the island,
and from the mouth of the trumpet fell flowers and roses in such
abundance that they covered the ground. Without any hesitation Oriana
passed on to the adventure of the Forbidden Chamber. As she passed
between the pillars she felt hands invisible violently pushing her
backward, and three times did they thrust her past the pillars. But by
reason of her surpassing faithfulness and beauty she won, despite
opposition, to the enchanted portal, where the hand which had admitted
Amadis was thrust out, and she entered the chamber, while the voices of
viewless singers softly chanted the praises of her beauty and constancy.
Now all the assembled company who had beheld this last marvel entered
the chamber, and the marriage feast

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

was spread therein. The long endurance of Amadis and Oriana was over,
and at length united to each other and to their son Esplandian they
looked forward to an existence of such happiness as is only vouchsafed
to mortals in the unclouded pages of old romance.

So ends this brave old tale, in which we read of manners and modes of
thought so widely removed from those of our own time as almost to appear
like those of the people of another planet. The conduct of knight and
damsel is, perhaps, a little strained. No matter how absurd a promise or
fantastic the circumstances in which it was extracted, it is still
regarded as binding, and if we admire the romantic nature of such a code
we are tempted to smile at the seriousness with which bearded knights
and all-powerful monarchs give way before the quibble of magicians whose
lures and devices would be laughed at by a modern schoolboy.
Nevertheless, in perusing the story we experience a strong conviction of
its author's purity of soul and integrity of purpose.

From the reader who has followed me through the mazes of this enchanting
romance I must ask pardon for having omitted in my rendering of it many
passages of rare beauty and touching humanity. My business in this
volume, however, is to present the thread of the story, to describe its
main incidents, and, keeping as closely as possible to the adventures
and doings of its principal characters, to supply an outline of the
whole. I might readily have enhanced the brilliancy and readableness of
my account if I had chosen to narrate isolated adventures and the
incidents of more surpassing excellence with which it teems. But my
purpose, as I have said, is to provide readers who have little time to

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

peruse an original text with the story in brief. At the same time I have
attempted to conserve the true spirit of the romance, and if I have
failed to do so that must in some measure be attributed to the difficult
task of compression with which I was confronted. In the words of one who
'set' Amadis to verse, I may say, with justice:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" width="421">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP"><p>To tell as meet the costly feast's array,<br />
My tedious tale would hold a summer's day.<br />
I let  <span id="fr_46"></span><a href="#fn_46">12</a> <strong></strong> to sing who mid the courtly throng<br />
Did most excel in dance or sprightly song,<br />
Who first, who last, were seated on the dais,<br />
Who carped of love and arms in courtliest phrase. <span id="fr_47"></span><a href="#fn_47">13</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[94:1](lrs05.htm#fr_35.md) See the work of
Rivadeneyra, *Biblioteca de Autores españoles,* vol. xl (1846-48), where
the romance is prefaced in a brilliant and scholarly manner by Gayangos.
Its origins are ably discussed by Eugene Baret, *Études sur la Relacion
Espagnole d l’ Amadis de Gaule* (1853); T. Braga, *Historia dos Novellas
Portuguezas de Cavalleria* (1873); and L. Braunfels, *Kritischer Versuch
über den Rom an Amadis von Gallien* (1876).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[98:2](lrs05.htm#fr_36.md) Anstruther, in Fife? The
Spaniards would know the place througb their intercourse with the
Flemings, who traded considerably with it. A Spanish vessel put into
Anstruther during the flight of the Armada round the coasts of Scotland.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[100:3](lrs05.htm#fr_37.md) I think I can see in
this giant Albadan the giant Albiona, one of the two monsters, sons of
Neptune, who, according to Pomponius Mela, attacked Hercules in Liguria.
The name Albion was once given to the whole of Britain, and later, as
Alba and Albany, to Scotland, whose people were known as Albannach. This
is said to mean 'the White,' in

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

allusion to the cliffs of Dover! It is much more probable that it
signified 'the place or region of the god Alba,' 'the country of the
white god.' All the Scottish gods were giants, like the Fomorians of
Ireland.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[102:4](lrs05.htm#fr_38.md) Strange that a sword
and a ring should so often be the test of identity in such tales! So it
was, as regards the first of these tokens at least, with Theseus,
Arthur, and many another hero. On this head see Hartland, *The Legend of
Perseus* (1894-96).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[103:5](lrs05.htm#fr_39.md) Urganda, as Southey
remarks, is a true fairy, resembling Morgan le Fay in her attributes,
but, as Scott says, she has no connexion with the more classic
*nymphidae.* But is not this *dea phantastica* identical with Morgan,
and her name merely a Hispanic rendering of the Celtic fairy's?

<span id="fn_40"></span>[117:6](lrs05.htm#fr_40.md) Scott girds fiercely
against Southey's interpolation of Anthony Munday's translation of these
verses in his *Amadis,* and with justice. The above translation is only
slightly more tolerable, but it is at least sense. Poor Tony was bitten
by the absurdities of euphuism, and his lines are mere nonsense. But
there is even less excuse for a modern translation to backslide into the
style of the eighteenth century.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[118:7](lrs05.htm#fr_41.md) She had previously
visited Scotland and embarked there "for Great Britain," and while on
this voyage was driven on the Poor Rock, which would seem to have been
'somewhere' in the Mediterranean! Strange that geography should have
been so shaky at such a period and among a people who had done so much
for discovery and navigation.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[121:8](lrs05.htm#fr_42.md) 'Cildadan' I take to be
Cuchullin (*pron.* Coohoolin, or Coolin), the hero of the well-known
Irish epic.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[122:9](lrs05.htm#fr_43.md) It was Munday's
translation of these verses from the French which chiefly aroused the
scorn of Scott, and it is in dread of the memory of that scorn that I
offer these lines, which partake much more of the nature of an
adaptation than a translation, the original Spanish being much too stiff
and artificial for rendition in English.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[125:10](lrs05.htm#fr_44.md) I take this incident
to be a reminiscence of the Minotaur story. Indeed the Firm Island
appears to me, both from its geographical proximities and its whole
phenomena, as a borrowing of Cretan or Minoan story. The "old covered
way" from which the bull emerges is surely the Labyrinth. Is the wise
old ape Daedalus?

<span id="fn_45"></span>[136:11](lrs05.htm#fr_45.md) It is scarcely
necessary to indicate to the reader that the name Nasciano is borrowed
from that of Nasciens, the hermit king of Grail romance.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[138:12](lrs05.htm#fr_46.md) Forbear.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[138:13](lrs05.htm#fr_47.md) William Stewart Rose,
*Amadis de Gaul: A Poem in Three Books* (London, 1803).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Sequels to "Amadis de Gaul"](lrs06.md)
