[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs13)  [Next](lrs15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

CHAPTER XII:  
TALES OF SPANISH MAGIC AND SORCERY

 

SPAIN seems to have been regarded by the other countries of Western
Europe as the special abode of superstition, sorcery, and magic,
probably because of the notoriety given to the discoveries of the
Moorish alchemists, the first scientists in Europe. But with the coming
of the Inquisition a marked and natural falling off is noticeable in the
prevalence of occult belief, for anything which in the least tended to
heresy was repressed in the most rigid manner by that illiberal
Institution. In this way much of the folk-lore and peasant belief of
Spain, many fascinating legends, and many a curious custom have been
lost, never to be recovered. The Brothers, in their zeal for the purity
of their Church, banished not only the witch, the sorcerer, and the
demon from Spain, but also the innocent fairy, the spirits of wood and
wold, and those household familiars which harm no one, but assist the
housewife and the dairymaid.

The first information we receive that the authorities intended a
campaign against the whole demonhood, good and evil, of Spain is
contained in a work by Alfonso de Speria, a Castilian Franciscan, who
wrote, about 1458 or 1460, a work specially directed against heretics
and unbelievers, in which he gives a chapter on those popular beliefs
which were derived from ancient pagan practices. The belief in witches,
whom he calls *xurguine (jurguja)* or *bruxe,* seems to have been
imported from Dauphiné or Gascony, where, he tells us, they abounded.
They were, he says, wont to assemble at night in great numbers on a high
tableland, carrying

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

candles with them, for the purpose of worshipped Satan, who appeared to
them in the form of a boar rather than in that of the he-goat in which
he so frequently manifested himself in other localities.

Liorente, in his *History of the Inquisition in Sp* states that the
first *auto-de-fé* against sorcery was h at Calabarra in 1507, when
thirty women charged with witchcraft by the Inquisition were burnt. In
the first treatise on Spanish sorcery, that of Martin de Castanaga, a
Franciscan monk (i 529), we learn that Navarre was regarded as the
motherland of Spanish witchcraft, and that that province sent many
'missionaries' to Aragon to convert its women to sorcery. But we find
that the Spanish theologians of the sixteenth century were so much more
enlightened than those of other countries that they admitted that
witchcraft was merely a delusion, and the punishment they meted out to
those who believed in it was inflicted in respect that the belief,
erroneous though it was, was contrary to the tenets of the Church.

Pedro de Valentin, in a treatise on the subject (1610) entirely adopts
the opinion that the acts confessed to by the witches were imaginary. He
attributed them partly to the manner in which the examinations were
carried out, and to the desire of the ignorant people examined to escape
by saying what seemed to please their persecutors and partly to the
effect of the ointments and draughts which they had been taught to use,
which were com

posed of ingredients that produced sleep and acted upon the imagination
and the mental faculties.

 

The Religion of Witchcraft

This view is very generally held at the present time as accounting for
the phenomena of witchcraft. But the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

researches of Charles Godfrey Leland, Miss M. A. Murray, and others,
seem to indicate that the cult of witchcraft is by no means a thing of
the imagination. The last-named writer, indeed, claims that it is the
detritus of an ancient pagan faith surviving into modern times, having a
priesthood and well-defined ritual of its own, and in a measure
conserving the practice of child-sacrifice.

There can be little doubt that this conception of witchcraft is the
correct one. In the records of the caste there are numerous proofs that
it had a definite ritual and an established priesthood, d that
imagination played but a small part in shaping the belief of the
adherents of the cult.  <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)

 

The Story of Dr. Torralva

Spain had not in the sixteenth century ceased to be celebrated for its
magicians, who still retained a modicum of the occult philosophy of the
Moorish doctors of Toledo and Granada. Perhaps the most celebrated of
these comparatively modern masters of magic was Doctor Eugenio Torralva,
physician to the family of the Admiral of Castile. Educated at Rome, he
early became a pronounced sceptic, and formed an intimacy with a certain
Master Alfonso, a man who, after changing his Jewish faith for Islam,
and that again for Christianity, had at last become a free-thinker.
Another evil companion was a Dominican monk called Brother Pietro, who
told Torralva that he had in his service a good angel called Zequid, who
had no equal in the spiritual world as a seer, and was besides of such a
disinterested

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

temperament that he served only those who had complete confidence in him
and deserved his attachment.

All this excited Torralva's curiosity to an unbounded degree. He was one
of those people, fortunate or otherwise, in whom the love of mystery has
been deeply implanted, and when Pietro generously proposed to resign his
familiar spirit to his friend's keeping he eagerly accepted the offer.
Nor did Zequid himself offer any opposition to this change of master,
and appearing at the summons of Pietro, assured Torralvo that he would
follow his service as long as he lived, and wherever he was obliged to
go. There was nothing very startling in the appearance of the spirit,
who was dressed in a flesh-coloured habit and black cloak, and had the
appearance of a young man with an abundance of fair hair.

From this time onward Zequiel appeared to Torralva at every change of
the moon, and as often as the physician required his services, which was
generally for the purpose of transporting him An a short space of time
to distant places. Sometimes the spirit assumed the appearance of a
hermit, at others that of a traveller and even accompanied his master to
church, from which circumstance Torralva concluded that he was a
beneficent and Christian-minded spirit. But, alas! Dr Torralva was to
find, like many another, that attendance at the sacred edifice is not
necessarily a guarantee of piety.

For many years Torralva continued to reside in Italy, but in the year
1502 he felt a strong desire to return to the land of his birth. He did
so, but seems to have made Rome his headquarters once more in the
following year, placing himself under the protection of his old

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

patron, the Bishop of Volterra, now become a cardinal. The influence
this connexion brought him proved of the greatest service to him, and he
soon rose to high repute for his skill in medicine. But neither the
pious cardinal nor any of the other distinguished patients who sought
his aid knew that he drew practically all his medical knowledge from his
unseen famulus, who taught him the secret virtues of young plants, with
which other physicians were not acquainted. Zequiel, however, was
untainted by the love of lucre; for when his master pocketed those
‘thumping' fees to which all good physicians aspire the spirit rebuked
him, telling him that since he had received his knowledge for nothing he
ought to impart it gratuitously. On the other hand, did the doctor
require funds, he never failed to find a supply of money in his private
apartment, which.he knew implicitly must have been placed there by his
familiar.

Torralva returned to Spain in 1510, and lived for some time at the Court
of Ferdinand the Catholic. One day Zequiel confided to him that the King
would shortly receive Some very disagreeable news. Torralva at once
communicated this piece of intelligence to Ximenes de Cisneros,
Archbishop of Toledo, and to the Grande Capitan, Gonzalvo Hernández de
Cordova. On the same day a courier arrived from Africa bearing
dispatches which informed his Majesty that an expedition against the
Moors had met with disaster, and that its commander, Don Garcia de
Toledo, son of the Duke of Alva, had been slain.

When in Rome it appears that Torralva had been so indiscreet as to
summon Zequid to appear before his patron, Cardinal Volterra, who now,
hearing of the manner

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

in which his *protégé* had 'prophesied' the disaster to the Spanish
arms, acquainted the Archbishop of Toledo with the means by which the
doctor had received intelligence of the defeat. Torralva, ignorant of
this, continued in his forecasts of political and other events, and soon
found his reputation as a seer greatly enhanced. Among others who
consulted him was the Cardinal of Santa Cruz, to whom a certain Donna
Rosales had complained that her nights were disturbed by a frightful
phantom, which appeared in the form of a murdered man. Her physician,
Morales, had watched at night with the lady, but although she had
pointed out the precise spot where the grisly vision took its stand, he
could discern nothing. Torralva accompanied Morales to the lady's house,
and, seated in an ante-chamber, they heard her cry of alarm about an
hour after midnight. Entering her apartment, Morales again confessed his
inability to see the apparition, but Torralva, who was better acquainted
with the spiritual world, perceived a figure resembling a dead man,
behind which appeared a shadowy female form. "What dost thou seek
here—"he inquired, in a firm voice, whereupon the foremost spirit
replied : " I seek a treasure," and immediately vanished. Torralva
consulted Zequiel upon the subject, and upon his advice the cellars of
the house were dug up, whereupon the corpse of a man who had been
stabbed to death with a poignard was discovered, and upon its receiving
Christian burial the visitations ceased.

Among Torralva's intimate friends was one Don Diego de Zuñiga, a
relative of the Duke of Bejar, and brother of Don Antonio, Grand Prior
of the Order of St John in Castile. Zuñiga had consulted the learned
doctor as

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

to how he could gain money at play by magical means, and Torralva
informed him that this could be accomplished by writing certain
characters on paper, using for ink the blood of a bat. This charm
Torralva advised him to wear about his neck, so that he might experience
good luck at the gaming-table.

In 1520 Torralva went once more to Rome. Ere he left Spain he told
Zuñiga that he would be able to travel there astride a broomstick, the
course of which would be guided by a cloud of fire. On his arrival at
Rome he interviewed Cardinal Volterra, and the Grand Prior of the Order
of St John, who earnestly begged him to abandon all commerce with his
familiar spirit. Because of their exhortations, Torralva requested
Zequiel to leave his service, but met with a stern refusal. The spirit,
however, advised him to return to Spain, assuring him that he would
obtain the place of physician to the Infanta Eleanora, Queen-Dowager of
Portugal, and later consort of Francis I of France. Acting upon this
counsel, Torralva sailed once more for the land of his birth, and
obtained the promised appointment.

In 1525 an incident occurred which greatly enhanced Torralva's celebrity
as a seer. On the 5th of May of that year Zequiel assured him that the
troops of the Emperor would take Rome on the following day. Torralva
desired the spirit to carry him to Rome so that he might witness this
great event with his own eyes. Zequiel gave him a stick full of knots,
and commanded him to shut his eyes. Torralva obeyed the request of the
famulus, and when after a space the spirit told him to open his eyes
once more, he found himself in Rome, standing on a high tower. The hour
was

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

midnight, and when day dawned he duly witnessed terrible events which
followed the death of the Constable of Bourbon, the flight of the Pope
into the Castle of St. Angelo, the slaughter of the citizens, and the
wild riot of the conquerors. Returning to Valladolid by the same means
as that by which he had come, Torralvo immediately made public all he
had seen, and when, a week or so later, news arrived of the capture and
sack of Rome, the Court of Spain was very naturally filled with
unbounded surprise.

Many persons of high rank had been accomplices of the gifted doctor in
his practice of the black art, and one of these, in a fit of remorse,
notified the Holy Inquisition of his dealings with the supernatural.
Zuñiga too, who had benefited so greatly by the occult knowledge of
Torralva, now turned against him, and denounced him to the holy Office
of Cuença, which had him arrested an cast into prison. The terrified
magician immediately confessed all his doings with Zequiel, whom he
persisted in regarding as a beneficent spirit, and penned no les than
eight declarations of his dealings with the supernatural, some of which
contradicted statements made in others in a most ludicrous manner. In
view of their unsatisfactory nature, the unhappy necromancer was put to
the torture, and an admission of the demonic nature of his familiar was
quickly extracted from him. In March 1529 the Inquisitors suspended his
process for a year, a common practice of the Inquisition, which thus
attempted to wear its victims down. But, to the dismay of Torralva, a
new witness made his appearance, who testified that in his early days at
Rome the imprisoned medico was prone to indulgence in occult arts, so
that in January 1530 Torralva was once more put upon his

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

trial. The Inquisition appointed two learned theologians to labour for
his conversion, to whom Torralva promised amendment in everything,
except the renunciation of the evil spirit with whom he had been
associated for so long, assuring his mentors that he had not the power
to dismiss Zequiel. At length, on his making a pretence to cast off his
familiar and abjure his heresies, he was released, and entered the
service of the Admiral of Castile, who had employed all his influence to
obtain a pardon for him. Immortalized in the pages *of Don Quixote,* he
remains for all time the archetype of the Spanish magician of the
sixteenth century.

 

Moorish Magic

By no race was the practice of the occult arts studied with such
perseverance as by the Moors of Spain, and it is strange indeed that
only fragmentary notices of their works in this respect remain to us.
The statement that they were famous for magical and alchemical studies
is reiterated by numerous European historians, but the majority of these
have refrained from any description of their methods, and the Moors
themselves have left so few undoubted memorials of their labours in this
direction that we remain in considerable ignorance of the trend of their
efforts, so that if we desire any knowledge upon this most recondite
subject we must perforce collect it painfully from the fragmentary
notices of it in con temporary European and Arabic literature.

The first name of importance which we encounter in the broken annals of
Moorish occultism is a great one-that of the famous Geber, who
flourished about 720-750, and who is reported to have penned upward of
five hundred works upon the philosopher's stone and the

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

elixir of life. In common with his fellow-alchemists, he appears to have
failed signally in his search for those marvellous elements, but if he
was unable to point way to immortal life and boundless wealth, he is to
have given mankind the nitrate of silver, corrossive sublimate, and
nitric acid. He believed that a preparation of gold would heal all
diseases in both animals plants, as well as in human beings, and that
all men were in a condition of chronic sickness in so far that they had
departed from their natural and original state of gold. His works, all
of which are in Latin, are not considered authentic, but his *Summa
Perfectionis* manual for the alchemical student, has frequently been
translated.

The Moorish alchemists taught that all metals are composed of varying
proportions of mercury and sulphur. They laboured strenuously to
multiply drugs out of the various mixtures and reactions of the few
chemicals their disposal, but although they believed in the theory of
transmutation of metals they did not strive to effect. It belonged to
their creed rather than to the practice. They were a school of
scientific artisans and experimentalists, first and last. They probably
owe their alchemical knowledge to Byzantium, which in turn had received
it from Egypt; or it may be that the Arab drew their scientific
inspiration at first hand from the land of the Nile, where the great art
of alchemy undoubtedly had its birth.

 

Astrology

Astrology was also an important branch of occult study with the Moors of
Spain, whose consideration of ii greatly assisted the science of
mathematics, especially

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

that branch of it which still retains its Arabic name-algebra *(al =*
the, *jabara =* to set, compute). It is probable that the Arabs first
received an insight into the practice of foretelling events by the
position of the planets at a given time from the Chaldeans, who
undoubtedly were its earliest students. References to astrology are
plentifully encountered in Spanish story, as the reader will have
observed. But high as it stood in the estimation of the Moorish sages,
it was still subservient to the grander and more mysterious art of
magic, whereby the spirits of the air could be forced to do the will of
the magus, and carry out his behests in four elements. Most
unfortunately, we are almost entirely ignorant of the tenets of Moorish
magic, owing probably to the circumstance that it was averse to the
spirit of Islam. But we know that it was founded upon Alexandrian magic,
and therefore recognized the principles of that art as laid down by the
great Hermes Trismegistus, who was none other than the Egyptian Thoth,
the god of writing, computation, and wisdom.

About the end of the tenth century the learned men of Europe began to
resort to Spain for the purpose of studying the arts, occult and
otherwise. Among the first to do so was Gerbert, afterward Pope
Sylvester II, who spent several years in Cordova, and who introduced
into Christendom the knowledge of the Arabic numerals and the no less
useful art of clock-making. Strange that he did not apply his knowledge
of the one to the other, and that even to-day our timepieces are
burdened with the old and cumbrous Roman numerals! William of Malmesbury
assures us that Gerbert made many discoveries of treasure through the
art of necromancy, and relates how he visited a magnificent

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

subterranean palace, which, though dazzling to the sight, would not
remain when its splendours were subjected to the test of human touch.
Ignorant Europe took Gerbert's mathematical diagrams for magical signs,
and his occult reputation increased as his moral character withered. It
was said that the Devil had promised him that he should not die until he
had celebrated high mass at Jerusalem. One day Gerbert celebrated his
office in the Church of the Holy Cross of Jerusalem at Rome, and,
feeling ill, asked where he was, observed the *double entendre* of the
Evil One, and expired. Such was the tale that benighted ignorance cast
round the memory of this single-minded and en-lightened man, much in the
same spirit as it bedevilled the recollections of our own Michael Scot
and Roger Bacon.

 

The Dean of Santiago

In the *Conde Lucanor,* a Spanish collection of tales and homilies of
the fourteenth century, already alluded to, is a story of the Dean of
Santiago, who went to Illan, a magician of Toledo, to be instructed in
necromancy. The magus raised a difficulty, saying that as the Dean was a
man of influence, and would attain a high position. he would probably
forget all past obligations. The Dean, however, protested that no matter
to what eminence he attained he would not fail to remember and assist
his former friends, and particularly his tutor in things supernatural.
Satisfied with the churchman's promises, the necromancer led his pupil
to a remote apartment, first requesting his housekeeper to purchase some
partridges for supper, but not to cook them until she had definite
orders to do so.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

When the Dean and his instructor had settled themselves to the business
before them, they were interrupted in their labours by a messenger, who
came to inform the Dean that his uncle, the Archbishop, had summoned him
to his death-bed. Being unwilling, however, to forgo the instruction he
was about to receive, he excused himself from the duty. Four days later,
another messenger arrived, informing the Dean of the Archbishop's death,
and later he learned that he had been appointed Archbishop in his
uncle's place. On hearing this, Illan requested the vacant deanery for
his son. But the new Archbishop preferred his own brother, Inviting,
however, Illan and his son to accompany him to his see. Later the
deanery became vacant once more, and once again the magician begged that
his son might be appointed to it. But the Archbishop refused his suit,
in favour of one of his own uncles. Two years later the Archbishop
became a cardinal, and was summoned to Rome, with liberty to appoint his
successor in the see. Once more Illan was disappointed. At length the
Cardinal was elected Pope, and Illan, who had accompanied him to Rome,
reminded him that he had now no excuse for not fulfilling the promises
he had so often made to him. The Pope, in anger, threatened to have
Illan cast into prison and starved as a heretic and sorcerer. "Ingrate!"
cried the incensed magician, "since you would thus starve me, I must
perforce fall back upon the partridges I ordered for to-night's supper."

With these words he waved his wand, and called to his housekeeper to
prepare the birds. Instantly the Dean found himself once more in Toledo,
still Dean of Santiago, for, indeed, the years he had spent as
Archbishop, Cardinal, and Pope were illusory, and had existed

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

only in his imagination at the suggestion of the magus. This was the
means the sage had taken to test his character, before committing
himself to his hands and so crestfallen was the churchman that he had
nothing to reply to the reproaches of Illan, who sent him off without
permitting him to sup upon the partridges!

It is strange that physicians and priests figure most notably as the
heroes of Spanish magical story-strange, until we reflect upon the
manner in which the learned classes were regarded by an illiterate and
illiberal commonalty. Torquemada tells a story of a youth of his
acquaintance, a young man of great ability, who was afterward physician
to the Emperor Charles V. When he was a student at Guadalupe, and was
travelling to Granada, he was invited by a traveller, dressed in the
garments of a churchman, whom he had obliged in some manner, to mount
behind him on his horse, and he would carry him to his destination. The
horse seemed a sorry jade, unable to carry the weight of two able-bodied
men, and at first the student refused the mount, but, on pressure, at
length accepted a seat behind the seeming ecclesiastic. The horseman
requested his companion not to fall asleep in the saddle, and they
jogged on, without any appearance of' their going at an extraordinary
rate. At daybreak, to the student's surprise, he found himself near the
city of Granada, where the horseman left him, marvelling that the
distance between two places so widely separated could have been covered
in a single night.

 

Spectres and Apparitions

As might be imagined, the strong vein of superstition in the Spanish
character, if subdued to some extent by

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

the harsh dictates of the Holy Office, yet rose triumphant in other
spheres of occult belief. We find, for example, a widely diffused belief
in the power of the dead to return to the scenes of previous existence,
and this superstition is well illustrated by a weird passage in the
thrilling and mysterious pages of Goulart, who in his *Tresor des
Histoires admirable,* knows well how to mingle shadows with the colours
on his palette.

Me tells us how Juan Vasquez Ayala and two other young Spaniards, on
their way to a French university, were unable to find suitable
accommodation at a certain village where they had halted for the night,
and were obliged to take shelter in a deserted house, the reputation of
which as a haunted vicinity had flourished for a considerable time among
the villagers.

The young men made the best of matters, borrowed articles of furniture
from several neighbouring houses, and resolved to give a warm reception
to any supernatural visitant who should have a mind to pay them a call.
But on the first night of their occupancy they had scarcely fallen
asleep when they were awakened by a noise as of clanking chains, which
seemed to proceed from the lower regions of their temporary dwelling.

Absolutely fearless, young Ayala leaped from his bed and, donning his
clothes, sallied downstairs in search of the cause of the clamour which
had awakened himself and his comrades. In one hand he carried his drawn
sword, in the other a lighted candle, and on coming to a door which led
to the courtyard of the house he perceived a dreadful spectre—a grisly
skeleton, standing in the entrance. The grim apparition which confronted
him was loaded with chains, which clanked with a doomful

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

and melancholy sound on the ears of the gallant young student, who,
however, undismayed by the spectacle before him, advanced the point of
his sword and demanded the intruder's reason for disturbing his rest.
The phantom waved its arms, shook its bony head, and beckoned with its
hand, as if asking Ayala to follow it. The student expressed his
willingness to do so, on which the ghost commenced to descend a flight
of steps, dragging its legs as it went like a man whose limbs were
weighted with iron shackles. Ayala followed fearlessly, but as he
advanced his candle suddenly flickered and went Out, a circumstance
which did little to reinforce his courage. " Hold!" he called to the
phantom. "You perceive my candle has gone out. If you will wait till I
relight it, I shall return in a moment.

Rushing to a light which burned in the hall, he relit his candle, and
returned to the spot where he had left the apparition. He entered the
garden, where he saw a well, close by which he perceived the ghost,
which signed to him to continue his progress, and having gone a little
way forward, vanished.

Puzzled, the student returned to his apartment, and told his comrades to
accompany him to the garden, but search as they might, nothing could
they find. Next day they reported what had occurred to the *alcalde* of
the village, who had the garden examined, with the result that
immediately beneath the spot where the phantom had disappeared a
skeleton was exhumed, loaded with chains. When proper burial had been
given to the remains the noises in the house abruptly ceased, but the
adventure proved too much for the superstitious Spaniards, who returned
home abruptly, without fulfilling the object of their journey.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

This tale is a capital example of the typical ghost story in its
earliest phase. I will not descant upon it here, as a book on Spanish
romance and legend is scarcely the place for a disquisition on the
occult. But we are learning, slowly and painfully perhaps, to regard
these matters from another point of view than our Victorian
grandfathers, whose materialism pooh-poohed the supernatural without
trying to account for it. In any case I am one of those who believe in
it and who desire to believe in it, so that the reflections of such a
biased person are perhaps better dispensed with.

Torquemada tells a gruesome story of one Antonio Costilla, a Spanish
gentleman, who one day left his mansion, well mounted, on a matter of
personal business. When he had ridden several leagues, night suddenly
fell, and he resolved to return to his home, but to his dismay he was
overtaken by the darkness, and seeing a light ahead rode his horse at a
walk in its direction. He saw that it proceeded from a small hermitage,
and, dismounting, he entered the little chapel and engaged in prayer. As
his eyes became accustomed to the darkness, he saw that he was not
alone, for the hermitage was occupied by three persons, who lay upon the
ground, wrapped in black mantles. They did not address him, but lay
regarding him with wild, melancholy eyes. Terrified, he knew not by
what, he leaped into the saddle and rode off. In a little while the moon
shone out, and showed him the three men whom he thought he had left in
the chapel riding a little in front of him on black horses. In order to
avoid them, he turned down a by-path, but to his horror still observed
them riding a few paces ahead. Spurring madly on, yet always preceded by
those whom he desired to avoid, he came in time to the gate of his

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

own house, where he dismounted, and led his horse into the
courtyard—only to find there the three cloaked figures awaiting him. He
rushed into the house, and entered his wife's apartment, calling for
help. Instantly the entire household came to his assistance, but
although he screamed loudly that the three fiends or apportions stood by
the couch on which he had thrown himself, they were invisible to all
others. A few days later the wretched Costilla died, maintaining to the
last that three forms with glaring eyes stood over his bed, menacing him
with frightful gestures.

Pity it is that our knowledge of the supernatural as manifested in Spain
is so slight and fragmentary. But the dread of the sorcerer's fate was
heavy upon the people, and the fear of torture by rack or fire
successfully banished witch, wizard, fay, and phantom from the fields
and cities of the Peninsula.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[335:1](lrs14.htm#fr_55.md) The reader who wishes
to follow this phase of the subject further should consult Miss M. A.
Murray's recent articles In *Man.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Humorous Romances of Spain.](lrs15.md)
