[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lrs14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

CHAPTER XIII:  
HUMOROUS ROMANCES OF SPAIN

 

Cervantes, the bold metal of thy lance  
Shatters the crystal torrets of Romance  
Down falls the wreck in roin most immense  
Upon the dreary plains of common sense.  
  
L.S.

 

CERVANTES was one of the world's great satirists, a man gifted with a
keen and peculiar sense of the ridiculous. He would himself have been
the first to laugh at those modern critics who professed to see in him a
great poet, and indeed, at the end of his days, when he assessed his
life's work in his mock-heroic *Voyage to Parnassus,* he admitted that
he had not the poetic gift. That he had a golden imagination is obvious
to anyone who cares to read his *Galatea,* imitative as it is, and *Don
Quixote* over-flows with imagination and invention, although certain
later passages of the wondrous satire are extremely reminiscent of some
of its earlier pages.

To me *Don Quixote* has always seemed one of the most precious and
curious of books, but probably for very different reasons from those by
which it makes its appeal to the majority of people, for it is because
of the information it affords concerning romantic literature and customs
that I treasure it most. Where the satire is really legitimate I revel
in the fun as much as it is possible for anyone to do, but I feel that
many of its passages are rather shabbily iconoclastic, and that some of
its strictures are levelled not only against the absurdities of
chivalric extravagance, but against the whole spirit and structure of
romance. It had been well, too,

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

for Cervantes had he confined himself entirely to the satiric vein, for
when he essays to employ the very literary vehicle at which he chiefly
scoffed he frequently becomes more maudlin—that is the only word for
it—than the most sentimental writers against whom he girds. His
shepherds and shepherdesses and his runaway nuns are long-winded and
pedantic, and he was indeed badly bitten by that tiresome Arcadian phase
in European literature which culminated in the prose pastoral, which had
its roots in false conventions and employed as its *mise en scène* an
atmosphere of sham rural felicity. Sannazaro, in his *Arcadia,* had
indeed piped the tune to which Cervantes danced for many a day ere his
own strong common sense showed him the fatuity of the models which he
followed. The author of the *Pastor de Fitida,* Luiz Galvez de Montalvo,
was his own close friend, and there is every evidence that he made
wholesale raids upon the distinctly minor efforts of such poetasters as
Hebrao and Alonso Perez. The works of the men who composed this school
of pseudo-Arcadianism had none of the charm of the delightful canvases
of Watteau and Fragonard, silk-coated and satin-gowned though their
shepherds and shepherdesses be. The country of the Spanish pastoral had
a background of pasteboard scenery, and theatrical effects of lighting
flashed across its stage. It was peopled by bores of the most
intolerable description, who, instead of looking after their live stock,
as they were paid to do, wearied each other and the wretched traveller
who was unhappy enough to encounter them with their amorous bellowings
and interminable tales of misfortune. Little wonder that the native good
sense of Cervantes recoiled later from this unworthy and unmanly
nonsense. But it is extraordinary that although he meted out such

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

merciless treatment to chivalric romance, he still retained a weakness
for the follies of Arcady, from which, to the last, he was unable to
free himself.

The circumstances of Cervantes career undoubtedly assisted him to
discipline his ideas. As a collector of taxes he had, perforce, to come
into contact with the seamy side of life, and much of his time was spent
in the Bohemian atmosphere of inns, where he was compelled to lodge
while he worked the district allotted to him. In these circumstances and
in these places he encountered men and women of flesh and blood, and
came up against the iron wall of hard, solid reality. Such an experience
is undoubtedly most valuable to a man of romantic or imaginative
temperament, gifted with creative ability. It tempers his natural
capacities and enlarges his views. Doubtless Cervantes, when he first
went his rounds, had been in the habit of regaling his fellow-travellers
in the *posadas* in which he sojourned with high-falutin stories of
errant shepherds and wandering shepherdesses. We can imagine the degree
of amusement with which the rough muleteer, the blunt soldier, and the
travelling quack would greet those sallies. The criticism of such people
is not strained—it is annihilating! Can we doubt that the laughter with
which his earlier rhapsodies were received in company of this sort blew
away the fantastic cobwebs from Cervantes’ brain?

I have already indicated that in the age in which he lived the romance
proper had fallen unto considerable popular disfavour. This was due
partly to the circumstances of a changed environment, and partly to the
type of literary opinion which had recently been fostered by the rise of
the Spanish drama, which had

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

brought about an entirely new literary ideal. Can it be that Cervantes,
finding that his audiences regarded the Arcadian type of tale with
disfavour, attributed this to the circumstance that it was fashionable
in high circles, and fell back upon the romance, only to find that it
too was greeted with guffaws and laughed out of the inn parlour? Was it
in the quips and sneers of such audiences, the very autithesis of the
romantic personages of whom he had dreamed, that the idea of *Don
Quixote* took shape in his brain, and that in the laughter of clowns and
men of the hard world, of the struggling lower middle class, he
perceived the certain popularity which a caricature of chivalry would
enjoy? So, it seems to me, it may have been.

For many a year the sham romance of chivalry had been regarded as a
pest. Serious and responsible writers had thundered against it and there
is every evidence that in a measure it stood between a certain section
of the people of Spain and anything like mental advancement. It had,
indeed, turned the heads of that portion of the nation unaccustomed to
think for itself, and unable to form a rational opinion regarding its
demerits. In all countries and at all times, this class, usually
impressionable and easily led, falls an easy prey to the blandishments
of the hack writer of sensational proclivities. It is not too much to
say that unhealthy sensationalism in literature constitutes a real and
active danger to national well-being. It seduces the people from their
duties, unfits them for the serious business of life, renders them
pretentious rather than independent, and leads them to the belief that
they reflect the virtues or vices of the absurd heroes and heroines of
their favourite tales. The one weapon which the more sensible portion

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

of the community can bring to bear against such a pernicious condition
of affairs is healthy ridicule, which it usually meets with from the
rational and the well-balanced. But the danger exists that in the
revulsion of public feeling against literary extravagance not only the
absurdities which have obsessed he thoughtless and irritated the
sensible will undergo destruction and banishment, but those higher
virtues and graces of which they are the distorted reflection will not
be discriminated against, but will be demolished along with them. Such
indeed, was the fate which befell the greater romances, those jewels of
human imagination, which, although Cervantes himself made an effort to
save them, shared in the general wreck and ruin of the fiction of which
they were the flower, until the taste and insight of a later day
excavated them from the super-incumbent mass under which they lay
buried.

 

The Figure of Don Quixote

Don Quixote, the central figure of the mighty satire which gave its
death-blow to chivalry, is perhaps typical of the romance reader of
Cervantes' day. Crack-brained and imaginative to the verge of madness,
he is entirely lost to the uses of everyday existence. He lives in a
world of his own, and has nothing in common with that of his time, to
the spirit of which he cannot adapt himself. In this gentleman of La
Mancha the vices of the imagination are well portrayed, but they are
unaccompanied by those gifts through which imagination can be rendered
of utility to the community. Don Quixote dwells on the heights of a
chivalric Parnassus, a land of magic peopled by the spectres and shadows
which he has encountered in the books with which his

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

library is so well furnished. His imagination is thus not even creative,
but derivative; reliance upon the "idols he has loved so long" has "done
his credit in men's eyes much wrong," and he is regarded by his
neighbours as an amiable lunatic of no importance. But the dreamer, when
roused to action, can be a very terrible person if his visions chance to
direct him astray, and if he attempt to realize a nightmare. Thus it was
with Don Quixote. Scarcely mad enough for confinement, but yet
sufficiently crazy to become a public nuisance, if not a public menace,
he justly typifies the kind of person in whom romance runs mad, and is
thus of the same class as the small boy who is incited to acts of petty
larceny by the perusal of detective stories, or the young lady behind
the ribbon-counter who is under the impression that she is the long-lost
daughter of a mysterious peer.

It is symptomatic of such craziness that it craves companionship. It is
indeed a species of vanity which must have an audience, however small or
however unsuited to its purposes. Again, the element of conspiracy is as
the apple of its eye, and it must confide its ideas and aspirations to
one sympathetic ear at least. In Sancho Panza, Don Quixote finds a
strange confidant. The luckless peasant is completely unable to
comprehend his master's point of view, but is carried away by his
rodomontades and the glib and gorgeous promises of preferment and
prosperity which the crack-brained knight holds out to him. To his
participation in the wild scheme of the visionary Don, Sancho's shrewd
spouse violently objects, but when dreamer and dunce get together common
sense may hold its tongue and content itself with the knowledge that it
is not until

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

windmills have been tilted at and sound trouncings have been received
that its advice will be listened to.

But though he begins his travels as a dunce, Sancho by no means remains
one. He profits from his experiences, and almost every page shows him
increasing in judgment and in that humour which is the salt of good
judgment. As his master grows madder, Sancho grows wiser, until at last
he becomes capable of direction and guidance toward the rueful knight.
As we proceed we begin to suspect that the peasant-squire exists as a
kind of chorus to illustrate the excesses of his master and criticize
his absurdities. But apart altogether from Don Quixote, Sancho Panza is
a striking and arresting figure in modern fiction, possessing a
philosophy of his own, rich in worldly wisdom and abounding with
practical ability. On the humorous side he is equal to Falstaff, only
whereas Falstaff's humour is typically English that of Sancho Panza is
universal. He is a world-clown, with the outlook of a philosopher and
the unconscious humour of a Handy Andy.

 

The Adventure at the Inn

The true measure of the character of Don Quixote is perhaps met with in
that chapter which recounts what occurred to him in the inn which he
took for a castle. The place seems to have been a very ordinary Spanish
*posada.* The host and hostess were kindly folk whom the knight at once
exalted to the rank of a castellan and chátelaine, and in the dowdy
maidservant, who has been immortalized under the name of Maritornes, he
saw a great lady who dwelt in their company. After the terrible
trouncing he had received from the Yanguesian carriers the wretched
knight was glad to rest his battered

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

limbs in a miserable garret of the place, while Sancho explained to the
inn-folk the nature of a knight-errant and the vicissitudes of errantry,
which one day compelled its adherents to undergo such hardship as the
Don now suffered from, and the next exalted them to the heights of
sovereignty over many empires. These explanations were seconded by the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance himself, who, sitting up in bed,
entertained the hostess and maidservant to a speech so grandiloquent
that, lost in wonder at his eloquence, "they admired him as a man of
another world." But Don Quixote, anxious to recover from his injuries,
begged his squire to procure from "the governor of the castle" the
ingredients of a magical balm of which he had read in some book of
chivalry. These he obtained, and Don Quixote busied himself by
concocting the enchanted liquor over the fire, saying over it many
credos and paternosters. Then he drank deeply of the awful compound,
with distressing effect, and Sancho, following his example, underwent a
similar but more violent experience, and was assured by his master that
the balsam disagreed with him because he had not received the order of
knighthood!

Saddling his horse, the knight was about to proceed on his journey, but
before he set out he assured "the lord governor of the castle" how
deeply grateful he was for the honours he had received while under his
roof. The innkeeper suggested that the time for paying his reckonmg had
come, but Don Quixote retorted that it was impossible for him to do so,
as no knight-errant of whom he had ever read was wont to pay for board
and lodging. The innkeeper protested loudly, whereupon, clapping spurs
to Rozinante, the knight rode out at the gate. The innkeeper then
attempted to extort his dues from

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

Sancho Panza, but without avail, as the squire quoted the same
authorities as his master, whereupon some of those who sojourned at the
inn seized him and tossed him in a blanket. Don Quixote, hearing his
cries, rode back, but although he stormed loudly the travellers still
continued to toss Sancho in the blanket, until at length, tired of the
exercise, they let him go.

 

Don Quixote's Love-Madness

In the space at our disposal it would be impossible to follow Don
Quixote step by step through the land of false romance which he had
created for himself. We will recall how Amadis on the Firm Island
bemoaned his separation from his lady-love, and how, when he came to a
locality known as the Black Mountain, Don Quixote resolved to follow the
example of the great hero of chivalry. Before he left his native village
he had placed his affections upon a country wench, to whom he gave the
romantic name of Dulcinea del Toboso, and now that he had come to the
Black Mountain he resolved to spend his time in meditation upon the
virtues and beauties of this super-excellent damsel. After lecturing
Sancho Panza upon the duty of a knight-errant in meditation upon his
lady, he became irritated with the squire because he could not
understand the reason for his amorous fury.

"Pray, sir," quoth Sancho, "what is it that you mean to do in this
fag-end of the world?"

"Have I not already told thee," answered Don Quixote, "that I intend to
copy Amadis in his madness, despair and fury? Nay, at the same time I
will imitate the valiant Orlando Furioso's extravagance when he ran mad,
at which time in his frantic despair he tore up tree

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

by the roots, troubled the waters of the clear fountains, slew the
shepherds, destroyed their flocks, and committed a hundred thousand
other extravagances worthy to be recorded in the eternal register of
fame."

"Sir," quoth Sancho, " I dare say the knight who did these penances had
some reason to be mad. But what lady has sent you a-packing, or even so
much as slighted you?"

"That is the point," cried Don Quixote, "for in this consists the
singular perfection of my undertaking. It is neither strange nor
meritorious for a knight to run mad upon any just occasion. No, the
rarity is to run mad without a cause, without the least constraint or
necessity, for thus my mistress must needs have a vast idea of my love.
Waste no more time, therefore, in trying to divert me from so rare, so
happy, and so singular an imitation. I am mad and will be mad until you
return with an answer to the letter which you must carry from me to the
Lady Dulcinea. If it be favourable, my penance shall end, but if not,
then shall I be emphatically mad."

"Body o’ me!" quoth Sancho, "why run you on at such a rate, Sir Knight?
All these tales of yours of the winning of kingdoms and bestowing of
islands rather appear to me as so much braggartry, and now this latest
mood of yours—"

"Now as I love bright arms," cried the Don, "I swear that thou art an
addle-pated ass. Know you not that all the actions and adventures of a
knight-errant seem to be mere chimeras and follies? Not that they are
so, but merely have that appearance through the malice and envy of
powerful enchanters."

As they talked they came near to a high rock, round

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

which the wild trees, plants, and flowers grew in profusion, and here
the Knight of the Woeful Figure resolved to perform his amorous penance.
Throwing himself on the ground, he broke into a loud frenzy of grief.
"Go not yet," he cried to Sancho, "for I desire that thou shalt be a
witness of what I will do for my lady's sake, that thou mayst give her
an account of it."

"Bless us," cried Sancho, "what can I see more that I have not seen
already?"

"Nothing as yet," replied Don Quixote. "Thou must see me throw away mine
armour, tear my clothes, knock my head against the rocks, and do a
thousand other things of that kind that will fill thee with
astonishment."

"Beware, sir," cried the squire. " If you needs must knock your noddle,
do so gently, I pray you."

 

The Army of Sheep

But surely the most mirth-provoking of all the adventures of Don Quixote
is that in which he takes a flock of sheep for an army. He and Sancho
were riding at bridle-pace over a wide plain, when they perceived a
thick cloud of dust in the distance.

"The day is come," cried the knight, "the happy day that fortune has
reserved for me, and in which the strength of my arm shall be signalized
by such exploits as shall be transmitted even to the latest posterity.
Seest thou yonder cloud of dust ? Know then that it is raised by a
prodigious army marching this way and composed of an infinite number of
nations."

The wretched Don's brain was of course full to overflowing of the
accounts of those stupendous battles of myriads of paynims which, as we
have seen, are so frequently encountered in the old romances, and he was
delighted

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

when Sancho pointed out that two separate hosts seemed to be approaching
from different points of the compass.

"Ha, so! " cried Don Quixote, flourishing his lance, "then shall we
assist the weaker side. Know, Sancho, that the host which now confronts
us is commanded by the great Alifanfaron, Emperor of the Island of
Taprobana. The other that advances behind us is his sworn enemy,
Pentapolin of the Naked Arm, King of the Garamantians."

"Pray, sir," quoth Sancho, "what is the cause of this quarrel between
two such great men?"

"It is a simple matter," answered Don Quixote. "The pagan Alifanfaron
dares to make his addresses to the daughter of Pentapolin, who has told
him that he will have naught of him unless he abjure his false beliefs."

"If a battle be at hand," said Sancho nervously, "where shall I place my
ass, for I fear he will not prove of much avail in the charge."

"True," answered Don Quixote. "We will soon provide a destrier for thee
when the knights begin to fall from their saddles. But let us scan their
ranks. He who wears the gilded arms and bears on his shield a crowned
lion couchant at the feet of a lady is the valiant Lord Luarcalco, Lord
of the Silver Bridge. Yonder is the formidable Micocolembo, the great
Duke of Quiracia, wearing armour powdered with flowers of gold. The
gigantic form upon his right is the dauntless Brandabarbaran, sovereign
of the Three Arabias, whose armour is made of serpents' skins, and who
carries for a shield the gate of the temple which Samson pulled down at
his death. But our allies also advance. Yonder marches Timonel of
Carcaxona, Prince of New Biscay, who bears on his shield a cat *or* in a
held *guIes,* with the

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

motto ‘Miau.’ Beside him rides Espartafilardo of the Wood, whose blue
shield is powdered with asparagus plants. But the pagans press on. To
the right cluster those who drink the pleasant stream of the Xanthus,
there the rude mountaineers of Massilia, behind them those who gather
gold from the sands of Arabia Felix, the treacherous Numidians, the
bowmen of Persia, the Medes and Parthians who fight flying, the
houseless Arabians, and the sooty Ethiopians."

"Upon my soul," cried Sancho, "surely thy magicians are at work again,
for not a single knight, giant or man can I see of all those you talk of
now."

"Blockhead!" cried Don Quixote. " Hark to the neighing of countless
horses, the fanfare of the trumpets, and the thunder of many drums."

"Surely this is sorcery," replied the puzzled Sancho, "for I hear
nothing but the bleating of sheep."

"Retreat, if thou fearest the engagement," replied the Don, with a
haughty sneer, "for I with my single arm am sufficient to give the
victory to that side which I shall favour with my assistance," and with
a loud and warlike cry he couched his lance, clapped spurs to the lean
side of Rozinante, and charged like a thunderbolt into the plain,
crying: "Courage, brave knights! Woe upon that great infidel Alifanfaron
of Taprobana."

In another moment he was among the flock of sheep, charging through and
through it, and piercing an animal at each thrust of his lance. The
shepherds, in great dismay, unloosed their slings and began to ply him
with stones as big as their fists. But, disdainful of this petty
artillery, he cried upon Alifanfaron, whom in imagination he was about
to engage, when a stone as big as a good-sized pippin struck him heavily
upon the

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

short ribs. Thinking himself desperately wounded, he pulled out the
earthen flask which contained his magic balsam; but just as he was in
the act of raising this to his lips, a stone from the sling of a
shepherd struck it so forcibly as to shiver it to atoms, and passing
through it broke three of his teeth and tumbled him from the saddle. The
shepherds, fearing that they had killed him, picked up the dead sheep
and made off; leaving him more dead than alive.

 

Mambrino's Helmet

No less notable is Cervantes' account of the adventure in which Don
Quixote succeeded in obtaining the helmet of Mambrino. At a distance he
espied a horseman who wore upon his head something that glittered like
gold. Turning to Sancho, he said:

"Behold, yonder comes he who wears upon his head the helmet of Mambrino,
which I have sworn to make mine own."

"Now the truth of the story," says Cervantes, '' was this: there were in
that part of the country two villages, one of which was so little that
it had not so much as a shop in it, nor any barber; so that the barber
of the greater village served also the smaller. And thus a person
happening to have occasion to be let blood, and another to be shaved,
the barber was going thither with his brass basin, which he had clapped
upon his head to keep his hat, that chanced to be a new one, from being
spoiled by the rain; and as the basin was new scoured, it made a
glittering show a great way off. As Sancho had well observed, he rode
upon a grey ass, which Don Quixote as easily took for a dapple-grey
steed as he took the barber for a knight, and his brass basin for

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

a golden helmet; his distracted brain easily applying every object to
his romantic ideas. Therefore, when he saw the poor imaginary knight
draw near, he fixed his lance, or javelin, to his thigh, and without
staying to hold a parley with his thoughtless adversary, flew at him as
fiercely as Rozinante would gallop, resolved to pierce him through and
through; crying out in the midst of his career: "Caitiff! wretch! defend
thyself, or immediately surrender that which is so justly my due.'" The
barber, seeing this awful apparition come thundering down upon him, and
in terror lest he should be run through by Don Quixote's lance, threw
himself off his ass on to the ground and, hastily rising, ran off at the
top of his speed, leaving both his ass and his basin behind him.

"Of a truth," said Don Quixote, "the miscreant who has left this helmet
has shown himself as prudent as the beaver, who, finding himself hotly
pursued by the hunters, to save his life cuts off with his teeth that
for which his natural instinct tells him he was followed."

"Upon my word," cried Sancho, "it is a right good basin, and worth at
least a piece of eight."

Don Quixote at once placed it on his head, but could find no visor, and
when he perceived that it had none, "Doubtless," said he, "the pagan for
whom this famous helmet was first made had a head of a prodigious size,
but unfortunately part of it is wanting."

At this Sancho laughed outright.

"I fancy," continued Don Quixote, "that this enchanted helmet has fallen
by some strange accident into the hands of some one who for the lucre of
a little money, and finding it to be of pure gold, melted one half of it

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

and of the other made this headpiece, which as thou sayest has some
resemblance to a barber's basin."

 

The Adventure of the Windmills

The most celebrated, if not the most amusing of Don Quixote's adventures
is certainly that of the windmills. Indeed " tilting at windmills " has
passed into a proverb. The dismal Don and his squire had entered a
certain plain where stood thirty or forty windmills, and as soon as the
knight espied them he cried: "Fortune directs our affairs better than we
ourselves could have wished. See, Sancho, there are at least thirty
outrageous giants whom I intend to encounter, and with whose spoils we
shall enrich ourselves."

"What giants?" quoth Sancho Panza.

"Those whom thou seest yonder," answered Don Quixote, "with their long,
extended arms."

"By your leave, sir," said the squire, "those things yonder are no
giants, but windmills."

"Alas, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "thou art but little acquainted with
adventures. I tell thee they are giants, and therefore if thou art
afraid, turn aside and say thy prayers, for I am resolved to engage in
an unequal combat against them all." Without another word he clapped
spurs to his horse, crying out: "Stand your ground, ignoble creatures,
and fly not basely from a single knight who dares encounter you all." At
that moment the wind rose and the mill-sails began to move, at which the
Don cried aloud : " Base miscreants! though you move more arms than the
giant Briareus, you shall pay for your arrogance. Then, devoutly
recommending himself to his lady, he bore down upon the first windmill,
and running his lance into the sail,

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

transfixed it. The sail, however, continued to rise, drawing up both
knight and horse along with it, until at last the lance broke into
shivers and Rozinante and his master fell a good distance to the ground.

Sancho Panza at once ran up to the dismounted knight, who seemed to have
fared badly. "Alas, your worship," he cried, "did hot I tell you they
were windmills, and that nobody could think otherwise unless he had
windmills in his head."

"Peace! " replied Don Quixote, who had been badly shaken by the fall. "I
am verily persuaded that the cursed necromancer Freston, who continues
to persecute me, has transformed these giants into windmills. But, mark
you, in the end all his pernicious wiles and stratagems shall prove
ineffectual against the prevailing edge of my sword."

 

The Story of the Captive

One of the most remarkable of the tales which are interspersed
throughout the history of Don Quixote is that of the captive which the
hero encounters at a certain inn, and which, if it is not actually based
upon the facts of Cervantes' own personal captivity among the Moorish
pirates, certainly draws much of its substance and colour therefrom. On
26th September, 1575, the Spanish vessel *Sol,* on which Cervantes
served as a private soldier, was separated from the rest of the Spanish
squadron in the neighbourhood of Marseilles, and, falling in with a
flotilla of Moorish pirates, was captured after a desperate resistance.
Cervantes himself was sold as a slave to one Dali Mami, a Greek
renegade, who found upon his prisoner certain highly eulogistic letters
from Don John of Austria and the Duke of Sessa. These flattering

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

credentials led his new master to suppose that Cervantes was a man of
consequence, and that he would presumably be able to draw a large ransom
for him. But although the great are often quite ready to provide genius
with grandiloquent testimonials which cost them only the expense of a
little ink and paper, they are by no means prone to back their
assertions of ability by tabling large sums of money, and Cervantes
continued to languish in captivity. In 1576 he attempted to escape with
other prisoners, but their Moorish guide played them false, and,
threatened by hunger, the party was forced to return to Algiers. In the
following year Cervantes brother was ransomed, and he undertook to send
a vessel to carry off Miguel and his friends. Meanwhile the author of
*Don Quixote* enlisted the sympathies of a Spanish renegade, a Navarrese
gardener named Juan. Between them they dug a cave in a garden near the
sea, and secreted in it, one by one, fourteen Christian slaves, who were
secretly fed during several months by the help of another rencoade known
as El Dorador. The vessel sent by Rodrigo de Cervantes stood in to the
shore, and was on the point of embarking those hidden in the cave when a
Moorish fishing-boat passed by, and so alarmed the rescuers that they
put to sea again. Meanwhile the treacherous El Dorador had revealed the
plan to Flassan Pasha, the Dey of Algiers, and when several of the crew
of rescuers landed on a second occasion to convey the fugitives on
board, the Dey's troops surrounded the garden, and the entire band of
Christians was captured. Cervantes, with that true nobility which
characterized him throughout life, took the entire blame of the
conspiracy upon himself. Dragged bound before Hassan he adhered to his
statement, and although the unfortunate

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

gardener was hanged, Hassan decided to spare Cervantes' life, and for
some reason known to himself purchased the poet from Dali Mami for five
hundred crowns. Perhaps the tyrant expected an immense ransom from a man
whose nobility of bearing must have impressed him. But be that as it
may, Cervantes at once began to set on foot a third scheme of escape. He
sent a letter to the Spanish Governer of Oran, asking for assistance,
but this was intercepted, and the poet was sentenced to two thousand
blows, which, however, were never inflicted. Cervantes now conceived the
idea of inducing the Christian population of Algiers to rise and capture
the city. In this project he was assisted by some Valencian traders, but
the scheme was revealed to Hassan by a Dominican monk, and the
Valejicians, hearing of the priest's treachery, and fearing lest they
might be implicated, begged Cervantes to make his escape on a ship which
was about to start for Spain. But Cervantes refused to desert his
friends, and when he was once more dragged before Hassan with a
hangman's rope round his neck, and threatened with instant death unless
he revealed the names of his accomplices, he obstinately refused to
betray them.

Meanwhile his family were doing their utmost to procure his release, and
in order that they might collect his ransom, his mother, the better to
inspire pity, actually passed herself off as a widow, though her
husband, a medical practitioner of great age, was still alive. By
tremendous exertions they succeeded in collecting two hundred and fifty
ducats, which they paid to a certain monk who went regularly to Algiers,
but this Hassan refused to accept, asking for one prisoner of
distinction, called Palafox, the sum of one thousand ducats. The

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

monk seems to have acted as an official ransomer to the Spaniards, and
when Hassan found that he would pay no more than five hundred ducats for
Palafox, he offered to ransom Cervantes for that sum by way of making a
bargain. So after five years of slavery the author of *Don Quixote* was
set free, and returned to his native soil. But the Dominican monk who
had revealed to Hassan his attempted escape, and who was probably afraid
that Cervantes would charge him with this treachery, no sooner heard
that he had landed in Spain than he spread false reports regarding his
conduct. These, however, Cervantes was easily able to rebut, and his
character as a heroic leader among the captives was amply vindicated.
The captive's story, for which Cervantes had had the mournful privilege
of collecting so much 'local colour,' is recounted to Don Quixote by an
escaped slave, who, with his Moorish lady-love, has come to the inn
where the woeful knight is sojourning. I shall adhere to Cervantes'
manner of recounting it in the first person, but as it occupies a
considerable portion of the first part of his famous history,
considerations of space will necessitate its condensation.

"My family had its origin in the mountains of Leon, and although my
father had considerable substance, he had by no means been prudent in
his expenditure, and at an early age my brothers and myself were faced
with the necessity for carving out our own fortunes. One of my brothers
resolved to go to the Indies, the youngest embraced Holy Orders, and I
concluded that for my part I would be a soldier. With a thousand ducats
in my pocket I travelled to Alicant, whence I took ship to Genoa. From
that city I went to Milan, where I joined the forces of the great Duke
of Alva and saw

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

service in Flanders. Some time after my arrival in that country there
came news of the league concluded by Pope Pius V in conjunction with
Spain against the Turks, who had at that time taken the island of Cyprus
from the Venetians, Hearing that Don John of Austria had been given the
conduct of this expedition, I returned to Italy, enrolled myself in his
service, and was present at the great battle of Lepanto, on which
glorious day the fable that the Turk was invincible, which had so long
deluded Christendom, was dissipated. But instead of participating in
this victory, I was so unfortunate as to be made a prisoner in the
course of the engagement. Vehali, the bold pirate king of Algiers,
having boarded and taken the galley *Capitana* of Malta, the vessel of
Andrea Doria, to which had been commissioned, bore up to assist it. I
leaped on board the enemy's ship, which, however, succeeded in casting
off the grappling-irons thrown upon it, and I found myself surrounded by
enemies who quickly bore me down. I was carried to Constantinople, and
was made a slave in the captured *Capitana* at Navarino.

"As I did not wish to burden my father with the collection of a ransom,
I refrained from letting him know of my circumstances. My master Vehali
dying, I fell to the share of a Venetian renegade called Azanaga, who
sailed for Algiers, where I was shut up in prison. As it was thought
that I might be ransomed, the Moors placed me in a *bagnio,* and I was
not forced to labour like those captives who had no hope of redemption.
Upon the courtyard of this place there opened the windows of the house
of a wealthy Moor, and it chanced one day that I was standing underneath
one of these, when there appeared from it a long cane, to which was
attached a

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

piece of linen. This was moved up and down as if it was expected that
some of us should lay hold upon it, and one of our number stood
immediately beneath it to see if it would be lowered. But just as he
came to it, the cane was drawn up and shaken to and fro sideways, as if
in denial. Another of my comrades advanced, and had the same success as
the former. Seeing this, I resolved to try my fortune also, and as I
came under the cane, it fell at my feet. I untied the linen, and found
wrapped up in it about ten gold coins called *zianins. I* took the
money, broke the cane, and looking upward, beheld a white hand close the
window in haste. Shortly afterward there appeared out of the same
casement a little cross made of cane, and by this token we concluded
that some Christian woman was a slave in that house. But the whiteness
of the hand and the richness of the bracelets upon the arm made us think
that perhaps we had to deal with a Christian lady who had turned
Mohammedan.

"For more than fifteen days we received no other token of the lady's
presence, although we watched carefully for the same, but we learned
that the house belonged to a Moor of high rank, called Agimorato. At the
end of this time the cane appeared once more, and on this occasion I
found that the linen bundle contained no less than forty crowns of
Spanish gold, with a paper written in Arabic, at the top of which was a
great cross. But none of us understood Arabic, and it was with
difliculty that we could find an interpreter. At last I resolved to
trust a renegade of Murcia, who had shown me great proofs of his
kindness. He agreed to translate it, and I found the contents were as
follow:

"'As a child I had a Christian nurse who taught me

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

much of your religion, and especially of Lela Marien, whom you call the
Virgin. When this good slave died, she appeared to me in a vision and
bid me go to the land of the Christians to see the Virgin, who had a
great kindness for me. I have seen many Christians Out of this window,
but none has appeared to me so much of a gentleman as thyself. I am
young and hand-some and can carry with me a great deal of money and
other riches. Pray consider how we may escape together, and thou shalt
be my husband in thine own country, if thou art willing. But if not, it
does not matter, for the Virgin will provide me a husband. Trust no Moor
with this letter, for they are all treacherous.

The renegade to whom I had given the letter for translation promised to
assist us in every way in his power, should we venture upon making our
escape, and indeed the hearts of all of us rose high, for we argued that
the influence and means of the lady who had befriended me might greatly
help us in our efforts for freedom. I dictated a reply to the renegade,
who translated it into the Arabic tongue, offering the lady my services
and those of my companions, and promising on the word of a Christian to
make her my wife. Soon the cane was let down from the window once more.
I attached the note to it and it was drawn up. That night we prisoners
discussed the best means of effecting our escape, and at last we agreed
to wait for the answer of Zoraida (for such we discovered was the lady's
name), feeling assured that she could best advise us how to proceed.

For some days the *bagnio* was full of people, during which time the
cane was invisible, but when we were once more left to ourselves it was
thrust through the

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

window, and on this occasion the bundle which depended from it contained
a letter and a hundred crowns in gold.

"The renegade speedily translated the missive, which stated that
although the writer could not contrive the manner of our escape, she
could still furnish us with sufficient money to enable us to buy our
ransoms. She suggested that having done this one of us should proceed to
Spain, purchase a ship there, and return for the others. She concluded
by saying that she was now about to proceed to the country with her
father, and that she would pass all the summer in a place near the
seaside, which she closely described.

"Every one of our company offered to be the man who should go to Spain
and purchase the ship which was to deliver the rest, but the renegade,
who was experienced in such matters, strongly opposed this proposal,
saying that he had seen too many such enterprises wrecked by placing
trust in a single individual. He offered to purchase a ship in Algiers,
and pretend to turn merchant, by which means, he said, he could contrive
to get us out of the *bagnio* and the country. Meanwhile I answered
Zoraida, assuring her that we would do all she advised, and in reply to
this she gave us, by means of the cane, two thousand crowns in gold. Of
this sum we gave the renegade five hundred crowns to buy the ship, and
through the good offices of a merchant of Valencia, then in Algiers, I
effected my own ransom with another eight hundred crowns. But on the
advice of this trader the money was not paid down to the Dey at once,
lest his suspicions should be aroused, but he was informed that it would
shortly be forthcoming from Spain, and meanwhile I remained in the
Valencian's house upon parole. Before Zoraida finally departed for her
father's

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

summer residence she gave us another thousand crowns, explaining, by
letter, that she kept the keys of her father's treasury, and on this
occasion I made arrangements for ransoming three of my friends.

 

The Flight from Algiers

"Soon after this the renegade purchased a vessel capable of carrying
above thirty people, in which he pretended to make several voyages in
company with a Moorish partner whom he took in order to avoid suspicion.
Each time he passed along the coast he cast anchor in a little bay close
to the house where Zoraida lived, so that the people of the place should
get used to his doing so. He even landed on several occasions and begged
fruit from Zoraida's father, which he always received, for the old Moor
was of a liberal spirit. But he could never succeed in having speech
with Zoraida herself. Our plan was now upon such a footing that he asked
me to fix a (lay upon which we might make the great effort upon which
everything depended. So I collected twelve Spaniards known to be good
oarsmen and whose comings and goings were not very closely watched. It
was arranged among us that we should steal out of the town upon the
evening of the next Friday, and rendezvous at a certain spot near
Agimorato's dwelling. But it was necessary that Zoraida herself should
be apprised of our intention, and with this object in view I entered her
garden one day upon pretence of gathering a few herbs. Almost at once I
encountered her father, who asked me what I (lid there. I told him I was
a slave of Arnaut Mami, who I knew was a friend of his, and that I
wanted a few herbs to make up a salad. While we spoke Zoraida came out
of the garden house, and as it was quite the custom for

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

the Moorish women to be seen before Christian slaves, her father called
her to come to him. She was most richly dressed and wore a profusion of
jewels, and now that I beheld her for the first time I was astounded by
her beauty. Her father told her for what purpose I was there, and she
asked me if I were about to be ransomed. Speaking in *lingua franca,* I
replied that I had already been ransomed, and that I intended to embark
on the morrow upon a French ship.

"At that juncture the old Moor was called away upon business, and I at
once assured Zoraida that I would come for her on the morrow. She
immediately threw her arms around my neck and began to walk toward the
house, but her father returning at that moment espied us, and came
running to us in some alarm. Immediately Zoraida pretended to be in a
fainting condition, and explained to Agimorato that she had suddenly
felt indisposed. I yielded her up to him and they retired into the
house.

"Next evening we embarked and dropped anchor opposite Zoraida's
dwelling. When darkness had come we walked boldly into the garden, and
finding the gate of the house open entered the courtyard. Zoraida
immediately emerged from the house carrying a small trunk full of
treasure, and told us that her father was asleep, but as misfortune
would have it, some slight noise that we made awakened him and he came
to a window calling out, 'Thieves, thieves! Christians, Christians!' The
renegade at once rushed upstairs and secured him, and we carried father
and daughter on board. We also made prisoners of the few Moors who
remained on the vessel, bent to the oars, and set out to sea.

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

"At first we endeavoured to make for Majorca, but a strong wind arising,
we were driven along the coast. We were in great fear that we might
encounter some of the Moorish cruisers which we knew to be in the
vicinity. I made very effort in my power to assure Agrimorato that we
would give him his liberty on the very first occasion, and told him that
his daughter had become a Christian and desired to live the rest of her
life in a Christian land. On hearing this, the old man behaved as if
suddenly seized by a frenzy, and rising cast himself into the sea,
whence we succeeded with difficulty in rescuing him. Shortly afterward
we drove into a small bay, where we set Agrimorato ashore. I shall never
forget his curses and imprecations upon his daughter, but as we sailed
away he called out, begging her to return. However, she hid her face in
her hands and commended him to the Virgin.

"We had proceeded some little distance from the coast when the light of
the moon became obscured. All at once we nearly collided with a large
vessel, which hailed as in French, bidding us to heave to. Perceiving
that it was a French pirate, we made no answer, but pressed onward,
whereupon its crew launched a boat, boarded us and dragged us on board,
stripping Zoraida of all her jewels and throwing us into the hold. As we
neared the Spanish shore next morning they placed us in their long-boat
with two barrels of water and a small quantity of biscuits, and the
captain, touched with some remorse for the lovely Zoraida, gave her at
parting about forty crowns of gold. We rowed us through the early dawn,
and after some hours of plying the oars landed. After proceeding some
miles inland we came upon a shepherd, who on seeing our Moorish dress

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

made off and gave the alarm. Soon we encountered a company of horsemen,
one of whom chanced to be related to one of our member. They placed us
on their horses and we soon reached the city of Vedez Malaga. There we
were brought to church to thank God for His great mercy upon us, and
there for the first time Zoraida saw and recognized a picture of the
Virgin. With some of the money the pirate had given Zoraida I bought an
ass and resolved to discover whether or no my father and brothers were
still alive. That is, gentlemen, the sum of our adventures."

The escaped Christian had scarcely finished his narration when a
splendid coach drove up to the door of the inn. From this equipage there
alighted a richly dressed gentleman and lady, who entered the *posada*
and were met with great courtesy by Don Quixote. The Christian refugee
recognized the gentleman as his brother, now a judge of the Court of
Mexico, who greeted him affectionately and introduced the as his
daughter. The man of many adventures with his Moorish bride resolved to
return with the judge to Seville, whence they intended to advise their
father of these strange happenings, that he might come to see the
baptism and marriage of Zoraida, for whose future, and that of his
sorely tired brother, the grandee resolved to make ample provision.

 

The Growth of Cervantes

It is in such a tale as the above that we observe how Cervantes’ style
grows more supple and adaptable as his work proceeds. It is clear that
he has made an effort to shake off the literary trammels of his time,
and that he has succeeded. No longer does he find it necessary

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

to imitate such writers as Antonio de Guevara, as in the passage in
which Don Quixote describes the Age of Gold. He has shaken off the
rather recondite euphuism of some of the earlier passages, and has
become more human and familiar. His speeches are appropriate to his
characters; his dialogue is full of life and his narrative of incident.
But although in these pages we behold the evolution of a realist,
Cervantes never altogether throws off the cloak of the academic
eloquence—only it becomes a carefully restrained eloquence which has
left affectation far behind.

The great and immediate success of *Don Quixote* was, however,
principally due to its large humour, and to its faithful portraiture of
the Spanish types of Cervantes’ day. Into juxtaposition with figures
that were familiar to all he brought the extraordinary character of the
Knight of the Rueful Countenance, disturbing its ordinary routine and
quarreling with its conventions, carrying the days of chivalry in his
head, and projecting their phantasms on the landscape by means of the
all too powerful light of his imagination. But if the incongruity of the
Don is a modern setting roused grave and sober Spain to inextinguishable
laugher, his character and that of Sancho Panza were still recognized as
triumphs of creative fiction—the representatives of imagination run mad
and of the grossest common sense.

The perfection and finish of *Don Quixote,* and the consummate
craftsmanship with which it is conceived,

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

cannot fail to commend themselves to readers of discretion. It is full
of the knowledge of the man of the world; it breathes leisure and
urbanity, its spirit is that which stamps the work of the great master.
Here there are no loose ends, no clumsy constructions, no weaknesses of
diction. It does not seem to me that Cervantes wrote with any great
facility, and herein probably lies the measure of his great literary
excellence. On the other hand, no drudgery is apparent in his
composition. He strikes the happy medium between brilliant facility and
that meticulous and often nervously apprehensive mode which so
frequently disgraces the work of modern stylists. He is precise and
wonderfully sure-footed, and we cannot imagine him grasping in alarm at
every projection in the course of his ascent. Whatever the secret of his
style, it succeed in producing a wonderfully equable yet varied
narrative, just and appropriate in expression. His entire canvas is
filled in and completed with a masterly eye to the smallest detail.

 

The Second Part of "Don Quixote"

We can see by the time which he permitted to elapse between the first
and second parts of his great romance how careful Cervantes was not to
hazard his well-won reputation upon an unfortunate sequel, and the
fictioneer of our own time, harassed by a public greedy for sensation
and flushed by momentary success, might well turn to him for an example
in this respect. It is often alleged that the circumstances of modern
literature do not permit the leisure which is necessary to the
excogitation of a carefully developed technique or a sound style. This,
alas! is only too true. The

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

successful author of to-day can scarcely permit ten months, much less
ten years, to elapse between one effort and another, and to this
feverish condition of things we undoubtedly owe those disappointing
sequels to great novels with which all of us must be only too familiar.
Ours is emphatically not an age of connoisseurs. We eat, drink, and read
pretty much what is given us, and if we grumble a little at the quality
thereof, we feel that no complaints will alter the conditions which
produce the things against which we inveigh. The Spain of Cervantes day
offered a much more critical environment. Bad or hastily conceived work
it would not tolerate. But there were elements within it which
frequently did much to hasten the publication of a sequel, and the chief
of these was undoubtedly literary piracy. Cervantes appears to have been
spurred on in the publication of the second part of *Don Quixote* by the
appearance in 1614 of a book by Alonso Fernandez de Avellaneda, a
spurious sequel to the first portion of his great work, the preface of
which is filled with personalities of the most insolent kind. That he
resented the piracy is shown by the circumstance that he put all his
other work aside and brought *Don Quixote* to a hurried conclusion.

In the last chapters of *Don Quixote* he was forced to write hastily
because his rival had stolen his plan, and it was necessary for him to
recast it as well as to bring out his novel with all speed. But, these
blemishes notwithstanding, much of the sequel is truly epical in its
grandeur. Don Quixote, if less amusing, is greatly more
thought-provoking, and Sancho Panza becomes even richer in common sense
and clear-sightedness. The portraiture of the remaining characters, too,
is

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

sharper in outline than in the first part. The sequel, indeed, is a
great mirror in which the Spanish society of Cervantes' day is reflected
with all the thaumaturgy of genius. The immense success which followed
it must have afforded the greatest gratification to the dying novelist,
and must in great measure have consoled him for the disappointments of a
career spent in the shallows of exile and poverty.

 

Lazarillo de Tormes

The greatest humorous romance which Spain had produced prior to *Don
Quixote* was the *Lazarillo de Tormes* of Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, a
many-sided man and once Spanish Ambassador to England. He was of noble
extraction on both sides, and was born in Granada in 1503**.** As a
younger son he was destined for the Church, and studied at the
university of Salamanca, where, while still a student, he wrote the
novel which rendered him famous. Its graphic descriptions, its
penetration into character, and its vivacity and humour instantly gained
for it a high place in contemporary Spanish literature. But Mendoza soon
exchanged the clerical for the political sphere of activity, and Charles
V created him Captain-General of Siena, a small Italian republic which
had been brought beneath Spanish rule. Haughty and unfeeling, Mendoza
exercised a most tyrannical sway over the wretched people committed to
his care. They complained bitterly to the Emperor regarding his conduct,
and when this remained without effect, his life was attempted by
assassination. On one occasion, indeed, his horse was killed under him
by a musket-shot aimed at himself. During his absence Siena was captured
by a French army, and as

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

the weakness of the city was attributed to his withdrawal of certain
troops he was recalled to Spain in 1554.

But while thus employed in Italy as a statesman and a soldier Mendoza
had not been idle in a literary sense, for he had written his political
commentaries, a paraphrase of Aristotle, a treatise on mechanics, and
other notable works, none of which, however, have achieved for him a
tithe of the popularity of his first literary effort.

Lazaro, or, to give him his diminutive name, Lazarillo, was the son of a
miller who plied his trade by the banks of the river Tormes, from which
he took his name. When he was only ten years old his father was killed
in a campaign against the Moors, and as his mother was unable to support
him she gave him into the charge of a blind man who wandered about the
country as a beggar. While at the bridge of Salamanca the boy noticed an
animal carved in stone in the form of a bull, and was told by his master
that if he placed his ear to the effigy he would hear it roar. He did
so, when the old man gave his head such a violent thump against it as
almost to bereave him of sense, and, laughing brutally, told him that a
blind man's boy must needs have his wits about him. "I have no silver or
gold to give you," said he, "but what is far better, I can impart to you
the result of my experiences, which will always enable you to live."

The little Lazarillo had much difficulty in getting enough food to keep
body and soul together. The old beggar kept his bread and meat in a
linen knapsack, the neck of which was tightly secured. But the boy made
a small rent in one of the seams of the bag, and thus helped himself to
the choicest pieces of meat, bacon, and

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

sausage. It was his task also to receive the alms which charitable
people bestowed on the blind man, and part of this he secreted in his
mouth, until, by dint of practice, he was able to hide a goodly treasure
of copper money in that receptacle. It irked him on a hot day to watch
the beggar drinking his wine while he himself went thirsty. The wine was
kept in a large jar, and from time to time he managed to get a sip of
the cooling liquor. But his master soon discovered the practice and kept
the jar between his knees, with his hand on its mouth. Lazarillo
therefore bored a small hole in the bottom of the jar, which he closed
with wax. At dinnertime, when the blind beggar sat over the fire, the
wax melted, and Lazarillo, putting his mouth to the hole, absorbed the
wine. His master was enraged and surprised when he found that the liquor
had vanished, and attributed its disappearance to magical means. But the
next time his charge attempted the feat the crafty old mendicant seized
the jar with both hands and dealt him such a blow on the face with it as
to break the vessel and wound the boy severely. From that day Lazarillo
bore a grudge against the sightless old tyrant, and took a sly revenge
by guiding him over the worst roads he could find and through the
deepest mud.

Resolving to quit a service the perquisites of which were all kicks and
no halfpence, Lazarillo led his master to the Arcade at Escalona, beside
which a brook ran rather swiftly. In order to cross this it was
necessary either to jump or to wade almost up to the neck in water, and
when this was explained to him the old beggar chose the former method of
negotiating it. The crafty Lazarillo told him that the narrowest place
was Opposite a great stone pillar, and the wretched mendicant, taking

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

a step or two backward to give him impetus, leapt with such force that
he crashed into the pillar, at the bottom of which he immediately fell
unconscious. With a shout of triumph Lazarillo ran off and from that day
never set eyes upon the blind man again.

The next master whose service he entered was a priest, and if his
experiences with the beggar had been unhappy, they were as nothing to
what he now had to bear, for the holy man was a miser of the most
pitiful description, and starved him in a shameful manner. He kept his
bread in a large wooden chest, to which Lazarillo got a travelling
tinker to fit a key during the priest's absence, and was thus able to
regale himself daily, until his miserly master discovered the shortage.
This he attributed to rats, and as there were several holes in the box
he carefully mended it with small pieces of wood; but still the bread
disappeared, and as one of the neighbours had seen a snake in the
priest’s domicile the padre concluded that this reptile was the cause of
the depredations. To avoid discovery, Lazarillo slept with the key of
the chest in his mouth, but one night his breathing caused a whistling
sound upon the orifice of the implement, and the old priest, taking this
for the hissing of the snake, delivered such a shrewd blow in the
direction of the noise as to render the unfortunate Lazarillo an invalid
for some considerable time. When he had recovered, the old priest took
him by the hand and, leading him into the street, said to him,
"Lazarillo my son, thou hast great natural gifts ; thou art indeed far
too clever for an old man like me, and I assure thee that I do not wish
to see thee more. Farewell."

Lazarillo, however, was not long in attaching himself to another master,
who appeared to be a gentleman of

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

birth and breeding. But now he found that he was in worse straits than
ever, as though his master seemed a cavalier of family, he had not a
penny in the world, and was entirely dependent for his daily bread upon
what the boy could beg from charitably disposed persons. One day the
landlord called for the rent, and the gentleman, assuring him that he
would fetch it from his banker's, sallied forth and never returned, so
that once more the wretched urchin was without a master.

He next succeeded in obtaining the patronage of a pardoner who travelled
from place to place selling indulgences and relics. On one occasion they
stayed at an inn, where his master struck up a friendship with an
*alguazil,* or constable. One night the pair sat late carousing, when a
quarrel arose between them, and next day, as the pardoner was preaching
in the church preparatory to selling his wares, the alguazil entered and
denounced him as an impostor. The pardoner, with a great show of piety,
prayed loudly that the heavenly powers would vindicate his character and
would punish the *alguazil,* who immediately fell to the ground in the
most dreadful convulsions. Some of the congregation prayed the pardoner
that he would attempt some mitigation of the wrath of heaven upon his
traducer, and the holy man stepped from the pulpit and laid a bull which
he pretended he had received from the Pope upon the sufferer's forehead.
The man instantly rose as if cured, and the people, convinced that a
miracle had occurred, at once bought up the pardoner's entire stock. But
the acute Lazarillo soon discovered that the pair had been in league
with one another.

The last master to whose service Lazarillo attached himself was the
Arch-priest of Salvador, in whose

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

service he flourished exceedingly, and one of whose servants he married.
But scandal crept into his household, and with the death of his wife he
found himself as poor as ever.

Here the tale ends. It is impossible in such a brief sketch as this to
do justice to the great degree of insight into the workings of the human
heart which characterizes the authorship of this little novel, the first
of its kind. *Lazarillo de Tormes* was the forerunner and exemplar of
the entire school of the Picaresque novel, which at a later date became
almost typical of Spanish fiction, and which gave rise to such
masterpieces as *Guzman de Aifarache,* the *Gil Bias* of Le Sage, and
the novels of Scarron, and the spirit of which to some extent was
mirrored in our own Laurence Sterne; nor is its influence by any means
defunct, as can readily be seen by reference to certain of the works of
Mr Maurice Hewlett and Mr Jeffery Farnol.

 

Guzman de Alfarache

Mateo Aleman, the author of the great Picaresque romance of *Guzman de
Alfarache,* was a native of Seville.

Throwing up a Government appointment in early life, he crossed the sea
to Mexico, where in 1609 he published a work on Spanish orthography and
several treatises in Latin. But the effort which has gained for him the
title of novelist was his *Vita del Picaro Guzman de Alfarache,* a work
which has been translated into every European language from the date of
its first appearance in 1599. Although written in the most correct and
approved literary style, it is yet easy and familiar in manner, and is
unrivalled in the picture it presents not only of the lowest grades of
Castilian

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

society, but of the more exclusive orders of life at the period in which
he wrote.

"My ancestors," he says, "were originally from the Levant, but settled
in Genoa and employed themselves in the mercantile life of that city in
such a manner that they were accused of usury."

Thus the stock from which the lively adventurer came was of such a
character as to bring him at an early age into contact with the
realities of roguery. But if his relations were by no means particular
in trade, they concealed their ignominious conduct under the cloak of
hypocrisy and social correctness. They never failed to be present at
Mass, and the finger of reproach could not be pointed against their
family life. Before Guzman was born his father learned that one of his
correspondents at Seville had become bankrupt, and setting out for Spain
in order to investigate his affairs on the spot, he was captured by an
Algerine pirate, adopted the religion of Mohammed, and married a Moorish
lady. His agent at Seville, having heard of what had happened to his
principal creditor, adjusted his affairs without him, and was soon in a
better condition than ever. But the elder de Alfarache succeeded in
making his escape, and, coming to Seville, demanded a reckoning from his
rascally business *confrère,* from whom he succeeded in extorting a
considerable sum. He set himself up in business at Seville, and bought
an estate, which he named St Juan de Alfarache. Here he lived right
royally, and, having married the wealthy widow of an old knight, he
found himself in a fortunate position. Soon after this his son Guzman
was born. But de Alfarache was unfortunately prone to the distractions
of company, splendour, and show, and having dissipated most of his
means, ere long

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

became himself bankrupt, and shortly afterward paid the debt of nature.

His widow and the little Guzman were only indifferently provided for,
and when the boy had entered his fourteenth year he resolved to seek his
fortune, and set out for Genoa, in the hope that his father's relations
would extend their assistance to him. Soon he arrived at a miserable
tavern, where he asked for something to eat, and was given an omelet,
which, he says, might more properly have been called an "egg poultice,"
but which he attacked "as hogs do acorns.' Leaving the inn, he soon felt
very ill, and in a condition bordering upon collapse he encountered a
muleteer, to whom he described the unsavoury meal he had just eaten, and
who laughed heartily at his story. The kindly fellow told him to jump on
one of his mules, and soon they were trotting nimbly eastward. Shortly
after this they met two friars, and arrived at an inn, where they were
given another indifferent meal, which the host extolled so much that the
simple boy was fain to swallow the mess without making any great ado.
But to his horror he later discovered that it had been made from the
flesh of a young mule. On being challenged with this the innkeeper drew
a long sword, whereupon the muleteer seized a pitchfork, and murder
would have been done had not the town police separated the parties. The
dishonest landlord was taken to prison, but although he confessed to
passing off the mule for veal he would not admit that he had stolen
Guzman's cloak, which had gone amissing, and the boy had perforce to
leave the place minus this article of apparel.

Riding on their way, Guzman and the muleteer were soon overtaken on the
road by two persons on mules,

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

who examined them with the greatest attention, and then quite suddenly
threw themselves upon the unfortunate lad, asserting that he had stolen
some jewels of value. The muleteer interfered, but only to receive a
rough handling, and the strangers tied the comrades to their mules with
cords. At this juncture the party was joined once more by the friars,
who amused themselves by telling tales, the morals of which hinged upon
the mutability of human affairs; but these are much too long and too
slightly connected with the thread of our story to be repeated here. The
party then arrived at the gates of Cazalla, and the officers of the law,
finding that they had made a mistake in arresting Guzman, gave him his
liberty. He put up at the best inn that the place afforded, and on the
following morning took the direct road to Madrid on foot. At an inn on
the outskirts of the capital he met with a beneficent priest, who shared
his meal with him, but in the morning the landlord attempted to
overcharge him, and was about to take his coat in payment of his bill
when the muleteer, who had rejoined him, interfered, and gave it as his
opinion that Guzman had run away from home. The villainous landlord,
seeing in this some hope of enriching himself, offered to take the lad
into his service as a kind of stable-boy, his duty being to band out
straw and oats to the muleteers who put up at the place. Here the young
Guzman was initiated into habits of dishonesty and sharp practice, for
when a cavalier or person of consequence visited the inn he usually
doled out a mere handful of provender to his horses 'or mules, while
charging him the usual sum for it. The place was, indeed, a regular sink
of iniquity, and for Guzman life became so miserable that, relying

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

upon the little money he had saved, and selling his coat and waistcoat,
he absconded, and joined a passing company of beggars. These people
lived right royally on what they begged and what they poached. They were
inveterate gamblers, and in the evening Guzman found every opportunity
of picking up tricks with playing-cards. Soon after, however, he took
employment as scullion to a cook in the service of a nobleman.

 

Guzman as Scullion

In this situation Guzman passed a jovial time, for there was no lack of
good cheer in the knight's establishment. Albeit the lad did his work to
admiration. But the vice of gambling seized upon him, and every day he
joined the lackeys and pages at cards, often sitting up all night to
indulge in this pastime. In this way he soon got rid of the money he
received in gratuities, and being short of funds wherewith to gratify
his passion for gaming, began to pilfer such small articles as he could
find about the house, excusing himself by saying that he only did as
others did. One day his master had given a great carouse to some
friends, and Guzman entered the room where they had been drinking to
find them fast asleep. On the table he observed a large silver goblet,
and this he purloined. The cook's wife soon missed the article, and
inquiries with regard to it were set afoot, whereupon the cunning
youngster, taking the cup to a jeweller, had it cleaned in such a manner
that it resembled a new one. Carrying it back to the woman, who was in
great fear that her master would hear of the loss, he told her that he
had found a similar goblet at a jeweller's, which he could procure for
fifty-six *reales,* and, anxious to avert trouble, she at once gave him
the sum to purchase

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

it. The money thus dishonestly won was instantly thrown in gaming, and
Guzman was no better off than before.

About this time the cook was requested to prepare a splendid dinner for
a foreign nobleman who had newly arrived at Madrid. A large sack
containing game was entrusted to the lad, and this he carried home, but
as it was late he took it up to his own garret. In the middle of the
night he was wakened by cats, who fought over one of the hares which he
had brought home. Seeing that this was not missed, and that his brother
lackeys stole the provisions right and left, Guzman presently slipped
half a dozen eggs into his pocket. But the head cook observed him do so,
and dealt him such a furious kick that he fell, and the broken eggs
gushed from his pocket, to the amusement of all present. Guzman however,
managed to embezzle a couple of partridges and some quails. These he
took to sell to another cook, but his master, suspecting him, followed
and discovered what he was about, and immediately dismissed him after
thrashing him soundly.

After this nothing was left for the young adventurer but to return to
his old trade of running errands. He soon heard that certain troops were
about to be embarked for Genoa, and resolved to follow them and enlist.
A certain old apothecary, who had always found him honest in his
dealings, sent him to a foreign merchant with a large quantity of
silver, and this Guzman secreted in a large hole by the riverside. In
the morning he returned to the place, and, digging up the bags of money,
found that they contained two thousand five hundred *reales* in silver
and thirty *pistoles* in gold. Slinging the bags on his back, to
resemble a traveller's pack, he

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

set off in the direction of Toledo, making his way across the fields and
carefully avoiding the high road. Arriving within two leagues of Toledo,
he entered a wood, where he intended to rest the whole of the day, as he
did not wish to approach the city till nightfall. His plan was to betake
himself to Genoa and introduce himself to his relations, and he was
thinking of the best way to lay out his money in order to reach them and
make a good appearance before them, when he heard a noise and, turning
hastily, beheld a young man of about his own age reclining on the
ground, with his head against a tree. Guzman shared his wine with him,
and the youth informed him that he was penniless. Guzman offered to buy
some of the clothes he carried with him in a bundle, and, opening one of
his money-bags, reassured him as to his ability to pay. For a hundred
*reales* a handsome suit changed hands, and, taking leave of the
stranger, Guzman entered Toledo, where he at once put up at the best
inn. Next day he fitted himself out with such articles of attire as he
required, but his vanity got the better of him, and he ordered a most
magnificent suit, which cost him a long price. On Sunday he betook
himself to the cathedral, where he met a very fine lady, who asked him
to accompany her home to supper. For this occasion Guzman ordered a
magnificent feast, but the pair had hardly sat down to partake of it
when a loud knocking was heard at the door, and the lady cried out in
alarm that her brother had returned and that he had better conceal
himself. The only place in which he could do so with advantage was
inside a great inverted bath, and from this place of concealment he had
the mortification of beholding the gentleman who entered devour the
gorgeous supper which he had

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

provided and drink every drop of the four bottles of wine he had
purchased for his own use. Soon the gentleman, having eaten and drunk
thus sumptuously, fell sound asleep, and Guzman took the opportunity of
stealing from the house, a sadder but a wiser lad.

Hearing that an *alguazil* had been inquiring very particularly
regarding him, Guzman hurriedly left Toledo, and, arriving at the town
of Almagro, joined the company of soldiers who were bound for Genoa.
Their captain, taken with his distinguished appearance, hailed him as a
brother in arms, and treated him as an equal. Guzman had engaged the
services of a page at Toledo, and this little rascal assisted him
greatly in his new sphere by spreading the report that he was a
gentleman of consequence. But our hero's purse was now sadly depleted,
although he had still about half of his ill-gotten gains left. Instead
of embarking at once the company remained at Barcelona for three months,
so that his resources soon gave out, and he was neglected by the
officers, and even avoided by the soldiers. His captain, indeed,
condoled with him, and offered him a place in his household at the
servants' table, assuring him that this was all he could do for him, as
he himself was compelled to dine out from his utter incapacity to
receive his friends at home. Guzman assured him of his gratitude, and
hinted that he might in turn be able to assist him. The soldiers were
billeted in the village, and Guzman commenced a system of imposing a
larger number of men upon each house than was necessary, or at least
threatening to do so, so that the anxious inhabitants were only too glad
to buy him off. In this manner he completely re-established the
captain's finances, and as presents of provisions poured in from

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

the frightened villagers the young rascal and his chief lived well. But
he now grew bolder, and, selecting half a dozen of the most desperate
men in the company, began to rob passengers on the high road. His
captain, learning of this, however, immediately put a stop to such
dangerous proceedings.

One day Guzman observed that among the few jewels the captain still had
left to him there was a very handsome gold reliquary set with diamonds,
and this he begged his superior to lend him for a few days. The
audacious stripling at once took it to a jeweller's, to whom he offered
it for two hundred crowns. But the man would only tender him a hundred
and twenty, and this Guzman refused. The jeweller called upon him next
day to renew his offer, which the lad accepted. Guzman handed him the
purse in which the reliquary was kept, receiving the hundred and twenty
crowns in exchange. But the old fellow had scarcely left the house when
the young adventurer raised a cry of "Stop thief! Stop thief!" Some
soldiers immediately arrested the jeweller, and Guzman cried out that he
had robbed him of the captain's reliquary. The jeweller assured the
arquebusiers that he had paid a hundred and twenty crowns for the
article, but this Guzman denied. The wretched goldsmith was haled before
a magistrate, and, as he had a bad reputation for usury, was forced to
disgorge the reliquary. But although the captain was glad enough to get
the money thus scurvily gained, he f\~ared that further association with
such a rascal as de Alfarache would ruin him. In a few days the company
set sail for Genoa, and when they had arrived there his superior
intimated that they must part, at the same time thrusting a *pistole*
into his hand.

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

Tormented by Devils

The young adventurer now began to make inquiries about his relations,
and was informed that they were the most rich and powerful persons in
the republic. He inquired the way to their mansion, where he was but ill
received, all the more so as his appearance was shabby in the extreme.
But as he had taken care to make his relationship to them public
property, they could not very well repulse him. One evening he met a
venerable-looking old man, who told him that he had known his father,
and that he felt quite indignant at the behaviour of his relations
toward him, and offered him an asylum at his own house. Without giving
him anything to eat, he at once sent him to bed, where the wretched lad
lay tormented by the pangs of hunger. Before he went to sleep the old
man informed him that the room he occupied had the reputation of being
haunted by evil spirits. Famished and restless, Guzman lay awake, when
to his horror four figures in the shape of devils entered the chamber
and dragged him out of bed. Throwing him into a blanket, they tossed him
in the air with such violence that he struck the ceiling again and
again, until, exhausted by the exercise, they placed him in bed once
more and departed. In the early morning, stiff, sore, and dejected,
Guzman crawled from the mansion, but he registered an oath never to
forget the detestable manner in which his acquaintance had treated him,
and resolved to be avenged upon him at the first opportunity.

 

Guzman Joins the Beggars of Rome

Leaving Genoa in this miserable plight, in which he compares himself to
one of those who escaped from the

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

battle of Roncesvalles, Guzman resolved to make his way to Rome. Italy,
he says, is the most charitable country in the world, and anyone who can
beg can travel within its bounds without concerning himself about his
next meal. In a few weeks he found himself in the Roman Catholic
capital, with money enough in his pocket to buy a new suit of clothes,
but he resisted the temptation to do so, and wandered about the streets
of the Imperial city seeking alms. He soon fell in with a comrade in
distress, who enlightened him regarding the manners and customs of the
beggars of Rome and who gave him such good instructions that he soon
received more money than he could spend. In a short time Guzman was a
perfect master of the trade of begging. After spending some weeks in
this kind of life he fell in with one of the master-beggars of the city,
who instructed him in the laws of begging, which he sets forth at length
in his autobiography. These laws Guzman got by heart. The beggars lived
together, and met in the evening to practise and invent new exclamations
to excite pity. In the morning there was usually a scramble among them
to see who could get nearest the holy water at the entrance to the
churches, for there it was that the greatest harvest was reaped, and in
the evening the beggars usually made a round of the country seats in the
neighbourhood of Rome, whence they returned laden with provisions.
Nearly all of the beggars were adepts at simulating bodily malformations
or loathsome diseases. On one occasion, in the town of Gaeta, Guzman
simulated a terrible disease of the head, and the Governor, who was
passing, gave him alms. Next day he sat at the porch of a church with
what appeared to be a grievous affection of the leg, and

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

much money was flowing in upon him, when unhappily the Governor chanced
to pass, and recognizing him, told him that he would give him some
cast-off clothing if he would follow him home. Arrived there the
Governor asked him by what singular remedy he had contrived to cure
himself of his former complaint within the short space of one day, and
without waiting for an answer sent for a surgeon, who, on examining the
leg, assured the Governor that it was perfectly sound. The Governor then
handed Guzman over to his lackeys, who trounced him severely and thrust
him forth from the town.

One morning our rascally hero had posted himself at the gate of a
certain Cardinal celebrated for his compassionate disposition, who, on
passing and hearing his plaint, told his domestics to convey the seeming
sufferer to a chamber in his mansion and attend to his wants. Guzman had
once more simulated a terrible disease of the leg, and the Cardinal,
observing this, sent for two of the most celebrated surgeons in Rome.
Their preparations were of such a nature that Guzman feared they were
about to amputate his leg, so when they consulted together in an
adjoining room he went to the door to listen to what they were saying.
One of them gave it as his opinion that the disorder was merely a bogus
one, but the other as warmly maintained that it was genuine. At length
they agreed to lay their deliberations before the Cardinal, and were
about to do so when Guzman, entering the room where they consulted,
admitted his fraud, and proposed that they should combine in deceiving
the Cardinal. To this the surgeons agreed, and when his Eminence
appeared they made the most alarming and touching report

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

regarding Guzman's sham disorder. The Cardinal, who was a man of lofty
character and unsuspicious nature, begged them to take as much time as
they thought proper in effecting a cure, and to neglect nothing that
might contribute to the patient's recovery. So anxious were the surgeons
to pile up their fees that they compelled Guzman to keep his bed for
three months, which appeared three ages to him, so keen was his desire
to return to the gaming which had become second nature to him. At the
end of this time they presented their bill to the Cardinal, telling him
that a complete cure had been effected, and so pleased was the churchman
at having assisted in so remarkable a case, and so keen his appreciation
of Guzman's native wit, that he ended by taking the youthful charlatan
into his service as one of his pages.

Guzman was, however, not very well satisfied with his new life, which in
great measure consisted in waiting in ante-chambers and serving at
table. The discipline was rigorous, and all that he could purloin was a
few candle-ends. But he found that a large quantity of very fine
preserved fruit was kept in a certain chest, and to this he applied
himself. The Cardinal discovered the peculation, yet failed to trace it
to its source; but when Guzman was rifling the chest on a second
occasion his Eminence entered and caught him in the act. He received a
thorough castigation at the hands of the major-domo, which put an end to
his knaveries for some considerable time.

 

Guzman Cheats a Banker

But Guzman played so many tricks in the Cardinal's palace that at length
this excellent prelate had to

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

dispense with his services. He then entered the service of the Spanish
Ambassador, who was a friend of the Cardinal's, and who knew all about
our hero's capacities. After some considerable time spent in the service
of this dignitary, Guzman resolved to leave Rome for a tour through
Italy. Shortly before this he had encountered a Spaniard called
Sayavedra, with whom he became very friendly. Provided with about three
hundred *pistoles* and some jewels, which he had purloined from the
ambassador, Guzman set out on his travels. But Sayavedra had taken a wax
impression of Guzman's keys, and pilfered his luggage before he left, so
that if it had not been for the generosity of the ambassador he could
not have left Rome. At Siena, however, Guzman fell in with Sayavedra
once more, who entreated him to pardon his perfidy, and offered to
become his servant. Guzman, who was sorry for his miserable condition,
agreed to the proposal, and the pair, going to Florence, began to
concert measures for improving their position. It was bruited abroad
that Guzman was a nephew of the Spanish Ambassador, arid he even had the
insolence to present himself at Court, where he was received by the
Grand Duke in that capacity. Here he met a charming widow of great
wealth, with whom he fell violently in love. But her relatives, making
inquiries about him, discovered that he had once begged in the streets
of Rome, and he was forced to leave the city. At Bologna he gained a
good deal of money at play, and on arriving at Milan he and Sayavedra
took apartments in that city and cast about for some means of putting
their newly acquired funds to use. Here they soon fell in with a
rascally friend employed as clerk in a banker's house, and concerted

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

with him as to how they should relieve his master of his surplus wealth.
Guzman called upon the banker and told him he wished to deposit with him
about twelve thousand francs in gold. He was well received, and -the
financier entered his name and other particulars in his daybook. On his
way home he bought a gilt casket, which he filled with pieces of lead,
and, giving this to Sayavedra, along with a bag of real money, enjoined
that he should get into conversation with the landlord of the inn where
they were staying, and tell him that he was taking the cash to the
banker's house which of course he was not to do. The banker's clerk got
false keys made to fit his master's coffer, and, when the latter was at
Mass on Sunday, he opened it and placed therein the gilt casket, which,
instead of lead, now contained ten quadruples, thirty Roman crowns, and
a written account of its contents. He then counterfeited his master's
handwriting, and completed the entry in the daybook which he had begun,
making it appear that not only the casket, but all the money in the
coffer, had been credited to Guzman.

On the Monday Guzman called at the banker's and asked him very politely
to return the cash that had been sent to him a few days before. The man
naturally denied that any sum had been lodged with him at all,
where-upon Guzman made so great an outcry that a large crowd collected,
and the quarrel assumed such a serious aspect that a constable appeared
on the scene, accompanied by the landlord of the inn at which Guzman was
staying. Guzman asserted that if the banker's books were examined the
sum he mentioned would be found noted in them, and on the daybook being
produced this was proved to be the case. The wretched banker admitted
that part

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

of the writing was in his own hand, and this was sufficient to incense
the crowd, with whom he had a very bad reputation for usury and sharp
practice. Guzman, too, was able to give a most circumstantial account of
the contents of the coffer, which, on being opened, was found, to the
banker's amazement, to contain the gilt casket he spoke of and the exact
sum named by him, including even the various coinages he had enumerated
and the written note of its contents. The landlord was able to
corroborate Guzman's ownership of the casket, and as the evidence seemed
conclusive the local magistrate awarded him the money, which he divided
with his confederates.

Guzman now resolved to return to Genoa for the purpose of being revenged
upon the relatives who had treated him so scurvily upon his previous
visit to that city. Disguising himself as a Spanish abbot of
consequence, he put up at the best inn of the place, and his relatives,
learning of his arrival, and of the pomp he displayed, hastened to pay
their respects to him. They failed to identify him with the ragged and
friendless urchin who had sought their assistance some years before, and
his uncle even retailed the adventure of the devils to him as if it had
been played upon an impostor. Guzman completely gained their confidence,
and as he had plenty of money to spare they readily entrusted to his
keeping a valuable collection of jewels, which he told them a friend
desired to borrow for his wedding ceremony. With these he and Sayavedra
made off to Spain, but on the way the latter fell ill of a fever, and,
rushing on the deck of the galley, threw himself overboard and was
drowned.

Guzman, reaching his native country, after a number

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

of adventures arrived in Madrid, where he sold his jewels to a rich
merchant, who, believing him to be a person of consequence, gave him his
daughter in marriage. The merchant relied upon Guzman's supposed wealth
to further his financial operations, Guzman relied upon his
father-in-law's equally supposititious resources, and as the extravagant
young wife relied on both, all were soon plunged into bankruptcy. The
shock was too much for the lady, and she expired, but her cunning parent
succeeded in saving sufficient from the wreck to commence business once
more.

Guzman, however, was tired of the world of finance, and decided to
invest the remainder of his ill-gotten gains in studying for the Church.
With this object in view, he betook himself to the university of Alcala
de Henares, where he took his Bachelor of Arts degree, and after four
years hard reading at divinity only awaited a benefice to permit him to
graduate as a full-fledged priest, when evil influences once more began
to beset him. He made the acquaintance of a lady who had a family of
daughters, with one of whom he became infatuated, and whom he married.
The pair betook themselves to Madrid, where they embarked upon an
adventurous career, after some years of which the lady eloped, taking
with her everything of value which she could lay hands upon. By this
time Guzman had presented himself to his mother, who, so far from
dissuading him from his evil courses, assisted him in his schemes of
roguery, so that shortly, going from bad to worse, he found himself
doomed to a long period of servitude in the royal galleys. But here he
was able to assist the authorities in discovering a mutiny, for which he
was rewarded with his freedom.

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

At this stage we take our leave of the most consummate rogue in fiction;
but if Guzman de Alfarache is perhaps the most wily scoundrel in the
records of romance, he is certainly one of the most original and
amusing. It is noticeable, however, that his career, on the whole, was
not a remunerative one, and that when he makes his farewell bow to us he
is no better off than when we first encountered him. Perhaps the most
amusing thing about his narrative is the sham propriety of tone in which
it is couched-a style which was almost slavishly copied by Le Sage in
his *Gil Blas,* who was not only obliged to this novel for its general
atmosphere, but for many of the incidents which occur in his celebrated
work.

 

Conclusion

We have trodden the ways of Spanish story, sublime, mock-heroic, and
humorous. Perhaps no chapter in the world's literature is so rich in
colour, or displays such a variety of mood and sentiment. Still the
key-note is one of noble and dignified beauty, of chivalrous
distinction, of exquisite propriety, courteous, immaculate, and
unspotted by vulgarity or sordid meanness. The wine-cup of Spanish
romance is filled with the heart's blood of a nation august, knightly,
imaginative, a people who have preferred ideals to gross realities, and
the heights of national aristocracy to the deserts of false democracy
"Poor Spain!" How often does the Anglo-Saxon utter the phrase in
complacent self-assurance? With the solace of such a treasure-house of
poetic and romantic wealth as she possesses, Spain may well rest in
assured hope of the return of the brave days in praise of which her
trovadores struck the lyre and her poets sang in stately

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

epic. Poor Spain! Nay, golden Spain-enchanted cavern, glowing with the
spoil of song, the rainbow treasure of legend, and the gem-like radiance
of immortal romance!

Her citizens, imperial spirits,  
Rule the present from the past;  
On all this world of men inherits  
Their seal is set.
