[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Zuñi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](zft30)  [Next](zft32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE HERMIT MÍTSINA

When all was new, and the gods dwelt in the ancient places, long, long
before the time of our ancients, many were the gods-some destined for
good and some for evil or for the doing of things beneath understanding.
And those of evil intent, so painfully bad were they to become that not
in the company and council of the precious beloved of the *Kâkâ* (the
Order of the Sacred Drama) could they be retained.

Thus it happened, in the times of our ancients, long, long ago, that
there dwelt all alone in the Cañon of the Pines, southeast of Zuñi,
Mítsina the Hermit. Of evil understanding he; therefore it had been said
to him (by the gods): "Alone shalt thou dwell, being unwise and evil in
thy ways, until thou hast, through much happening, even become worthy to
dwell amongst us." Thus it was that Mítsina lived alone in his house in
the Cañon of the Pines.

Sometimes when a young man, dressed in very fine apparel (wearing his
collars of shell, and turquoise earrings, and other precious things
which were plentiful in the days of our ancients), would be out hunting,
and chanced to go through the Cañon of the Pines and near to the house
of Mítsina, he would hear the sounds of gaming from within; for, being
alone, the hermit whiled away his time in playing at the game of sacred
arrows (or cane-cards).

{p. 386}

Forever from the ceiling of his house there hung suspended his
basket-drum, made of a large wicker bowl, over the mouth of which was
stretched tightly a soft buckskin, even like the basket-drums which we
use in the playing of cane-cards today, and which you know are suspended
with the skin-side downward from the ceilings of the gaming rooms in the
topmost houses of our town. Though the one he had was no better than
those we have today, save that it was larger and handsomer perhaps, yet
he delighted to call it his cloud canopy, bethinking himself of the
drum-basket of his former associates, the gods, which is even the
rounded sky itself, with the clouds stretched across it. Forever upon
the floor of his house there lay spread a great buffalo robe, the skin
upward dressed soft and smooth, as white as corn-flour, and painted with
the many-colored symbols and counting marks of the game, even as our
own. But he delighted to call it his sacred terraced plain,\[1\]
bethinking himself of the robe-spread of the gods, which is even the
outspread earth itself, bordered by terraced horizons, and diversified
by mountains, valleys, and bright places, which are

\[1. The words "terrace," "sacred terrace," "terraced plain"
(*awithluiane*, *awithluian-pewine*), and the like, wherever they occur,
refer to the figurative expression for the earth in the Zuñi rituals
addressed to the gods, where they are used as more nearly conforming to
the usage of the gods. The symbol of the earth on the sacred altars is a
terraced or zigzag figure or decoration, and the same figure appears in
their carvings and other ornamental work. The disgraced god Mítsina
applied the term to the robe spread out as the bed for his game. It may
be stated in further explanation that the country in which the Zuñis
have wandered and lived for unnumbered generations, and where they still
dwell, is made {footnote p. 387} up largely of mesas, or flat-top
mountains or elevations, rising one above another and showing as
terraces on the horizon. Beheld at great distances, or in the evening,
these mountain terraces are mere silhouettes and serve to exaggerate the
zigzag spaces of light between them. As the conventional sacred emblem
for the earth is a terrace, outspread or upreaching, as the case may be,
so the conventional sacred emblem for the sky is an inverted terrace.

To the gods the whole earth is represented as having seemed so small
that they invariably spoke of it as the terraced plain, and in their
playing of this game they are supposed to have used it as the bed for
the game, as the Zuñi people used the outspread buffalo robe for the
purpose.\]

{p. 387}

the symbols and game marks whereby the gods themselves count up the
score of their game.

Hearing these sounds of the game in passing, the young man would
naturally draw near and listen. Though all alone, every time he made a
good throw Mítsina would exclaim "*Her-r-r-r!*" and as the canes struck
the skin of the drum-basket above, *tcha-le-le*, *tcha-le-le*, it would
sound; and *ke-le-le* they would rattle as they fell on the robe below.
"Ha! ha!" old Mítsina would exclaim, as if triumphantly to some opponent
in the game, "*Kohakwa iyathlokyai!*" as much as to say: "Good for you,
old fellow! The white-corn symbol fell uppermost!"

"Oh!" the young man would exclaim as he listened. "Oh!"--and, wishing to
learn more about the matter, he would stealthily climb up the ladder and
peer down through the skyhole. Old Mítsina would catch sight of him, be
sure of that, and greet him most cordially, calling to him: "Come in,
come in, my fine young fellow, come in; let's have a game!"

Now, he had practised so long that he had

{p. 388}

acquired more skill than anyone else throughout the world-at least among
mortals; so that when any of the young men chanced to play with him, he
invariably lost, poor fellow! Hanging on the pole along the north side
of Mítsina's house were the necklaces, embroidered mantles, and
turquoises, and all sorts of treasures which he had won in this way; and
as many on the western side, on the southern side as many, and on the
eastern side also.

When the young man came in, Mítsina would continue: "My good friend, sit
right down over there. Have you your canes today?" If the young man said
"Yes," he would say "Ha! very well." Or, if he said "No," "Never mind,"
Mítsina would say; "here are some," producing a very fine set of
polished canes. The young man, being thus pressed, would stake perhaps
his necklace or his earrings, and the game would begin. Losing them, he
would stake his clothing, his bows and arrows-in fact, everything he had
about him. You know how it is with gamesters when they have lost a great
deal and wish to get it back again? Well, so it was then. When the young
man had lost everything, he would bow his head on his hand, and sit
thinking. Then old Mítsina, with a jolly, devil-may-care manner, would
say: "Bet your left thigh. I'll put all you have lost and more, too, on
that." The young man would say to himself, with a sigh of relief: "What
an old fool you are!" and reply: "All right! I will take your bet."
Alas! the one thigh he bet is lost; then the

{p. 389}

other goes the same way; then one of his sides and arms; losing which,
he bet the other, and so on, until he had bet away his whole body,
including his head. Then in utter despair he would exclaim: "Do with me
as thou wilt. I am thy slave." And old Mítsina with the same
devil-may-care manner would catch him up, take him out to the back of
his house and wring his neck that he might not go back and report his
losses to his people.

Again, some other well-equipped young man would be passing that way, and
hearing the sound made by the solitary player, and being attracted
thereby, would be drawn in the same way into the game, would lose
everything, and old Mítsina would wring his neck and keep his treasures.

Thus it was in the days of the ancients. Great were the losses of the
young men, and many of them perished.

Well, one day little Áhaiyúta and Mátsailéma--the War-gods of peace
times--who dwelt, as you know, where their shrine now stands on Face
Mountain, with their old grandmother,--went out hunting rabbits and
prairie-dogs. It chanced that in following the rabbits along the cliffs
of a side cañon they came into the Cañon of the Pines, near where the
house of Mítsina stood. Presently they heard the sounds of his game.
"*Hu, hu!*" the old fellow would exclaim as he cast his canes into the
air. *Ke-le-le-le* they would rattle as they fell on the skin.

"Uh!" exclaimed Áhaiyúta, the elder. "Brother younger, listen."

{p. 390}

The younger listened. "By my eyes exclaimed he, "it is someone playing
at cane-cards. Let's go and have a peep at him." So they climbed the
ladder and peered in through the skyhole.

Presently, old Mítsina espied them, and called out: "Ha! my little
fellows; glad to see you today! How are you? Come in, come in! I am
dying for a game; I was playing here all by myself."

The two little War-gods clambered down the ladder, and old Mítsina
placed blankets for them, invited them most cordially to sit down, and
asked if they would like to play a game. Nothing loth they, seeing all
the fine things hanging, round his room; so out from their girdles they
drew their cane-cards, for those, as you know, they always carried with
them.

Perhaps I have not told you that even the basket-drum old Mítsina played
with was fringed with the handsome long turquoise earrings which he had
won, and even under the robe on which he played there were piled one
over another, in a great flat heap, the finest of the necklaces gathered
from those whom he had defeated in playing and then slain.

"What would you like to put up?" asked the old fellow, pointing around
his room--particularly to the basket-drum fringed with turquoises--and
lifting the robe and showing just enough of the necklaces underneath it
to whet the appetites of the little War-gods.

{p. 391}

"We've nothing fine enough to bet for these things," said they ruefully.

"O ho!" cried Mítsina. "No matter, no matter at all, my boys. Bet your
bows and arrows and clothing; if you like, bet everything you have on,
and I'll put up that poleful there on the north side of my room."

"Good! good! tell him all right," whispered the younger brother to the
elder.

So the elder agreed, chuckling to himself, for it was rarely that a man
was found who could beat the little War-gods in a game. And they began
their playing. How the turquoises rattled as they threw their canes! How
the canes jingled and thumped as they fell on the robe!

The game was merry and long, and well played on both sides; but the poor
little War-gods lost. Their countenances fell; but old Mítsina, with a
merry twinkle in his eyes, exclaimed: "Oh pshaw! never mind, never
mind!"

"Yes," said the two War-gods, but how in the world are we ever going
back to our grandmother in this plight?"--glancing down over their bare
bodies, for they had bet even the clothing off their backs. "What else
can we bet? How can we win back what we have lost?"

"Bet your left thighs," said the old hermit.

They thought a moment, and concluded they would do so. So the game was
staked again and begun and the canes rattled merrily; but they lost
again. Then old Mítsina suggested that they bet their other thighs. They
did so and again lost.

{p. 392}

Then he suggested they should bet their left sides, hoping forthwith to
get hold of their hearts, but the young War-gods were crafty. The elder
one exclaimed: "All right!" but the younger one said: "Goodness! as for
you, you can bet your left side if you want to, but I'll bet my right,
for my heart is on my left side, and who ever heard of a man betting
away his heart!"

"Just as you like," said Mítsina, "but if you'll bet your bodies up to
your necks I will stake all you have lost and all I have besides," said
he, looking around on his fine possessions.

Done cried the War-gods. And again they played and again lost. Then they
had nothing left but their heads and ears and eyes to bet. Finally they
concluded to bet these also, for said they to one another: "What good
will our heads do us, even though they be the crown-pieces of our being,
without the rest?"

They played again, but the poor fellows lost their heads also. "Alas!
alas! do as thou wilt with us," exclaimed the little War-gods, with
rueful countenances.

Old Mítsina, locking them up in a small recess of his house, went out
and gathered before his front door a great quantity of dry wood. Then he
tied the little fellows hand and foot, and laid them near by,--not near
enough to burn them up, but near enough so that they would scorch,--and
lighted the fire, to have the pleasure of roasting them. When they began
to brown and sizzle a little they writhed and howled with pain, but they

{p. 393}

were tough and quite bad, as you know, and this did not kill them.

Who can hide a thing from the eyes of the gods? The elder brothers of
these two foolish little War-gods, Áhaiyúta and Mátsailéma, those who
dwelt on Thunder Mountain, became aware of what was going on. "Come,
brother younger," said the elder, strapping on his quiver and taking his
bow in hand, "come, let us off to old Mítsina's house and teach him a
lesson!" So, in a twinkling they were climbing down the mountain,
speeding across the wide valley, and threading their way through the
Cañon of the Pines.

Mítsina had grown tired of watching the poor little War-gods and had
gone in to have another little game, and there he was pitching his
cane-cards and talking to himself, as usual. The two gods hauled their
unfortunate brothers away from the fire, and, climbing the ladder,
peered in. Mítsina espied them, and as usual invited them in to a game.
With as jolly an air as his own they accepted his challenge and sat
down. Mítsina offered to bet all his fine things hanging on the north
side of the house. "What will you put up, my little fellows?" asked he.

"If you will include those ugly little devils that we saw sizzling
before the fire when we came in, we will bet you everything we have with
us," said they.

"Good! good! haul them in!" shouted Mítsina.

The War-gods scrambled out of the house, and, by no means gently,
dragged their wretched

{p. 394}

little brothers in by the heels and dumped them down on the floor to
show their indifference, sat down, and began to play. They bet their
weapons, holding up the knife of war which they carried, the point of
lightning itself fatal in power,--splitter of mountains and overcomer of
demons and men alike.

Old Mítsina, when told of the power of the weapons, became doubtful as
to his company, but presently fell to and played with a will. He lost.
Then he put up all the rest of his goods hanging on the other side of
the room. Again he lost, and again, even the turquoises hanging from the
basket-drum, the necklaces under his robe, and the things he played
with, and getting wild with excitement, sure that his luck would return,
followed out the plan he had so often suggested to others, and bet away
his thighs, then his sides and arms, then his head and ears, excepting
his eyes, and last of all his very eyes themselves. Each time the young
War-gods won. The old gambler let his hands fall by his sides, and
dropped his head on his breast, sick with humiliation and chagrin.

"Now, my brother," said the elder to the younger, "what shall we do with
this beast?"

"I don't know," said the other. "We can't kill him; yet, if we leave him
to go his own way, he will gamble and gamble without ceasing, and make
no end of trouble. Suppose we make a good man of him."

"How?" asked the other.

"Pluck out his eyes."

{p. 395}

Capital!" exclaimed the first. So, while one of them held the old fellow
down, the other gouged out his eyes, and with pain and horror he utterly
forgot in unconsciousness (swooned away).

The two elder War-gods set their younger brothers on their feet, and all
four of them joined in clearing out the treasures and magnificent
possessions which Mítsina through all these years had won from his
victims; and these they took away with them that by their sacred
knowledge they might change them into blessings for the faithful of
their children among men, and thus return, as it were, what had been
lost. Then away they went, leaving old Mítsina still as witless as a
dead man, to his fate.

By-and-by the old man came to his senses, and raising himself up, tried
to look around, but, forsooth, he could not see.

"What in the world has happened? What a fearful pain I have in my
temples said he. What is the matter? Is it night?"

Then gradually his situation came to him. He uttered a groan of pain and
sorrow, and, putting out his hand, felt the wall and raised himself by
it. Then he crept along, feeling his way to the window, not yet quite
certain whether he had been dreaming all this and it was still night, or
whether he had really lost everything and been bereft of his eyes by
those midgets. When he put his hand into the window, however, he felt
the warm sunlight streaming in, and knew that it was still day, and that
it was all true.

{p. 396}

In feeling there he chanced to touch a little package of pitch which had
been laid in the window. He felt it all over with both hands, but could
not quite tell what it was. Then he put it against his cheek, but was
still uncertain; then he rubbed it, and smelt of it. "Pitch! pitch! as I
live!" said he. "I have often lighted this when it was dark, and been
able to see. Now, maybe, if I light it this time, I shall be able to see
again." He felt his way all round the room to the fireplace, and after
burning his fingers two or three times in feeling for coals, he found a
sliver and held it in the coals and ashes until he heard it begin to
sputter and crackle. Then he lighted the pitch with it. Eyeless though
he was, the fumes from this medicine of the woodlands restored to him a
kind of vision. "Good!" cried the old fellow, "I see again!" But when he
looked around, he saw nothing as it had been formerly; and his thoughts
reverted to the great City of the Gods (*Kothluellakwin*); and, as it
were, he could see the way thither. So he turned toward his door, and
with a sigh gave up his old place of abode, relinquished all thought of
his possessions, gave up his former bad inclinations, and turned
westward toward the City of the Gods and Souls.

As he went along holding his light before him and following it, he sang
a mournful song. The Birds, hearing this song, flocked around him, and
as he went on singing, exclaimed to one another: "Ha! ha! the old
wretch; he has lost his eyes! Served him right! Let's put out his light
for him."

{p. 397}

Now, before that time, strange as it may seem, the Eagles and even the
Crows were as white as the foam on warring waters. The Eagles were so
strong that they thrust the other birds away, and began to pounce down
at Mítsina's light, trying to blow it out with their wings. Thluh!
thluh! they would flap into the light; but still it would not go out;
and they only singed their feathers and blackened their wings and tails
with smoke. In looking at one another they saw what sad plight they were
in. "Good gracious, brothers!" exclaimed some of them to the others, "we
have made a fine mess of our white plumage!" And they gave it up.

Then the Crows rushed in and flapped against the light, but they could
not put it out; and although they grew blacker and blacker, they would
not give it up. So they became as black as crows are now; and ever since
then eagles have been speckled with brown and black, and crows have been
black, even to the tips of their beaks. And whenever in the Sacred Drama
Dance of our people old Mítsina appears, he sings the doleful song and
carries the light of pitch pine. He goes naked, with the exception of a
wretched old cloth at his loins; and he wears a mask with deep holes for
eyes, blood streaming from them.

Thus shortens my story.

{p. 398}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Twins Of War And Chance, Áhaiyúta And Mátsailéma, Fared
With The Unborn-Made Men Of The Underworld](zft32)
