[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit08)  [Next](bit10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI

### THE SYSTEM OF MYSTICISM

GENERAL CHARACTER--THE KÂLA CHAKRA SYSTEM; ITS ORIGIN AND DOGMAS.

THE contact of the Buddhists with their various pagan neighbours
gradually introduced into their creed ideas foreign to Buddhism, and the
consequence of this was the rise of a new system full of mystic
modifications. We see already in the later Mahâyâna schools,
particularly in the Yogâchârya branch, a more general yielding to the
current superstitious notions; but the principles of mystic theology
such as we find them in the actual Buddhism of the present day have
chiefly been developed in the most modern system, which originated
independently of the earlier ones, in Central Asia, Its theories were
afterwards even engrafted upon. later productions by a subsequent
incorporation, to such a degree, that without a knowledge of this
system, we should often

{p. 47

be almost at a loss how to understand the Mahâyâna sacred books.

European orientalists use to apply to this third system the name of
Yogâchârya; and if we bear in mind, that Yoga means in Sanskrit
"abstract devotion, by which supernatural faculties are acquired,"\[1\]
it becomes evident that they were led to do so by the conformity of the
name with the system to which they applied it. But Wassiljew has clearly
proved in his work, that Yogâchârya is but a branch of the Mahâyâna
system, and he therefore substituted the name of "Mysticism," which I
have also adopted. This name was chosen because this system places
meditation, the recital of certain prayers, and the practise of mystical
rites above the observance of precepts and even above moral deportment.

Mysticism appears for the first time as a specific system in the tenth
century of our era; it is called in the sacred books Dus kyi khorlo, in
Sanskrit Kâla Chakra, "the circle of time."\[2\] It is reported to have
originated in the fabulous country Sambhala (Tib. Dejung),,source or
origin of happiness." Csoma, from careful investigations, places this
country beyond the Sir Deriáu (Yaxartes) between 45° and 50° north
latitude. It was first known in India in the year 965 A.D.; and it was
introduced,

\[1. Wilson, "Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms," see the article
Yoga.

2\. See Csoma, "On the origin of the Kâla Chakra system," Journ. As.
Soc. Beng., Vol. II., p. 57. "Grammar," 192. "Analysis," As. Res., Vol.
XX., pp. 488, 564. Compare also Burnouf, "Introduction," Section V.
Hodgson, "Notice on Buddhist Symbols," R. As. Soc., Vol. XVIII, p. 397.
Wilson, "Sketch of the Religious Sects of the Hindus," As, Res., Vol.
XVII., p. 216-29.\]

{p. 48}

they go on to say, into Tibet from India viâ Kashmír, in the year 1025
A.D. I cannot believe it accidental that the beginning of the Tibetan
era of counting time, about which I shall have occasion to say some
words in a later chapter, coincides with the introduction of this
system. I am rather inclined to think (though as far as I know, this has
not yet been pointed out as particularly important) that the readiness
with which this system was received made it appear at once so important,
that events were dated from its introduction.

The principal rites and formulae of mysticism and the theories about
their efficacy bear an extraordinary analogy to the Shamanism of the
Siberians, and are, besides, almost identical with the Tantrika ritual
of the Hindus; for it promises endowment with supernatural faculties far
superior to the energy to be derived from virtue and abstinence, and
capable of leading to the union with the deity, to the man who keeps in
mind that all three worlds exist in the imagination only and regulates
his actions accordingly. Its theories are laid down in two series of
works, which are known under the collective titles of Dhârânîs (in
Tibetan Zung), and Tantras (in Tibetan Gyut). The Dhârânî formulæ may be
of considerable antiquity, and it is not unlikely that already the
Mahâyâna leaders took Some of them into their books. The Tantras are of
a more modern date, especially those of them, in which the observance of
magical practices is carried to a point which is an extreme even for
mysticism in any form. Wilson believes Tantrika notions to have
originated in India in the early

{p. 49}

centuries of Christianity, but the present Hindu ritual seems to him not
to date back beyond the tenth century; about at the same time the
Tantras were probably introduced also into the Buddhist sacred
literature. Their modern origin is proved by the statement of the
Tibetan autorities {*sic*}respecting the appearance of the Dus kyi
khorlo system, which makes the deliverance from metempsychosis dependent
upon the knowledge of the Tantras. So at least says Padma Karpo, a
Tibetan Lama, who lived in the sixteenth century, in his description of
these doctrines. "He who does not know the Tantrika principles and all
such, is a wanderer in the orb of transmigration and is out of the way
(path) of the supreme triumphator, Sanskrit Bhagavan Vajradhara."\[1\]
Another and indirect proof of their recent origin is the fact, that
there are much fewer works on Tantrika principles existing in the
Chinese language; had the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims who travelled in
India still during the seventh century A.D. found such treatises (had
they existed at all, they would soon have become acquainted with them),
they would certainly have brought them home in order to have them
translated into the Chinese language; and then, also, in this particular
branch the Chinese Buddhist literature would be richer than the Tibetan,
whilst the reverse is actually the case. Besides, it is also reported,
that the most expert Indian magicians, or Tantrists, did not exist till
after the travels of the

\[1. The claim that Sâkyamuni is their original author, is undoubtedly
inadmissable, both on account of their style and contents, as well as of
historical dates.\]

{p. 50}

Chinese pilgrims in India, and that the most important Tantras had been
translated into Chinese during the reign of the northern Song dynasty
which ruled from the years 960 to 1127 A.D.

Kâla Chakra is also the title of the principal work of this system; it
stands at the head of the Gyut division of the Kanjur, as well as, the
Tanjur, and was explained and repeatedly commented on by several learned
men who lived in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, of
whom the most celebrated were Puton or Buston, Khetup, and Padmo Karpo.

I have arranged the dogmas propounded by mysticism in four groups.

I. There is a first, chief Buddha, Âdi Buddha, in Tibetan Chogi dangpoi
sangye, who is without beginning or end; none of the human Buddhas have
arrived at the Buddhaship for the first time, and the Sambhogakâya; or
body of blissfulness of the Buddhas has existed from all eternity and
will never perish. This first of the Buddhas is called in the Tantras
Vajradhara (in Tibetan Dorjechang or Dorjedzin), and Vajrasattva (in
Tibetan Dorjesempa).\[1\] As Vajradhara he is epitheted "the supreme
Buddha, the supreme triumphator, the lord of all mysteries,\[2\] the
prime minister of all Tathâgatas, the being who is without beginning or
end, the being who has the soul of a diamond (Vajrasattva)." It is he to
whom the subdued and conquered evil spirits swear that

\[1. Dorjechang and Dorjedzin. have the same meaning, "holding the
diamond (Vajra)." Sempa (sem*s*-pa) means "the soul."

2\. Sangbai Dagpo, "concealed lord," in Sanskrit Guhyapati.\]

{p. 51}

they will no longer hinder the propagation of the faith of the Buddha,
nor in future do any mischief to man. To Vajrasattva the epithets are
given of "the supreme intelligence, the chief (Tsovo), the president of
the five Dhyâni Buddhas."\[1\] But Vajradhara and Vajrasattva are also
considered as two different, beings, as they occur in several treatises
both at the same time, the one putting questions, the other answering
them. Their respective position may be explained the best by supposing
Vajradhara to be too great a god and too much lost in divine quietude to
favour man's undertakings and works with his assistance, and that he
acts through the god Vajrasattva, who would be to him in the relation of
a Dhyâni Buddha to his human Buddha. This explanation is also supported
by the epithet of "president of the Dhyâni Buddhas."

By the name of Dhyâni Buddha,\[2\] "Buddha of contemplation," or by the
term Anupadaka, "without parents," celestial beings are designated
corresponding to the human Buddhas teaching upon earth, who are called
"Mânushi Buddhas." The Buddhists believe that each Buddha when preaching
the law to men, manifests himself at the same time in the three worlds
which their cosmographical system acknowledges. In the world of
*desire*, the lowest of the three to which the earth belongs, he appears
in

\[1. See Csoma, As. Res., Vol., 20, pp. 496, 503, 549, 550. Journ. As.
Soc. Beng., Vol. II., p. 57. Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," p. 205.

2\. Respecting the theory of the Dhyâni Buddhas see Schmidt,
"Grundlehren," Mem. de l'Acad. de Petersb., Vol. I, p. 104. Burnouf,
"Introduction," pp. 116, 221, 525, 627. "Lotus de la Bonne Loi," p. 400.
The more theistical ideas of the Nepalese about their origin are noknot
wn {*sic--unknown?*} to the Tibetan Buddhists.\]

{p. 52}

human shape. In the world of *forms* he manifests himself in a more
sublime form as Dhyâni Buddha. In the highest world, the one of the
*incorporeal beings*, he has neither shape nor name. The Dhyâni Buddhas
have the faculty of creating from themselves by virtue of Dhyâni, or
abstract meditation, an equally celestial son, a Dhyâni Bôdhisattva, who
after the death of a Mânushi Buddha is charged with the continuance of
the work undertaken by the departed Buddha till the next epoch of
religion begins, when again a subsequent Mânushi Buddha appears.\[1\]
Thus, to each human Buddha belongs a Dhyâni Buddha and a Dhyâni
Bôdhisattva,\[2\] and the unlimited number of the former also involves
an equally unlimited number of the latter.

Out of this vast number the five Buddhas of the actual period of the
universe are particularly worshipped. Four of these Buddhas have already
appeared; Sâkyamuni is the fourth and the last who has appeared till
now; his Dhyâni Buddha is Amitâbha, in Tibetan Odpagmed; his Dhyâni
Bôdhisattva Avolôkitêsvara, or Padmapâni, in Tibet generally implored
under the name of Chenresi. To the Dhyâni Buddhas of these five Mânushi
Buddhas is added, as a sixth and the highest in rank, Vajrasattva. To
him or occasionally also to Amitâbha who then takes his place, the
Tibetans attribute the function of the "God

\[1. The Buddhas am men and subjected to the physical conditions
established for human creatures; it is in consequence of this principle
that the stay of every Buddha upon earth is limited by the laws which
fix for the period during which he appears, the life-time of man, which
varies from 80,000 to 10 years. When this period had elapsed he dies, or
as the Buddhists say, he returns to Nirvâna.

2\. He has, besides, a female companion, a Sakti.\]

{p. 53}

above all." One of these two divine persons is addressed in such
ceremonies as are believed to grant success to undertakings, and the
belief in the absolute necessity of their assistance is so positive that
a Lama told my brother that "a ceremony which does not include an
address to Dorjesempa (Vajrasattva) is similar in efficacy to a bird
which, with its wings cut, tries to fly."'

With reference to the representations of these divine persons in
drawings I am able to add the following details.

A picture on canvas received by Adolphe from Thóling, in Gnári Khórsum,
represents Vajrasattva with rosy complexion, holding the Dorje in his
right hand and a bell in his left; the latter, in Tibetan called Drilbu,
is identical in shape with those used in sacred choral songs to mark the
pauses. Vajrasattva is surrounded by various groups of gods representing
protectors of men against evil spirits.--Amitâbha is represented in all
the images I have examined, with a vivid red complexion; in a very
nicety executed picture from Mángnang in Gnári Khórsum were subjoined
beneath the seat the seven precious things, in Tibetan called Rinchen na
dun. They are:--Khorlo (Sanskr. Chakra), "the wheel;" Norbu (Sanskr.
Mani), "the precious stone;" Tsunpo, "the royal consort;" Lonpo, "the
best treasurer;" Tachog, "the

\[1. A very powerful prayer is that which concludes the address to the
Buddhas of confession, see Plates V *et seq.*-The fact of the frequent
imploration of the Dhyâni Buddhas shows that the Tibetan Buddhists
differ in this point from those of Nepál, who believe the Dhyâni Buddhas
to be absolutely inactive.\]

{p. 54}

best horse;" Langpo, "the elephant;" Maglon, "the best leader."\[1\]

II\. *Worldly* notions or phenomena dare not be selected for
contemplation; but from assiduous meditation in which any *religious*
object is analysed (Zhine lhagthong, Sankr. Vipasyana), man acquires new
faculties, provided he most earnestly concentrates his thoughts upon one
object. Such a state of calmness nd tranquillity, in Sanskrit Samatha,
occasions, however, great trouble, and it is considered as not at all
easy to concentrate the mind, this requiring long practice; but if man
has once succeeded, aided by preparatory exercises,\[2\] in bringing
himself to meditate with unmoved mind upon the deepest religious
abstractions in the four degrees of meditation, Dhyâna (in Tibetan
Samtan), he finally arrives at entire imperturbability, Samâpatti (in
Tibetan, Nyompa), which has also four gradations. First of all, a
perfect absence of all idea of individuality is the result; then secrets
and powers hitherto concealed to him become at once unveiled, and he has
now entered "the path of seeing," Thonglam; by continued, uninterrupted
meditation on the four truths, his mind becomes supernaturally pure, and
gradually rises to the most perfect states, called the Top, Tsemo (in
Sanskrit Mûrdhan), patience, Zodpa (in Sanskrit Kshânti), and the
supreme in the world (in Sanskrit Lokottaradharma).\[3\]--

\[1. Compare about them I. J. Schmidt, "Ssanaug Ssetsen," p. 471.

2\. A Tibetan mode of keeping the thoughts together, shall be noticed in
Chapter XV.

3\. See Burnouf, "Le Lotus," pp. 348, 800. Hardy, "Eastern Monachism,",
p. 270. Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," p. 149.\]

{p. 55}

This dogma is in decided contradiction to the Mahâyâna principle that
the meditation *on any object whatever* keeps man back from arriving at
the highest degree of perfection.\[1\]

III\. The recital of mystical words and sentences, the Dhâranîs (Tib.
Zung), bestows upon man every kind of bliss and obtains for him the
assistance of the Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas. These Dhâranîs\[2\] have
been decidedly adopted from the generally felt want of incantations as
remedies against fear of danger, though the Buddhists believe them to
have been delivered by Sâkyamuni, or by those Buddhas, Bôdhisattvas, and
gods over whom Dhâranîs are supposed to exercise an influence. The
number of the formulae taught by these gods is described in the sacred
books as enormous, and each is considered as equally efficacious. But
Wassiljew is of opinion that the great number alluded to most likely is
to be referred to so many verses (Gâthâs) or even single words of the
treatises which describe their powers and the ceremonies in the
performance, of which they are recited. These formulae are either short
sentences or even only a few words, as *e. g.* the names and the
epithets of the Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas. There are some Dhâranîs which
are equal to the practise of the Pâramitâs, others subdue gods and
genii, or call for Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas; some impart longevity or
accomplish every wish; others cure diseases, &c. It is even assumed,
that by a were

\[1. *See* p. 36.

2\. Compare Burnouf "Introduction," pp. 522-74. Wassiljew, 1. c., pp.
153, 193.\]

{p. 56}

uttering of the letters of which the Dhâranî is composed--nay even by
their aspect alone--power may be gained over those beings of which they
treat, or for such purposes for which they are supposed to grant help.

They dare not be altered when recited or written, as each letter has its
own magical power, and it is owing to this belief that they have not
been translated into Tibetan, and that the Tibetan alphabet has been
adapted to the exact rendering of every Sanskrit letter.'

The magical influence of words is deduced from the unreality of all
existing objects: all existence being but ideal, the name is just as
much as the object itself; consequently, if a man holds sway over a word
expressive of anything, he also disposes of the thing itself. The same
influence is also attributed to conventional signs formed by a certain
placing of the fingers, Chakja, in Sanskrit Mudrâ. All objects being
identical with reference to their nature, signs which symbolize the
attributes of a god produce the same effect as words and offerings.

IV\. The reciting of Dhârânîs, if combined with the practise of magical
rites and supported by morality and contemplation, leads to superhuman
faculties (in Sanskrit Siddhi)--nay, even to the union with the deity.
This is a doctrine which, in all probabilitity, {*sic*} has

\[1. The Sanskrit names of the Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas have been,
however, translated into Tibetan, but these names are rendered as
literally as possible. I quote as examples Amitâbha and. Odpagmed;
Manjusrî and Jamjang; Avalôkita and Chenresi; Vajrasattva and
Dorjesempa;--Vajradhara and Dorjechang.--For the alphabetical scheme of
the Sanskrit language when written with Tibetan characters *see* Csoma's
Grammar, p. 20.\]

{p. 57}

grown up very recently. The compendious books Tantra treat of this dogma
and say, that by magical arts either worldly purposes can be attained,
as longevity and riches, or also religious ones, as dominion over
malignant spirits, the aid of a Buddha or Bôdhisattva,, or the removal
by him of any doubt or uncertainty with regard to any of the dogmas. But
the chief aim is to obtain final emancipation from metempsychosis, and
acquire re-birth in Amitâbha's celestial mansion, which latter, by means
of such magical ceremonies, can be obtained already in one existence,
instead of being the reward of uninterrupted privations in an unlimited
series of existences.\[1\]

\[1. The observances in connexion with such magical arts, and the
description of magical rites, &c., is given in Chapter XV.\]

{p. 58}

{p. 59}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Historical Account of the Introduction of Buddhism
into Tibet](bit10)
