[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit09)  [Next](bit11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION II

### TIBETAN BUDDHISM

{p. 60}

{p. 61}

## CHAPTER VII

### HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHISM INTO TÍBET

EARLIEST RELIGION OP THE TIBETANS--INTRODUCTION OF BUDDHIST DOGMAS INTO
EASTERN TÍBET.--Era of King Srongtsan Gampo and King Thisrong de
tsan.--The reforms of the Lama Tsonkhapa.--PROPAGATION OF BUDDHISM INTO
CHINA, LADÁK AND EASTERN HIMÁLAYA.

BEFORE the propagation of Buddhist doctrines in Tibet the religion of
the inhabitants of this country was most probably a kind of worship
differing but little from that prevalent among all rude nations, viz. a
mingled system of idolatry and sorcery administered by priests enjoying
great reputation;and power, in consequence of their supposed intercourse
with the Gods, and presumed knowledge of the means whereby the divine
favour and assistance can be obtained. The first attempt of Buddhist
followers to extend their creed to Tibet doubtless met with general
opposition at the hands of both priesthood and people. The latter indeed
must have found it far less troublesome to pay a clerical class to
obtain a sensual prosperity for. them, than by painful discipline,

{p. 62}

combined with profound meditation, to seek salvation and eternal welfare
in a future re-birth and final emancipation from metempsychosis. In
order to attain success and the more readily impose upon the tribes they
were about to convert to a new religion, the first teachers of Buddhism
in Tibet were most probably induced to ascribe to themselves
supernatural qualities, and to yield, in minor points of discipline, to
some of the ideas of their neophytes. Many suggestions to this effect
are to be found in the sacred Tibetan books, as in the Bodhimör, and in
the history of Ssanang Ssetsen, which teems with the miraculous and
wonderful works performed by early Buddhist priests. Again, it is
related that Padma Sambhava's first labour was the subduing of the
dreadful demon who rose up in opposition to prevent his entering Tibet.
His scholars are said to have derived from the instructions he gave them
on the proper employment of charms, the power of performing most
extraordinary deeds.\[1\] Thus, they caused good harvests, and similar
prosperous events, taught the Tibetans some of the arts and sciences
which were then practised in the, more advanced civilization of China
and India (whence they came), but were discreet enough, after a while,
to attribute all their successes to the worship of the images and relies
of Sâkyamuni.

With regard to the introduction of Buddhism into the *Eastern* part of
Tibet we are now in possession of many positive data, though here also
the early history is involved

\[1. Schmidt, "Ssanang Ssetsen's Geschichte der Ostmongolen," pp. 41,
43, 355. Compare ."Forshungen," p. 136.\]

{p. 63}

in darkness and myth. The first attempts apparently led to very
unsatisfactory results; at least, the monastery which is reported to
have been erected in the year 137 B.C. on the slopes of the Kailás range
seems to have been soon abandoned and to have fallen into ruins.\[1\]
The legends attribute the conversion of the Tibetans to Buddhism to the
Dhyâni Bôdhisattva Avolôkitêsvara, the celestial son of Amitâbha, whose
Chosen land is Tibet; many of the rulers and priests who took an active
part in the consolidation of Buddhist faith in this country were
regarded by its inhabitants as incarnations of these two sacred persons.

We here give the following as a narrative of some historical facts
intimately connected with Buddhism.\[2\]

In the year 371 A.D. there, suddenly appeared five foreigners before the
king Thothori Nyan tsan, who instructed him, how he might use for the
general welfare

\[1. Lassen, "Ind. Alterthumskunde," Vol. II., p. 1072.

2\. See Csoma's Chronological Table, extracted from an historical book
written by Tisri, the regent at Lhassa in the year 1686 A.D.; in the
notes, Csoma adds further details from other original books. See his
"Grammar," pp. 181-98.--Ssanang Ssetsen, "Geschichte der Ostmongolen,"
aus dem Mongolischen übersetzt von I. J. Schmidt; Chapter III., treats
of the history of Tibet from the years 407 to 1054 A.D. The annotations
to Ssanang Ssetsen contain translations from the Bodhimör, and other
Mongolian books. "Chronologie Bouddhique, traduite du Mongol," par
Klaproth. Fragments Bouddhiques = Nouveau Journal Asiatique, 1831.--The
data of these three authors differ as far as the eleventh century, from
which period Csoma's and Klaproth's lists agree, saving a constant
diversity of two years, which results from the circumstance that the one
counts from the Tibetan era, whilst the other brings the data in
accordance with the Chinese years (see Chapter XVI.). In the text I have
adopted Csoma's dates, with the single exception of the time of Srongtan
Gampo's birth, which, it is more probable, took place in the year 617
A.D. (Klaproth and Ssanang Ssetsen), instead of the year 627. See
Köppen, "Die Religion des Buddha," Vol. II., p. 54. In the notes I have
added the dates given by Ssanang Ssetsen and Klaproth.\]

{p. 64}

of Tibet four objects, which, in the year 331 A.D.,\[1\] had fallen from
heaven, enclosed in a precious chest, but of' the intrinsic value of
which no one had hitherto entertained any adequate idea. These
instructions being given, the five foreigners at once disappeared. The
four precious objects were:--

1\. Two hands folded in prayer.

2\. A small Chorten.\[2\]

3\. A gem with an inscription of the prayer: Om mani padme hum.\[3\]

4\. The religious work Zamatog, "constructed vessel," a work on moral
subjects forming part of the Kanjur.

The king Thothori strictly obeyed the advice received from the five
foreigners,. and paid great reverence to the said four objects; by their
blessing and powerful influence he contrived to live one hundred and
nineteen years, during which time universal prosperity and welfare
prevailed throughout the kingdom.

Ssanang Ssetsen connects the introduction of Buddhism with the date of
this event; but according to Tibetan historians "the earliest period of
the propagation of Buddhism," which reached down till the end of the
tenth

\[1. Ssanang Ssetsen, anno 367, calls this king Lhatotori; Csoma's
authorities have Thothori Nyan tsan. The above is the version according
to Ssanang Ssetsen; Csoma, p. 194, relates 'that a voice was heard from
heaven, saying, that after so, many generations (in the seventh
century), the contents of the book should be made known'.--It is not
stated whence these five men proceeded, but I believe them, for reasons
which will hereafter become apparent, to have been Chinese Buddhist
priests. *See* p. 68.

2 About Chortens, *see* Chapter XIII.

3 See Chapter X.\]

{p. 65}

century A.D., begins with King Srongtsan Gampo, who was born in the year
617 A.D. and died 698.\[1\] This king is highly extolled by them on
account of his successful efforts in propagating Buddhism. He even went
so far as to send to India, in the year 632 A.D., his prime-minister,
Thumi Sambhota, with sixteen companions, who had orders to study
carefully the sacred Buddhist books and the Indian language; the members
of this mission were also instructed to bring back to Tibet a complete
system of the alphabet as used in India, with a view to its being
hereafter adapted to the Tibetan language.\[2\] After the safe return of
the party from a journey which is described as fraught with incredible
difficulties, Thumi Sambhota constructed the Tibetan letters from the
Devanâgari alphabet; whereupon King Srongtsan Gampo ordered the sacred
Indian books treating on Buddhists doctrines to the translated into
Tibetan.\[3\] At the same time he

\[1. Respecting this distinction of the two periods see Csoma's Grammar,
p. 196, Note 18.--The year of Srongtsan's death is given on the
authority of Ssanang and Klaproth; in Csoma's list it is not mentioned.

2 A previous mission is said to have been compelled by the malignant
spirits to return after reaching the frontier. For Tibetan accounts of
the attempts of Srongtsan to form a Tibetan alphabet, see Schmidt's
notes to "Ssanang Ssetsen," p. 326.

3\. Respecting the striking resemblance of the Tibetan capital letters
to the ancient Devanâgari characters much interesting information is
furnished in the comparative tables given by Hodgson in his "Notices,"
As. Res., Vol. XVI., p. 420. Schmidt, "Ueber den Ursprung der tib.
Schrift," Mém. de l'Acad. de Pet., Vol. I., p. 41. Csoma, "Grammar," p.
204.--Thumi Sambhota is said to be an incarnation of the Bodhisattva
Manjusrî. This divine person, in Tibetan called Jamjang, is to be viewed
in a double sense. He appears to be an historical personage who taught
Buddhist doctrines in Népal in the 8th or 9th century A.D.; but he is
also worshipped as a mythological person of the divine nature of a
Bôdhisattva (his Sakti is Sarasvatî, Tib. Ngagi lhamo), who is believed
to have inspired with his divine intelligence many a person who has much
contributed to the propagation of Buddhist theories. He is {footnote p.
66} the God of wisdom, swinging the "sword of wisdom" (Tib. Shesrab
ralgri) with a famed point to dissipate the darkness among men. Chinese
books say of his faculties: "When he preaches the great law, every demon
is subjugated, every error that may deceive man is dissipated, and there
is not a heretic but returns to his duty." Manjusrî is also "the ruler
of the Year," which epithet refers to the first day of the year being
consecrated to him. Foe koue ki, p. 116. Compare Hodgson,
"Classification of the Nevars," in Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. XII., p.
216. Burnouf, "Le Lotus," pp. 496-511. Lassen, "Indische
Alterthumskunde," Vol. III., p, 777.\]

{p. 66}

issued severe laws with the intent of abolishing once and for ever some
of the rude manners of his subjects.

In all these praiseworthy actions King Srongtsan Gampo was most
energetically supported by his two wives, one of whom was a Nepalese the
other a Chinese princess; both of them, who throughout their life-time
proved most faithful votaries to the faith of Buddha, are worshipped
either under the general name of Dolma (in Sanskrit Târâ), or under the
respective names of Dolkar and Doljang. These princesses are said to
have brought with them to Tibet a variety of valuable religious books,
with wonderful miracle-working images, and relies of Sâkyamuni, besides
building numerous temples and colleges.\[1\] Attracted by these acts of
benevolence, which soon became widely known, many foreign priests
settled in Tibet during the lifetime of these

\[1. In pictures they are both represented in identical attitudes, the
right foot hanging down over the throne, the right hand holding the blue
lotus Utpala (*Nelumbium speciosum*, "Encyclopaedia of India," by
Balfour, p. 1291, a plant which occurs in Kashmir and Persia). But the
complexion is different; Dolkar is of white colour, Doljang of green
colour. Doljang is also implored by women for fecundity, and it is in
allusion to this virtue that in a picture of ours a flat dish in which
apples are heaped up, is drawn at their feet, The fullest Tibetan
account of the legends concerning these deities is found in the Mani
Kambum (see p. 84) and in a book mentioned to Adolph to be entitled, "a
clear mirror of royal pedigree." A hymn addressed to Doljang is given by
Klaproth, "Reise in den Kaukasus," Vol. I., p. 215.\]

{p. 67}

princesses, and thus contributed to a more general knowledge of
Buddhism.

Under the successors of King Srongtsan Gampo the religion did not
greatly flourish, but under one of them, Thisrong de tsan, who lived in
the years 728-786 A.D.\[1\] Buddhism began to revive, owing to the
useful regulations proclaimed by this king. He it was who successfully
crushed an attempt made by the chiefs during his minority to suppress
the new creed, and it is principally due to him that the Buddhist faith
became henceforth permanently established. He induced the learned Pandit
Santa Rakshita (tib. Zhiva tso), commonly called Bôdhisattva, to leave
Bengál and settle in Tibet; and at his recommendation the great Guru
Padma Sambhava (in Tibetan Padma jungue, or Urgyen) from Kafiristán
(Udyâna), who was famed far and wide for his extraordinary knowledge of
Dhârânîs and their application and rites, also changed his residence to
become a Tibetan subject. The Indian sages who were now induced to
settle in Tibet for ever superseded the influence of the Chinese priests
and the doctrines propounded by them. The latter had been the first
Buddhist missionaries in Tibet,. and seem to have taught the principles
of Nâgârjuna with. the modifications established by the Yogâchârya
school; for we learn from the history of Buddhism of the Tibetan Puton
or Buston, who wrote in the fourteenth century, that in their system man
is not allowed to make any notion the object of his meditation. Padma

\[1. Ssanang Ssetsen, 787-845. Klaproth, 778.\]

{p. 68}

Sambhava and subsequent Indian priests, however, explained the law in
the sense of the Madhyamika school, which in India at this period had
just gained influence over the Yogâchârya system; they insisted upon
assiduity in undisturbed meditation. But King Thisrong de tsan, who did
not wish two opposing doctrines to be taught, ordered a disputation to
take place between the Chinese Mahâyâna (a name evidently symbolical of
the system he defended) and the Hindu Kamalasîla. Mahâyâna was defeated
and obliged to leave Tibet, and since this period Indian priests only
were called and Madhyamika doctrines taught.\[1\] King Thisrong built
the large monastery and temple of Bima at Samyé, and ordered the
translation of the sacred books into the Tibetan language to be carried
on energetically.

A later ruler of the name of Langdar, or Langdharma, again tried to
abolish Buddhist doctrines. He commanded all temples and monasteries to
be demolished, the images to be destroyed, and the sacred books to be
burnt; but so intense was the indignation excited by these acts of
sacrilege, that he was murdered, in the year 900 A.D.\[2\] Langdar's son
and successor is also said to have died in his 64th year "without
religion." Bilamgur Tsan, Langhdarma's grandson, proved, on the other
hand,

\[1. *See* p. 54.--Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," p. 350; comp. pp. 324,
355. Rémusat, Nouv. Journ. As. 1832, p. 44. The Bhodimör designates the
two doctrines *s*Tonmin and Tsemin; Georgi, "Alphab. Tibet," p. 222, by
Dote (from the *m*Do or Sûtras) and Gyute (from the Gyut or Tantras);
these names imply that Tantrika principles had gradually crept into the
Madhyamika systems.

2\. Ssanang Ssetsen post-dates this event to the year 925. Langdharma
was born, according to Csoma, in 861; Ssanang Ssetsen says 863 and
Klaproth 901.\]

{p. 69}

favourably inclined to Buddhism; he re-built eight temples, and died
after a glorious reign of eighteen years. With this period we have to
connect "the second propagation of Buddhism;" it received, especially
from the year 971, a powerful impetus from the joint endeavours of the
returned Tibetan priests (who had fled the country under the preceding
kings), and of the learned Indian priest Pandita Atisha and his pupil
Bromston. Shortly before Atisha came to Tibet, 1041 A.D., the Kâla
Chakra doctrine, or Tantrika mysticism, was introduced into Tibet, and
in the twelth and thirteenth centuries, many Indian refugees settled in
the country, who greatly assisted the Tibetans in the translation of
Sanskrit books.

Three hundred years from the time of Atisha's death bring us to the
period of Tsonkhapa, the extraordinary reformer, who was born in the
year 1355 A.D., in the district of Amdo, where is now the famous
monastery of Kunbum. Tsonkhapa had imposed upon himself the difficult
task of uniting and reconciling the dialectical and mystical schools
which Tibetan Buddhism had brought forth, and also of eradicating the
abuses gradually introduced by the priests, who had returned to the
ordinary tricks and pretended miracles of charlatanism, in order to
prove to the crowd their extraordinary mission. Tsonkhapa strictly
prohibited such proceedings, and enforced a rigid observance of the laws
binding upon the priests; he also distinguished himself by publishing
most comprehensive works, in which the principles of the faith of the
Buddha are explained from his particular point of view.--Traditions

{p. 70}

report him to have had some intercourse with a stranger from the west
who was remarkable for a long nose. Hue believes this stranger to have
been a European missionary, and connects the resemblance of the
religious service in Tíbet to the Roman Catholic ritual with the
informations which Tsonkhapa might have received from this Roman
Catholic priest. We are not yet able to decide the question as to how
far Buddhism may have borrowed from Christianity; but the rites of the
Buddhists enumerated by the French missionary can for the most part
either be traced back to institutions peculiar to Buddhism, or they have
sprung up in periods posterior to Tsonkhapa.\[1\]

Though all the innovations introduced by Tsonkhapa, were never
universally acknowledged, yet he obtained numerous followers, whose
numbers rapidly increased during the next two centuries, until they
predominated in Tibet and High Asia. The rigour of his ordinances
against the priests has been, however, considerably relaxed, and how
widely the practice now differs from theory, we may infer from the fact,
that the entrance into the clerical profession is an object of general
ambition, and that a considerable part of the priestly revenues is
derived from rites of an emphatically shaman character, performed at the
request of the lay population to drive off the evil spirits.

\[1. Csoma, Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. VII., p. 145. Hue, "Christianity
in China, Tartary and Thibet" Vol. II., p. 10. Wassiljew, "Notices sur
les ouvrages on langue de l'Asie orientale," &c., Bull. hist.-phil. de
St. Pet., Vol. XIII., pp. 233, 242. Köppen, "Die Religion des Buddha;'
Vol. II, p. 117. About the miracles executed by Buddhist priests
previous to Tsonkhapa, see Marsden "The travels of Marco Polo," p.
169.\]

{p. 71}

With reference to the introduction of Buddhism into *China proper*, I
will only add, that as early as the year 217 B.C. an Indian missionary
is said to have preached in that country, but the Emperor sent him away,
and Buddhism in China did not become fully established till the year 65
A.D., when it was received with universal pleasure.\[1\]

According to Cunningham,\[2\] Buddhism was introduced into *Ladák* about
the year 240 B.C., but its final domestication in the country, seems not
to have been anterior to the first century before the Christian era. The
historical books concerning the early history of Ladák are said to have
been destroyed. about at the end of the sixteenth century by the fanatic
Mussalmans of Skárdo who invaded the country, burned the monasteries,
temples, and religious monuments, and threw the contents of the various
libraries into the river Indus. But the reign of the Mussalmans was of
but short duration, and the Buddhists have not been oppressed since this
period.

In the Eastern Himálaya, in *Bhután* and *Sikkim*, the conversion of the
inhabitants to Buddhism was effected at a comparatively modern date,
namely about the sixteenth century of the Christian era.\[3\] The
circumstances

\[1. Lassen, "Indische Alterthumskunde," Vol. II., p. 1078, Vol. IV., p.
741. W. Schott, "Ueber den Buddhaismus in Hochasien," p. 18. About the
fate of Buddhism in China see "Nouveau Journal Asiatique," 1856, pp.
106, 137, 139. C. Gützlaff, R. As. Soc., Vol. XVI., p. 73.

2\. Cunningham "Ladák," p. 317. When at Leh, my brothers came into
possession of several large historical books. A particular value was
laid upon two books entitled Gyelrap salvai melong "a true mirror of the
Gyelrap," or the genealogy of the Râjas of Ladák, which were obtained
from Chigmet Choiki Senge, a descendant of the former Râjas.

3\. Hooker, "Himalayan Journals," Vol. I., p. 127. Köppen, "Die Religion
des Buddha," Vol. II., p. 360.\]

{p. 72}

attending the introduction of the new religion are well known to the
lamas of these countries, who are still in possession of many historical
books treating of this interesting subject. Of works of this class we
have, in our own private library, a manuscript account of "The first
arrival of the Lamas in Síkkim," in twelve leaves, written with small
characters; besides a printed, "History of the Erection of Colleges,"
consisting of no less than three hundred and seventy-five leaves. Both
of these books were originally contained in the library of Pemióngchi,
and were obtained in Síkkim by my brother Hermann.

Buddhist sects in Tibet.

Sects did not exist in Tibet previous to the eleventh century; nine are
still existing and are considered orthodox, we know, however, but few
details about them. The sect founded by Tsonkhapa and its later
subdivisions have chosen the yellow colour for their dress; the others
wear in preference a red garb. The sects are:\[1\]

1\. The *Nyigmapa* sect is the most ancient, to which the Lamas of
Bhután, Gnári Khórsum and Ladák belong. This sect adheres Strictly to
the ancient rites and ceremonies in the manner probably taught by the
earliest Chinese priests, and possesses some peculiar

\[1. See Csoma's Chronological table, Note 18 in his "Grammar," p. 197;
Colloquial phrases, ibid. p. 175; Notices, Journ. As. Soc. Bengal., Vol.
VII., p. 146; Cunningham, "Ladák," pp. 367-72; Köppen, "Die Religion des
Buddha," *Index*.\]

{p. 73}

symbolical works which have not been embodied in the large compilations
of the Kanjur and Tanjur works.

2\. The *Urgyenpa* sect (disciples of Urgyen, or Padma Sambhava) is also
one of the most ancient, and has its adherents especially in those parts
of Tibet which border on Nepál and the Himalayan provinces of India; but
the principal monastery of this sect is at Samyé, in Eastern Tibet. The
Urgyenpas differ from the Nyigmapas in the worship of the incarnation of
Amitâbha as Padma Sambhava.

3\. The *Kadampa* sect, founded by Bromston (born in the year 1002
A.D.), limits itself to the observance of the "precepts" (*b*ka'), and
does not care for the acquirement of the higher branches of
transcendental wisdom. The followers of this sect wear red dresses.

4\. Respecting the sect *Sakyapa*, nothing is known, except that its
followers wear a red costume.

5\. The *Gelukpa*, or *Galdanpa* and *Geldanpa* sect, a name derived
from its principal monastery, called Gáldan, at Lhássa, which had been
erected by Tsonkhapa: this sect adheres to his doctrines and
institutions. Its members wear a yellow costume, and are now the most
numerous sect in Tibet.

6\. The adherents of the *Kargyutpa* sect, "the believers in the
succession of precepts," are satisfied with the observance of the Do
(Sûtras or aphorisms), and do not care either for the attainment of the
esoteric doctrines of the Prâjna Pâramitâ, or for the transcendental
wisdom.

{p. 74}

7\. The *Karmapa* Sect, "the believers in the efficacy of works," seems
to be nearly identical with the Karmika sect of Nepál.\[1\]

8\. The *Brikungpa* sect derives its name from the monastery Brikung in
Eastern Tibet. This sect, as well as the two preceding ones (the
Kargyutpa and Karmapa), are offshoots of the Gelukpa sect, and also
adhere to their rule of dressing in yellow.

9\. The *Brugpa* (also Dugpa or Dad Dugpa) sect has established a
particular worship of the Dorje (Vajra, or thunderbolt), which descended
from heaven and fell upon the earth at Séra in Eastern Tibet. This sect
seems, moreover, to be particularly addicted to the Tantrika mysticism,
in which the Dorje is considered as a very important and powerful
instrument.

To these nine sects must be still added the *Bon* religion, which has
many followers called *Bonpas*, and numerous and wealthy monasteries in
Eastern Tibet As yet little is known about the Bon religion. Judging
from the way in which Tibetan books speak of the followers of this sect,
it is probable that the name *Bonpa* was restricted to those who
neglected to embrace Buddhism upon its first introduction. By degrees
they have, however, adopted Buddhist principles, still rigorously
preserving as far as we are able to infer from the meagre information
hitherto known about them, the ancient superstitious ideas and rites of
the primitive inhabitants of Tibet. This opinion is also that of Csoma,
and is

\[1. About these see Hodgson, "Illustrations," pp. 82, 112.\]

{p. 75}

later supported by Hodgson, who has recently published several
engravings of their deities; it is further corroborated by the important
fact, that to the exorcists of some of the ruder Himálayan tribes, as
the Murmis and Sunvars, the name of "Bonpa" is applied even to the
present day.\[1\]

\[1. The Bodhimör in Ssanang Ssetsen's history, pp. 351, 367. Csoma,
"Geographical Notice of Tibet" in "Journ. As. Soc. Beng.," Vol. I., p.
124; "Dictionary of the Tibetan language," p. 94. B. H. Hodgson, "Notice
on Buddhist symbols," in Royal As. Soc., Vol. XVIII., p. 396. The
identity of these Bonpa images with those met with in the temples of the
orthodox Buddhists (the only difference existing in the name) is a
further corroboration of the close alliance (already examined p. 48) of
the Buddhist faith with pagan rituals and ideals.\]

{p. 76}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Sacred Literature](bit11.md)
