[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit11)  [Next](bit13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

### VIEWS ON METEMPSYCHOSIS

RE-BIRTHS.--MEANS OF DELIVERANCE FROM RE-BIRTH.--SUKHAVATÎ, THE ABODE OF
THE BLESSED.

WHEN treating the developement of Buddhism, I had repeated occasion to
allude to metempsychosis, or the migration of the souls of animated
beings, as one of the established laws of Buddhism, according to which
man's soul migrates as long as the causes of re-birth have not been
taken away from it. The forms under which any living being may be
re-born, are sixfold:--

1\. The highest class are the Lha, "spirits, highest beings, gods,"
Sanskr. Deva; they rank next to the Buddhas, and inhabit the six
celestial regions (Sanskr. Devalôkas). Two of these regions belong to
the earth; but the four others, which are considered as superior
mansions, lie in the atmosphere, far beyond the earth.

{p. 92}

2\. The second class is formed by men, called Mi.

3\. The third class are the Lhamayin, "the evil spirits" literally, not
a god (in Sanskrit Asuras). They are the adversaries of the Devas., and
the most powerful of the evil spirits; they dwell in the regions below
the mountain Meru (Tib. Lhungpo).

4\. The fourth class are the brutes (beasts), Dudo, or Jolsong.

5\. The fifth class is formed by the Yidags, imaginary monsters
representing the state of a wretched being (Sanskrit Prêta). They do not
receive food or water, though greatly in want of both. Accordingly they
ever remain in a state of extreme hunger and thirst; their mouth has the
size of a needle's eye, but their bodies are twelve miles in height.

6\. The sixth and lowest class of beings is composed of the wretched
inhabitants of the hell, Myalba (Sanskrit Naraka), a place of dreadful
punishment for the wicked, who are tormented there most cruelly.

Of the six classes, those of gods and men are styled the good grades,
the four otheTs being called the bad conditions.\[1\]

\[1. Respecting these six orders of sentient existence see Burnouf,
"Loins de Is Bonne Loi," p. 309; Pallas "Mongol. Völkerschaften," Vol.
II., p. 95; Schmidt, "Ueber die dritte Welt der Buddhist-en;" Mém. de
l'Acad. des sciences, Vol. II., pp. 21-39. The Mongolian authorities
place the Lhamayin before man, degrading the latter to the third class;
but the works consulted by Burnouf, Rémusat, Hardy, &c., classify them
in the order given in our text. In many sacred books, however, only five
classes are enumerated, the Singhalese, for instance,, omitting the
class of Asuras. Hardy's Manual, {footnote p. 93} p. 37; Burnouf, p.
377. For the description and divisions of hell see Foe koue ki, Engl.
Transl., p. 133; Hardy's Manual, pp. 2, 27; Pallas, Vol. II., p. 53.\]

{p. 93}

The class in which any animated being is to be reborn depends upon the
actions, or works, "Las," which he has performed, either in the present
life, or in a previous existence; they are the destiny (in Tibetan
Kalba) of the Buddhists, good works involving re-birth in one of the
superior classes, evil conduct in the bad states of existence. The
valuation of the works, viz. the determination of the moment in which
the present existence has to end, and of the class in which man has to
be reborn, is the particular business of Shinje, "the Lord of the dead,"
also called Choigyal (in Sanskrit Dharma râja), "the king of the law."
Shinje possesses a wonderful mirror, which shows him all the good and
bad actions of men; with a balance he weighs both the good and the bad,
and, if in this manner he finds that the present existence of an
individual has to cease, he orders one of his servants, who are also
styled Shinjes, to seize the soul and bring it before him, in order that
its future may be announced. It not unfrequently happens, that the
messenger seizes a wrong soul by mistake, or in some instances by
design, being bought off by offerings. The Lord of death, after
revealing by his mirror that the soul brought before him is the wrong
one, then dismisses it, and threatens his servant with severe punishment
in the event of the mistake proving an intentional one. At the same
time, he orders another servant, to bring him the right soul, which,
pending the discovery,

{p. 94}

has remained undisturbed in the body. Hence it appears that the life of
a being can be lenghtened {*sic*} by propitiating the servant of the
Lord of death.\[1\]

Means of deliverance from re-birth.

Re-birth is to be regarded in the light of an expiation of sins. The
pains to be endured through being subjected to migration are, however,
considered so terrible, that the Buddhist faith has offered its votaries
the means of atoning, even during their lifetime, for a portion at least
of the evil they have committed. Emancipation may be obtained by
subduing evil desires, by the assiduous practise of virtues, of
Dhâranîs, and Tantras, and by confession. Already in the early history
of Buddhism we find confession of sins enjoined by authority. Thus the
novice had to perform this rite before they were received into the
congregation of the faithful; the predominant character of public
worship, also, when performed according to the prescriptions of the book
Pratimoksha, is decidedly that of a solemn confession (Poshadha) before
the assembly of priests. This renewal of priestly vows was, in fact, the
original purport

\[1. Shinje answers to the god Yama of the Hindus, about whom compare
Coleman, "Mythology of the Hindus," p. 112. The Mongolians call him
Erlik Khan, or Yamantâka; Pallas, "Mongol. Völker." Vol. II., pp. 95,
61. "Voyages," Vol. I., p. 553. Pallas was told that the good and bad
actions are recorded by two spirits, the one favourable, the other
ill-natured. These, by order of Shinje, bring the soul before him and
mark the number of its good and bad actions by white and black pebbles,
a proceeding which Shinje controls by the book Bealtan Tooli, in which
the deeds of every individual are registered.\]

{p. 95}

of confession; the dogma that it confers entire absolution from sins
("from the root, tsava nas") was established by the Mahâyâna
Schools.\[1\]

Up to the present day this is also the character of confession amongst,
the Tibetan Buddhists, who consider it of the greatest influence for a
happy metempsychosis and the attainment of Nirvâna. The confession (in
Tibetan Sobyong) always includes an open repentence of the sins and the
promise to commit no more. Also the solicitation of the gods is
indispensable, but various are the modes which may accompany the avowal
and the prayers addressed to the deities for abolishment of one's sins.
As the most easy may be named the use of the water which has been
consecrated by the Lamas in the divine ceremony Tuisol, "entreaties for
ablution;" but also the abstinence from food and the tiresome reciting
of prayers may be combined with it, a kind of confession which bears the
name of Nyungne, "to continue abstinence."\[2\] Such painful modes of
getting rid of sins are, however, not greatly in favour, and the less as
a simple address to the gods is considered to be almost equally
efficacious.

The gods who have the faculty of delivering from sins, are for the
greater part imaginary Buddhas

\[1. See Burnouf, "Introduction," p. 299. Csoma, "Analysis," As. Res.,
Vol. XX., p. 58. Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," pp. 92, 100, 291.
Pratimoksha is a Manual containing the laws of the Buddhist priesthood.
A translation by the Rev. Gogerly appeared in the "Ceylon Friend," 1839;
an analysis is to be found in Csoma, 1. c., with whom compare Burnouf's
"Introduction," p. 300. Hardy gives numerous extracts from its precepts.

2\. 'Khrus, "to be thoroughly washed;" g*s*ol, "prayer, entreaty;"
*s*nung, "to reduce (in food);" *g*nas, "to continue." For details I
refer to Chapter XV.\]

{p. 96}

who are considered to have preceded Sâkyamuni; others are the holy
spirits equal in power to the Buddhas, such . as the Hêrukas, Samvaras,
&c. From all these deities thirty-five Buddhas are considered the most
effectual in taking away sins, and to them accordingly the prayers of
the contrite are most frequently addressed. These Buddhas are styled
Tungshakchi sangye songa,\[1\] "the thirty-five Buddhas of confession."
Already in the two highly esteemed Mahâyâna compilations, the Ratnakûta
and Mahâsamaya, the adoration of these Buddhas is strongly
recommended;\[2\] and beautiful coloured images of them adorn the
interior of numerous monasteries, where they take their places by the
side of the most celebrated Indian and Tibetan priests and gods. Prayers
to these Buddhas are also included in almost every Tibetan liturgy, or
compilation of the daily prayers, such as the Rabsal, "principal
clearness," and Zundui, "collection of charms." The number of the
Buddhas implored has not been, however, limited to thirty-five; in one
of these petitionary addresses, the translation of which is the object
of Chapter XI, I found their number to be fifty-one; also to the Buriats
Tibetan treatises of this kind are known in which more than the original
number of thirty-five Buddhas occurs.

One of these Buddhas is also Sâkyamuni; he is called in the address just
mentioned by his Tibetan name, Shakya Thub-pa, and is the twenty-seventh
of the list; it

\[1. *L*tung-*b*shag*s*, "confession of sins;" kyi (chi) = the genitive
case; so-*l*nga "thirty-five."

2\. Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," pp. 170, 186.\]

{p. 97}

is said that "if a man once utter this name he shall be purified from
all sins committed in anterior existences." In sacred images
representing the Buddhas of confession his figure is regularly the
central and the most prominent one, the other thirty-four Buddhas being
smaller and ranged above his head.. In a picture which bad been hung up
in the temple of Gyungul, in Gnári Khórsum, the images of various sacred
persons are added to these thirty-five Buddhas. Amongst the additional
figures the persons in the clerical garb of the ancient Indian priests
are the sixteen Netan (Sanskrit Stavirâs), who are said in the sacred
books to have visited Ceylon, Kashmír, and the southern foot of the
Kailâsa or Trans Sátlej range already shortly after the first
convocation of the Bikshus, held immediately after Sâkyamuni's death,
and to have spread in these countries Buddhist theories.\[1\] Six other
priests in Tibetan lamaic dress have each some words written beneath
them, viz. Je Tsonkhapa; Prulku thongva dondon; Khetup sangye;
Jampaijang Mai thama shesrab od; Khetub chakdor gyatso; Grubchen
tsulkhrim gyatso. Tsonkhapa, the famous Lama, who was born 1355 A.D., is
honoured, by the title of reverence, *r*je; Thongva dondon (prulku, the
word preceding his name, means incarnation) was born in 1414; Khetup
sangye is probably the Khetup pal-gyi senge of Csoma (born 15315);

\[1. See their Tibetan names in A. Schiefner's "Tibetanische
Lebensbeschreibung Sâkyamuni's," Note 43. Csoma, As. Res., Vol. XX., p.
439, has for several of them other names. The Netans enjoy great
reputation amongst the Tibetans, who have recited on various occasions a
hymn in their honour, entitled Netan chudrugi todpa "praise of the
sixteen Netan." The library of the St. Petersburgh university has a copy
of it.\]

{p. 98}

Tsulkhrim gyatso (grubchen =very perfect) is probably the tenth, Dalai
Lama, who ruled from 1817-35;\[1\] concerning the other two Lamas I know
no particulars.

An additional figure in Chinese dress has the words Genyen darma written
at his feet; Genyen (Sanskrit Upâsaka) denotes him to be an adherent to
the Buddhist faith, Darma is most probably his proper name. He carries a
basket filled with the Sheets of a religious book, probably the Prâjna
Pâramitâ; this very ancient mode of using a basket-case for the
palm-leaves, which in former times served as paper, is said to be
actually still in use in Tibet, the single volumes of larger works being
put together into a common basket. Beneath the throne is represented the
goddess Lhamo (Sanskr. Kâlâdevî), with her attendants; Tsepagmed
(Sanskr. Amitâyus), the god of longevity; and the five great kings (in
Tibetan Ku nga gyalpo).\[2\]

Sukhavatî, the abode of the blessed.

Complete deliverance from existence, or from the world in its most
general meaning, is comprised under the name of Nirvâna (Tib. Nyangan
las daspa, by contraction Nyangdas).\[3\] The essence of Nirvâna is not
clearly pointed out in the sacred books; and this, indeed, is

\[1. See Csoma, "Grammar," pp. 181

seq.

2\. About Lhamo see p. 112; concerning Tsepagmed see p. 129; about the
five great Kings see Chapter XIII.

3, Respecting the difference between the genuine idea, of Nirvâna and
the Tibetan opinion, see Köppen, "Die Religion des Buddha," Vol. I., p.
307.\]

{p. 99}

not possible in a philosophical system in which negation of reality is
the fundamental principle;\[1\] and the sacred Buddhist books also
declare at every occasion that it is impossible positively to define the
attributes and properties of Nirvâna.

The secondary kind of happiness, to which the Buddha has likewise
revealed the path,\[2\] is the enjoyment of Sukhavatî, the abode of the
blessed, into which ascend those who have accumulated much merit by the
practise of virtues. Already the entering into Sukhavatî involves the
deliverance from metemphsychosis, {*sic*} but not from absolute
existence, nor is the perfection of the Buddhas yet attained.

In general, the Tibetans of the present day do not properly distinguish
between Nirvâna and Sukhavatî, their highest ideal being attained by
liberation from rebirth and the reception into Sukhavatî. My brothers
who have had frequent opportunity of consulting Tibetan Lamas, learned
that particular stress is now laid upon the complete emancipation from
metempsychosis. It is believed, that then they have no feeling whatever
about their existence; a Lama once compared them to a healthy man, who,
though provided with a stomach, lungs, a liver &c., experiences no
feeling of their presence. How greatly freedom from metempsychosis is
prized, appears from a conversation, which Hermann once held with a Lama
of Bhután. This man who had been at Lhássa, during the residence there
of the French missionaries,

\[1. See p. 33.

2\. Compare p. 42.\]

{p. 100}

Hue and Gabet, had seen some coloured lithographs representing our
Saviour Jesus Christ, and various episodes of Bible history. The Lama
alleged against the creed of these missionaries, that it does not afford
final emancipation. According to the principles of their religion, he
said, the pious are rewarded with a re-birth among the servants of the
supreme God, when they are obliged to pass an eternity in reciting
hymns, psalms, and prayers, in his glory and honour. Such beings, he
argued, are consequently not yet freed from metempsychosis; for who can
assert, that, in the event of their relaxing in the duty assigned them,
they shall not be expelled from the world where God resides, and in
punishment be re-born in the habitation of the wretched.\[1\] Buddhist
doctrines, the Lama concluded, are certainly preferable to this theory:
they do not allow a man to be deprived of the fruits of the good works
performed during life; and if once arrived at final perfection, he is
never again, under any circumstances, subjected to metempsychosis,
although, at the same time, if desiring to benefit animated beings, he
is at liberty to re-assume the human form, whenever it pleases him,
without being obliged to retain it or to suffer from any of its
disadvantages.

The happy region Sukhavatî, where thrones Amitâbha, lies towards the
west.\[2\] 1n Sanskrit it is called Sukhavatî,

\[1. In the prints seen by the Lama angels were doubtless depicted
soaring in the air and hovering round the chief figures of the picture.
He must have also heard of the expulsion of the bad angels from heaven.

2\. Genuine Buddhism rejects the idea of a particular locality being
appropriated to Nirvâna. In the remarkable treatise entitled Milindi
prasna, {footnote p. 101} translated by Hardy in his works on Buddhism,
the priest Nâgasena (Nâgârjuna), is said to have replied to the King
Milinda of Sangala (who ruled about 140 B.C.; see A. Weber, Indische
Studien, Vol. III., p. 121), in answer to his inquiries about the
nature, essence, and locality of Nirvâna: "Nirvâna is wherever the
precepts can be observed; and there may be the observance in Yawana,
China, Milâta, Alasanda, Nikumba, Kâsi, Kôsala, Kâsmira, Ghandhâra, the
summit of Mahâ Meru, or the Brahma-lôkas; it may be anywhere; just as he
who has two eyes can see the sky from any or all of these places; or as
any of these places may have an eastern side." Eastern Monachism, p.
300.\]

{p. 101}

"abounding in pleasures;" in Tibetan Devachan, "the happy;" the Chineses
designate it Ngyan-lo, "pleasure;" Kio-lo "the greatest pleasure;"
Tsing-tu "pure or glorious land;" and in sacred treatises it is
denominated "the pure region, a kind of prosperity." We find an account
of this glorious region of Amitâbha, in many religious books.\[1\]
Sukhavatî is declared to be a large lake, the surface of which is
covered with lotus-flowers (Padmas), red and white, with perfumes of
rare odour. These flowers form the couches for pious men, whose virtues
were the cause of their growth, while yet sojourners upon earth. Such
men, after being purified from their sins, soar up into their
lotus-flowers. The inhabitants of this paradise are moved to earnest
devotion by the beautiful song of paradisiacal birds, and receive food
and clothes for the mere wishing, without any exertion on

\[1. Some descriptions of this region were translated from the Mongolian
and Chinese into European languages by Pallas, l'Mongol. Völker," Vol.
II. p. 63 (his description, however, seems not to have been correctly be
rendered from the original text, see Schott); Schmidt, "Geschichte
Ssanang Ssetsens," p. 323 (from the Bodhimör); Kowalewsky in his
"Mongolian Chrestomathy" (in Russian), Vol. II., p. 319. Schott, "Der
Buddhaismus in Hochasien," pp. 50-9. Compare also the analysis of, the
Sukhavatî vyûha in Burnouf's "Introduction," p. 99, and in Csoma's
paper, As. Res., Vol. XX., p. 439. Among other Tibetan books containing
a description of it, are the Mani Kambum and the Odpagmed kyi shing kod,
"construction of Amitâbha's land." The library of St. Petersburgh has a
copy of it in a Mongolian translation, entitled: Abida in oronu
dsokiyal.\]

{p. 102}

their part. They have not yet reached the estate of a Buddha, but have
entered the direct path which leads to it; they are endowed with the
faculty of assuming human forms and descending upon earth; although when
doing so, they are not subjected to a repetition of births, but rise
again to the region they have left. Re-birth into a Padmaflower of this
paradise is obtained by invocations of the Buddhas, and more
particularly of Amitâbha; a form of devotion, according to the Tsing tu
nen, translated by Schott, involving greater merit, than that of
offerings and mortifications.

{p. 103}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Details Characteristic of the Religion of the
People](bit13.md)
