[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit12)  [Next](bit14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X.

### DETAILS CHARACTERISTIC OF THE RELIGION OF THE PEOPLE.

AMOUNT OF RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE.--GODS, GENII AND MALIGNANT SPIRITS. The
Spirits Lhamayin and Dudpos. The legends about Lhamo, Tsangpa, and
Chakdor.--PRAYERS.

Amount of religious knowledge.

IT is evident that a religion containing so much of philosophical
speculation and divided into many various systems, schools and sects,
cannot be known in its full extent by the lower classes forming the bulk
of the population, but only by those of a certain degree of education.
Csoma, who paid great attention during his personal intercourse to the
general amount of religious knowledge amongst the various classes, gives
the following details in his "Notices:"\[1\]

"The systems Vaibhâshika, Sautrântika, Yogâchârya, and Madhyamika, are
well known to many of the learned

\[1. Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. VII., p. 145.\]

{p. 104}

in Tibet; but there are, on the other hand, many who are acquainted with
their names only. The works explanatory of the Yogâchârya and Madhyamika
theories can be understood only by the learned, because they deal with
too many abstract terms and minute distinctions, while the generality of
the religious persons (or the clergy) prefer reading Tantrika works, and
of the Kanjur, the Dulva (or discipline), and some tracts of the Do (or
Sûtra) class." He adds, that the Tibetans are tolerably familiar with
the dogma of the "three vehicles" (Tib. Thegpasum, Sanskr.
Triyâna).\[1\] This dogma, which has been taken from the Mahâyâna
schools, is explained in detail in the Tibetan compendiums entitled
Lamrim, or the gradual way to perfection, of which the most celebrated
was written by Tsonkhapa. The argumentations of these books are taken
from the consideration, that the dogmas of the Buddha are intended alike
for the lowest, the mean or middle, and the highest capacities; as they
contain low, or vulgar, middle, and high principles; thus, from the
knowledge of each of these classes a particular degree of perfection is
deducible. They then describe what a man must believe according to his
capacities, in the following terms:

1\. "Men of vulgar capacities must believe, that there is a God, that
there is a future life, and that they shall earn the fruits of their
works in this, their worldly life.

2\. Those that are in a middle degree of intellectual and moral
capacity, besides admitting the former

\[1. Compare p. 22.\]

{p. 105}

positions, must know, that every compound thing is perishable, that
there is no reality in things; that every imperfection is pain, and that
deliverance from pain, or bodily existence, is final happiness or
beatitude.

3\. Those of the highest capacities must know, in addition to the above
enumerated dogmas, that from the body, or last object, to the supreme
soul, nothing is existent by itself; neither can it be said that it will
continue always or cease absolutely, but that every thing exists by a
dependent, or causal connexion (or concatenation).

5\. With respect to practice, those of vulgar capacity are content with
the exercise of the ten virtues. Those of a middle degree, besides
fulfilling the ten virtues, endeavour to excel in morality, meditation,
and ingenuity, or wisdom. Those of the highest capacities, besides the
former virtues, will perfectly exercise the six transcendental virtues."

Also with reference to the *summum bonum* of beatitude or perfection,
three degrees are distinguished. Some are already content with a happy
transmigration, and limit their wishes to be re-born as gods, men or
Asuras. Others hope to be rewarded by a re-birth in Sukhavatî, and to be
delivered from pain and bodily existence. A third class wishes not only
to attain Nirvâna for themselves, but also to show others the paths
leading to it in a future period as most perfect Buddhas.

Such a power, however, can only be gained by those

{p. 106}

who enter the priesthood, or, as the Lama say, who take the vows, Dom.
There are many legends illustrating the merits to be acquired by
entering the religious order and inculcating the necessity of doing
so.\[1\] The idea at last grew into an undisputable dogma, that laymen
cannot gain the Bôdhi in their present existence, but only in a future
state; their actual religious occupations will secure the reward of
re-birth in a happy condition, or in Amitâbha's celestial region, but,
with respect to the Supreme rank of a Buddha, their attempts are nothing
but preparations.

Clear and intelligible as these principles are, they have been found
nevertheless, too learned for the lay followers of Buddhism; and for a
more general diffusion, a code of eight specific duties was drawn up,
forming a practical summary of the laws of the Buddhist faith. The
contents of the popular code are given in Csoma's paper as follows:

1\. To take refuge only with Buddha.

2\. To form in one's mind the resolution to strive to attain the highest
degree of perfection, in order to be united with the supreme
intelligence.

3\. To prostrate one'sself {*sic*} before the image of Buddha; to adore
him.

4\. To bring offerings before him, such as are pleasing to any of the
six senses: as, lights, flowers, garlands, incenses, perfumes; all kinds
of edible and drinkable things (whether raw, or prepared);

\[1. See p. 27, 38.--I cite as an example Schmidt, "Dsang-lun, der Weise
und der Thor," p. 108.\]

{p. 107}

stuffs, cloths, &c. for garments and hanging ornaments.

5\. To make music, sing hymns, and utter the praises of Buddha,
respecting his person, doctrine, love or mercy, perfections or
attributes; and his acts, or performances, for the benefit of all animal
beings.

8\. To confess one's sins with contrite heart; to ask forgiveness for
them and to resolve sincerely not to commit the like hereafter.

7\. To rejoice in the moral merits of all animal beings, and to wish
that they may thereby obtain final emancipation or beatitude.

8\. To pray and entreat all the Buddhas that are now in the world to
turn the wheel of religion (or to teach their doctrines), and not to
leave the world too soon, but to remain here for many ages, or Kalpas.

Gods, genii, and malignant spirits.

The Tibetan Buddhists believe well-being and misfortune alike to depend
upon the action of gods, genii, and malignant spirits.' The gods are
considered to exist in large numbers; they derive their divine nature
from having received a particle of the supreme intelligence, which
possesses such power and is of such

\[1. Many instances of this belief, common to all the Buddhist races of
Asia (Schmidt, "Forschungen," p. 137; "Ssanang Ssetsen," p. 352;
Marsden, "The travels of Marco Polo," pp. 151), 163), will be found in
the writers on Tibet.\]

{p. 108}

illimitable extent as to allow of a division amongst any number of
beings. All gods are, therefore, embodiments and multiplications of one
and the same supreme wisdom, created for the purpose of choosing the,
most suitable way for the salvation of mankind from Samsâra (the
world).\[1\] In the face of all these gods, the Lamas emphatically
maintain monotheism to be the real character of Buddhism.

In Tibetan the collective name for deity (god and genius) is Lha, an
appellative similar to its Sanskrit equivalent Deva, meaning a god, a
divinity. The deities have each their particular names, by which they
are worshipped, as also their definite spheres, beyond which they cannot
exercise any power, but within which they cannot be influenced by
another god. They materially assist man in his undertakings, and remove
the dangers with which they may be threatened from natural
phenomena--acts in which they feel great delight and pleasure and which
they perform in a state of calmness, Zhiva. There exist male as well as
female deities, the latter being either the wives of male deities,
deriving from the husband the same power of which he is the possessor,
or they are endowed with special faculties of their own. Of this kind
are the Samvaras (in Tibetan Dechog), and the Hêrukas, female genii
equal in power to the Buddhas, whose images occur in numerous religious
pictures.\[2\]

\[1. Schmidt, in Mém. de l'Acad. de Petersb., Vol. I., p. 119.

2\. Csoma in his Analysis, As. Res., Vol. XX., p. 489, considers these
divine beings as two gods or demons, and, in an other passage, p. 491,
he calls the Hêruka a deified saint of the character of Siva, and the
Samvara a Dâkinî. He {footnote p. 109} also treats of both in the
singular number; but Burnouf, "Introduction," p. 538, doubts whether
Samvara be a proper name; and his opinion is supported by the fact that
various Samvaras and Hêrukas occur in pictures; as well as by the
Tibetan treatise Dechogi gyut, in which numerous Samvaras and Hêrukas
are mentioned. The case appears to be similar to that of Shinje, the
judge of the dead (see p. 93), whose assistants, the Dudpos, are
likewise styled Shinjes.\]

{p. 109}

The malignant spirits are designated by names expressive of their
hostility towards man, as Da, "enemy," Geg, "devil;" the most dreaded
are the Lhamayin and the Dudpos.

To the Lhamayin, amongst which also man may be re-born (see p. 92), the
Yakshas, the Nâgas, the Râkshasas, and many other groups of ill-natured
spirits are subjected; their particular adversaries are the four
Maharajas (Tib. Gyalchen zhi), who dwell upon the fourth step of the
mount Mêru.\[1\] Amongst these evil spirits those deserve a particular
notice who cause the Dusmayinpar chi, or "untimely death." According to
the belief of the Tibetans, that is considered an untimely death, which,
in opposition to the ordinary course of nature, is accelerated by the
evil spirits, such as Sringan, Dechad, Jungpo, and others. As a
consequence of premature decease, the "Bardo," is prolongated. This is
the middle state between the death and the new re-birth, which does not
follow immediately, but there exists an interval, which is shorter for
the good than for the bad. The prolongation of this intermediate state
is considered as a punishment caused by evil spirits who have only power
over sinful men. The soul exists during this interval without any shape
whatever, and the

\[1. See Burnouf, "Introduction," p. 603. Schmidt, in Mém. de l'Acad. de
Petersb., Vol. II., p. 33 *et seq.*\]

{p. 110}

wretched ones, who have been seized by the spirits, make earnest efforts
but without success to get placed within a body. At such moments they
appear to men as a raw, shapeless piece of meat, and such a vision is
considered unlucky, boding illness and even death., Dhârânîs and
particular offerings are supposed to keep off such dreaded visions, and
the wealthy have magical sentences and treatises printed, of which the
following are the most frequently met with:\[1\] Choichi gyalpoi shed
dul, "to break the power of Choigyal," an epithet of Shinje; Tamdin
gyalpoi sri nanpa, "to subdue the honourable King Tamdin"; Dragpo
chinsreg, "the fierce sacrifice;"\[2\] Jig grol gyi pavo "the hero
delivering from the danger (of Bardo)."\[3\]

The Dudpos, the assistants of Shinje, the judge of the dead, and often
likewise called Shinjes, inhabit the region Paranirmita Vasavartin
("that exercises a power over the metamorphoses produced by others"),
the highest in the world of desire. They try to hinder the depopulation
of the world by supporting man in evil desire, and by keeping off the
Bôdhisattvas from attaining the Bôdhi; it is they who disturb the
devoutness of assembled Buddhists, and put an end to steady meditation
by assuming the shape of a beautiful woman, or by suggesting

\[1. Untimely death is also enumerated in a Tantra of the Kanjur amongst
the objects of fear against which protection is obtained by the Dhâranîs
therein mentioned. Csoma, "Analysis," As. Res., Vol. XX., p. 519.
Respecting the dogma of the Bardo, see Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," p.
110.

2\. Chinsreg is the Tibetan name for the burnt-offering, a description
of which is to be found in Chapter XV., No. 2; about Tamdin compare No.
5.

3\. In full title: Bardo phrang grol gyi sol debjig grol gyi pavo
zhechava "a petition protecting from the chasm of Bardo, or a hero
delivering from the danger (of Bardo)."\]

{p. 111}

ludicrous ideas, by asserting that those who do not enjoy the pleasures
of life shall be re-born in hell, with many other tricks of a similar
nature. But they are also those spirits who, when the time of death has
arrived, seize the released soul and bring it before Shinje, their King,
to be tried and sentenced according to its works. The apparent
contradiction of this function with their tendency to induce man to
abandon himself to pleasure in existence, is to be explained from the
dogma, "that birth and decay cannot be separated;" whence it results
that the gods who cause existence simultaneously bring. into action the
destructive power, which is the unavoidable consequence of
existence.\[1\]

To subdue the evil spirits, is one of the most important duties of the
gods and genii, and they assume a horrible aspect when fighting with the
evil spirits: during these such dreadful encounters, they are supposed
to become highly inflamed with rage. Though any god is at liberty to
subdue any of the evil spirits, yet there exist a particular class who
have especially devoted themselves to the extirpation of evil spirits,
in the pursuance of which object they are further confirmed by an awful
oath deposited in the hands of the Buddha Vajradhara.\[2\] These gods
are called Dragsheds,\[3\] "the cruel hangmen," and their anger against
the evil spirits--so

\[1. Foe koue ki, Engl. transl., p. 248. Schmidt, Mém. de l'Acad. de
Petersb., Vol. II., p. 24. "Ssanang Ssetsen," p. 310.

2\. See about him p. 50

et seq.

3\. From dragpo, "cruel, wrathful," and *g*shed-ma "a hangman." In
Mongolia out of this variety of Dragsheds eight are particularly
worshipped; they are styled, according to Pallas, "Mongol. Völker," Vol.
II., p. 95, Naiman Dokshot.\]

{p. 112}

the legends relate--arose in consequence of the innumerable tricks that
had been played off upon them by the latter. There are again
subdivisions amongst the Dragsheds themselves. The one called Yab yum
chudpa, "the father embracing his mother," in addition to his power of
successfully keeping off a legion of evil spirits, is also able to
deliver man from his sins, if the latter sincerely repent and confess
them prostrate before his image. These representations show them in a
curious position, with a female tenderly clasped round their bodies.

As an addition to the number of the legendary tales communicated by
Pallas concerning the eight Dragsheds whom the Mongolians predominantly
implore, I insert here the legends about Lhamo (Sanskr. Kâladevî),
Tsangpa (Sanskr. Brahma), and Chakdor or Chakna dorje (Sanskr.
Vajrapâni), having become the adversaries of the evil spirits.

The legend about Lhamo (Sanskr. Kâladevî). The goddess Lhamo\[1\] was
married to Shinje, the king of the Dudpos, who at the time of the
marriage had assumed the form of the king of Ceylon. The goddess had
made a vow, either to soften her husband's notoriously wild and wicked
manners, and make him favourably disposed towards the religion of
Buddha, or, failing in her praiseworthy endeavours, to extirpate a royal
race so

\[1. In a prayer addressed to this goddess, and which is printed on
Plate No. III., she is also invoked by the name of Rimate.--The present
legend is related in the book Paldan Lhamoi kang shag, "to perform
confession before the venerated Lhamo," a treatise which is read when
offerings are presented to this goddess. A copy of this book in Tibetan
and Mongolian is in the library of the Petersburgh university. The
Mongolian edition contains some details in Kalmnk, which are not met
with in the Tibetan.\]

{p. 113}

hostile to his creed by killing the children that might issue from the
marriage. Unfortunately it was beyond her power to effect an improvement
in the evil ways of the king, and, accordingly, she determined to kill
their son, who was greatly beloved by his father because in him he had
hoped to put a complete end to Buddhism in Ceylon. During a temporary
absence of the king, the goddess put her design in execution; she flayed
her son alive, drank the blood from out his skull, and even ate his
flesh. She then left the palace and set out for her northern home, using
her son's skin as a saddle for the king's best horse. On his return,
seeing what had happened, the king at once seized a bow, and, with a
terrible incantation, shot off a poisoned arrow after his dreadful wife.
The arrow pierced the horse's back, in which it stuck fast; but the
queen, neutralizing the efficacy of the imprecation, took out the deadly
weapon and uttered the following sentence: "May the wound of my horse
become an eye large enough to overlook the twenty-four regions, and may
I myself extirpate the race of these malignant kings of Ceylon!" The
goddess then continued her journey towards the north, traversing in
great haste India, Tíbet, Mongolia, and part of China, and finally
settling in the mountain Oikhan, in the district Olgon, which is
supposed to be situate in Eastern Siberia. This mountain is said to be
surrounded by large, uninhabited deserts, and by the ocean
Muliding.\[1\]

\[1. A portrait of Lhamo, who is identical with the goddess Okkin Tängri
of the Mongolians, and with the Chammo or Lchamu of Pallas (Mongol.
Völkerschaften, Vol. II., p. 98), I found added to the picture of the
thirty-five Buddhas {footnote p. 114} of confession described p. 97.
There is a similar representation of her in Plate VI. of Pallas's work,
beneath the central figure; in Fig. 5, Plate IX., she is represented
without the staff and the skull-cup.\]

{p. 114}

The legend about Tsangpa (Brahma). Tsangpa, a follower of the Buddha,
who had retired into the woods, was on the point of discovering the
secrets of the Buddha doctrine by extraordinary meditation and the
practice of virtues, when a Dudpo appeared before him in the shape of a
beautiful woman, who offered him exquisite delicacies. Tsangpa
incautiously partook of them, was soon drunk, and in his phrensy killed
the ram upon which the demon had ridden. By this savage act he lost the
merits of the good works which he had accumulated with so much pain and
perseverance, and attained no higher degree than that of a common
follower, or Upâsaka (Tib. Genyen).\[1\] Tsangpa was now filled with
rage towards the evil spirits, and took an awful oath, in the hands
of of {*sic*} the Buddha Vajradhara, vowing to do his utmost to
extirpate the pernicious race through which he had lost his
position.\[2\]

The legend about Chakdor (Vajrapâni).\[3\] Once upon a time the Buddhas
all met together on the top of Mount Mêru, to deliberate upon the means
of procuring the water of life, Dutsi (Sanskr. Amrita), which lies

\[1. I have already stated that these are not virtually admitted to the
rank of a Buddha. *See* pp. 28, 38, 106.

2\. This legend inclines me to believe that Manjusrî, a Bôdhisattva, and
the god of wisdom (*see* p. 65), do not, when repelling the obnoxious
Choichishalba, take the dreadful form of Yamântaka by order of
Sâkyamuni, as Pallas was informed (see his Mong. Völker., Vol. II., p.
96), but assumed it of his own free will, and in consequence of a
similar snare laid for him.

3\. This legend is given in the book Drimed shel phreng, "spotless
garland of crystals." For an image of Vajrapâni see Plate II.\]

{p. 114a}

To face p. 114. Plate II.

\#\#\#

{p. 114b}

To face p. 114. Plate III.

\#\#\#

{p. 115}

concealed at the bottom of the deep ocean. In their benevolence, they
intended, as soon as they obtained possession of the water of life, to
distribute it amongst the human race as a powerful antidote against the
strong poison Hala hala, which the evil demons, at this period, had been
using with such mischievous effect against mankind.

In order to procure the antidote they determined to churn the ocean with
the mountain Mêru, and so cause the water of life to rise to the surface
of the sea. This they did, and delivered the water of life to Vajrapâni,
with orders to secure it safely until a future meeting, when they would
impart it to living beings. But the monster Râhu\[1\] (Tib. Dachan), a
Lhamayin, happened to hear of this precious discovery, and having
carefully watched Vajrapâni's movements, seized an opportunity, in the
absence of the latter, to drink :the water of life; not satisfied with
this act, he even voided his Water deliberately into the vessel. He then
hurried away as fast as possible, and had already proceeded a great
distance, when Vajrapâni came home, and having perceived the theft,
instantly set out in pursuit of the culprit. In the course of his flight
Râhu had passed the sun and

\[1. In his "Manual of Buddhism," p. 58, Hardy has extracted from
Singhalese books the following mythical measurements of Râhu's body:
"Râhu is 76,000 miles high, 19,000 miles broad across the shoulders; his
head is 14,500 miles round; his forehead is 4,800 miles broad; from eye
brow to eye-brow he measures 800 miles; his mouth is 3,200 miles in
size, and 4,800 miles deep; the palm of his hand is 5,600 miles in size;
the joint of his fingers 800 miles; the sole of his foot 12,000 miles;
from his elbow to the tip of his fingers is 19,000 miles; and with one
finger he can cover the sun or moon, so as to obscure their light."\]

{p. 116}

the moon, whom he menaced with vengeance, should they venture to betray
him to Vajrapâni. His searches proving fruitless, Vajrapâni betook
himself to the sun, and asked him about Râhu. But the sun replied
evasively, saying, that he had certainly seen somebody passing a long
time ago,. but had paid no particular attention as to who it was. The
moon, on the other hand, returned a candid answer, only requesting that
Vajrapâni would not repeat it before Râhu. Upon this information Râhu
was shortly afterwards overtaken, when he got such a terrible blow from
Vajrapâni's sceptre that, besides receiving many wounds, his body was
split into two parts, the lower part of the body with the legs being
entirely blown off.

The Buddhas once more held a meeting, in which they deliberated upon the
best means of disposing of Râhu's urine. To pour it out would have been
most dangerous for living beings, as it contained a large quantity of
the poison Hala hala; they therefore determined, that Vajrapâni should
drink it, in just punishment for the carelessness through which the
water of life had been lost. Accordingly he was forced to do so, when
his fair, yellow complexion was changed by the effects of this dangerous
potion into a dark one. Vajrapâni conceived, from his transfiguration, a
most violent rage against all evil demons, and in particular against
Râhu, who, notwithstanding his deadly wounds, was prevented from dying
by the water of life. This powerful water, however, dropped from his
wounds and fell all over the world, numerous medicinal herbs

{p. 117}

springing up on the spots where it touched the soil. A severe punishment
was also inflicted upon Râhu by the Buddhas themselves; they made a
horrible monster of him, replaced his legs by the tail of a dragon,
formed nine different heads from his broken one, the principal wounds
were made into an enormous throat, and the lesser ones changed into so
many eyes.

Râhu, who had ever distinguished himself from his fellow-beings by his
wickedness-in their earliest youth even the other gods had to suffer
from his malignity became, after this transformation, more dreadful than
he was before. His rage was turned especially towards the sun and the
moon, who had betrayed him. He is constantly trying to devour them,
particularly the moon, who displayed the most hostile disposition
towards him. He overshadows them whilst trying to devour them, and thus
causes eclipses; but owing to Vajrapâni's unceasing vigilance, he cannot
succeed in destroying them.\[1\]

Prayers.

Prayers, in the usual sense of the word, as addresses to the deity
imploring assistance, or in the form of

\[1. This legend decidedly derives its origin from the Hindus, from
whose tales it was taken almost without alteration. According to these,
the water of life, Amrita, was also procured by churning the ocean, and
was distributed amongst the gods. Râhu, a monster with a dragon's tail,
disguised himself like one of the gods, and received a portion of it;
his fraud having been discovered by the sun and moon, Vishnu severed his
head; but the nectarean fluid secured his immortality. See Fr. Wilford,
"On Egypt and the Nile," As. Res., Vol. III., p. 331, 419; "Essay on the
Sacred Isles in the West," As. Res., Vol. XI., p. 141.\]

{p. 118}

thanksgivings and praises for mercies received,\[1\] are known to
genuine Buddhism only in the form of hymns for honouring and glorifying
the Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas, for having pointed out to man, by word and
example, the right path leading to Nirvâna. But in the Mahâyâna Buddhism
man is not directed to perfection by information only, but he may hope
to be actually supported by divine assistance; for the Bôdhisattvas,
instead of emulating the quietness of the Buddhas, are supposed to
wander about in the world and to ensure by their powerful assistance
man's attainment of eternal happiness. We here meet with implorations
which, in their first stage, however, do not exhibit the character of
petitions or thanks, but only express the desires of the votary to
attain the same high faculties as the Bôdhisattvas enjoy themselves.
Whenever, in the legends, any Buddhist is about to perform a meritorious
work, he utters the words: "May I become delivered from pains on account
of this work, and may I lead all beings to deliverance by my good
example and these works." But in the books belonging to the later
Mahâyâna and the mystical schools, we see such wishes very closely
allied to the dogma of an unlimited charity of the Bôdhisattvas towards
man. As an example of this I quote a Tantra of the Kanjur, in which
seven imaginary Buddhas had each desired, when they were practising a
holy life in Order to become

\[1. Schott, "Ueber den Buddhaismus in Hochasien" p. 58. Wassiljew, 1.
c., pp. 156, 139, 166. Csoma, "Analysis," As. Res., Vol. XX., p. 508.
See also the Address to the Buddhas of Confession in the following
chapter.--Concerning the Gêyas, or works in metric form, to the glory of
the Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas, see Burnouf's Introduction, p. 52.\]

{p. 119}

Buddhas, that all animal beings (or creatures) that were suffering such
and such specified kinds of misery or distress, might, at the time of
their becoming Buddhas, enjoy all sorts of prosperity and happiness. In
the sacred writings of these systems the mythological Buddhas residing
in the various regions beyond the earth are frequently addressed with
prayers in the strict sense of the word, and the reciting of prayers is
recommended as a most successful expedient for annihilating sins and for
removing the impediments which hinder the attainment of final
emancipation.

In Tibet this is also the actual opinion respecting prayers (Tib.
Monlam). The general confidence of the Tibetan Buddhists in their
efficacy is more especially due to their enjoying the character and
possessing the virtue of Dhârânîs; they are endowed with supernatural
powers and are considered to exercise an irresistible magical influence
over the deity implored. That this is the light in which they are viewed
is clearly evident from the form of many prayers, which are frequently
little more than mere incantations. Here, for instance, is an address to
the goddess Lhamo, which runs thus: "I summon thee hither from the
north-eastern region surrounded by the great ocean Muliding, by the blue
letter Hum, which is traced upon my heart, spreading with its iron hook
a beam of light;--thee, the mighty and powerful mistress and queen
Rimate and thy attendants."\[1\]

\[1. For the Tibetan text which Adolphe got written down by a Lama, see
Plate No. III.\]

{p. 120}

Other prayers are, according to their form, praises, or hymns, or
petitions in which the name of the god addressed is mentioned, as in the
prayer: Om Vajrapâni hum; or is at times omitted altogether, as in the
celebrated six-syllable prayer: Om mani padme hum, O, the Jewel in the
Lotus: Amen. This prayer is an invocation of Padmapâni (see p. 88), who
is believed to have delivered it to the Tibetans; it is the most
frequently repeated of all prayers, and has on this account excited the
curiosity of the earliest visitors to Tibet. Its real meaning, however,
was long involved in doubt, and it is only by the most recent researches
that a positive determination has been finally arrived at.\[1\] The
Lotus (*Nymphæa Nelumbo, Linn.*), is known to be the symbol of highest
perfection, and is here employed in allusion to Padmapâni's genesis from
this flower. To each syllable of the prayer is attributed a special
magical faculty,\[2\] and this theory has perhaps more favoured its
general application than its supposed divine origin.

In the plates this prayer occurs in No. IV., which is a print from an
original wood-block. In a prayer cylinder\[3\] which I had the
opportunity of opening, I found the

\[1. See Klaproth, "Fragments Bouddhiques," p. 27; Schmidt, Mém. de
l'Acad. de Pétersb., Vol. I., p. 112; Foe koue ki, Engl. Translation, p.
116; Hodgson's "Illustrations," p. 171; Schott, "Ueber den Buddhaismus,"
p. 9; Hofmann, in "Beschreibung von Nippon," Vol. V., p. 175.

2\. Schmidt, "Forschungen," p. 200; Pallas, "Mongol. Völkerschaften,"
Vol. II., p. 90. The power of any sentence or book is increased by being
written in red, silver or gold. Red ink *e. g.* is considered to have
exactly 108 times more power than black ink. Schilling de Canstadt, in
Bull. hist. phil. de Pet., Vol. IV., pp. 331,. 333.

3\. Further information about these curious instruments will be given in
a subsequent chapter.\]

{p. 120a}

\#\#\#\#

{p. 121}

sentence printed in six lines and repeated innumerable times upon a leaf
49 feet long and 4 inches broad. When Baron Schilling de Canstadt paid a
visit to the temple Subulin in Siberia, the Lamas were just occupied
with preparing 100 millions of copies of this prayer to be put into a
prayer cylinder. His offer to have the necessary number executed at St.
Petersburg was most readily accepted, and he was presented, in return
for the 150 millions of copies he forwarded to them, with an edition of
the Kanjur, the sheets of which amount to about 40,000.--When adorning
the head of religious books, or when engraved upon the slabs resting on
the prayer walls,\[1\] the letters of the above-mentioned sentence are
often so combined as to form an anagram. The longitudinal lines
occurring in the letters "mani padme hum" are traced close to each
other, and to the outer longitudinal line at the left are appended the
curved lines. The letter "om" is replaced by a symbolical sign above the
anagram, showing a half-moon surmounted by a disk indicating the sun,
from which issues a flame. Such a combination of the letters is called
in Tibetan Nam chu vangdan, "the ten entirely powerful (viz. characters,
six of which are consonants, and four vowels);" and the power of this
sacred sentence is supposed to be increased by its being written in this
form. This kind of anagrams are always bordered by a pointed frame
indicating the leaf of a fig-tree.

\[1. See about them. Chapter XIII.\]

{p. 122}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Translation of an Address to the Buddhas of
Confession](bit14.md)
