[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit17)  [Next](bit19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XV

### WORSHIP OF THE DEITIES, AND RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES

DAILY SERVICE. Offerings. Musical instruments.
Prayer-cylinders.--PERFORMANCE OF RELIGIOUS DRAMAS.--SACRED DAYS AND
FESTIVALS.--Monthly and annual festivals. The ceremony Tuisol. The
ceremony Nyungne.--RITES FOR TEE ATTAINMENT OF SUPERNATURAL
FACULTIES.--PECULIAR CEREMONIES FOR ENSURING THE ASSISTANCE OF THE GODS.
1. The rite Dubjed. 2. The burnt-offering. 3. Invocation of Lungta. 4.
The Talisman Changpo. 5: The magical figure Phurbu. 6. The ceremony
Thugdam Kantsai. 7. Invocation of Nagpo Chenpo by moving the arrow. 8.
The ceremony Yangug. 9. Ceremonies performed in cases of illness. 10.
Funeral rites.

Daily service.

THE ordinary daily service, instituted for the praise of the Buddha,
consists in the recital of hymns and prayers in a manner intermediate
between singing and reading. The service is accompanied by instrumental
music; offerings are presented, and perfumes are burnt. This kind of
service is celebrated by the Lamas three times a day, at sunrise, noon,
and sunset; and lasts each

{p. 228}

time about half an hour. Laymen may be present, but they take no active
part in the performance; those who are present are required to make
three prostrations, touching the ground with their forehead, when they
receive from the Lamas the benediction. On certain days more time is
spent in the religious services; the prayers and ceremonies have then
reference to the festival of the day, public processions not
unfrequently precede the solemnities which take place in the temples,
and on some few occasions, even religious dramas conclude them.

Offerings. Blood forms no part of these: they consist chiefly of flour,
clarified butter, and tamarind-wood, Ombu in Tibetan. To some particular
gods flowers are offered, or, if they cannot be obtained, grain, which
is thrown into the air so as to fall down upon the image. To the Buddhas
and Bôdhisattvas cones of dough, Zhalsai, literally "meat, food," are
offered, similar in shape to the Tsatsas (see p. 194), but differing
from them in this respect, that they contain no relies or other sacred
objects; also the feathers of a peacock are set up in narrow-necked
vessels before some of these gods.

Musical instruments. Of all the instruments used by the Tibetans for
their Service, such as drums, trumpets, flageolets, and cymbals, the
trumpets are certainly the most remarkable, being generally made of
human bones. Thigh bones give the finest trumpets; they sound very deep.
To the top of the bone is fastened a mouthpiece of brass, while the
other end is ornamented by brass wire, or leather rings; and the
instrument (the construction of which requires but a very trifling
outlay)

{p. 229}

is ready for use. Besides this kind of trumpets, there are still larger
ones of copper, from 6 to 7 feet long, which are only made in Lhássa,
and which are very expensive.

The flageolets are of wood, and are generally double ones, each tube
having seven holes along the upper side and a larger one underneath for
the thumb.

The drums are hemispherical, joined on their convex side; upon the skin
sacred sentences are frequently written. The drums are beaten in a very
curious manner. There are two small leather balls attached to a rope of
some length fastened to the drums at the point of their junction; the
drums are taken in the hand and shaken in such a manner as to cause a
swinging motion of the two balls, which are thus brought into contact
with the drums, and cause no little noise. The large tambourines, which
are fixed upon a stick about three feet long, are beaten with a bamboo
cane, which, on account of its elasticity, strikes the skin often, but
not very heavily. The cymbals are very similar to those used in Europe;
they are kept in boxes of twisted bast.

All Tibetan music is slow, sounds deep, and is far superior to that of
the Hindus of India. Although it cannot be asserted that there is much
melody in Tibetan music, yet the instruments employed produce a certain
harmonious combination and rythmical succession of sounds.

Prayer-cylinders. An instrument peculiar to the Buddhists, and very
characteristic of their religious notions, is the prayer-cylinder, in
Tibetan called Khorten, also Mani,

{p. 230}

or Mani chos khor.\[1\] The use of these instruments may probably have
originated in an exhortation to a frequent reading of the holy books and
to the recital of sacred sentences, in order to the attainment of a
knowledge of the tenets of the Buddhist doctrine. In the course of time
the mere reading or copying of the holy books and writings had come to
be regarded as a work of merit, and as one of the most efficacious means
for becoming purified from sin and delivered from metempsychosis.\[2\]
Few men, however, knew how to read at all, and those who did were
prevented by their occupations from doing so frequently; and therefore,
as I believe, the Lamas cast about for an expedient to enable the
ignorant and the much-occupied man also to obtain the spiritual
advantages attached to an observance of the practice mentioned; they
taught that the mere turning of a rolled manuscript might be considered
an efficacious substitute for reading it.

The cylindrical cases, in which the prayers to be turned are enclosed,
are generally of metal; but envelops of wood, and leather, or even of
coarse cotton, are not rare. They are from three to five inches high and
two to three inches in diameter. A wooden handle passes through each
cylinder and forms its axis. Round this axis long strips of paper or
pieces of cloth are rolled, with printed sacred sentences; all these
rolls are again covered by an un-printed piece of cotton stuff. To
facilitate the turning of the cylinders, a small pebble or a piece of
metal is fastened to

\[1. Mani "a precious thing;" chhos "the doctrine;" khor, from 'khor-ba
"to turn;" *br*ten "to hold, support."

2\. See the Address to the Buddhas of confession, or Confessor Buddhas,
Chapter XI.\]

{p. 231}

it by a string, so that a very gentle movement of the hand maintains a
steady and regular revolving motion.

Besides the prayer-cylinders of these ordinary dimensions there are some
of very large size permanently fixed near monasteries. A man is employed
to keep them constantly in motion, or occasionally they are turned by
water, like mills, and revolve day and night. Numbers of smaller ones
are also ranged at the entrance of monasteries, along the walls, and are
turned by passers-by or by those who enter the temple. They are
generally so close to each other that anyone going by may easily cause
all to revolve one after the other without interruption, by gliding over
them with the hand. The number of these prayer-cylinders set up in one
single monastery is quite astonishing; thus, the inscription relating to
the foundation of the monastery of Hímis, in Ladák (see p. 183), states
that 300,000 prayer-cylinders were put up along the walls of the
monastery. Though this is an exaggeration in oriental style, the actual
quantity is nevertheless very considerable.

Each revolution of the cylinder is considered to be equal to the reading
of as many sacred sentences or treatises as are enclosed in it, provided
that the turning of the cylinder is done slowly and from right to left;
and the effect is made dependent upon a strict observance of these two
rules. A slow motion is enjoined because those who turn the cylinders
must do so with a faithful, quiet, and meditative mind. The motion from
right to left was adopted in order to follow the writing, which runs
from left to right. Some of the larger prayer-cylinders,

{p. 232}

are so constructed that a stroke of a bell indicates each single
revolution.

The prayer inscribed is most generally simply Om mani padme hum,
repeated as often as the space allows of it. The papers rolled up in the
larger cylinders are, however, more generally covered with the contents
of many of their sacred books.\[1\] The Lamas have particular books
which detail the advantages to be derived from turning these cylinders;
I mention especially the Khorloi phanyon, "the advantage of the wheel,"
which also treats of the prayers and books to be put inside, and of the
mode of turning these cylinders.

Prayer cylinders were amongst the very first objects which became known
in Europe, through missionaries; but in reference to the religious
dramas and the ritual to be observed in particular ceremonies, which
shall be now detailed, I was limited for the greatest part to the
materials and the native information before me. I may be allowed to
allude to this circumstance, in order to request that it may be taken
into consideration, in case the interpretations should not be found so
complete as the importance which the Tibetans connect with it might seem
to require.

Performance of religious dramas.

On certain days of the year religious dramas are performed by the Lamas,
who call them Tambin shi,\[2\]

\[1. Compare p. 120.

2\. It is spelled *bs*tan-pa "to show, instruction, the doctrine;" 'i,
the genitive case; shi*s*, "a blessing, bliss; blessed."\]

{p. 233}

"the bliss of instruction." My brother Hermann, when at the monastery of
Minis, was fortunate enough to witness the representation of such a
drama performed expressly for him; it was as follows:--

The dramatis personæ are Dragsheds (the deities who defend man against
the evil spirits; see p. 111), malignant spirits, and men. The actors of
every group are plainly distinguished by the peculiar kind of masks
(Tib. Phag) they wear, and much less by their dresses, which are
surprisingly uniform and non-distinctive gowns. The Dragsheds and
malignant spirits wear over their clerical dress beautiful large silken
gowns of rich showy colours; some few Dragsheds have besides a gilt
cuirass and arms. Even the party representing the men are furnished with
a uniform particular dress where the means of the monastery allow it.

The *masks* of the first group, those of the Dragsheds, are of enormous
size and ferocious aspect; the hinder part of the head is covered by a
triangular piece of cotton or silk, and also on the front a similar
piece is fastened to the chin and falls down to the breast. The second
group, the evil spirits, wear masks of brown or some, other dark colour,
of dimensions somewhat larger than seems exactly suitable, and their
garments are well wadded, so that they feel but little the blows
showered upon them. The actors of this group and the following are
either neophites, or are taken from among the lay population. The third
group, finally, represent s the men, who wear their usual dress, but
also have their faces covered by a mask of natural size and colours;
under

{p. 234}

their clothes they carry heavy wooden sticks, with which at times,
during the performance of the drama, they threaten the evil spirits.

The *drama* is preceded by the recital of hymns and prayers and by a
very noisy music. The actors are seen on the stage as follows: The
Dragsheds occupy the centre, the men are placed to their right, the evil
spirits to their left. At short intervals, the men and the evil spirits,
execute slow dances, each group for itself. At last, an evil spirit and
a man step forth. The evil spirit then tries, in a well-made speech, to
induce the man to do wrong by violating some precepts of morality or
religion; other evil spirits approach and assist their comrade in this
speech. The man, though at first firm in his resistance to all these
entreaties, gradually becomes weaker, and is just about to yield to the
temptations of his would-be seducers, when he is joined by other men,
who endeavour to dissuade him from listening to evil suggestions. He is
now closely pressed by the two different parties, and it takes
considerable time before he yields to the exhortations of his human
companions. The men render thanks to the Dragsheds, to whose assistance
they ascribe the victory (although the Dragsheds have as yet taken no
part in the action), and implore them to punish the evil spirits. The
Dragsheds are but too ready to do so. Their head god, who is
distinguished from the others by an unusually large yellow mask, called
by the Lamas Gonyan serpo, "the yellow borrowed head," advances
surrounded by about a dozen of followers, representatives of the most
powerful Dragsheds. Amongst

{p. 235}

these was, at the performance at Hímis, Lhamo (see p. 112), with a mask
of dark complexion and large tails of Yak's-hair; Tsangpa (*i. e.*
Brahma, see p. 114), had put on a cuirass. Several men wore three-eyed
red masks, and were styled Lhachen, "the mighty gods;" another group,
with masks of green complexion and high conical caps of white cutton
{*sic*} stuff upon which three eyes are traced, represented the "sons of
the gods;" they were styled Lhatug.\[1\] The other Dragsheds now rush
out too from the back-ground, shoot arrows upon the evil spirits, fire
upon them with muskets, throw stones and spears; whilst at the same time
the men belabour them heartily. with their sticks, hitherto concealed.
The evil spirits run away, but the Dragsheds follow them, and drive them
into houses, holes, &c., where they are safe from further molestation.
The drama is then concluded; all the actors, Dragsheds, men, and evil
spirits, return and sing hymns in honour of the victorious Dragsheds.

During the performance, which lasts from one to two hours, most
ridiculous mistakes occasionally occur, on account of the large masks
which, in certain positions, deprive the wearers of the use of their
eyes; thus it sometimes happens, that a Dragshed strikes another
Dragshed, or that he--such a powerful god!--falls down at full length
upon the ground, where he is then ill-treated by the evil spirits till
he is again on his feet.

\[1. Drawings of these masks, taken from the originals obtained by
Hermann, will be given in the Atlas accompanying the "Results of a
Scientific Mission."\]

{p. 236}

These dramas remind us of the "Mystères" and l'Moralités" of the Middle
Ages;\[1\] but the noisy music, the firing of musketry, and the final
fray, produce an effect still less in accordance with a religious act
than the comical and burlesque intermezzos of the *Mystères* and
*Moralités*, which were intended to amuse the audience and somewhat
unbend their minds in the intervals between the serious and heavier
parts of the play, calculated to excite their feelings of devotion and
appeal to their moral sense.

The subjects of the religious dramas represented in Arrakán have a
remarkable analogy to those of Tibet; I quote the following description
from Hardy's "Eastern Monachism."\[2\] "Lines are drawn upon the ground,
in an open space, and dancers are introduced. These lines are regarded
as the limits of the territory belonging to different Yakâs and Dêvas;
and the last is appropriated to Buddha. One of the dancers advances
towards the first limit, and when he is told to what Yakâ it belongs, he
calls out the demon's name in defiance, uttering against him the most
insulting language; and declaring that in spite of all the opposition
that can be brought against him, he will cross the limit, and invade the
territory of its infernal possessor. Then, passing the limit in triumph,
he acts in the same manner towards all the other demons and divinities
who have had divisions assigned to them, until

\[1. Compare Alt, "Theater und Kirche." Berlin 1846. Chapter 26, 27. The
"Passionsspiele;" which are still kept up in Oberammergau, in Bavaria,
have, at present, assumed a thoroughly serious character.

2\. Page 236.\]

{p. 237}

at last be approaches the limit of Buddha. Still he professes to be
equally fearless, and bids defiance to the woolly-headed priest who
carries the alms-bowl from door to door like a common mendicant; but the
moment he attempts to pass the limit, he falls down as if dead; and as
he is regarded as suffering the punishment of the blasphemy he had dared
to utter, all who are present applaud the greatness of him whose prowess
is thus proved to be superior to that of all other beings."

Sacred days and festivals.

Monthly and annual festivals.

The *monthly festivals* are in some countries four in number, connected
with the phases of the moon; in others, only three of these days are
celebrated, those of the first quarter of the moon, or full moon and of
new moon. On these days no animal food should be taken nor any animal
killed; and those who do so are threatened with severe punishments in a
future existence. To abstain from worldly occupations is, however, not
enacted, and as the Buddhist laymen in the Himálaya and Western Tíbet
are not very fond of passing the whole day in prayers and in the
temples,\[1\] these holy days are not particularly marked in the habits
of the population. But the Lamas spend more time in the temples; they
perform the ceremony Tuisol, for the taking away of

\[1. The northern Mongolians show in this regard much more devotion. See
Pallas, "Reisen," French translation, p. 562.\]

{p. 238}

sins, and they make confession in a more solemn way The confession of
sins is preceded and followed by the reading and reciting of passages
from sacred books, which occupation is sometimes continued for days,
during which time the taking of food and drinking are reduced to a
minimum. These austerities, for the deliverance from sins, bear the name
of Nyungne, or Nyungpar nepai choga. Every layman is allowed to undergo
the hardships connected with this kind of confession, but as less
painful modes have, in their opinion, the same effect,\[1\] the
Tibetans--priests as well as laymen--submit to them only so and so many
times a year, and not, as they ought properly to do, three times a
month. In general, the Lamas do no more than read certain books and
celebrate the ceremony Tuisol; the laymen make prostrations before the
images of particular gods, and repeat more sentences than on other days.

Annual festivals. In almost every month a particular religious festivity
is celebrated, and public amusements are got up on such days; the
festivities--religious as well as public--are the most varied at the
following periods, which are regarded as the most sacred: About the
first of February the festival of the New Year is celebrated; on the
fifteenth of the fourth moon (about the beginning of May) honour is done
to "Sâkyamuni's having entered the womb of his mother;" on the fifteenth
of the seventh moon (in August), before the cutting of the grain, solemn
processions are made into the fields, where prayers are offered up and
thanksgivings repeated

\[1. Compare p. 95.\]

{p. 239}

for the blessings of harvest; the twenty-fifth of the same month is the
anniversary of the death of Tsonkhapa. For the particular festivals of
these days, which are very grand and diversified in character in places
where incarnated priests reside, I refer the reader to the "Description
du Tubet," translated from the Chinese, and Hue, Pallas, and
Klaproth.\[1\] My brothers, however, were not present at any of them,
and I therefore restrict myself to quoting the works where descriptions
of them may be found; but I now give the details which my brothers
obtained concerning the ceremonies Tuisol and Nyungne.

The Ceremony Tuisol.

The Tuisol, "to pray for ablution," ranks amongst the most sacred of the
Buddhist rites, and is performed at every solemn-assembly for the
washing away of sins. Water is poured out from a vessel similar to a
teapot, called Mangu, and also Bumpa, over the vessel's well-cleaned
cover, called Yanga, or a particular metallic mirror, Melong, which is
held so, that it reflects the image of Sâkyamuni which stands on the
altar. The water falls down into a flat vessel, called Dorma,\[2\]
placed

\[1. Nouv. Journ. As., Vol. IV., p. 140. Pallas, "Mongol. Völker," Vol.
II., pp. 190-215. Klaproth, "Reise in den Kaukasus," Vol. I., p. 193.
Hue, "Souvenirs," Vol. I., pp. 96, 291, Vol. II., p. 95. Compare Köppen,
"Die Rel. des Buddha," Vol. II., pp. 309-15.

2\. *b*Krus, part. pret. from 'khrud-pa, "thoroughly washed, ablution;"
*gs*ol, "to pray, beg for entreaty."

3\. The terms Mangu, Yanga, Dorma, appear to be local designations, as I
could not find them in the dictionaries. In Síkkim the Mangu vessel was
called by the Lepcha Lamas Guri, and the vessel for the reception of the
water Thepshi.\]

{p. 240}

upon a tripod. The Lamas of Gnári Khórsum informed my brothers that they
put into the vessel a bag filled with rice, which they called Brakhug,
"rice bag."\[1\]

The Ceremony Nyungne, or Nyungpar nepai choga.

This ceremony is performed in its full rigour only once or twice a year;
its name means "to continue to abstain," or "ceremony of continued
abstinence."\[2\] It occupies four days; the prayers and passages of
books read during them are chiefly in honour of Padmapâni in his quality
as Jigten Gonpo, "the protector of the world," for his efforts to
release mankind from the miseries of life.\[3\] Any layman is allowed to
take part in these ceremonies; he has to present himself in the
afternoon at the monastery, well washed and in clean garments, with a
rosary, a cup called Thor, and a bottle filled with pure water for
washing.

The first day, "the introductory exercises," in Tibetan called
Tagom,\[4\] are performed, preparatory to those of the following day;
prayers are recited and passages from sacred books are read under the
direction of a learned Gelong, who has been deputed by the head Lama.
The second day is taken up with Chorva, "the

\[1. The Mongolians, according to Pallas, "Mongolische Völker," Vol.
II., pp. 161, 177; perfume the water with saffron, and sweeten it with
sugar.

2\. *s*Nyung-par "to reduce (in food);" *g*nas-pa "to continue;" chho-ga
ceremony."

3\. Comp. pp. 88, 120.

4\. *l*Ta "to view, theory;" gom "step;" a literal translation gives:
"step to the theory."\]

preparations."\[1\] The devotees are called at sunrise, and wash and
prostrate themselves several times before the image of Padmapâni. The
head Lama then admonishes them no more to violate their vows, and to
renew promises previously made; he commands them to confess their sins,
and seriously to meditate upon the evils which result from them. He
reads with his attendants for about an hour extracts from several books,
an act which is called Sobyong, "confession, amendment of the vicious
life." The book Nyungpar nepai choga is then read till ten o'clock, when
tea is taken (Cha-chosh, not Cha\[2\]). After this the reading of books
and the recital of prayers is continued till two o'clock, when a dinner
is served, consisting of vegetables and pastry; animal food is not
allowed. After this scanty dinner, prayers and readings are continued
till late at night; but at intervals, tea is handed round. Before
retiring to rest, the head Lama specifies the various duties of the
assembly for the following day, and orders them, as a penance, to sleep
according to "the mode of the lion," Sengei nyal tab,\[3\] viz. to lie
on the right side, to stretch out the feet and to support the head with
the right hand.

The following day is the principal one; it is styled Ngoishi, "the
substance, the reality." The day is passed in rigorous abstinence from
meat and drink--nay, it is not even allowed to swallow one's saliva;
every one has

\[1. 'Byor-ba, literally "to come, to arrive," referring to the
purification of sins resulting from these exercises.

2\. See p. 168.

3\. Seng-ge "the lion;" nyal "to sleep;" stabs "mode." In this attitude
Sâkyamuni is believed to have entered Nirvâna.\]

{p. 242}

a vessel before him which he uses as a spittoon. Weak persons, who are
unable to endure for any length of time this painful operation, are
occasionally refreshed with some drops of water, and are brought for
some moments into the open air. Not a word is allowed to be spoken, and
should any body utter one, he is punished by having to sing some hymns
at the height of his voice. All prayers are to be recited in silence,
and sinful actions have to be again repented of. The abstinence from
food and drink is continued till the sun-rise of the next day; the head
Lama then asks the assembly, whether there are any devotees willing to
continue in like manner till the next morning--an operation which is
considered a very efficacious means for obtaining deliverance from all
sins; it is, however, extremely rare that any one feels strong enough to
continue. The head Lama therefore gives permission, to eat and drink,
whereupon the assembly rise, leave the temple, and partake of a
substantial meal, which the pious crowd have prepared for them outside.

Rites for the attainment of supernatural faculties.

The confidence in the powerful influence of prayers and ceremonies is so
common among all Buddhist tribes of High Asia, that every undertaking is
begun by them with the recital of incantations and the performance of
certain ceremonies by which to appease the wrath of the demons; they,
moreover, believe that by virtue of the strict observance of the duties
connected with such rites,

{p. 243}

they will in time acquire a miraculous magical energy, called Siddhi,
and finally become liberated from metempsychosis. This view is not
opposed to the principles of Buddhism, which declare that faculties
superior to those with which nature has endowed man can be obtained by
meditation, abstinence, the observation of moral duties, and true
repentance for sins. This exhortation to a moral life, the consequences
of which we see illustrated in the sacred books by numerous parables, is
well adapted for exercising a favourable influence in mitigating the
barbarous customs of the nations professing Buddhism; but, by errors
involved in the misunderstanding of the real aim of virtue, by the
non-admittance of a supreme, all-dominating deity, and by the viewing of
existence as the cause of all misery, Buddhism was rendered incapable of
producing a civilization so general as that developed by
Christianity.\[1\]

The books in which the magical arts are the most systematically treated
are the Tantra Sabâhupariprichchâ, and the Lamrim of Tsonkhapa, in which
every thing having reference to the theory as well as to the practical
application is explained in full. In the Sabâhupariprichchâ\[2\]
Vajrapâni describes to the Bôdhisattva Sabâhu, in the usual form of a
dialogue, the mode of performing various ceremonies, and indicates the
prayers and incantations to be used during their performance, in order
to acquire

\[1. A very interesting dissertation on Buddhism is contained in
Barthélemy St. Hilaire's "Le Bouddha et sa religion," Chapter V. Comp.
also M. Müller, "Buddhism and Buddhist Pilgrims," pp. 14-20.

2\. The abstract of its contents quoted here has been published in
Wassiljew's "Buddhismus," pp. 208-17. See also Burnouf's remarks on the
acquirement of magical powers in his "Lotus de la Bonne Loi," p. 310.\]

{p. 244}

the Siddhi. The book points out the obstacles met with, and specifies
the signs from which is perceived that Siddhi will be soon obtained; it
also defines its essence and qualities.

Eight classes of Siddhi are distinguished:-

1\. The power to conjure.

2\. Longevity.

3\. The water of life, or the remedy (amrita).

4\. The discovery of hidden treasures.

5\. The entering into Indra's cave.

6\. The art of making gold.

7\. The transformation of earth into gold.

8\. The acquiring of the inappreciable jewel.

Of the highest character are the Siddhis Nos. 1, 3, and 5; the degree of
perfection to be attained is fixed by the dignity of the man.

Those desirous of acquiring Siddhi must renounce the vanities of life,
they must strictly observe the moral law, and confess their sins; they
also must apply for an able teacher, in order that nothing be forgotten;
when they proceed to perform the rites, they must be shaved, washed, and
cleaned. Of particular importance for the success is the scene of their
performance. It must be a place not calculated to distract the mind by a
variety of objects more or less attractive, or by the possible
appearance of wild beasts. The most favourable spots are those where
Buddhas and Bôdhisattvas or Srâvakas dwell. The place must be well swept
and otherwise cleaned, and fresh earth must be thrown upon it, in order
to make its surface even and smooth. A magical

{p. 245}

circle of the five sacred colours must be drawn, in order to overcome
the impediments, the "Vinâyakas," opposed by the demons; for these
latter do all in their power to prevent the devotee's efforts and the
incantations from exercising their full effect. Within the circle an
altar is erected, upon which various vessels are ranged filled with
bread, grain, and perfumed water. The ceremonies consist in the reciting
of incantations and in the presentation of offerings to the kings of
magical power, to the genii, and to demons. A Vajra (Dorje) is held
during the recital of the incantations; the material of which this is
made varies according to the kind of Siddhi sought. The incantations
must be repeated a fixed number of times, as *e. g.* 100,000 times a
day; the number is counted by means of a rosary of 108 beads. They must
be recited slowly and distinctly, without raising or lowering the voice;
nor is it allowed to make any addition or omission; the most earnest
attention must be devoted to the recital, otherwise the end aimed at
cannot be attained.\[1\] The thoughts must be predominantly directed to
the tutelary deity (Tib. Yidam) selected for bestowing success upon the
incantations, offerings, &c.; even the way of placing and holding the
fingers, the Mudrâs,\[2\] is important; such positions have to be chosen
as typify the attributes of the patronal god. Amongst the offering
ceremonies the burnt offering, in Tibetan Chinsreg or Sregpa, in
Sanskrit Hôma, is the most important;

\[1. The description of a rite considered most excellent for
concentrating the thoughts, is given further on, in No. 1.

2\. Concerning the Mudrâs see p. 56.\]

{p. 246}

it must be performed with a minute observance of the rules laid down for
it.\[1\]

The approach of the moment when the devotee attains the possession of
supernatural qualities is indicated by various signs, such as agreeable
dreams, the diffusion of sweet odours, &c. Particular offerings must
then be made to the Buddhas., only a minimum quantity of food is allowed
to be taken for two, and even for four days; and certain Sûtras must be
read. If, however, notwithstanding the strict observance of all these
rules, no marks reveal the approach of the Siddhi, it is a positive
token, that unknown reasons have hindered it, which the patronal deity
is supposed to reveal to the devotee in his dreams.

The rites and Dhâranîs vary according to the deity, whose patrocination
is implored; each deity has its particular Dhâranîs, Mudrâs, magical
circles, offerings, and attributes. Avalôkitêsvara, Manjusrî, Vajrapâni,
and numerous other persons, are reported to have made known to the
Buddha their wish to defend his religion, and to grant their assistance
to those who implore it; but the Dhâranîs and ceremonies which are
suitable for each of these persons, and the instructions as to their
application are not always clear, satisfactory, and complete;
explanatory commentaries, have, therefore, been written by famous
magicians, which do not, however, always exactly agree; hence, numerous
methods, "Lugs," of celebrating the rites, are in practice.

\[1. For a description of these offerings see p. 248.\]

{p. 247}

Peculiar ceremonies for ensuring the assistance of the gods.

For most of the ceremonies the performance by a Lama is considered
indispensable to its due effect; but even if this is not the case, a
Lama is charged with it in cases of importance, as the efficacy of any
rite is supposed to become increased by the services of a priest; this
assistance, however, causes the laymen considerable expense, as the
officiating priests tax them according to their means.\[1\] The
execution by a Lama is not required for the usual libations to the
personal genii, nor to those of the house, the country, &c., in whose
honour it is the custom to pour out upon the ground some drink or food,
and to fill one of the offering vessels ranged before their images
before eating or drinking one'sself.\[2\] Also the putting up of
prayer-flags (the Derchoks and Lapchas), and the offerings on the sacred
spots met with on travels, can be done without the Lamas, who are
likewise not required for the efficacy of the mystical sentences of
magical power, the Dhâranîs.

1\. *The rite Dubjed*.

This rite, the name of which means "to make ready" (*viz*. the vessels),
is intended to concentrate the thoughts. Those who are about to devote
themselves to profound meditation, place before them a vase-like vessel
called Namgyal bumpa, the entirely victorious vessel," and a flat vessel

\[1. Compare p. 160.

2\. This is done very generally in all countries of Asia and South
Eastern Europe. See Pallas, "Reisen," Vol. I, p. 561.\]

{p. 248}

called Lai bumpa, "the vessel of the works."\[1\] The Namgyal bumpa
typifies abstraction of the mind from surrounding objects, the Lai bumpa
perfection in abstract meditation. These vessels are not put upon the
earth, but upon a cloth or a paper on which an octagon frame is drawn,
called Dabchad, "octagon;" the vessels are filled with water perfumed
with saffron, and strips of the five sacred colours are twisted round
them; flowers also, or kusagrass are put into them.\[2\] The devotee,
fixing his eyes upon these two vessels, reflects upon the benefit to be
derived from meditation, and is exhorted to intense concentration of the
mind.

The frame Dabchad has nine compartments, of which each is separated from
the next by ornaments representing clouds. In each compartment is
inscribed the name of a Dâkinî or Yôginî, in Tibetan Khado, or also
Naljorva; in the central division are words denoting that it is meant
for "the chief of the Dâkinîs," who is called in the religious books
Sangye Khado in Tibetan, Buddha Dâkinî in Sanskrit. In a Dabchad
obtained by Hermann in Síkkim, the central words are
*d*bus-byas-*m*khro',\[3\] and mean, "Dâkinî occupying (done in) the
centre," the word *m*khro' being decidedly an abbreviation from Khado,
which is spelled *m*kha'-'gro, and is literally "walking in the air."
The Dâkinîs are female spirits countless in number, who evince the
greatest kindness towards man. They

\[1. These vessels are not unfrequently traced upon the cushions upon
which the Lamas sit during the public religious services.

2\. Of this kind was also the grass of which Sâkyamuni had piled up his
seat when sitting down under the Bôdhi tree.

3\. *d*Bus "centre," byas "done."\]

{p. 249}

are addressed in a religious treatise translated by Schmidt with
surnames of sanctity, as *e. g.* Sarva Buddha Dâkinî, and their head is
styled Bogda Dâkinî, Bogda meaning "divine nature." This highest Dâkinî
is also the female companion, the Sakti of Vajradhara, and is endowed
with faculties equally great with those of her husband.\[1\]

2\. *The burnt-offering*.

By the burnt-offering (in Tibetan Chinsreg, or Sregpa,\[2\] in Sanskrit
Hôma) the offerer seeks to be endowed with the faculty of obtaining
happiness, wealth, and power, of becoming purified from sins, and of
being protected against "untimely death" and the pains connected
therewith. It consists in the burning of tamarind-wood, Ombu, and
cotton, with coals and perfumed oils in a kind of stove, Thabkhung,\[3\]
made of clay or bricks. The shape and colour of the stove depends upon
the purpose for which it is used; in one case it is square, in the
others semi-circular, or circular, or triangular. These stoves are about
one foot high and two feet broad; they have straight sides, and the
bottom is formed by a plate of burnt clay, which projects about two
inches beyond the sides; upon the projecting border half-dorjes\[4\] are
stamped, and a mystical sign is cut in the centre of the bottom of the
stove,

\[1. Schmidt, "Geschichte Ssanang Ssetsens," pp. 468, 75, 76, 81. About
Vajradhara see p. 50.

2\. *s*Byin (chin), "alms;" *s*reg-pa, "to destroy by fire."

3\. Thab, "fire place;" khung, "a hole." In the Tantra
Subâhupariprichchâ (Wassiljew, "Der Buddhismus," p. 212) 10,000 grains
of wheat, sesame, mustard, lotus, &c., are among the offerings required
to be burnt.

4\. See p. 215.\]

{p. 250}

symbolizing either the earth, or fire, water, or the air, according to
the shape of the stove.

The offerings must be burnt by a Lama, who wears a large gown of the
respective colour of the stove, interwoven with numerous characters of
the element engraved upon the bottom. He ranges on a side-table, with
prayers beginning with the respective appellation of the particular
element, the offerings to be burnt, which he puts into the stove, but
only in small quantities at a time, as their combustion must be a slow
one. He keeps the offerings burning by dropping upon them perfumed oil
with two brass spoons; with the larger one, called Gangzar,\[1\] he
takes the oil out of a small brass vessel, and pours it into the smaller
spoon, called "Lugzar,"\[2\] from which he lets it fall, drop by drop,
upon the offerings.

This ceremony has four particular names, according to the aim of its
celebration:--

1\. *Zhibai Chinsreg*, "sacrifice for peace," to ward off calamity in
the shape of famine, war, &c., to weaken or totally neutralize the
effects of malignant influences, and to abolish sins. The stove is
Square, the lower part of a red colour and the upper part white. On its
bottom "lam" is designed, the symbol of earth.

This offering ceremony is very generally performed after a person's
death, because the sins of the deceased are supposed to be gathered into
the stove by virtue of the Dhâranîs repeated by the officiating Lama,
and

\[1. 'Gang, "to make full, to fill," *g*zar, "a ladle," a large spoon.

2\. *b*Lug, "to pour out."\]

{p. 261}

by the power of Melha, or Melhai gyalpo, "the lord of the genii of
fire," who is always implored on such occasions; it is believed that
with the combustion of the offerings the sins disappear for ever. The
address to Melha runs thus:--"I adore thee and present to thee the
offerings for the deceased, who has left this world and has entered the
circle, for him who dwells in the assembly of the three merciful
deities, who are now in calmness now in wrath.\[1\] Pray purify him from
his sins and any violations of the law, and teach him the right way.
Sarva-agne-dzala-ram-ram."

This prayer is given in Plate X., which is an impression from an
original woodcut from Eastern Tíbet;\[2\] it is placed beneath the image
of Melha in a state of calmness. Here he is sitting crosslegged upon a
Lotus-flower, holding the blue lotus Utpala (*Nelumbium speciosum*),
with joined hands. His head is shaded by the

\[1. It is difficult to understand what deities are meant. The phrase
would lead us to the three Isvaras, viz. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva
(Schmidt, Mém. de l'Acad. de St. Pétersb., Vol. II., p. 23), about whom
we might suppose, from the legend concerning Brahma (see p. 114), that
they all three place a check upon the doings of evil spirits. If this be
the right interpretation, they would become wrathful in the case of
activity, according to the views of the Tibetans (see p. 111). But I
cannot perceive for what reason the deceased, in general, should, as it
is here stated, ascend to the region where reside these gods so highly
esteemed and so extremely superior to simple man and ordinary gods; for
Shinje (see p. 93), before whom the deceased is brought, dwells in an
inferior region.

2\. As the intersyllabic points are not in the original woodcut, I give
the address here in Roman characters, rendering the intersyllabic points
which are omitted by horizontal lines:--

Yangs-pa-*g*sum-zhi-khro'i-lha-ts'hog*s*-dang-gar-*d*vang-thug*s*-*r*je'i-chen-po'i-drung-pu-'jig-*r*ten-'di-na-pha-rol-du-ts'he-las-'das-pa-*d*kyil-'khor-la-phyag-ts'hal-lo-*m*chbod-pa-'bul-lo.

3\. *s*Dig-*s*grib-*s*byang*s*-du-g*s*ol; *g*nas-so-rab-tu-*g*sol;
lam-*b*stan-du-*g*sol.

Sarva-agne-dza-la-ram-ram.\]

{p. 252}

Dug (umbrella), to which are added the horizontal ribands Labri and the
flags Badang.

2\. *Gyaspai*\[1\] *Chinsreg*, "the rich sacrifice," to obtain a good
harvest, riches, &c. The stove is hemispherical, and of a yellow colour;
on its bottom is figured the word "yam," the symbol of air.

3\. *Vangi*\[2\] *Chinsreg*, "the sacrifice for power," to obtain
influence, power, and success in war. The stove is of a red colour and
circular, a form symbolical of the Lotus-flower; it bears on its under
side "bam," the symbol of water.

4\. *Dragpo*\[3\] *Chinsreg*, "the fierce sacrifice," to obtain
protection from "untimely death," as well as to bring down punishment
upon the evil spirits who have caused such a dreaded misfortune. The
stove is triangular and of a black colour; the character on its bottom,
"ram," is the symbol of fire.\[4\]

Plate No. XIV., Lit. a, gives--immediately transferred upon paper, as if
it were a woodcut intended for printing--the surface of a rectangular
oblong piece of wood, in which four holes are made, into which bread,
paste, butter mixed with grains or similar objects, are pressed and
sacrificed as a substitute for the burnt-offering. The characters in the
centre are the symbols of the four elements, and the holes show the form
of the stoves in which the offerings are burnt. In addition to these
figures and symbols there is represented on the woodcut

\[1. *r*Gyas-pa, "ample, copious."

2\. *d*Vang, "power."

3\. Drag-po, "fierce, cruel."

4\. Concerning untimely death see p. 109.\]

{p. 252a}

MELHAI GYALPO, THE LORD OF THE GENII OF FIRE

Plate X. From a woodcut from Easter Tíbet

\#\#\#

{p. 253}

the officiating Lama, holding in his left hand the two spoons,
emblematical of those used in this ceremony.

3\. *Invocation of Lungta*.

Lungta, "the airy horse, the horse of wind,"\[1\] occurs in the list of
the seven precious things under the name of Tachog, "the best horse of
its kind." This horse is praised in the legends for its extraordinary
swiftness. "When the king of the golden wheel, the governor of the four
continents (in Sanskrit Mahâ Chakravartin Râja), mounts it to traverse
the world, he sets out in the morning and returns at night without
having experienced any fatigue." The Norvu phrengva reports, that it
passes over immense tracts in one moment.\[2\]

The Lungta is the symbol of "harmony;" for it unites in harmony the
three conditions of human existence, upon the union of which happiness
depends; it strengthens these conditions, so as to cause a union
salutary to man. These three conditions of existence and welfare are:
Srog, Lus, and Vang.

Srog, the vital principle, "breath," is the basis of existence.

Lus, "body," means the due development of the organic formation of the
body.

Vang, "power," means the moral energy enabling man to abstain from such
actions as injure the vital

\[1. *r*Lung, "wind;" "horse."

2\. Rémusat, in Foe koue ki, p. 128. Schmidt, Ssanang Ssetsen, p. 471.
About the seven precious things, see p. 53.\]

{p. 254}

principle and the organs of the body, and produce illness and death. It
indicates, at the same time, the faculty of averting the dangers which
arise from the natural hostility of the elements.\[1\]

Another faculty of Lungta is the power of depriving the constellations
of the planets hostile to man of their obnoxious influence. Moreover,
the efficacy of any Dhâranî, or mystical sentence, for happiness in this
existence is supposed to become more certain by the presence of Lungta,
and from this belief it has become customary to add to such Dhârânîs a
horse supporting the precious stone Norbu, or a figure allegorical of
the horse, or at, least an address directed to Lungta.

The plates brought home by my brothers, exhibit specimens of this
practice. The Dhârânîs are Sanskrit, and are written with Tibetan, and
occasionally also with Lantsa characters. The purposes aimed at, and the
deities implored by them vary; in most of them, however, we meet with
"Om mani padme hum," and "Om Vajrapâni hum," Dhârânîs meant for
Padmapâni and Vajrapâni.

The horse stands in the centre of plate No. XI., and bears the precious
stone Norbu. In other copies it is running towards the left border,
whilst the letters run as usual from left to right; in the present plate

\[1. As often as the element which at a person's birth occurred in the
denomination of the year comes in contact in "the cycles of years" with
a hostile element, the years in which this takes place are unlucky ones;
health is endangered and failure in one's undertakings may be expected.
This idea refers to the belief of the Tibetans in an influence of the
elements upon the welfare of man. See Chapter XVII.\]

{p. 254a}

MYSTICAL SENTENCES, WITH THE FIGURE OF THE AIRY HORSE.

The letters are here inverted, the same having been cut in the block
itself in their positive form.

Plate XI.

\#\#\#

{p. 254b}

FORMS OF INVOCATIONS OF LUNGTA, THE AIRY HORSE.

1\. Print from a Tibetan woodcut, from Síkkim.

\#\#\#

2\. Copies of Formulæ, obtained at the monastery of Hímis, in Ladák.

\#\#\#

Plate XII.

{p. 255}

every thing has the opposite direction, the maker decidedly not taking
the trouble to invert his own work. Such irregularities are not very
unfrequent, particularly if the plates are not intended to be printed on
paper, but only to make impressions on articles of food. As allegorical
signs occasionally substituted for the figure of the horse we sometimes
find the anagrammatic form of the prayer Om mani padme hum in Lantsa
characters, or the Lantsa letter Om, encircled in either case by a
glory, with the characters Ba and Bam at its sides. Other invocations of
Lungta have no central ornament.

The addresses directed to Lungta personally are generally limited to the
lower part of the table; a most potent imploration of it is the one
printed on Plate XII., No. 2; it runs thus: "Wealth, the friend of
sharpness, Lungta of breath, of body, of power, may you increase and
grow like the new moon." In tables on which are inscribed this prayer,
the four corners of the image are almost always filled out with the
figures or with the names of a tiger (Tib. Tag), a lion (Senge), a bird
(Khyung), and a dragon (Brug); and a Dhâranî is frequently inserted
before the imploration of the Lungta, running thus: "Tiger, lion, bird
and dragon, may they too co-operate to a complete union;
sarva-du-du-hom."

In order that the Lungta produce its proper effect, the colour of the
cloth or paper upon which it is printed, is also of importance; the
rules concerning the modalities are, however, very simple; and if the
right colour is not at hand, it may be supplied by rags of

{p. 256}

the required colour, which are cut into triangles (indicating that they
are Phurbus), and fastened along the lower border of the table. The
implorations of Lungta do not require the performance by a Lama, neither
do the ceremonies more complicated still which have been established.
for increasing the probability of success,\[1\] and this belief may also
be one of the reasons of the frequent application to Lungta.

4\. *The Talisman Changpo*.

This talisman, which means "the keeper, the holder," is believed to
protect man from the machinations of the evil spirits and to enable
those who hang it up in their houses, or who wear it as an amulet, to
resist the temptations to sin prompted by these demons. The form of this
talisman is circular, as seen in Plate XIII. In the centre is a smaller
inner circle; in a second, larger circle is traced a star, and along the
inner side of this circle and in the eight intersectional compartments
formed by the corners of the star are inscribed the names of hostile
spirits. Outside the circles are seen a male and a female, the arms of
the one figure tied with chains to the feet of the other.

This Plate is a print from a woodcut; the block had been so much used
that the original sharpness was quite gone, and the wood had become
cracked.

\[1. There are several books in which is detailed what may be done
besides.\]

{p. 256a}

Plate XIII.

THE TALISMAN CHANGPO

From Dába; in Gnári Khórsum.

\#\#\#

{p. 257}

5\. *The magical figure Phurbu*.

The Phurbu, literally "a peg," "pin," or "nail," is drawn as a triangle
upon paper covered with charms; the handle has the form of a half-dorje.
The Buddhists attribute to the Phurbu the faculty of preventing the evil
spirits from inflicting mischief, or of expelling them, in case they
have already begun to exercise their baneful influence. It is believed,
that even the mere presence of the *word* Phurbu prevents the evil
spirits from entering the houses and from injuring those who carry it as
an amulet; the sentence Phur-bui-dab-vo, "I cast thee with the nail," is
therefore repeated in many books\[1\] which treat of the evil spirits;
the point of a Phurbu, if directed towards the side where evil spirits
dwell, drives them away, and brings them to ruin.

Generally, three Phurbus, enclosed by flames, are traced upon the same
paper; this is fixed on paste-board or thin boards. In case of an
illness, or when any mischief has been done which is supposed to have
originated with evil spirits, the head of the family--or if he is
wealthy enough to engage a Lama, the Lama--accompanied by the family and
relatives, goes round the house, turning the point of the Phurbu in all
directions, and uttering incantations at the height of his voice.

\[1. In the book Dug karchan, "provided with a white umbrella," this
sentence is added to the name of the twenty evil spirits who are
mentioned there.\]

{p. 258}

The accompanying woodcut shows the arrangement of the Phurbu. The two
Tibetan characters in the central part of the figure stand for *d*Gra
(pronounced Da), which means "enemy," and for *b*Geg*s*, pronounced Geg,
"evil spirit." The human face between the smaller Phurbus is that of
Tamdin, in Sanskrit Hayagrîva. Tamdin is a Dragshed who is considered to
take a very prominent part in protecting man against the evil spirits. A
dorje projects from his head; and under the chin is inscribed the
mystical syllable Ah.

\#\#\#

The oblong rectangle next his face and the hexagon contain a Dhâranî
several times repeated, which threatens all the "evil spirits who dwell
above the earth." The Dhâranîs in the following rectangle are directed
against the Geg who inhabit the east, Shar, the south-east, Sharlho, and
the south, Lho. The Dhâranîs in the joint of the triangle and at the
beginning of the first large line in the triangular part keep off the
evil spirits occupying the south-east, Lhonab. Each Dhâranî finishes
with the words "destroy, bring to ruin." The Dhârânîs are Sanskrit,
written with Tibetan characters.

{p. 259}

On the handles of the two smaller Phurbus is inscribed the mystical
syllable hum.

The other charms in the triangle begin with "Ah Tamdin," a mystical form
of imploring this god. They keep off the evil spirits who dwell in the
north-east, Nub-jang, in the north, Jang, and in the other quarters of
the world;\[1\] and it is declared that the wearing of such a
Phurkha,\[2\] "sharp Phurbu," serves as a protection against all
mischief originating in any of these quarters. Each of these Dhârânîs is
Sanskrit, which, like numerous other charms, cannot well be translated
in detail, and terminates with the syllables hum phat, a charm, of which
the chief of the Dâkinîs says, in the Norvu phrengva, "Crying with the
voice of concealment hum and phat, I shall keep in order the innumerable
legion of Dâkinîs." At the end of the inscription it is said that this
Dhâranî is particularly directed against the spirits inhabiting the air,
and against that class especially called
*r*Gyal-po-rgyas-'gong-shin-dre-sron-dre.

The Dhârânîs inscribed on the handle, and the joint of the triangle, are
always addressed to Tamdin; those with which the triangle itself is
filled may vary, as any one who orders a Phurbu may have Dhârânîs
directed against such evil spirits as he considers particularly hostile
towards himself.

Those Phurbus are considered the most efficacious to which Dalai Lama
and Panchen Rinpoche have composed

\[1. Concerning the quarters of the world, which are ten in number, see
p. 126.

2\. Kha, "bitter," here in the sense of sharp.

3\. Schmidt, "Geschichte der Ostmongolen," p. 468.--Compare also p.
247.\]

{p. 260}

the Dhârânîs; such Phurbus as can prove this claim fetch a high price.

The Phurbus also form an important article of trade for the Mongolian
pilgrims returning from Tibet, who never fail to assert that the
Dhârânîs on their Phurbus are the composition of the Dalai Lama.

6\. *The Ceremonies Thugdam kantsai*.\[1\]

Whenever the assistance of any one of the many Dragsheds is sought by
ceremonies, the prayers recited and the offerings made to him, must
follow in a certain order:

1\. The ceremonies with hymns praising the power of the god implored,
and enumerating his attributes. This is called Ngontog,\[2\] "to cause
the eminent understanding."

2\. The region where the god dwells is described, the technical term
being Chandren, "to cite."

3\. The offerings are laid on the altar; Chodpa "the sacrifice."

4\. Prayers are spoken imploring the remission of sins; an act called
Shagpa, "repentance, confession."

5\. Kantsai, the presentation of objects "to make content." The mode of
offering consists in the consecration of the objects to the gods, which,
hereafter, can no more be used for worldly purposes.

The offerings are, in some cases, weapons and living animals, one of the
chief objects being an arrow, to which

\[1. Thug*s*-dam "prayer;", b*s*kang "satiate, to make content;"
*r*dzas, "substance, wealth."

2\. *m*Ngon "clear, eminent;" *r*tog*s* "understanding."\]

{p. 261}

five silken strips of the five sacred colours are fastened, called
Darnai janpa, "ornament of five strips of silk,"\[1\] as well as a disk
of brass, called Melong, "a mirror," upon which the mystical syllables
om, tram, ah,\[2\] hri, hum are inscribed as here follows:--

|      |     |     |
|------|-----|-----|
|      | om  |     |
| tram | ah  | hri |
|      | hum |     |

 

Feathers, also, are attached to the arrow; they must be selected from
such birds as are known favourites of the Dragshed implored; thus, to
Lhamo the arrow presented is ornamented with the feathers of the raven,
to Gonpo (Mahâdeva) with those of a kite. Between the feathers small
strips of paper are inserted on which are written certain charms, which
are also inscribed upon the point and the shaft of the arrow.

When the act of imploration is over, the arrow is stuck perpendicularly
into the ground, a position from which it can only be removed by the
astrologers.

7\. *Invocation of Nagpo Chenpo, by moving the arrow*.

Nagpo Chenpo, in Sanskrit Mahâkala, is supposed to grant success in
undertakings and to protect from the hostility of mischievous spirits in
general; but the ceremony

\[1. Dar "silk," *s*na "end, strip," *l*nga "5;" *r*gyan-pa "ornament;"
the nga "5," was suppressed in the pronunciation.

2\. Csoma, "Grammar," p. 105, explains *om* to be a mystical
interjection, denoting the essential body or person of a Buddha, or any
other divinity. *Hri* is a mystical very powerful imploration of
Chenresi.\]

{p. 262}

of "moving the arrow," is also performed for the purpose of discovering
the perpetrators of a theft.

The head Lama of the monastery in which the ceremony has to take place
begins it, amidst the loud sound of cymbals, drums, and pipes, with the
reading of certain passages from a book which treats of Nagpo Chenpo's
faculties, of the Dhâranîs communicated by him to man, of his hatred
towards the evil spirits, and of the offerings which are most agreeable
to him. The Lama concludes this lecture by threatening the malignant
spirits with Nagpo Chenpo's wrath, if they do harm to those who have
ordered the performance of this ceremony. He then hands to a novice a
large and heavy arrow trimmed with feathers, strips of silk, and slips
of paper inscribed with invocations to Nagpo Chenpo. The novice, who has
taken a seat upon a carpet of white felt, holds this arrow with one
hand, the point resting perpendicularly upon the palm of the other; by a
slight shaking and turning he brings this point into motion, and
gradually lets the arrow fall on the ground; his shakings become more
violent as soon as the point has left the palm of his hand and moves on
to the ground; he then seizes it with both hands, and by convulsive
shaking he keeps it constantly moving. But the spectators believe the
arrow to go on by its own power, and the shakings and tremblings of the
priest to be the natural consequences of its spontaneous motion.

The novice continues to turn the arrow for several hours, during which
he has perhaps walked over as many miles, and he only ceases to move it,
when his hands

{p. 263}

show blisters or when his strength is exhausted. The halt of the arrow
is taken as an unmistakeable manifestation that the evil spirits have
been driven away; or if the arrow has been moved for the discovery of a
theft, that its perpetrator is to be looked for in the direction pointed
out. The novice then returns with his arrow to join the Lamas, who in
the meantime have been engaged in singing hymns, and reciting the
prescribed prayers; some concluding hymns are sung, and the arrow is
solemnly handed over, to him who had ordered the ceremony.

8\. *The Ceremony Yangug*.

The aim of this ceremony, Yangug or Yangchob, "to call for luck, to
insure luck,"\[1\] is to implore Dzambhala or Dodne vangpo,\[2\] the god
of wealth, to grant riches. An arrow is offered similar to that used in
the purchase of the assistance of the Dragsheds (No. 6), but the disk
attached to it has a central perforation and four groups of lateral
ones, as substitutes for the mystical syllables; the feathers on the
shaft of the arrow are those of a black eagle, and round the five strips
of silk is wrapped a band of white cloth covered with some Dhâranîs, and
terminating in two loops.\[3\] These notices also present additional
illustrations of the address to the Buddhas of confession (Chapter X1).
Every contribution to its explanation was the more welcome to me as the
novelty

\[1. *g*Yang "luck," 'gug*s* "to call;" *s*kyob*s* "to protect."

2\. *g*Dod-nas "from the beginning;" *d*vang-po "ruler, the entirely
powerful."

3\. The arrow I have also seen traced on an astrological table.\]

{p. 264}

of the object so considerably increased the difficulty of entering into
the full particulars. We found it mentioned there (see p. 137), that in
the period of the destruction of the universe the performance of the
ceremony Yangug will be more frequent than the pious acts which afford
purification from sins.

The representations of Dzambhala show him generally surrounded by the
eight other gods granting riches, who are styled Namthosras, in Sanskrit
Vaïsravanas; these personages are always represented holding in the left
hand a rat with a jewel in its mouth, a supposed symbol of fertility.
Dzambhala himself is in all pictures represented riding upon a white
lion with a green mane, his right hand supporting the Gyaltsan, in
Sanskrit Dhvaja, a kind of banner with a floating cloth which typifies
victory. His eight companions bear in the right hand the following
objects: 1. A precious thing, in Tibetan Rinchen; 2. The flat vessel Lai
Bumpa (see p. 247); 3. A small house several stories high, Khangtsig; 4.
A pick-axe, Dungtsi; 5. A sword, Ralgri; 6. The precious Stone Norbu; 7.
A sword, Ralgri; 8. A clasp-knife, Digug.--A detailed account of the
doings of these gods and of the meaning of the articles they hold, is
given in the book Gyalpo chenpo namthosras chi kang shag, of which the
St. Petersburg Academy has a copy.

My brothers once saw an image in which the mythological Buddha
Dîpankara, (see p. 131), in Tibetan Marmedzad, and a "Buddha of
medicine," in Tibetan Manla, were associated with Dzambhala instead of
his eight companions.

{p. 265}

9\. *Ceremonies performed in cases of illness*.

The remarks offered here are partly taken from the Tibetan book on
medicine published by Csoma, and partly based upon made by my brothers.

The Tibetan book\[1\] enumerates three principal and four secondary
causes of diseases. The three principal causes are: 1. Lust, or desire;
2. Passion, or anger; 3. Dullness, or ignorance. By the first wind is
caused; by the second bile; by the last phlegm. The four causes of a
secondary nature are: 1. Season, with respect to cold and heat; 2. Any
evil spirit; 3. Wrong use of food; 4. A bad course of life. The book
contains useful hints, as to the course to be pursued in order to remain
free from illness, and also gives a number of rules with respect to
food, occupation, conduct of life in conformity with the different
seasons, &c. The symptoms of diseases are indicated, and the questions
are given which are to be addressed by the physician to the patient
respecting his food, occupation and the circumstances how the disease
first arose, its progress, and the. pain felt. The several remedies
prescribed against diseases are enumerated, 1,200 in number, which may
be reduced to four classes: medicine, manual labour, diet, and manner of
life.

\[1. It in entitled Gyut zhi, "the tract in four parts," and is declared
by Csoma, to be the principal work on medicine in Tibet. For an analysis
of it see Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. IV., p. 1-20. It is not introduced
into the large collections of the Kanjur and Tanjur, which contain
several other works on medicine; see Wilson, Journ. As. Soc. Beng.,
Vol.. I., p. 4. Gleanings in Science, Vol. III., p. 247. For further
notices on medicine, compare also the "Description du Tubet," in Nouv.
Journ. As., Vol. IV., p. 257. Trail, "Kamaon," As. Res., Vol. XVI., p.
222. Pallas, "Mongol. Völker," Vol. II., p. 338.\]

{p. 266}

My brothers had never seen or heard of any medicine having been taken,
or any surgical operation undertaken, which was not preceded and again
followed by addresses to the Buddhas of medicine, in Tibetan Manlas,
"the supreme physicians," and by the performance of certain ceremonies
supposed to increase the sanative power of the medicine. The Manlas are
eight in number; they are the imaginary Buddhas who are believed to have
created the medicinal plants. When men set out to collect such plants
they implore the assistance of the Manlas, and their names are uttered
when the medicine is prepared and taken; their names or images are also
generally printed at the commencement of books treating on medicine. The
greatest number of prayers are addressed to them when the pills "Mani"
are prepared, which are employed only in cases of very serious illness.
The ceremonies accompanying the preparation of these pills are styled
Manii rilbu grub thab, "preparation of the pill Mani."\[1\] The Manis
are made of a particular kind of bread-paste, with which particles of
the relies of a saint have been mixed in the form of powder or ashes.
This paste is moistened with consecrated water, and kneaded up with
ordinary bread-paste, from which are then made the smaller pills to be
taken by sick persons.\[2\] The vessel with the water and paste is put
upon a circle divided into six sections and a smaller central circle; in
this centre stands the Syllable "hri," a mystical and very powerful
imploration of Chenresi; in each

\[1. Mani "a precious stone" ril-bu "a globular figure, a pill;" grub
"to have done; made ready;" thab*s* "means, method."

2\. These pills are identical with those mentioned by Huc, "Souvenirs,"
Vol. II., p. 278, as highly esteemed.\]

{p. 267}

of the six sections is inscribed a syllable of the prayer Om mani padme
hum. As long as the paste remains in the water (the prescribed time
ranges from one to three weeks) some Lamas (who are not allowed to eat
meat during this period) recite all day long particular prayers in
honour of the Manlas.

With reference to diseases caused by ghosts and evil, spirits, the 73rd.
Chapter of Part IV. of the book mentioned enumerates twelve kinds, the
77th. eighteen. The causes, symptoms, and remedies are also enumerated.
About these kinds of diseases and the methods of curing them my brothers
learned the following particulars.

Each malignant spirit causes some particular disease. Thus Râhu\[1\]
inflicts palsy, in Tibetan Zanad; fifteen other devils, called Donchen
Chonga,\[2\] "the fifteen great evil spirits," cause children to fall
sick, &c. When the Lama physician who has been called to a sick man, has
determined the illness to have been occasioned by a malignant spirit, he
proceeds to examine into the circumstances, in order to detect the
causes which have allowed the spirit to gain influence over the patient,
and the means he employed to make him sick. When the illness is
insignificant, as in cases of cold, hoarseness, light wounds, &c., it
does not take, according to the belief of the Tibetans, much trouble to
drive away the evil spirit; the remedies consist either in charms, which
the patient has to wear, to affix to the door, or to read; or a noisy
music is performed, before which the evil spirits are supposed to

\[1. See p. 115.

2\. *g*Don "an evil spirit;" chhen "great;" *b*cho-*l*nga "fifteen."\]

{p. 268}

yield; or the very Dragshed who is the particular enemy of the offending
evil spirit is implored, and his image is hung up after having been
carried in procession round the house; or the Phurbu is applied. These
are the most common methods employed for the recovery of health; but it
lies in the nature of this matter that these rites should vary
considerably.

In cases of serious illness, particularly when the sick man is no more
able to rise, the evil spirit is supposed to have crept into the house
in the shape of an animal, and to dwell in this form near the sick man.
The first business of the Lama then is to find out the form which the
evil spirit has assumed, in which endeavours he finally succeeds by
various ceremonies very much of a character akin to juggling. An animal
is formed of clay or bread-paste by means of a wooden mould, of which he
carries with him a variety for selection,\[1\] and the soul of the
spirit is compelled to leave the assumed brute form, and to enter into
the representation of it; for this purpose magical circles are traced
and incantations recited for some time. When the evil spirit has been
confined, by these means, the Lama reads passages out of certain books,
and hands the moulded animal over to the patient to burn or to bury it;
prints of it are also pasted on various parts of the house and are only
removed when the disease has disappeared. If this means is not attended
with success, and the sick man dies, it is averred that the illness was
a punishment for immoral actions committed in some former existence.

\[1. Specimens of such blocks are given in Plates Nos. XIV. to XVI.\]

{p. 268a}

Plate XIV.

PRINTS FROM SLIPS OF WOOD USED IN TÍBET AS A SUPPOSED PROTECTION AGAINST
EVIL SPIRITS.

No. 1: From Síkkim.

\#\#\#

{p. 269}

10\. *Funeral rites*.

The funeral (Tib. Shid) of a layman generally terminates, where
circumstances, allow of it, in the burning of the body, although the
practice of exposing the corpse on the hills as a prey to wild animals,
formerly a very common one, is even now sometimes resorted to on account
of the scarcity of wood.\[1\] The ceremony of burning the body is
performed upon an altar of a cubical form; in larger towns several of
these are kept ready for immediate use; thus there are twelve such
altars at Leh, surrounding the burial ground. In countries where wood is
plentiful, as in Bhután and Síkkim, enough is employed to render the
combustion complete, nothing remaining but ashes; but in Tíbet it often
happens that quantities of the bones remain unconsumed, which are, then
carefully collected, together with the ashes, and buried.\[2\]

The bodies of the Lamas are not burnt: they are

\[1. For descriptions of various kinds of funerals see Nouv. Journ.
Asiat., Vol. IV., p. 254. Huc, "Souvenirs," Vol. II., p. 347.
Cunningham, "Ladák," p. 308.

2\. Concerning the mode of collecting the ashes in Eastern Bengál and
Assám my brother Hermann gave me the following details--A cloth about
three feet square is fastened at its four ends to canes about three to
four feet high, which are driven into the earth; into this cloth, thus
forming a sort of trough, the ashes, bones and remaining pieces of
charcoal are gathered, and left to be dispersed by the wind, or
gradually decomposed by the rain and heat. The tribes of the Khássia
hills, where the amount of rain exceeds that of any known country,
although it is limited to a duration of three to four months, have a
most curious practise of keeping their dead till the rainy season is
over; as long as the heavy rains last no combustion in the open air
would be possible. They put the corpse into trunk of a hollow tree, and
fill this up with honey, a process which prevents decomposition for
several months, even in these hot and moist regions.\]

{p. 270}

buried in a reclining attitude (not exactly in a sitting posture), with
the knees brought up to the chin, and the whole corpse laced together
into as small a space as possible; occasionally they are put into a
cloth bag. In general, the: graves are not dug; the grave-yard being
selected in places abounding with stones, the corps is simply laid down
on the ground and concealed beneath a heap of stones. The erection of
Chortens over the dead is limited to exceptional cases. With the
remarkable toleration so characteristic of Buddhism, my brothers were
allowed to open and examine some of the graves near Leh, and they even
induced a Lama to undertake the boiling of some corpses for the purpose
of cleaning and preparing the skeletons, though the latter process had
to be concealed from the population in general. The corpses taken out of
their graves were not decomposed; the great dryness of the atmosphere
had caused the flesh to shrink to a hard leathery substance covering the
bones, and this yielded but very slowly to the action of the boiling
water. The length of several corpses compressed in the way just
described was found to be from 2½ to 3 feet.

During the process of combustion and interment prayers are recited and
various ceremonies performed; offerings are presented to the god of the
fire, Melha; the Zhiba Chrinsreg, to obtain the remission of the sins of
the deceased,\[1\] is also performed. A ceremony which precedes the
interment consists in the purchase of the burial-ground from the *lord
of the ground*, in Tibetan

\[1. For its description see p. 249.\]

{p. 271}

Sadag gyalpo. The lord of the ground, and the mischievous spirits
obeying him, are supposed to do mischief, from innate malice, to the
dead in his future existence, as well as to his surviving relatives in
their present one. The lord of the ground can be pacified by the
purchase of the burial ground, while the other malignant spirits are
banished by charms and rites, in which reverence is paid to the three
gems, viz. to Buddha, Dharma, and Sanga.\[1\] These rites are said to
have been taught to man by Manjusrî, the god of wisdom. The relatives of
the deceased inform the astrologers, who are considered to have
intercourse with Sadag, of the amount they propose to pay to Sadag,
either in the form of cattle or money, and request them to persuade him
to be satisfied therewith. Invariably the answer is returned, that
Sadag, who is represented as insatiable, wants more for his pacification
than the amount offered. When, finally, the necessary sum has been
settled, the grave is marked out, and the astrologers proceed to expel
Sadag and all the other malignant spirits in the following terms:

"Lord of the ground, and you Mahôragas,\[2\] hear my command and order,
which I issue with the ceremonies prescribed by the sacred law of the
god Manjusrî and of the three gems. I drive the arrow not into the eyes,
not into the feet, not into the bowels of the evil spirits, Lord of the
ground, but into the earth, in order to

\[1. See p. 184, Note 2.

2\. Mahôragas, in Tibetan Tophye chenpo, are terrestrial dragons
superior to man. See Foe koue ki, Engl. transl., p. 133.\]

{p. 272}

render propitious the inferior mischievous spirits. Genii, if you do not
obey my order, I will break your heads with my dorje. Hear my order:
hurt neither the deceased (his name is here repeated) nor his surviving
relatives. Do them no damage, neither injure them, nor teaze them, nor
bring misfortune upon them."\[1\]

The Lama then drives the arrow into the ground, where it remains until
the dead person is buried.

\[1. From an oral communication from a Lama.\]

{p. 273}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Systems of Reckoning Time](bit19)
