<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotd45)  [Next](fotd47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f45"></span>

NATURE AND TIME

Through the streets of Coventry one winter's night strode a triumphant
spirit. Behind him stooping, unkempt, utterly ragged, wearing the
clothes and look that outcasts have, whining, weeping, reproaching, an
ill-used spirit tried to keep pace with him. Continually she plucked him
by the sleeve and cried out to him as she panted after and he strode
resolute on.

It was a bitter night, yet it did not seem to be the cold that she
feared, ill-clad though she was, but the trams and the ugly shops and
the glare of the factories, from which she continually winced as she
hobbled on, and the pavement hurt her feet.

He that strode on in front seemed to care for nothing, it might be hot
or cold, silent or noisy, pavement or open fields, he merely had the air
of striding on.

And she caught up and clutched him by the elbow. I heard her speak in
her unhappy voice, you scarcely heard it for the noise of the traffic.

"You have forgotten me," she complained to him. "You have forsaken me
here."

She pointed to Coventry with a wide wave of her arm and seemed to
indicate other cities beyond. And he gruffly told her to keep pace with
him and that he did not forsake her. And she went on with her pitiful
lamentation.

"My anemones are dead for miles," she said, "all my woods are fallen and
still the cities grow. My child Man is unhappy and my other children are
dying, and still the cities grow and you have forgotten me!"

And then he turned angrily on her, almost stopping in that stride of his
that began when the stars were made.

"When have I ever forgotten you?" he said, "or when forsaken you ever?
Did I not throw down Babylon for you? And is not Nineveh gone? Where is
Persepolis that troubled you? Where Tarshish and Tyre? And you have said
I forget you."

And at this she seemed to take a little comfort. I heard her speak once
more, looking wistfully at her companion. "When will the fields come
back and the grass for my children?"

"Soon, soon," he said: then they were silent. And he strode away, she
limping along behind him, and all the clocks in the towers chimed as he
passed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Song of the Blackbird](fotd47)

</div>
