<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Lord Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotd30)  [Next](fotd32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SWBC/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fifty-one Tales*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f30"></span>

SPRING IN TOWN

At a street corner sat, and played with a wind, Winter disconsolate.

Still tingled the fingers of the passers-by and still their breath was
visible, and still they huddled their chins into their coats when
turning a corner they met with a new wind, still windows lighted sent
out into the street the thought of romantic comfort by evening fires;
these things still were, yet the throne of Winter tottered, and every
breeze brought tidings of further fortresses lost on lakes or boreal
hill-slopes. And not any longer as a king did Winter appear in those
streets, as when the city was decked with gleaming white to greet him as
a conqueror and he rode in with his glittering icicles and haughty
retinue of prancing winds, but he sat there with a little wind at the
corner of the street like some old blind beggar with his hungry dog. And
as to some old blind beggar Death approaches, and the alert ears of the
sightless man prophetically hear his far-off footfall, so there came
suddenly to Winter's ears the sound, from some neighbouring garden, of
Spring approaching as she walked on daisies. And Spring approaching
looked at huddled inglorious Winter.

"Begone," said Spring.

"There is nothing for you to do here," said Winter to her. Nevertheless
he drew about him his grey and battered cloak and rose and called to his
little bitter wind and up a side street that led northward strode away.

Pieces of paper and tall clouds of dust went with him as far as the
city's outer gate. He turned then and called to Spring: "You can do
nothing in this city," he said; then he marched homeward over plains and
sea and heard his old winds howling as he marched. The ice broke up
behind him and foundered like navies. To left and to right of him flew
the flocks of the sea-birds, and far before him the geese's triumphant
cry went like a clarion. Greater and greater grew his stature as he went
northwards and ever more kingly his mien. Now he took baronies at a
stride and now counties and came again to the snow-white frozen lands
where the wolves came out to meet him and, draping himself anew with old
grey clouds, strode through the gates of his invincible home, two old
ice barriers swinging on pillars of ice that had never known the sun.

So the town was left to Spring. And she peered about to see what she
could do with it. Presently she saw a dejected dog coming prowling down
the road, so she sang to him and he gambolled. I saw him next day
strutting by with something of an air. Where there were trees she went
to them and whispered, and they sang the arboreal song that only trees
can hear, and the green buds came peeping out as stars while yet it is
twilight, secretly one by one. She went to gardens and awaked from
dreaming the warm maternal earth. In little patches bare and desolate
she called up like a flame the golden crocus, or its purple brother like
an emperor's ghost. She gladdened the graceless backs of untidy houses,
here with a weed, there with a little grass. She said to the air, "Be
joyous."

Children began to know that daisies blew in unfrequented corners.
Buttonholes began to appear in the coats of the young men. The work of
Spring was accomplished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Enemy Came to Thlunrana](fotd32)

</div>
