[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt13)  [Next](egt15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# ON PURITY OF HEART.

Then, since the object of desire exists not in anyplace, how canst thou
purpose to journey towards Him on foot? The highroad by which thy spirit
and prayers can travel towards God lies in the polishing of the mirror
of the heart. The mirror of the heart becomes not free from the rust of
infidelity and hypocrisy by opposition and hostility; the burnisher of
the mirror is your steadfast faith; again, what is it? It is the
unsullied purity of your religion. To him in

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

whose heart is no confusion the mirror and the form imaged will not
appear as the same thing; although in form thou art in the mirror, that
which is in the mirror is not thou,--thou art one, as the mirror is
another. The mirror knows nothing of thy form; it and thy form are very
different things; the mirror receives the image by means of light, and
light is not to be separated from the sun;--the fault, then, is in the
mirror and the eye.

Whoso remains for ever behind a veil, his likeness is as the owl and the
sun.. If the owl is incapacitated by the sun, it is because of its own
weakness, not because of the sun, the light of the sun is spread
throughout the world, the misfortune comes from the weakness of the
bat's eye.

Thou seest not except by fancy and sense, for thou dost not even know
the line, the surface and the point; thou stumblest on this road of
knowledge, and for months and years remainest tarrying in discussion;
but in this matter he utters only folly who does not know the
manifestation of God through his incarnation in man. If thou wishest
that the mirror should reflect the face, hold it not crooked and keep it
bright; for the sun, though not niggardly of his light, seen in a mist
looks only like glass, and a Yûsuf more beautiful than an angel seems in
a dagger to have a devil's face. Thy dagger will not distinguish truth
from falsehood; it will not serve thee as a mirror. Thou canst better
see thy image in the mirror of thy heart than in thy clay; break loose
from the chain thou hast fettered thyself with,--for thou wilt be free
when thou hast got clear from thy clay; since clay is dark and heart is
bright, thy clay is a dustbin and thy heart a rose-garden. Whatever
increases the brightness of thy heart brings nearer God's manifestation
of Himself to thee; because Abû Bakr's purity of heart was greater than
others', he was favoured by a special manifestation.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON THE BLIND MEN AND THE AFFAIR OF THE ELEPHANT.](egt15)
