[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt11)  [Next](egt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

# ON THE ASSERTION OF THE UNITY.

He is One, and number has no place in Him; He is Absolute, and
dependence is far removed from Him; not that One which reason and
understanding can know, not that Absolute which sense and imagination
can recognise. He is not multitude, nor paucity; one multiplied by one
remains one. In duality is only evil and error; in singleness is never
any fault.

While multitude and confusion remain in thy heart, say thou 'One' or
'Two,'--what matter, for both are the same. Thou, the devil's pasture,
know for certain what, and how much, and why, and how! Have a care! His
greatness comes not from multitude; His essence is above number and
quality; the weak searcher may

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

not ask '*Is it*' or '*Who*' concerning Him. No one has uttered the
attributes of the Creator, HE,--quantity, quality, why, or what, who,
and where. His hand is power, His face eternity; 'to come' is His
wisdom, 'the descent' His gift; His two feet are the majesty of
vengeance and dignity, His two fingers are the effective power of His
command and will. All existences are subject to His omnipotence; all are
present to Him, all seek Him; the motion of light is towards light-how
can light be separated from the sun?

In comparison with His existence eternity began but the day before
yesterday; it came at dawn, but yet came late. How can His working be
bounded by eternity? Eternity without beginning is a houseborn slave of
his; and think not nor imagine that eternity without end (is more), for
eternity without end is like to eternity without beginning.

How shall He have a place, in size greater or smaller? for place itself
has no place. How shall there be a place for the Creator of

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

place, a heaven for the Maker of heaven himself? Place cannot attain to
Him, nor time; narration can give no information of Him, nor
observation. Not through columns is His state durable; His nature's
being has its place in no habitation.

O thou, who art in bondage to form and delineation, bound by '*He sat
upon the throne*'; form exists not apart from contingencies, and accords
not with the majesty of the Eternal. Inasmuch as He was sculptor, He was
not image; '*He sat*' was, not throne, nor earth. Continue calling '*He
sat*' from thy inmost soul, but think not His essence is bound by
dimensions; for '*He sat*' is a verse of the Qur'ân, and to say '*He has
no place*' is an article of faith. The throne is like a ring outside a
door; it knows not the attributes of Godhead. The word 'speech' is
written in the Book; but shape and voice and form are far from Him;
'*God descends*' is written in tradition, but believe not thou that He
comes and goes; the throne is mentioned in order to exalt it, the
reference to the Ka\`ba is to glorify it. To say '*He has no place*' is
the gist of religion; shake thy head, for it is a fitting opportunity
for praise. They pursue <u>H</u>usain with enmity because 'Alî spoke the
word '*He has no place*.'

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

He made an earth for His creation in this form; behold how He has made a
nest for thee! Yesterday the sky was not, to-day it is; again to-morrow
it will not be,--yet He remains. He will fold up the veil of smoke in
front of Him;--'*On a day we will fold up the heavens*;' (Qur. 21:103)
breathe thou forth a groan. When the knowers of God live in Him, the
Eternal, they cleave '*behold*' and '*He*' in two through the middle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON GOD AS FIRST CAUSE.](egt13)
