[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt18)  [Next](egt20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

# ON THE PROTECTION AND GUARDIANSHIP OF GOD.

Whoso is fenced around by divine aid, a spider spreads its web before
him; a lizard utters his praise, a serpent seeks to please him. His shoe
treads the summit of the throne; his ruby lip is the world's

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

fitting ornament; in his mouth poison becomes sugar; in his hand a stone
becomes a jewel. Whoso lays his head on this threshold places his foot
on the head of things temporal; wise reason is powerless to explain
these things, for all are powerless who come not to this door. I fear
that through thy ignorance and folly thou wilt one day be left helpless
on

<u>S</u>irâ

<u>t</u>; thy ignorance will deliver thee to the fire; see how it is
administering the soporific lettuce and poppies to thee.

Thou hast seen how in the middle of a morsel of food that one eats there
will appear a grain of wheat, which has survived the attack of locust,
and bird, and beast, has seen the heat of heaven and the glow of the
oven, and remained unchanged under thy millstone. Who preserved it? God,
God. He is a sufficient protector for thee,--for possessions and life
and breath; thou art of His creation, that is

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

enough. If thou procurest dog and chain thou canst overcome the antelope
of the desert, and in thy trust and sincere belief in this thou art free
from anxiety as regards a maintenance and livelihood: I say to
thee,--and with reason and judgment, so that thou mayst not shut the
door of thine ear against my words,--Thy trust in dog and chain I see is
greater than in the All-hearing and All-seeing; the light of thy faith,
if standing on this foundation, is given over to destruction by a dog
and a thing of iron.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE PARABLE OF THOSE WHO GIVE ALMS.](egt20)
