[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt24)  [Next](egt26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

# ON THE EARNEST STRIVING.

When thou hast passed from Self to being naught, gird up the loins of
thy soul and set forth on the road, when thou standest up with loins
girt thou hast placed a crown on thy soul's head. Set then the crown of
the advance on the head of thy soul; let the foot that would retreat be
the companion of the mire; though the thoughtless man laughs at this
act, yet the wise chooses no other course.

Whoso turns not his face towards God, all his knowledge and possessions
deem thou an idol. Who turns away his face from God's presence, in truth
I call not him a man; a dog is better than a worthless man who turns
away his face, for a dog finds not its prey without a search. A dog that
lives in ease, though it gets fat, is not therefore more useful than a
greyhound.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

He will not take hypocrisy and deceit and lying, but looks to a man's
belief in the Unity and his sincerity. The eye that is fixed on wisdom
chooses the Truth; the pleasure-regarding eye sees not the Truth. False
is what delights the eye; the Truth enters not among earthy thoughts.
Infidelity and faith both have their origin in thy hypocritical heart;
the path is long because thy foot delays: were it not so, the road to
Him is but one step,--be a slave, and thou becomest a king with Him.
Know that the different names of the colours are illusory, that thy
sustenance is to be sought in the river of the Absolute. Leave off thy
talk, and come to the pavilion; loose thy heavy bonds from off thyself.
Perhaps thou hast not tasted the true faith, hast not seen the face of
truth and sincerity; so that thou thoughtest the mystery was plain to be
seen, and things thou sawest plainly have been mysteries to thee. I see
in thee no rightness of belief; if there were I would be the true dawn
of religion to thee;--I would have made the path of the true faith plain
to thee hadst thou not been a fool and a madman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF THE TRAVELLER ON THE PATH.](egt26)
