[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt32)  [Next](egt34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

# ON THE NEED OF GOD, AND INDEPENDENCE OF ALL BESIDE HIM.

He is wholly independent of me and thee in his plans; what matters
infidelity or faith to His Independence? What matters that or this to
His Perfection '? Know that God exists in real existence; in pursuance
of His decree and just designs, the Independent seeks thy favours, the
Guardian gives thee thanks.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

The wolf and Yûsuf appear to thee to be small and great; but with Him,
Yûsuf and wolf are the same. What, to His Mercy, matters opposition or
help? What, to His Wrath, are Moses and Pharaoh?

Thy service or thy rebellion are an honour or a shame to thee, but with
Him the colour of both is the same. What honour has He from Reason, or
from the lightning, what greatness from the soul, or the sky? The soul
and the heavens are His creatures. Happy the man who is chosen of Him.

The heavens and He who causes them to revolve are as the millstone and
the miller; the supreme Disposer and the obedient Reason are as the
carver's self and the matter he shapes. The motion of the restless
heavens and of the earth is as it were an ant in the mouth of a dragon;
the dragon does not swallow the ant, and the revolution of the
unconscious heavens sweeps on. He has imposed its task upon the
mill-wheel of misfortune, itself unmindful and closed round by
annihilation. Think of thy life as an atom in His time. His banquet as
accompanied by His affliction.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Thou knowest that thy goblet has four feet for movement; yet though thou
be persevering in His service thou wilt not reach His path but by His
grace. When will the slave who wishes to attain to God reach Him by
means of reason, or by hand and foot? When will he attain to God, who in
his own body attains (only to the recognition of) his hands and feet?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON SELF-ABASEMENT AND HUMILITY.](egt34)
