[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt47)  [Next](egt49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

# ON FOLLOWING THE PATH OF THE HEREAFTER.

All this knowledge is but a trifling matter; the knowledge of the
journey on God's road is otherwise, and belongs to the man of acuter
vision. What, for the man of wisdom and true religion, whose bread and
speech are alike of wheat, distinguishes that path and points it out?
Inquire its mark from the Speaker and the Friend.

And if, O brother, thou also ask of me, I answer plainly and with no
uncertainty, 'To turn thy face towards the world of life, to set thy
foot upon outward prosperity, to put out of mind rank and reputation, to
bend one's back double in His service, to purify ourselves from evil, to
strengthen the soul in wisdom.'

What is the provision for such a journey, O heedless one? By looking on
the Truth to cut oneself off from the false; to leave the abode of those
who strive with words, and to sit before the silent; to journey from the
works of God to His attributes, and from His attributes to the mansion
of the knowledge of Him; then from knowledge

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to the world of the secret, then to reach the threshold of poverty; then
when thou art become the friend of poverty, thy Soul destroys thy impure
Self; I thy Self becomes Soul inside thee; it becomes ashamed of all its
doings, and casting aside all its possessions is melted on its path of
trial; then when thy Self has been melted in thy body, thy Soul has step
by step accomplished its work; then God takes away its, poverty from
it,--when poverty is no more, God remains.

Not in folly nor ignorance spoke Bâyazîd, if he said '*Glory to me*;' so
too the tongue that spoke the supreme secret moved truly when it said,
'*I am God*.' When he proclaimed to the back the secret he had learned
from the face, it became his executioner and killed him; his secret's
day-time became as night, but God's word was what he spoke; when in the
midst of the rabble he suddenly

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

disclosed, unauthorized, the secret, his outward form was given to tile
gallows, his inward being was taken by the Friend; when his life's soul
could speak no longer, his heart's blood divulged the secret.

He spoke well who said in his ecstacy, *Leave thyself, O son, and come
hither*. From thee to the Friend is not long; thyself art the road, then
set thy feet on it, that with the eye of Godhead thou mayest see the
handwriting of the Lord of power and the land of spirits.

When shall we be separated from our Selves,--*I* and *thou* departed and
God remaining? the heart arrived at God's threshold, the Soul, saying,
Here am I, enter thou. When by the doorway of renunciation heart and
soul have reached the dome of a true belief in the Unity, the soul locks
itself in the embrace of the Houris, the heart walks proudly in the
sight of the Friend.

O thou who knowest not the life that comes of the juice of the grape,
how long then wilt thou be drunk with the grape's outward form? Why
boastest thou falsely that thou art drunk? So that they say, 'The fellow
has drunk butter-milk!' If thou drink wine, say naught; the drinker of
butter-milk too will guard his secret. Why seekest thou? Deem it not
like thy soul; drink it as thou dost thy faith. Thou knowest not what
*mâs* is in Persian; when thou

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

hast eaten it, thou recognizest the taste. When in this ruined hall thou
drinkest a cup of wine, I counsel thee put not thy foot outside the
house of thy drunkenness, lay down thy head where thou hast drunk the
wine; till thou hast drunk it, hold it an unlawful thing, and when thou
hast drunk it, rub a clod of earth on thy lips. When with a hundred
pains thou hast twice drunk the dregs, I will say, Look at the man's
courage!

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

More numerous than asses without head-stalls are all the carrion-hearted
wine-drinkers; wine has eaten up and the grape has carried off both
their understanding and their soul. In this company of youths, in their
cowardice no longer men, if thou speak not, thou remainest true; but if
thou speak, thou blasphemest.

How canst thou go forward? there is no place for thee, and how then wilt
thou leap? thou hast no foot; he feeds on sorrow for whom there is no
place, and he is destitute who has no foot. Those who, freed from being,
stand at the door of the true Existence, did not today for the first
time gird up their loins at His door; from Eternity the sons of the
serving-men, giving up wealth and power, have stood before Love as
numerous as ants.

Strive that when death shall come with speed he may find thy soul
already in his street. Leave this house of vagabonds: if thou art at His
door, remain there; if not, repair thither: for those who are His
servants are contented in His Godhead, (Qur. 39:36) ever, their loins of
servitude girt up, the lord of the seven heavens even as a slave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF THE LEARNED MAN AND THE FOOL.](egt49)
