[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt60)  [Next](egt62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

# THE PARABLE OF THE SCHOOLBOYS.

Thou knowest not the difference between the hidden world and
this,--canst not distinguish between welfare and affliction. In truth,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

thou art not a man travelling on this Path; thou art a child of the
Path, knowest not the Path; thou art but a boy,--go about thy play, go
back to thy pride and independence. The airs and graces of thy mistress
are enough for thee,--what, O son, hast thou to do with God? What
concern hast thou with Paradise and eternal delight, who hast rejected
the life to come for this present world? He knows thy baseness; how
shall He invite thy thee-ness to Himself? He offers thee the virgins and
palaces of Paradise, but thou art beguiled by this present world and its
beauties. O unfruitful one! be not feebler than a boy to follow the path
of God.

If a boy is unequal to learning his task, hear at once what it is that
he wants; be kind to him and treat him tenderly; make him not to grieve
in helpless expectation; at such a time give him sweetmeats in his lap
to comfort him, and do not treat him harshly. But if he will not read,
at once send for the strap; take hold of his ears and rub them hard;
threaten him with the schoolmaster, say that he will have strict orders
to punish him, that he will shut him up in a rat-house, and the head rat
will strangle him.

In the path that leads to the life to come be not thou less apt than a
boy to receive admonition; eternity is thy sweetmeat,--haste thou then,
and at the price of two rak\`ahs obtain Paradise. Otherwise the
rat-house will for thee be Hell,--will be thy tomb which meets thee on
thy way to that other mansion. Go to the writing-school of the prophets
for a time; choose not for thyself this folly, this affliction. Read but
one tablet of the religion of the prophets; since thou knowest nothing
thereof, go, read and learn, that haply thou mayest become their friend,
mayest haply escape from this stupidity;--in this corrupt

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and baleful world deem not thou that there is aught worse than
stupidity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ON STRIVING IN GOD'S PATH.](egt62)
