[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt84)  [Next](egt86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

# ON THE GLORY OF THE QUR'ÂN.

Glorious it is, though concealing its glory: and a guide, though under
the veil of coquetry. Its discourse is bright and strong; its argument
clear and apt; its words are a casket for the pearl of life,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

its precepts a tower over the water-wheel of the faith; to the Knowers
it is love's garden, to the soul the highest heaven.

O thou to whom, by reason of thy heedlessness and sin, in reading the
Qur'ân there comes upon thy tongue no sweetness from its words, into thy
heart no yearning from their comprehension,--by its exceeding majesty
and authority the Qur'ân, with argument and proof, is in its inner
meaning the light of the high road of Islâm, in its outward significance
the guardian of the tenets of the multitude; life's sweetness to the
wise, to the heedless but a recitation on the tongue,--phrases upon
their tongue whose sweetness they cannot taste, while careless of their
spirit and design.

There is an eye which sees the spirit of the Qur'ân, and an eye which
sees the letter;--for this the bodily eye, for that the eye of the soul;
the body, through the ear, carries away the melody of its words; the
soul, by its perceptive power, feeds on the delights of its spirit. For
strangers the curtains of majesty are drawn together in darkness before
its loveliness; the curtain and the chamberlain know not aught of the
king;--he knows who is Possessed of sight, but how can the curtain know
aught of him?

The revolutions of the azure vault have brought no weakening of its
power, no dimming of its lustre; its syntax and form, pronunciation and
nunation, prevail from earth to Pleiades.

Now hast thou in thy daily provision tasted the nut's first husk the
first skin is rough and harsh, the second is like the moon's

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

slough, the third is silk, pale and fine, and fourth is the succulent
cool kernel; the fifth degree is thy abode, where the prophets' law
becomes thy threshold. Seeing then thou mayest delight thy soul with the
fifth, why halt at the first? Thou hast seen of the Qur'ân but its
veil,--hast seen its letters, which do but hide it; it does not reveal
its countenance to the unworthy,--him only the letters confront. If it
had seen thee to be worthy, it would have rent this subtle veil and
shown its face to thee, and there thy soul might have found rest; for it
heals the wounded heart, and medicines the disappointed soul; the body
tastes the flavour of the dregs that it may live; the soul knows the
taste of the oil.

What can sense see, but that tile outward form is good? What there is
within, wisdom knows. Thou recitest the form of its sûras, and its true
nature thou knowest not; but know, that to him who truly reads the
Qur'ân, the feast it gives comes not short of the guesthouse of
Paradise. It has made the letter its veil, because it is to be concealed
from alien eyes; material existence knows naught of its inmost
soul,--know, its body is one thing, its soul a thing apart; from its
outward form thou seest but so much as do the common men from the
appearance of a king.

Why deemest thou that the words are the Qur'ân? What crude discourse is
thine concerning it? Though the letter is its bedfellow, it knows it
not, no more than the figures on the bath; nor do

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

the sleepers and the cut-purses I see, like those who watch, the spirit
of the Qur'ân.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: OF THE RECITAL OF THE SECRET OF THE QUR'ÂN.](egt86)
