[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt82)  [Next](egt84) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

# ON HIS DECREE AND ORDINANCE AND HIS CREATIVE POWER.

All that comes forth in the world is by decree, and what the prophet

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

speaks is also by decree; infidelity and faith, good and evil, old and
new,--all is referable to Him; whatso exists, is under the command of
the Almighty; all things work in accordance with the decree. All are in
subjection,--His Omnipotence the subduer; His creative Power appears
high above all. All is subject to His Omnipotence, dependent on His
mercy; all were preceded in time by His eternal Omniscience. The man of
the people, or he of the philosophers, he who is under command, or who
is of the learned,--all must return to His Presence; whoso possesses
power, it is of His favour. His causes have displaced Reason from her
position; His methods of deriving one thing from another have cut off
the soul's feet.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

The soul's relation to the world of life is like a blind man and a pearl
of \`Ummân. One showed a pearl to a blind man; the greedy fool asked
him, 'How much wilt thou give for this pearl?' He said, 'A round cake
and two fishes; for no one can discern ruby or pearl, why be
angry?--except by the pearl of the eye. So, since God has not given me
this pearl, do thou take away that other pearl, and talk no more folly.
If thou dost not wish to be laughed at by the ass, take thy pearl to one
who is skilled in pearls; as soon as he puts the sole of his foot upon
the oyster, his art knows well its value." Understanding is a tent
before His gate, the soul a soldier in His army; the soul from fear of
being rejected by Him sweeps not the dust of His Court except by
permission; all in place and time are His property, from the '*Be*' of
His decree to the wicket of '*It was*.' His decree has commanded the
service of His Court to all intelligences in the words '*Obey God*' from
the vegetative to the reasonable soul all like slaves are seeking Him.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

Well thou knowest that on the plain of eternity without beginning works
the hand of the creative power of God, the Great and Glorious. God's
decree has caused power in every sphere to become pregnant with act; so
that when the way of the membranes is opened, there comes forth that
wherewith they were pregnant. How shall Existence rebel against Him, to
whom non-Existence is obedient? One word of command awakened the
Universe; all things came together into the circle.

The soul that obeys the command, and commands; the intelligence that
understands the Qur'ân and gives us our faith; wisdom, and life, and
abstract form,--know that all proceed from the decree, and the decree
from God. When the sun's light falls upon the water, the quiet water is
stirred into activity; the sun's reflection from the water falls upon
the wall and paints the ceiling with beauty; know that that too, that
second reflection, of the water on the wall, is a reflection of the sun.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

He has caused all things to return to Himself; for none can escape from
Him. All things are, yet all are far from All; thou hast read in the
Qur'ân "*All things return*." (Qur. 42:53) From Him are evil and good,
power and might; '*the sentence is not changed*' is His decree (Qur.
50:28). His decree changes not: man can only stand in wonder before it.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

He is all-powerful to do whatso He shall desire; whatso He wills, He
does, for His is the dominion. He who, invested with His authority, is
in His secrets, and he whom He compels to be His slave,--all are
subjected or exalted according to His decree. Mankind heed not the good
or evil; as to whatso has been, and whatso shall be, that only can they
do which He commands. All that the Master has written and set forth, the
boy in school cannot but read; if from His records He has written out a
certain alphabet, he cannot turn his head away from it. Whether thou
existest or not is naught to the workings of God in the path of His
might and power: all is God's work,--happy is he who knows it.

Reason became the pen, the soul the paper; matter received form, and
body was transformed into individual shapes. To Love He said, 'Fear none
but me'; to Reason, 'Know thyself.' Reason is

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

ever Love's vassal; Love's point of honour lies in scorning life. To
Love He said, 'Do thou rule as king'; to human nature He said, 'Live
thou in thy household; in sorrow make the elements thy food, and
afterwards take in thy hand the water of life.' So that when the
reasonable soul has made of it her riches, and expends it in the path of
the Holy Spirit, that Holy Spirit rejoices in the soul, and the soul
becomes pure as the Primal Reason. This is the soul's progress from
life's beginning to its end.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

In view of thy religion to fly from poetry is better,--to shatter thy
verse as thou wouldst an idol; for religion and poetry, though at
present they are on all equality, are utterly foreign to each other. The
things that are permitted to us, are forbidden to one who is ignorant of
both of these; he appreciates the difference between prohibition and
permission who looks on ease in the light of a wound.

146

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TO REMEMBER THE WORDS OF THE ALL-KNOWING LORD](egt84)
