[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt91)  [Next](egt93) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

# ON THE HEARING OF THE QUR'ÂN.

When the pious reader has set the book with reverence upon his lap, and
has recited '*Let no one touch it*' (Qur. 56:78) over both his hands,
for a

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

single copper he gives forth a lusty cry, like a turtledove for a grain
of corn. Hear God's word from God Himself, for the labour of the reader
is only a veil. The Knower hears the word from the Truth; the force of
his desire denies him sleep. The feelings may be captive to the
professional reciter, but Love has its songster in the heart itself. Set
a mole in thy inmost heart, and not upon thy cheek; for it is thy
thoughts are the true index of thy state. The Qur'ân tells its secret to
the discerning thought; turn and twist and pause are only matters of the
voice, and whatso are matters of voice and written character and sound,
reside outside the gate.

If there were any meaning in its song, a nightingale would not be sold
for two coppers; seek for the essence of the matter in the meaning, not
in the written words,--thou wilt find no scent in a picture of
ambergris. The time of waiting in this transitory world deem but colour
to the eye, and sound to the ear; but the session of the Soul is a place
where hearing is not, and song is silence there. How shall Love deem
worthy notice a sweet that can be tasted? Make not thy soul glad with
song, for song brings no memories but of heaviness.

The friend who becomes thy friend at the bridge, take him not away from
the water with thee; either drown him in thy hatred, or put him under
ground, and then rest happy; but in Love, to bear the burden of its
commands, whether good or whether evil, is wisdom. Give to the flames
the gifts of the material world,--in thy smiling

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

heart place instead of smiles a cry of lamentation; and when one of
smiling heart gives forth a plaint, seize him by the foot and drag him
off to Hell.

Knowest thou not, thou monster, that all those devils of thy lower
nature, by using a hundred tricks and frauds and deceits, will break
forth within thee, till thy reason and sense desert thee? O thou, who in
this desert of injustice readest 'prosperity' for 'a whirlpool shame on
thee! The path of religion consists not in works and words, not in
syntax and accidence and metaphor; these kinds of things are far from
God's word,--the contents of the Qur'ân are like scattered pearls. O
Musalmâns, it may be the Qur'ân will one day depart again skywards; for
though now its name is with us, its laws and commands are obeyed among
us no longer.

The wise man listens to the Qur'ân with his soul, and abandons the
letter and the outward elegance; his soul takes its delight in it, and
sets to work afresh on all its duties. Know that to the eager disciple
music and beating time are like poverty to a lover; the state of ecstasy
that comes of skill and fraud is like the drowning cry of Pharaoh, his
cry was useless to him as he drowned,--the fire of his reconciliation
gave forth no smoke.

On the path, the condition of pursuing which is the devotion of one's
life. foolish shouting is asinine and shameless whoso gives forth three
shouts in the assembly, know that he does it in his anxiety for two
coppers; but the sigh of the disciple who has gained Love is like a
serpent sleeping upon a treasure; if the serpent raises himself upon

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the treasure, the pearl in his mouth darts forth fire. What is the
darwish's laughter?--folly; and what the crackling of a lamp?--water.
When water is mixed with the oil, the light, depending on the purity of
the oil, is affected; when the oil begins to burn, the foreign moisture
announces itself. Thy sighing is mere self-adornment, thy proper path is
to observe God's law;--thy path is a polished mirror, but thy sighs veil
it over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE COMPARISON OF THE CREATION OF ADAM AND OF JESUS SON OF MARY
(ON BOTH OF WHOM BE PEACE!).](egt93)
