[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](egt93) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

# TO COMMEMORATE THE PROPHETS IS BETTER THAN SPEAKING OF FOOLS.

The prophets were the upright ones of the faith, who showed to the
people the path of rectitude; the self-opinionated were bewildered

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

when they disappeared in the sunset of annihilation. The darkness of the
night of polytheism drew close its curtains: infidelity placed kisses on
the lips of idolatry; one bore a cross in his hand as it were a
rose-branch, another like a waterlily worshipped the sun; one worshipped
idols continually, and another had no aims whatever; this one in his
senseless folly deeming evil from the devil, good from God; some
strewers of dust, eaters of fire,--others beaters of the water, calmers
of the wind; here one scouring all sense out of his brain, as it were
done by wine,--there another dashing the turban from his head, as if it
were carried off by the gale; this one calling an image his god, and
that one like the priest of an idol-temple wrecking all religion; one
practising magic, another astrology,--one living in hope, another in
fear; all were leading unlovely lives, all were blind of understanding.

The masses were suppliants to an impostor in the faith,--the magnates
occupying the high places of religion; the religion of the Truth
concealed its face, and everyone published a false faith; false doctrine
and polytheism began to fly abroad, and every kind of heresy reared its
head. Here one in bondage to the teachings of folly, there another
satisfied with an empty deception; their ears listening to the devil's
promptings of desire, their ravings displaying the devil's guidance.
Folly and slander and idle chatter appeared wisdom alike to the crowd
and to the wise; the great were the slaves of their lusts and pleasures,
the populace of their jests and follies; the knowledge of God's religion
was blotted out, all alike triflers, babbling folly; under pretence of
knowledge each sought his own glory, and under cover of such knowledge
each hid his reason. From fear of imposture and magic the virtues hid
themselves, like the *alif* in *bism*, when the great withdrew to their
houses, the people returned to their impieties. One followed the path of
Moses, Jesus the leader of another; the faith of Zoroaster proclaimed
itself, the veil of mercy was torn to pieces.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

The land of Tûrân and kingdom of Irân were each laid waste by the
other's violence; the Ethiopians advanced towards Ya<u>th</u>rib, the
elephant and Abraha were routed by the birds. The house of the Ka\`ba,
seized by the stranger, became an idol-temple; the world was full of
stupidity and fraud, the man of wisdom found the path of religion
difficult. In this world of the lost ones dog and ass raised their
voices every morning; it was a world full of the vile and worthless,
\`Utba and <u>Sh</u>aiba and the cursed Bû Jahl; a world full of
devil-like beasts of prey,--a hundred thousand paths with pits in the
way, and all men blind; ghouls on either hand, in front a monster,--the
guide blind, his companion lame; disabled by their ignorance, in the
heaviness of sleep, the scorpion of their folly wards off from them the
knowledge of their danger.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Since somewhat has been said of the Unity, I will now speak of the glory
of the prophets; especially the praise of the last of the apostles, the
best and choicest of God's messengers.
