[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m08002) 
[Next](m08004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**3**

"Sanjaya said, 'Upon the fall of the great bowman Drona, thy sons, those
mighty car-warriors, became pale and deprived of their senses. Armed
with weapons, all of them, O monarch, hung down their heads. Afflicted
with grief and without looking at one another, they stood perfectly
silent. Beholding them with such afflicted countenances, thy troops, O
Bharata, themselves perturbed by grief, vacantly gazed upwards. Seeing
Drona slain in battle, the weapons of many of them, O king, dyed with
blood, dropped from their hands. Innumerable weapons, again, O Bharata,
still retained in the grasp of the soldiers, seemed in their pendent
attitude, to resemble falling meteors in the sky. Then king Duryodhana,
O monarch, beholding that army of thine thus standing as if paralysed
and lifeless, said, "Relying upon the might of your army I have summoned
the Pandavas to battle and caused this passage-at-arms to commence! Upon
the fall of Drona, however, the prospect seems to be cheerless. Warriors
engaged in battle all die in battle. Engaged in battle, a warrior may
have either victory or death. What can be strange then in this (viz.,
the death of Drona)? Fight ye with faces turned towards every direction.
Behold now the high-souled Karna, the son of Vikartana, that great
bowman of mighty strength, careering in battle, using his celestial
weapons! Through fear of that warrior in battle, that coward, viz.,
Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, always turns back like a small deer at the
sight of a lion! It is he who, by the ordinary methods of human battle,
brought the mighty Bhimasena endued with the strength of 10,000
elephants to that plight! It is he who, uttering a loud roar, slew with
his invincible dart the brave Ghatotkaca of a 1,000 illusions and
well-acquainted with celestial weapons! Behold today the inexhaustible
might of arms of that intelligent warrior of sure aim and invincible
energy! Let the sons of Pandu behold today the prowess of both
Ashvatthama and Karna resembling that of Vishnu and Vasava! All of you
are singly able to slay the sons of Pandu with their troops in battle!
How much more then are you capable, when united together, of that feat!
Endued with great energy and accomplished in weapons, you will today
behold one another engaged in the achievement of mighty tasks!'"

"Sanjaya continued, 'Having said these words, O sinless one, thy son
Duryodhana, with his brothers, made Karna the generalissimo (of the Kuru
army). Obtaining the command, the mighty car-warrior Karna, so fierce in
battle, uttered loud roars and fought with the foe. He caused, O sire, a
great carnage among the Srinjayas, the Pancalas, the Kekayas, and the
Videhas. From his bow issued innumerable lines of arrows, one close
behind the wings of another, like flights of bees. Having afflicted the
Pancalas and the Pandavas endued with great activity, and slain
thousands of warriors, he was at last slain by Arjuna!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](m08004)
