[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](chap06)  [Next](appendix) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

## THE LITERATURE OF THE 'DE CIVITATE DEI'

BERNHARD DOMBART has an interesting posthumous paper on the text. It is
printed in Harnack & Gebhardt's 'Texte und Untersuchungen,' 1908, with
the title: 'Zur Textgeschichte der Civitas Dei.' (Dombart having died
before the publication, it was produced by Otto Stählin.)

The first printed edition appeared at Subiaco in 1467. Mentelin produced
an important edition at Strasburg about the year following, which
included the earliest commentary--that of Thomas Valois and Nicholas
Triveth. This commentary is full in the earlier parts but meagre later.
In 1522 J. L. Vives published the first edition which was made from a
collation of the MSS., with a commentary of his own in which he attacked
violently all the scholastic commentators. He makes many annotations.
Some of them are amusing. We have interesting portraits of scholars like
Sir Thomas More and Budé (Budæus), shrewd gibes that relieve a mass of
detail, quips at scholastics, along with a defence of traditional
religion against the unquiet spirit of Luther. With the comments of
Vives are sometimes printed those of Leonard Coquæus (1661).

Of modern editions of the 'De Civitate Dei,' the best is that in the
Vienna ' Corpus Scriptorum by E. Hoffmann. A smaller and later one, also
in two volumes, by Dombart is useful. It lacks that elaborate table of
contents which closes certain less important editions.

This table is not authoritative, but it is useful. Scholz gives an
account of its origin.

In the late sixteenth century J. Healey made a fine translation. The
folio edition of it issued in 1610 and 1620 gives also Vives'
commentary. This translation (less the commentary) was recently
reprinted in the 'Ancient and Modern Theological Library.' What purports
to be the same appeared subsequently in three volumes in the Temple
Classics. At the end of Vol. III we are told that Dr. Bussell, its
editor, has rearranged and abridged it. He has done this without telling
the reader where the cuts are made. Consequently all the references are
useless except at the beginning, *e.g.* it has been compressed into
eighteen books instead of twenty-two. It is difficult to know where we
are, although the wording of the translation has not been changed.
Another modern translation is that by Dr. Marcus Dods in the ' Library
of the Fathers'--also there is one by Dr. Gee (London, 1894).

Literature on the 'De Civitate Dei' is large. Heinrich Scholz's 'Glaube
und Unglaube in der Welt-geschichte' (Leipzig, 1911) is indispensable
and everywhere interesting. It takes account of Reuter's view, but is
independent. Bruno Seidel's thesis, ' Die Lehre des heiligen Augustinus
vom Staate' is the most helpful single book. It is printed in Sdralek's
'Kirchen-geschichtliche Abhandlungen,' ix. 1 (1909). Hermann Reuter's
'Augustinische Studien' (Gotha, 1887) is illuminating; but his
anti-hierarchical bias must be borne in mind. The third essay, that on
the Church as the Kingdom of God, is the most important for the
understanding of the ' De Civitate Dei.' But no part of it can be
ignored.

Dorner's large book on Augustine ('Augustinus,' Berlin, 1873) has about
one hundred pages bearing on the topics discussed here. It is important
as it takes the view, followed by Ritschl and others, which makes
Augustine the father of the Papacy.

Ritschl's Essay, 'Ueber die Methode der älteren Dogmengeschichte,' which
appeared in the *Jahrbücher für Deutsche Theologie,* Bd. XVI, 191-214
(Gotha, 1871), is reprinted in the first volume of his 'Gesammelte
Aufsätze,' pp. 147-169. It contains certain important statements about
Augustine, which I have discussed. So also does the great work of Otto
Gierke,' Das deutsche Genossenschaftsrecht.' These maximise the
clericalist side (in order to condemn it). The same is true of H. von
Eicken in his book, 'Geschichte und System der mittelalterlichen
Weltanschauung' (Stuttgart, 1887). Hertling severely, but not unfairly,
attacked this in his 'Beiträge zur Philosophic.' Important essays on the
subjects here discussed are hidden away in journals, *e.g.* Reuter
laments the common ignorance of H. Schmidt's essays. They are published
in the *Jahrbücher für Deutsche Theologie.* Vol. vi. pp. 197-255 (1861)
contains that on 'Des Augustinus Lehre von der Kirche,' vols. vii.
237-281 and viii. 261-325 that on Origen and Augustine as apologists.
Those are important. Ferdinand Kattenbusch is said to be the first to
call attention to Augustine's identification of the Church with the
apocalyptic kingdom. His 'Kritische Studien zur Symbolik' (the second
essay) will be found in ' Theologische Studien und Kritiken' (Gotha,
1878). Feuerlein, who takes Augustine as a typical mediæval, wrote his
essay, 'Ueber die Stellung Augustins in der Kirchen- und
Culturgeschichte,' in Sybel's ' Historische Zeitschrift,' 1869, vol.
xxii. 270. It is not otherwise valuable.

Edmond Boissier's 'Fin du Paganisme' has a good many pages bearing on
this topic. So also an interesting thesis from Columbia University by E.
Humphreys, 'Politics and Religion in the Days of Augustine.' On the
philosophy of history there is Reinkens' rectorial address at Breslau
(1865), to which I alluded in my second lecture. He was afterwards an
Old Catholic bishop. This essay has been over-praised. Others are those
of G. S. Seyrich, 'Die Geschichtsphilosophie Augustins nach seiner
Schrift de Civitate Dei' (1891), and A. Niemann, 'Augustins
Geschichtsphilosophie' (1895).

Two books that are indispensable are Joseph Mausbach's 'Die Ethik des
heiligen Augustinus,' two volumes (Freiburg, 1909), and Ernest
Troeltsch, ' Augustin, die christliche Antike und die Mittelalter'
(1915). The latter is written in strong reaction against the view of
Augustine as essentially mediæval. Mausbach writes an apologetic of S.
Augustine against all who, like Ritschl, make him hostile to the State
and to culture.

An American, Dr. Anson, wrote on the sources of the first ten books, and
Dr. Frick has discussed those of the eighteenth.

A good account will be found in Dr. Cunningham's Hulsean Lectures
(1885), 'S. Austin and his Place in the History of Christian Thought.'
Dr. Carlyle in his 'History of Political Theories in the West' says
surprisingly little. Professor Dunning says even less in his 'History of
Political Thought.' There is an unsympathetic dissertation from Geneva
by F. Thomas, 'S. Augustin, La Cité de Dieu' (1886). Harnack in the
'History of Dogma ' says some important things on the same lines as
Ritschl and Gierke. Beard has some pages in his book on the Reformation.
The former German Chancellor, Count Georg von Hertling, has a book on
Augustine ('Der Untergang der antiken Kultur, Augustin,' 1902) in the
series 'Weltgeschichte in Karakterbilden'; the pp. 98 and *sqq.* treat
of the 'De Civitate Dei.' He declares this to be the most potent in
influence of all S. Augustine's works. Hertling takes the view which I
have taken in Lectures III and IV, and refuses to identify the two
cities *sans phrase* with Church and State. Roundly he declares that of
any hostility to the State on the part of the Church, Augustine knew
nothing. A large book on Augustine ('Augustinus,' Paderborn, 1898) by
Cardinal Rauscher, and published after his death, may be mentioned. Theo
Sommerlad's two works, 'Das Wirtschaftsprogramm der Kirche des
Mittelalters' (Leipzig, 1903) and 'Die wirtschaftliche Thätigkeit der
Kirche in Deutschland' (Leipzig, 1910), carry to the farthest point the
notion of Augustine as the author of a system of gigantic social reform.
Robert-son's 'Regnum Dei' may also be consulted. Much use therein is
made of Reuter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](appendix)
