[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](preface)  [Next](chap02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## I

## GENERAL SCOPE OF THE 'DE CIVITATE DEI'

'As Man amongst creatures and the Church amongst men and the Fathers in
the Church, and S. Augustine amongst the Fathers, so amongst the many
pretious volumes and in the rich storehouse of his workes, his bookes of
the City of God have a speciall preheminence.'

So W. Crashawe began the dedication which he prefixed in 1620 to the
second edition of J. Healey's translation of the text and of the
Commentary thereon of J. L. Vives. Vives had dedicated his Commentary to
Henry VIII, dating from Louvain on July 7, 1522.

This passage of Crashawe we might parallel from writers of almost every
age; and from some of widely different outlook. Bishop Otto of Freising,
the uncle and historian of Frederic Barbarossa, sings in unison with
Niceron, the collector of literary anecdotes in the seventeenth century.

The greatness of the 'De Civitate Dei' is not in dispute. No student of
the fifth century can afford to overlook it. No one can understand the
Middle Ages without taking it into account. What is true of historians
is true no less of ecclesiastical politicians and reformers--even down
to a leader in the modern socialist movement like
Sommerlad.\[<a href="#footnote01" id="text01">1</a>\] In his earlier
days Count Hertling has written on the book, and he alluded to its
principles in a recent speech. The book has been more widely read than
any other of S. Augustine except the 'Confessions.' It has had
commentators from Coquaeus down to Scholz. For these reasons it might
seem hardly a fitting topic for 'Pringle-Stewart' lectures. One
historian said to me on hearing of the Course: 'Is there anything new to
say about that?' Yet another said, that the more he tried to comprehend
the mind of the Middle Ages, the more was he convinced that it was
necessary to understand S. Augustine.

That understanding is not easy. There are those who are for treating S.
Augustine as the typical example of the medieval temperament with its
heights and depths, its glories and splendours of imagination, its
dialectical ingenuity and its irrational superstitions. Others see in S.
Augustine essentially a man of the antique world. They do not deny to
him real influence upon later times. Who can? But they are inclined to
minimise this; at least in matters of social and political importance.
The former is the view of Dorner, still more of
Feuerlein.\[<a href="#footnote02" id="text02">2</a>\] It became a
commonplace with scholars like Gierke and Ritschl, and in a less degree
with Harnack. It is presented in an extreme form in a book, once well
known, that came from America, the late Dr. A. V. G. Alien's '
Continuity of Christian Thought.' Hermann Reuter in his 'Augustinische
Studien' began a reaction. That book is of incalculable value for those
who wish to comprehend S. Augustine. This reaction reached its limit in
a book published during the war, by Troeltsch, 'Die christliche Antike
und die Mittelalter.' Signs of this view are to be found in Dr.
Carlyle's valuable work on 'Political Theory in the West'--although it
is more through what he does not say than what he does, that we gather
the views of the writer. Professor Dunning in his 'History of Political
Thought' is even more significant in his omissions.

Political thought and S. Augustine's influence thereon are to be the
topic of these lectures. That involves the whole subject of Church and
State. So we are carried some way into theology. The ' De Civitate Dei'
is not a treatise on politics. It is a *lime de circonstance* concerned
with apologetic. Most of S. Augustine's doctrine alike in theology and
philosophy is embedded in it. We may regard it as an expansion of the
'Confessions.' The relation of true philosophy to scepticism, the idea
of creation, the problem of time, the contribution of Platonism, more
especially Neo-Platonism, the meaning of miracle and nature, the
Incarnation as expressing the humility of God, the whole scheme of
redemption, salvation by grace, long divagations into comparative
mythology, all these might be made the subject of lectures on the 'De
Civitate Dei,' and that without leaving the *terrain* occupied by the
author. Another lecturer better equipped might give not six but twelve
lectures concerning the philosophic and theological problems suggested
by the 'De Civitate Dei,' and not even mention those points which I hope
to discuss. If that had been what was expected, you would not have done
me the high honour of choosing me to lecture on this work. To begin
with, a great Augustinian scholar, Canon T. A. Lacey, in the first
course of 'Pringle-Stewart' lectures discussed some of the more
important of these matters, although without special reference to this
book. You would not wish them discussed again by one who has neither Mr.
Lacey's intimate knowledge of S. Augustine nor his alertness of critical
judgment. So I shall limit myself to the political aspects of the book.

The points which it offers to the student of political thought are not
few, nor are they unimportant. The book has been treated as a philosophy
of history finer than that of Hegel; and again as the herald of all that
is significant in the 'Scienza Nuova' of Vico. Can such views be
sustained? Or is it the case that S. Augustine had no notion of a
philosophy of history, that his views are self-contradictory, and that
only a few passages throw more than a faint light on it. That question
will form the topic of the second lecture. Did S. Augustine teach, that
the State is the organisation of sin, or did he believe in its God given
character, and desire its developments? Did he teach the political
supremacy of the hierarchy, and, by implication, that of the Pope and
the Inquisition? Or was it of the Church as the *Communio sanctorum*
that he was thinking? Does his doctrine of individual election reduce to
ruins all ecclesiastical theory? These topics will occupy the third and
fourth lectures. What was S. Augustine's influence on mediæval life? Was
there something almost like a 'reception' of Augustinianism, followed by
a repudiation at the Renaissance? Or was it that only slightly he
affected political ideals in the Middle Ages? Some see the whole
controversy between Popes and Emperors implicit in the 'De Civitate
Dei.' Others would trace it to causes quite different. What real change
came about at the Reformation? Did S. Augustine's social doctrine (apart
from the theology of grace) lose all influence? Or did men retain
unimpaired the idea of the *civitas Dei,* as it had been developed?
These questions will occupy the last two lectures.

To-day let me try to determine certain preliminary points. Let us get
clear what is the nature and aim of the book. Much needs to be said
which will seem trite to students. I would crave your pardon. These
matters are needful for evidence of what will later be said. Besides, it
is a less error to take too little for granted than too much.

Like nearly all of S. Augustine's writings, the 'De Civitate Dei' is
controversial. It is a pamphlet of large scale. Like S. Paul and unlike
S. Thomas, Augustine wrote only under the pressure of immediate
necessity. All his writings have an apologetic character. Most of them
are coloured by his intensely rich personality. Trained in rhetoric,
Augustine is never abstract or impersonal. Sometimes we regret this and
the *longueurs* to which his skill in dialectic leads him. Theories
abound in S. Augustine's works, but the last thing he is is a theorist,
pure and simple. Augustine became a theologian, as he had become a
philosopher, driven by practical needs. Adversaries might even argue
that all his emphasis on the external, on the given quality of grace,
was due to his own experiences--just as Luther universalised his own
inner life into the doctrine of justification by faith. We must see the
place which these controversies, implied in the 'De Civitate,' occupied
in S. Augustine's life. After his conversion, he spent the first years
in assailing the doctrines of which he had been an adherent. We have the
books 'Contra Academicos,' the 'Soliloquy' and other writings against
the Manichæans. In these he is concerned with problems mainly
speculative, the nature and origin of evil, the nature of belief, the
possibility of certitude, the significance of error, which at least is
evidence of the personality of the man in error, and so forth.

To these controversies succeeded his great conflict with the Donatists.
When he was converted, Augustine did not become a merely intellectual
adherent of Christianity. He became a member of a visible, active and
world-wide Church; and that in a day of storms. When Augustine came home
to Africa, after his mother's death, he found the Church rent by schism,
with the Catholics appearing as the weaker party, and the Donatists
claiming almost a national position. Augustine was forced into the
position of a champion of the Catholic Church. Consequently, more in
regard to schism than to heresy, he developed the idea of the unity and
universality of the Church. He thus marked a difference between himself
and Greek theologians like Origen.

Then came the sack of Rome by Alaric. Only in our own time can the shock
of that world-catastrophe be paralleled in its effect on the imagination
and thoughts of men. The eternity of Rome had been a presupposition of
the common consciousness. But now the world seemed in ruins--*i.e.* the
world of imagination and mental comfort. Augustine saw that the taking
of Rome had no 'great military significance.' In one sermon he bids his
hearers be calm and recollect that Rome really means Romans--and that
the Roman name was not extinguished. The calamity gave its last chance
to dying paganism. Rome had been a stronghold of the ancient worship,
and was still largely pagan in feeling. Obvious then was its line of
counterattack. 'This horror would not have been, had we stood by the
ancient ways. The mad policy of the Emperors in prohibiting sacrifices
to the gods has produced its inevitable nemesis. The sack of Rome is the
judgment of Jove.'

This was the position in which Augustine was placed, one somewhat
resembling that of a modern Christian faced with the charge that
Christianity is bankrupt because it did not prevent the war. To meet the
charge Augustine wrote the 'De Civitate Dei.' He did not write it all at
once. In the 'Retractations' he admits that he was interrupted by the
Pelagian controversy. That too leaves its traces upon this encyclopedia
of his mind. Much of the book is but an expansion of Augustine's
doctrine of grace applied on the scale of world history. That is another
reason why the book is so hard. Augustine had a discursive mind, and his
training in rhetoric increased this tendency. He had no great powers of
construction. The architectonics even of the 'Confessions' leave much to
be desired--a fact which is less patent than it should be to many
because they do not read the latter books. In his controversial writings
he does not know when to stop; nor does he trouble much about relevance.
We can never understand S. Augustine if we think of him as a
system-maker. Systems may have come out of him, but before all else he
is a personality. He is the meeting-place of two worlds. All that the
training of that day in the West could give-- he knew little or no
Greek--he had. His mind was a mould into which the culture of the world
was poured. This he had either to assimilate to Christianity, or to
eliminate from himself. Sometimes he is inclined to do the latter. Hence
his inconsistencies; and in consequence many different people could
justify themselves out of his writings. Augustine is not, as some think,
a pure ascetic without interest in human life, careless of the goods of
learning--but sometimes he seems to be that. He is a rich, hot-blooded,
highly complex and introspective personality, passionately Christian,
but exquisitely and delicately human, sensitive and courageous, looking
with reverence on Rome, possessed, with Virgil and Cicero, of a Roman
love of authority and law, and an African touch of earth, yet ever
withal having the *nostalgia of the infinite.* Within Augustine there
struggle two personalities, a mystic, who could forgo all forms, not
only of outward but of inward mechanism, and fly straight--'the alone to
the Alone' --with a champion of ecclesiastical order, resolute to secure
the rights of the Church, and a statesman looking before and after.

One constant temptation besets the historian of thought in every sphere.
He is apt to suppose that his subjects are more consistent than they
are; to make logical wholes of scattered and often contradictory hints;
and sometimes even to rule out, as unauthentic, writings which have no
other evidence against them than that of being hard to reconcile with
others of the same author. In no case could this be a worse error than
in that of S. Augustine; in no part of S. Augustine could it be worse
than in the 'De Civitate Dei.' One student has said: 'It is not a book,
it is journalism; whenever S. Augustine had nothing else to do he sat
down and wrote a bit of it.' That may be fancy. But it is a fanciful way
of conveying a truth. Let us then take the work right through, and give
an account of it, not troubling about its logical consistency or the
relevance of parts to the main idea.

In the 'Retractations' Augustine gave his own analysis of it, though a
very brief one. The first five books are a reply to those who say that
the pagan gods are to be worshipped for the sake of earthly security and
peace. The next five are a reply to the contention of the philosophic
apologists that the worship of old Roman gods leads to the real good,
eternal life. The pagans having been routed, Augustine turned to
construction. This is divided into three parts. In Books XI-XIV we have
the origin of the two cities, the *Civitas Dei* and the *Civitas
terrena*; in the next four he traces their course in time, and in the
last four their consummation in eternity.

Let us go through the work in further detail. In Book I, Augustine
states that his object in writing is to rebut the charge that
Christianity has ruined Rome. He shows that temporal felicity had not
been the unvarying condition for the city of Rome. Besides, the same
gods had failed to protect Troy, or else Æneas would never have reached
Italy. Even at the time of writing, Christianity, he claims, is having
its effect, in getting better treatment for the vanquished. Pagans-- the
very men who attack the Church--go running to the churches to take
sanctuary. There they are safe. Augustine does not claim that a complete
acceptance of Christianity would guarantee the life of a nation.

The laments over a toppling order, he will not meet by saying that a
Christian commonwealth now or at any future date will be stable. What
marks this book is the final repudiation of the old views, as much
Jewish as pagan, that temporal felicity follows the service of the true
God--alike for the individual and the nation.

The wicked, either man or nation, may flourish like a green bay tree,
says S. Augustine, and often will. That will not advantage the wicked in
the end, which is outside this life. But it will teach the good man
humility and a due dependence on the eternal values. The world may be
saved. But it will be saved on other-worldly lines. Hermann Reuter is
right in saying that the whole world turns on the contrast between
worldly and other-worldly
motives.\[<a href="#footnote03" id="text03">3</a>\]

Augustine replies to the charge against the Christians by a doctrine
concerning the nature of religion which makes the topic of temporal
felicity irrelevant. This method was a revolution. Like most of S.
Augustine's thought--and some of Christian teaching--it was neither
entirely novel nor exclusively Christian. It rests on the philosophic
conception of God as the *summum bonum.* 'What is the chief end of man?
To glorify God and to enjoy Him for ever.' This may be a summary of the
Christian ideal, but it includes within it the Neo-Platonist also and
many others. Augustine was aware of this, and in the second part he will
meet and refute the argument that eternal goods are to be won by the
worship of the pagan deities. Meanwhile he is occupied with those who
complain of the evil wrought by Christianity. Against them he points out
the luxury and corruption of Rome, all the ills predicted by Scipio if
Carthage should be destroyed and Jeshurun wax fat with that lust of
sovereignty which among all other sins of the world was most appropriate
unto the Romans. He depicts the tragedies produced by the lust of power
describes the hideous sexualities current in the theatre and in certain
worships not yet discarded, despite all the Gothic peril. He concludes
by sketching his plan to point out (1) the evils that befel Rome in
early days; (2) the uselessness, so proved, of the old gods even for
temporal ends; (3) their even greater uselessness for eternal bliss.

The second book is mainly concerned with the profound moral gulf between
paganism and Christianity. Therein Augustine makes lavish use of the 'De
Republica' of Cicero. He describes in detail the decay of Roman manners
during the last days of the Republic, glancing at the moral and
political passions which preceded and provoked the Imperial regime. This
book is designed to establish the now familiar thesis of the moral and
political corruption produced by paganism, and concludes with an
exhortation to the Romans to renounce it.

Book III describes the miseries that ushered in and accompanied the
triumphs of Rome. With these are contrasted the golden times of peace
under King Numa and the wickedness of the attack on Alba Longa. Emphasis
is thus laid on the miseries inherent in the pagan state as an
expression of pagan ethics and religion.

In Book IV Augustine lays down that justice is to be set before power,
and that alike by by nations and individuals. We come to the maxim on
which so much more must be said: *Remota justitia, quid regna nisi magna
latrocinia.* The Roman Empire he seems on the whole to have viewed as a
just reward earned partly as the due of Roman virtue and partly in
compensation for unjust attacks; but he is not always consistent. He
speaks of the lust of power of Ninus and the Assyrian Empire. Here we
come in Chapters 3 and 15 to strongly anti-imperialist passages. Thence
Augustine proceeds (C. 11) to consider the more refined forms of
paganism-- those which take the individual deities as names for the
attributes of the one supreme God who was often interpreted
pantheistically. He decides that Jove was at least no final organiser of
victory for his children, and in that noteworthy passage (IV, 15) he
argues in favour of a society of small States, 'little in quantity and
peaceful in neighbourly agreement,' as against the aggregations of
empire. Once more he makes easy game of the puerilities of polytheism,
and denounces its obscene festivals. Thence he passes to the more
serious doctrine of Varro, for whom Augustine entertained the greatest
respect. Acute and learned, with a prodigious memory, Varro is
Augustine's main authority for mythology-- just as later on Vico, who
knew Varro mainly through the 'De Civitate Dei,' is driven at every turn
to appeal to him. Varro was a Theist or Pantheist of a kind, and like
Augustine worshipped a Providence, the bestower of kingdoms, who grants
his boons to bad no less than good, like a parent giving toys. The book
concludes with the assertion that God is the giver of all kingdoms and
the determiner of their end, and with illustrations drawn from the
Jewish State.

Book V enters into the problem of freedom and necessity. Despite his
strong predestinarian doctrine Augustine was no believer in a blind
fate--any more than was Calvin. Empire he holds, has been given to the
Romans as the reward of certain terrestrial virtues. Great qualities of
courage and self-sacrifice belong or did belong to Roman patriots. No
pagan could be more eloquent than he is on their grandeur. He will even
set them as an example for the citizens of the heavenly city. 'The
argonauts of the ideal' are bidden to emulate the zeal and sacrifice
which Romans had shown for a cause so far inferior. The well-known
passage from the sixth Æneid, *excudent alii spirantia mollius aera,* is
used to illustrate Roman imperialism (V, 12). Augustine argues that
ambition may be a vice, but that it acts in restraint.

of worse vices, cowardice and indolence. Even here the Christian martyr
is superior. He despised earthly honours and endured worse torments. The
Romans had not the true end of doing God's will. Hence they could have
no eternal hope. Their relative goodness would have gone unrewarded, and
God's justice therefore would for ever be assailable, had not an earthly
sovereignty been their meed. That species of power is other in kind than
the eternal joy of the children of God. Yet once more must Augustine
assert that it is the true God who gave Rome her Empire and who presides
over the origin and issue of all wars. There he anticipates the argument
of Dante. Rhadagaisus, the Gothic king, whom they all know, forms a
shining example of this divine supervision in his sudden and
incalculable downfall.

Following this passage is the famous *Fürsten-spiegel,* the picture of a
godly prince (V, 24). Somewhat to our surprise, Augustine chooses as an
instance Constantine the Great. Maybe he knew less ill of him than we
do. At least this choice shows how entirely Roman was Augustine.
Theodosius the Great is then made the topic of a panegyric, for he
grudged not to assist the labouring Church by all the wholesome laws
which he promulgated against heretics.

Augustine's first part concludes with Book V. He is now to be occupied
in showing that paganism is wrong even as a method of approach to the
True God.

Vulgar paganism is now demolished. We pass in Book VI to the philosophic
creeds. An interesting appreciation of Varro precedes an account of his
book on 'Human and Divine Antiquities' which indeed we know largely
through the use Augustine makes of it. Varro divides religion into three
stages, somewhat after the manner of Comte. There is *(a)* the mythical,
followed by *(b)* the natural and *(c)* the civic. He prefers the
second. Augustine tries to show the connexion between the two, and
denies that paganism can be detached from its darker side. It is vain to
worship pagan deities in the hope of eternal bliss. Book VII carries the
matter a little further, and argues the inconsistency of Varro.

Book VIII treats of the Platonic doctrine of God. This in the main
Augustine accepts; but he treats as futile the attempt to accommodate it
with the worship of the pagan pantheon. Apuleius, the African
representative of paganism, is discussed. We have vigorous words in
abuse of magic. The heathen practice of apotheosis is contrasted with
the honours given to the Christian martyr. This, he says, is high
reverence, but in no sense do we treat the martyrs as gods. Book IX is
concerned with a further condemnation of the doctrine of mediating
spirits and demons. Thence Augustine passes to the doctrine of the One
Mediator, and argues the possibility of the Incarnation. The Book shows
that the debate between the Christian apologist and his assailants is at
bottom a conflict between two forms of mediation.

Book X contains a further analysis of Plotinus, whose doctrine Augustine
parallels with the Logos doctrine of S. John i. He contrasts the one
sacrifice, once offered, with the offerings to idols; and the Christian
with the pagan miracles. In Chapter 25 he argues that all good men in
every age are saved, but saved through faith in Christ, *e.g.* the
saints of the Old Testament. Then we have more argument for the
Incarnation. Augustine sees the fundamental difficulty in Incarnation, a
self-limitation of God which is all but intolerable. It is this doctrine
of the humility of God at which imagination boggles. 'These proud
fellows scorn to have God for their Master, because the Word became
Flesh and dwelt among us.'

The last words of Book X sum up the first part of the whole:

'In these ten books I have spoken by the good assistance of God
sufficient in sound judgments (though some expected more) against the
impious contradictors that prefer their gods before the founder of the
holy city, whereof we are to dispute. The first five of the ten opposed
them that adored their gods for temporal respects; the five later
against those that adored them for the life to come. It remains now,
according as we promised in the first book, to proceed in our discourse
of the two cities that are confused together in this world, and distinct
in the other; of whose original, progress, and consummation I now enter
to dispute, evermore invoking the assistance of the Almighty.'

Now at last in Book XI we get to the two cities. Augustine begins by
proving that the universe and time began together. The City of God
begins with the creation of light, *i.e.* with the angels; and the other
with the sin of Satan. The doctrine of the Trinity is expounded, and
Augustine emphasises his view that evil is a defect of will, not of
nature, once more attacking the Manichæan dualism. 'Let there be light'
signifies the creation of the angelic hierarchy.

Book XII once more discusses the relations of the good and evil angels.
Augustine meets and denies the doctrine of the longevity of the world,
of the Antipodes, of an eternal recurrence. He goes on to the creation
of man. Book XIII describes the fall, and its consequence in death. He
combats the view that death was inevitable, not penal. In Book XIV we
proceed to the ordinary doctrine of the irruption of grace. After
dilating on the evils of sin, he describes the two cities more at large
in Chapter 28.

'Two loves therefore have given original to these two cities--self-love
in contempt of God unto the earthly; love of God in contempt of one's
self to the heavenly. The first seeks the glory of men and the latter
desires God only as the testimony of conscience, the greatest glory.
That glories in itself, and this in God. That exalts itself in
self-glory; this says to God, "My glory, the lifter of my head." That
boasts of the ambitious conquerors, led by the lust of sovereignty: in
this everyone serves the other in charity, both the rulers in
counselling and the subjects in obeying. That loves worldly virtue in
the potentates; this says unto God, "I will love thee, O Lord, my
strength." And the wise men of that follow either the good things of the
body or mind or both, living according to the flesh, and such as might
know God honoured him not as God, nor were thankful, but all were vain
in their own imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened; for
professing themselves to be wise-- that is, extolling themselves proudly
in their own wisdom-- they became fools, changing the glory of the
incorruptible God to the likeness of the image of a corruptible man and
of birds and fourfooted beasts and serpents: for they were the people's
guides or followers into all those idolatries, and served the creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. But in this other the
heavenly city, there is no wisdom of man, but only the piety that serves
the true God, and expects a reward in the society of the holy angels and
men, that God may be all in all.'

Book XV begins with the contrary course of the two cities in history.
Cain built the first city; not Abel, who was always a pilgrim.

'It is recorded of Cain that he built the city, but Abel was a pilgrim
and built none. For the city of the saints is above, though it have
citizens here upon earth, wherein it lives as a pilgrim until the time
of the kingdom come, and then it gathers all the citizens together in
the resurrection of the body and gives them a kingdom to reign in with
their king for ever and ever.'

Chapter 4 describes the earthly city. Peace is the aim of its life. This
it can win only by war. Cain's effort is compared with the building of
Rome by Romulus, who also slew his brother. Once more he compares them
in regard to Seth and Enos.

In XV, 21 he sums it up:

'Thus the two cities are described to be seated, the one in worldly
possession, the other in heavenly hopes, both coming out at the common
gate of mortality, which was opened in Adam; out of whose condemned
race, as out of a putrefied lump, God elected some vessels of mercy and
some of wrath; giving due pains unto the one, and undue grace unto the
other, that the citizens of God upon earth may take this lesson from the
vessels of wrath, never to rely on their own election, but hope to call
upon the name of the Lord: because the natural will which God made (but
yet here the Unchangeable made it not changeless) may both decline from
Him that is good and from all good to do evil, and that by freedom of
will: and from evil also to do good, but that not without God's
assistance.'

Book XVI goes on with the history. Augustine condemns in parentheses the
idea of inhabitants at the Antipodes. The supreme type of the earthly
city is the Tower of Babel. The course continues until the second
period, that of Abraham, and the third, that of the Mosaic Law. From now
onwards the city of God becomes represented for practical purposes by
the Hebrew nation. Therefore it takes on some of the qualities of an
earthly State. This gives occasion to S. Augustine to argue that all the
promises of permanence in the Old Testament could not refer to the
Jewish State but must have their fulfilment in that city eternal in the
heavens. This is true in especial of all the promises to David (XVII,
16). He is led to argue that peace is no enduring condition on earth,
but belongs of right only to the life beyond.

In Book XVIII we get to the course of the *civitas terrena, i.e.* the
whole topic of Vico. That is represented in the Assyrian monarchy; but
certain criticisms of Grecian myths and Egypt occur. We may cite here
the vivid words of Vives on the following chapters:

'In this eighteenth book we were to pass many dark ways and oftentimes
to feel for our passage, daring not fix one foot until we first groped
where to place it, as one must do in dark and dangerous places. Here we
cannot tarry all day at Rome, but must abroad into the world's farthest
corner, into lineages long since lost, and countries worn quite out of
memory; pedigrees long ago laid in the depth of oblivion must we fetch
out into the light like Cerberus, and spread them openly. We must into
Assyria, that old monarchy scarcely once named by the Greeks; and
Sycionia, which the very princes thereof sought to suppress from memory
themselves, debarring their very fathers from having their names set on
their tombs, as Pausanias relateth; and thence to Argos, which being
held the most antique state of Greece is all enfolded in fables; then
Athens, whose nimble wits aiming all at their country's honour, have
left truth sick at the heart, they have so cloyed it with eloquence and
wrapped it up in cloudes. Nor is Augustine content with this, but here
and there casteth in hard walnuts and almonds for us to crack, which
puts us to shrewd trouble ere we can get out the kernel of truth, their
shells are so thick. And then cometh the Latin gests, all hacked in
pieces by the discord of authors. And thence to the Romans; nor are the
Greek wise men omitted. It is fruitless to complain lest some should
think I do it causeless. And here and there the Hebrew, runneth like
veins in the body, to show the full course of the Two Cities, the
Heavenly and the Earthly. If any one travelling through those countries
and learning his way of the cunningest should for all that miss his way
sometimes, is not he pardonable? If any pass through, will anyone think
him less diligent in his travel? None, I think. What then if chance or
ignorance lead me astray out of the sight of divers mean villages that I
should have gone by, my way lying through deserts and untracked woods
and seldom, or never, finding any to ask the right way of. Am I not to
be borne with? I hope yes. Varro's Antiquities are all lost; and the
life of Rome. None but Eusebius helped me in Assyria, but that Diodorus
Siculus and some others set me in once or twice.

I had a book by me called Berosus by the booksellers, and somewhat I had
of Joannes Annius, goodly matters truly, able to fright away the reader
at first sight. But I let them lie still; I love not to suck the dregs
or fetch fables out of frivolous pamphlets, the very rackets wherewith
Greece bandieth ignorant heads about. Had this work been a child of
Berosus I had used it willingly; but it looketh like a bastard of a
Greek sire. . . . If any man like such stuff, much good may it do him. I
will be none of his rival. . . . Concerning Athens, Rome, Argos, Latium,
and the other fabulous subjects, the reader hath heard whatsoever my
diversity of reading affordeth, and much from the most curious students
therein that I could be acquainted withall. He that liketh not this
thing, may find another, by and by, that will please his palate better,
unless he be so proudly testy that he would have these my pains for the
public good, of power to satisfy him only. The rest, the Commentaries
themselves will tell you' (On *De Civitate,* XVIII, i.)

Prophecy comes in and the conflicts of philosophers. The rise and early
progress of Christianity are now described. The *Civitas Dei* is
beginning to be identified with the Church; but Augustine emphasises the
uncertainty of its true membership owing to the scarcity of the elect.
The book thus concludes the history on earth:

'Now it is time to set an end to this book, wherein, as far as need was,
we have run along with the courses of the two cities in their confused
progress, the one of which, the Babylon of the earth, has made her false
gods of mortal men, serving them and sacrificing to them as she thought
good; but the other, the heavenly Jerusalem, she has stuck to the only
and true God, and is his true and pure sacrifice herself. But both of
these do feel one touch of good and evil fortune, but not with one
faith, nor one hope, nor one law: and at length at the last judgment
they shall be severed for ever, and either shall receive the endless
reward of their works. Of these two ends we are now to discourse.'

Book XIX proceeds to the discussion with which we began, the thought of
the *summum bonum.* Augustine says that this can be found only in the
world beyond. After admitting that society is integral to human life, he
points to some of its inevitable miseries on earth--war, insecurity--and
becomes eloquenton the value of peace.

(C 11.) 'We may therefore say that peace is our final good, as we said
of life eternal. Because the Psalm says unto that city, whereof we write
this laborious work: "Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy Lord, O
Sion; for He hath made fast the bars of thy gates and blessed thy
children within thee; He giveth peace in thy borders." When the bars of
the gates are fast, as none can come in, so none can go out. And
therefore this peace which we call final is the borders and bounds of
this city; for the mystical name hereof, Jerusalem, signifies a vision
of peace. But because the name of peace is ordinary in this world where
eternity is not resident, therefore we choose rather to call the bound,
wherein the chief good of this city lies, "life eternal." . . . The good
of peace is generally the greatest wish of the world, and the most
welcome when it comes. Whereof I think one may take leave of our reader,
to have a word or two more, both because of the city's end, whereof we
now speak, and of the sweetness of peace, which all men do love.'

(C. 12.) ' Who will not confess this with me, who marks man's affairs
and the general form of nature? For joy and peace are desired alike of
all men. The warrior would but conquer; war's aim is nothing but
glorious peace. What is victory but a suppression of resistants; which
being done, peace follows? So that peace is war's purpose, the scope of
all military discipline and the limit at which all just contentions
level. All men seek peace by war, but none seek war by peace. For they
that perturb the peace they live in, do it not for hate of it, but to
show their power in alteration of it. They would not disannul it, but
they would have it as they like; and though they break into seditions
from the rest, yet must they hold a peaceful force with their fellows
that are engaged with them, or else they shall never effect what they
intend. Even the thieves themselves, that molest all the world besides
them, are at peace amongst themselves. . . .

'What tiger is there that does not purr over her young ones and fawn
upon them in her tenderness? What kite is there, though he fly
solitarily about for his prey, but will seek his female, build his nest,
sit his eggs, feed his young, and assist his mate in her motherly duty,
all that in him lies? Far stronger are the bands that bind man unto
society, and peace with all that are peaceable; the worst men of all do
fight for their fellows' quietness and would (if it lay in their power)
reduce all into a distinct form of state drawn by themselves, whereof
they would be the heads, which could never be, but by a coherence either
through fear or love. For herein is perverse pride an imitator of the
goodness of God having equality of others with itself under Him, and
laying a yoke of obedience upon its fellows, under itself instead of
Him; thus hates it the just peace of God, and builds an unjust one for
itself. Yet can it not but love peace, for no vice however unnatural can
pull nature up by the roots. . . .'

(C. 13.) ' The body's peace therefore is an orderly disposal of the
parts thereof; the unreasonable soul's, a good temperature of the
appetites thereof; the reasonable soul's, a true harmony between the
knowledge and the performance. That of body and soul alike, a temperate
and undiseased habit of nature in the whole creature. The peace of
mortal man with immortal God is an orderly obedience unto his eternal
law, performed in faith. Peace of man and man is a mutual concord; peace
of a family, an orderly rule and subjection amongst the parts thereof;
peace of a city, an orderly command and obedience amongst the citizens;
peace of God's City, a most orderly coherence in God and fruition of
God; peace of all things is a well disposed order. . . .'

(C. 14.) 'All temporal things are referred unto the benefit of the peace
which is resident in the terrestrial city, by the members thereof; and
unto the use of the eternal peace by the citizens of the heavenly
society. . . .'

'Now God, our good Master, teaching us in the two great commandments the
love of Him, and the love of our neighbour, to love three things, God,
our neighbours and ourselves, and seeing he that loves God offends not
in loving himself--it follows that he ought to counsel his neighbours to
love God and to provide for him in the love of God, sure he is commanded
to love him as his own self. So must he do for his wife, children,
family and all men besides, and wish likewise that his neighbour would
do as much for him, in his need; thus shall he be settled in peace and
orderly concord with all the world. The order whereof is, first, to do
no man hurt, and, secondly, to help all that he can. So that his own
have the first place in his care and those his place and order in human
society affords him more conveniency to benefit. Whereupon S. Paul says:
"He that provideth not for his own and, namely, for them that be of his
household, denieth the faith and is worse than an infidel." For this is
the foundation of domestic peace, which is an orderly rule and
subjection in the parts of the family, wherein the provisors are the
commanders, as the husband over his wife, parents over their children,
and masters over their servants; and they that are provided for obey, as
the wives do their husbands, children their parents, and servants their
masters. But in the family of the faithful man, the heavenly pilgrim,
there the commanders are indeed the servants of those they seem to
command; ruling not in ambition, but being bound by careful duty; not in
proud sovereignty but in nourishing pity.'

(C. 15.) ' Thus has nature's order prevailed and man by God was thus
created.' But sin ruled all. 'Sin is the mother of servitude and the
first cause of man's subjection to man.' Dominion in the strict sense
existed only between man and dumb animals. Yet for all that obedience is
our duty; and the family is ever a part of the city.

In Chapter 17 we find the two ends described; one is earthly peace
alone, the other has its other-worldly reference. Yet this heavenly city
has members in all earthly cities, gives them true peace and the
heavenly hope. Augustine goes on discussing (Chapter 21) Cicero's
definition of a republic in which justice is an integral element. On
that hypothesis Rome never was a commonwealth, since justice cannot be
where the true God is not worshipped. But in Chapter 24 he gives another
definition under which any stable state can be grouped. No true virtue
exists apart from God, yet earthly peace is needed and must be used by
the citizens of the heavenly state.

Book XX is concerned with the Last Judgment. In Chapter 6 Augustine
argues that the first resurrection has already taken place in the
conversion of sinners to Christ. The millennial kingdom is not, as the
Chiliasts say, a future reign of Christ in the world, but is the present
kingdom of the Church. This is the binding of the devil. It began with
the spread of the Church outside of Judaism. The 'thrones and they that
sat upon them' are the rulers of the Churches. The souls that reign with
Christ a thousand years are the martyrs. The beast is the society of
wicked man, opposed to the company of God's servants and fighting
against His holy city. This society consists not only of open enemies
but also of tares among the wheat. More apologetic discussion concludes
the book.

Book XXI is concerned with the pains of the lost. We have an interesting
passage on the miseries of life.

The last Book XXII gives an account of the felicity of the saved and the
eternal bliss of the kingdom of God. Here apologetic follows concerning
the Incarnation and the miraculous, in order to refute contemporary
errors. After a description of the ills of life comes an eloquent
passage on the goods of human life. Those passages form an interesting
contrast:

(C. 22.) 'Concerning man's first origin our present life (if such a
miserable estate can be called a life) does sufficiently prove that all
his children were condemned in him. What else does that horrid gulf of
ignorance confirm, whence all error has birth, and wherein all the sons
of Adam are so deeply drenched, that none can be freed without toil,
fear and sorrow? What else does our love of vanities affirm, whence
there arises such a tempest of cares, sorrows, repinings, fears, mad
exultations, discords, altercations, wars, treasons, furies, hates,
deceits, flatteries, thefts, rapines, perjuries, pride, ambition, envy,
murder, parricide, cruelty, villainy, luxury, impudence, unchastity,
fornications, adulteries, incests, several sorts of sins against nature
(filthy even to be named), sacrilege, . . . false witnesses, false
judgments, violence, robberies, and suchlike, out of my remembrance to
reckon, but not excluded from the life of man? All these evils are
belonging to man and arise out of the root of that error and perverse
affection which every son of Adam brings into the world with him.'

Augustine points out that the discipline of children has no other
meaning. 'What is the end of all these but to abolish ignorance and to
bridle corruption both which we come wrapped into the world withal.' He
goes on:

'To omit the pains that enforce children to learn the (scarcely useful)
books that please their parents, how huge a band of pains attend the
firmer state of man and be not peculiarly inflicted on the wicked, but
generally impendent over us all, through our common estate in misery!
Who can recount them, who can conceive them? What fears, what calamities
does the loss of children, of goods or of credit, the false dealing of
others, false suspicion, open violence and all other mischiefs inflicted
by others, heap upon the heart of man? Being generally accompanied with
poverty, imprisonment, bands, punishments, tortures, loss of limbs or
senses, prostitution to beastly lust, and other such horrid events? So
are we afflicted on the other side with chances *ab externo,* with cold,
heat, storms, showers, deluges, lightnings, thunder, earthquakes, falls
of houses, fury of beasts, poisons of airs, waters, plants and beasts of
a thousand sorts, stinging of serpents, biting of mad dogs, a strange
accident wherein a beast most sociable and familiar with man shall
sometimes become more to be feared than a lion or a dragon, infecting
him whom he bites with such a furious madness, that he is to be feared
by his family worse than any wild beast. What misery do navigators now
and then endure? Or travellers by land? What man can walk anywhere free
from sudden accidents? One coming home from the court (being sound
enough on his feet) fell down, broke his leg and died of it; who would
have thought this that had seen him sitting in the court? Eli, the
priest, fell from his chair where he sat, and broke his neck. What fears
are husbandmen, yea all men, subject unto, that the fruits should be
hurt by the heavens or earth or caterpillars or locusts or such
pernicious things! Yet when they have gathered them and laid them up
they are secured. Notwithstanding I have known granaries full of corn
borne quite away with an inundation.'

And so forth.

Augustine's tone may seem gloomy. But it must be borne in mind that the
times were not bright. The reason of this book was the breaking up of
the long centuries of Roman prosperity. As it neared its end, the storm
burst even in Africa. Augustine's life was passed in a series of changes
like those which divide the jubilees of Queen Victoria from the silver
wedding of her grandson. It may indeed be argued that the habitual
assumptions of Western civilisation both in Europe and America have been
too optimistic ; that they assume peace and progress as natural and
inevitable, and that the advance of physical science led to an
altogether too favourable view of the reduction of pain in human life in
a state of things rarely realised in history. It may be thought that the
temper of Augustine, of the Middle Ages, and of the present, is more
truly universal than that of the protected Roman Empire, of China, or of
the Victorians. Anyhow we can parallel S. Augustine from writers in many
ages, not only the Book of Job, but Richard Baxter, the author of a book
curiously suggestive of the 'De Civitate Dei'--'The Saints' Everlasting
Rest.' In that incomparable style of the seventeenth century he
declares:

(VII, 12.) 'Oh, the hourly dangers that we poor sinners here below walk
in! Every sense is a snare, every member a snare, every creature a
snare, every mercy a snare, and every duty a snare to us. We can scarce
open our eyes but we are in danger; if we behold those above us, we are
in danger of envy; if those below us, we are in danger of contempt; if
we see sumptuous buildings, pleasant habitations, honour and riches, we
are in danger to be drawn away with covetous desires; if the rags and
beggary of others, we are in danger of self-applauding thoughts and
unmercifulness. If we see beauty it is a bait to lust; if deformity, to
loathing and disdain.'

(VII, 15.) 'The Church on earth is a mere hospital; which way ever we go
we hear complaining; and into what corner soever we cast our eyes we
behold objects of pity and grief; some groaning under a dark
understanding, some under a senseless heart, some languishing under
unfruitful weakness, and some bleeding for miscarriages and wilfulness,
and some in such a lethargy that they are past complaining; some crying
out of their pining poverty; some groaning under pains and infirmities;
and some bewailing a whole catalogue of calamities, especially in days
of common sufferings when nothing appears to our sight but ruin;
families ruined; congregations ruined; sumptuous structures ruined;
cities ruined; country ruined; court ruined; kingdom ruined; who weeps
not, when all these bleed?'

(VII, 16.) 'Oh, the dying life that we now live; as full of suffering as
of days and hours! We are the carcasses that all calamities prey upon;
as various as they are, each one will have a snatch at us, and be sure
to devour a morsel of our comfort. . . . As all our senses are the
inlets of sin, so they are become the inlets of our sorrow. Grief creeps
in at our eyes, at our ears, and almost everywhere; it seizes upon our
heads, our hearts, our flesh, our spirits, and what part doth escape it?
Fears do devour us and darken our delights, as the frosts do nip the
tender buds: cares do consume us and feed upon our spirits, as the
scorching sun doth wither the delicate flowers. Or, if any saint or
stoic have fortified his inwards against these, yet is he naked still
without; and if he be wiser than to create his own sorrows, yet shall he
be sure to feel his share, he shall produce them as the meritorious, if
not as the efficient, cause. What tender pieces are these dusty bodies!
What brittle glasses do we bear about us; and how many thousand dangers
are they hurried through; and how hardly cured, if once cracked! Oh, the
multitudes of slender veins, of tender membranes, nerves, fibres,
muscles, arteries, and all subject to obstruc-tions, exesions, tensions,
contractions, resolutions, every one a fit subject for pain and fit to
communicate that pain to the whole; what noble part is there that
suffereth its pain or ruin alone?'

But Augustine does not stop at this. The Puritan ideal with its extreme
of otherworldliness could see little good in the natural and relative.
Not so Augustine. In Chapter 24 he almost outdoes his previously cited
passage in his anxiety to show the reality of earthly goods--goods
distinct from the life of grace.

'Besides the disciplines of good behaviour and the ways to eternal
happiness (which are called virtues), and besides the grace of God which
is in Jesus Christ, imparted only to the sons of the promise, man's
invention has brought forth so many and such rare sciences and arts
(partly necessary and partly voluntary), that the excellency of his
capacity makes the rare goodness of his creation apparent, even then
when he goes about things that are either superfluous or pernicious, and
shows from what an excellent gift he has those his inventions and
practices. What variety has man found out in buildings, attires,
husbandry, navigations, sculpture, and imagery! What perfection has he
shown in the shows of theatres, in taming, killing and catching wild
beasts! What millions of inventions has he against others and for
himself in poisons, arms, engines, stratagems and suchlike! What
thousands of medicines for the health, of meats for the throat, of means
and figures to persuade, of eloquent phrases to delight, of verses for
pleasure, of musical inventions and instruments! How excellent
inventions are geography, arithmetic, astrology and the rest! How large
is the capacity of man, if we should stand upon particulars! Lastly, how
cunningly and with what exquisite wit have the philosophers and the
heretics defended their very errors, it is strange to imagine. For here
we speak of the nature of man's soul in general, as man is mortal,
without any reference to the way of truth whereby he comes to the life
eternal.'

After dilating on the marvels of the human body, he goes on to natural
beauty.

'And then for the beauty and use of other creatures, which God has set
before the eyes of man (though as yet miserable and amongst miseries),
what man is liable to recount them? The universal gracefulness of the
heavens, the earth and the sea, the brightness of the light in the sun,
moon and stars, the shades of the woods, the colours and smells of
flowers, the numbers of birds and their varied hues and songs, the many
forms of beasts and fishes whereof the least are the rarest (for the
fabric of the bee or the ant is more to be wondered at than the whales),
and the strange alterations in the colour of the sea (as being in
several garments), now one green, then another, now blue, then purple?
How pleasing a sight sometimes it is to see it rough, and how more
pleasing when it is calm! And O what a hand is that, that gives so many
meats to assuage hunger! So many tastes to those meats (without help of
cook), and so many medicinal powers to those tastes! How delightful is
the interchange of day and night! the temperateness of air and the works
of nature in the barks of trees and skins of beasts! Oh, who can draw
the particulars? How tedious should I be in every peculiar of these few
that I have here as it were heaped together, if I should stay upon them
one by one! Yet are all these but solaces of men's miseries, no way
pertinent to his glories.

'What then are they that his bliss shall give him, if that his misery
has such blessings as these? What will God give them whom He has
predestinated unto life, having given such great things even to them
whom He has predestinated unto death? What will He give them in His
kingdom, for whom He sent His only Son to suffer all injuries even unto
death upon earth? Whereupon S. Paul says unto them: "He who spared not
His own Son, but gave Him for us all unto death, how shall He not with
Him give us all things also?" When this promise is fulfilled, O what
shall we be then? How glorious shall the soul of man be without all
stain and sin, that can either subdue or oppose it, or against which it
need to contend: perfect in all virtue and enthroned in all perfection
of peace!

How great, how delightful, how true shall our knowledge of all things be
there, without all error, without all labour, where we shall drink at
the spring-head of God's aspience, without all difficulty and in all
felicity! How perfect shall our bodies be, being wholly subject unto
their spirits, and thereby sufficiently quickened and nourished without
any other sustenance, for they shall now be no more natural, but
spiritual; they shall have the substance of flesh quite exempt from all
fleshly corruption.'

In Chapter 25 he points out that 'as touching the good things of the
mind which the blessed shall enjoy after this life, the philosophers and
we are both of one mind. Our difference is concerning the resurrection,'
which he proceeds to argue. Of Porphyry, who has on the whole his
deepest reverence, of Plato and Varro, Augustine speaks here, as always,
in terms of honour, almost love. In the last chapter he enlarges on the
*visio pads* and the eternal felicity of the city of God. It is
interesting as well as eloquent, for it brings out the human and
non-abstract quality of Augustine's theology:

(C. 35.) 'How great shall that felicity be, where there shall be no evil
thing, where no good thing shall lie hidden; there we shall have leisure
to utter forth the praises of God, which shall be all things in all! For
what other thing is done, where we shall not rest with any slothfulness,
nor labour for any want, I know not. . . . What the motions of those
bodies shall be there I dare not rashly define, when I am not able to
dive into the depth of that mystery. Nevertheless both the motion and
the state, as the form of them, shall be comely and decent, whatsoever
it shall be, where there shall be nothing which shall not be comely.
Truly, where the spirit will, there forthwith shall the body be; neither
will the spirit will anything, which may not beseem the body nor the
spirit. There shall be true glory, where no man shall be praised for
error or flattery. . . . There is true peace, where no man suffers
anything which may molest him, either from himself or from any other. He
himself shall be the reward of virtue, which has given virtue, and has
promised Himself unto him, than whom nothing can be better and greater.
For what other thing is that which He has said by the Prophet: "I will
be their God and they shall be My people": but I will be whereby they
shall be satisfied. I will be whatsoever is lawfully desired of men,
life, health, food, abundance, glory, honour, peace and all good things?
For so also is that rightly understood which the Apostle says: "That God
may be all in all." He shall be the end of our desires, who shall be
seen without end, who shall be loved without any satiety and praised
without any tediousness. . . . There we shall rest and see, we shall see
and love, we shall love, and we shall praise. Behold what shall be in
the end without end? For what other thing is our end but to come to that
kingdom of which there is no end?

'I think I have discharged the debt of this great work by the help of
God. Let them which think I have done too little and them which think I
have done too much, grant me a favourable pardon. But let them not think
I have performed enough, accepting it with a kind congratulation; give
no thanks unto me but "unto the Lord with me." Amen.'

This brief outline makes this much clear. The 'De Civitate Dei' is
apologetic and theological. It is not a treatise on polity, whether
ecclesiastical or civil. All S. Augustine's philosophical reading has
left traces-- and every kind of dialectic is displayed. As apologetic it
is more effective against paganism than against the Platonists. Too much
is assumed in regard to Jewish and Christian history. The book might
reassure those within the Church whose faith was shaken. It would hardly
arrest those without. It has the interest and also the coruscating
irrelevance that comes from a great variety of topics. The thread is
there, but sometimes it is hard to disentangle. Compare this book with
such a work of apology as that of Origen against Celsus. We note how
much larger the Church looms in the view of S. Augustine. It is no set
of propositions which he is defending in a dialectic debate with other
philosophers; although he can do this and does it in detail. But it is a
social life which he sets up against another form of social life. The
treatment is less individualist than that of Origen--though the latter
had to follow the course taken by Celsus. First we may observe that what
impressed Augustine was the witness of the vastness of the Church and
its triumph. As he says in a sermon:

'What do we see which they saw not? The Church throughout all nations.
What do we not see which they saw? Christ present in the flesh. As they
saw Him and believed concerning the Body, so do we see the Body; let us
believe concerning the Head. Let what we have respectively seen help us.
The sight of Christ helped them to believe the future Church; the sight
of the Church helps us to believe that Christ has risen. Their faith was
made complete, and ours is made complete also. Their faith was made
complete by the sight of the Head, ours is made complete from the sight
of the Body.' (*Sermon* lxvi. (cxi.) § 6.)

Probably those are right who say that in this respect also--if in
nothing else--Augustine is epoch-making, that all his apologetic rests
on the idea of Church. This characteristic would be developed in the
Donatist controversy. It must be admitted, however, that such a view of
him is not universally held, and some would put the distinctive basis of
S. Augustine in the idea not of the Church, but of
grace.\[<a href="#footnote04" id="text04">4</a>\]

Secondly we note the aggressive tone of the book. Despite his references
to Plato and his real debt to Plotinus and Porphyry, Augustine is far
more intransigent than Clement of Alexandria, who would treat
Christianity as but the coping-stone of Greek thought. It is not as a
superior gnosis, but it is as a scheme of Redemption, that Augustine
commends Christianity, and values it for himself. The cause of this lies
partly in that doctrine of original sin which was so strongly held by
Augustine, and even was in some degree being developed while this book
was in process. It is the point of the whole book.

Another note is the stress laid on the ethical difference between
Christianity and its competitors--though that is not a novel feature.
Augustine knows that it is not speculative truth but conduct that shows
the greatest difference. Also he is aware that he is dealing with a
dying interest. Paganism was uttering its death-cry (for the time).
Clear is his note of triumph in the conquering and universal power of
the Church.

History including miracle plays a great part. The destruction of
Jerusalem following the rejection of Jesus by the Jews is an emphatic
evidence of the Gospel. The argument from miracles he states as many
would state it now. A miracle is not contrary to nature but to what we
know of nature. The argument depends on our conception of God. Augustine
had no notion of the distinction between the natural--*i.e.* the
physical --and the supernatural. Nature means the whole world of God's
order--all that happens. The problem is whether God's Will be paramount.
All this has been treated by Mr. Lacey in his earliest Pringle-Stewart
Lectures, 'Nature, Miracle and Sin.'

Above all we must bear in mind that the whole course of created
existence is seen by S. Augustine as a conflict between two societies.
However little some may make use of the figure of *Civitas Dei,* they
have no right to deny its implications as against a doctrine purely
individualist. Sin in Adam has become the property of the race, it is
needful to show redemption in the order of historical development. The
apologetic rests on a philosophy of history.

Finally it is of and in the antique world that Augustine wrote. The
notion of him as medieval in temperament may have some evidence, yet it
must be understood with care. The atmosphere of the book is of the old
world. It is before Gelasius with his doctrine of the two powers, before
Justinian. Only a little over a century had passed since Diocletian's
effort at exterminating the Church. Less than that divided S. Augustine
from the reaction under Julian.

Notes to Lecture I

\[<a href="#text01" id="footnote01">1</a>\] Weinand, H., *Die Gottesidee
der Grundzug der Weltanschauung des hi. Augustins,* 1910, in Ehrhard und
Kirsch, *Forschungen,* X. ii. p. i. 'Wie die Geisteswerte der
heidnischen Kulturwelt in ihm zusammenfliessen, so hat vom fünften
Jahrhundert ab die christliche Kulturwelt in ihm Wurzeln und Fasern. . .
.

'Man hat darauf hinangewiesen, wie jede Neuerung bis herab auf den
Socialismus unserer Tage, ihn zu dem Ihrigen zu machen sich bemüht.'

\[<a href="#text02" id="footnote02">2</a>\] E. Feuerlein, *Ueber die
Stellung Augustins in der Kirchen- und Culturgeschichte* in Sybel's
*Historische Zeitschrift.* Bd. 22, 1869, p. 300.

'Dieser Eine Mann mit dem brennenden und zur Ruhe gekommenen Herzen ist
der Typus der mittelalterlichen Christenheit. Sein zügelloses und doch
zuletzt gezügeltes Temperament repräsentirt jenen wilden Volksgeist, der
mit der Völkerwanderung sich erhebt und seiner Zähmung durch die Kirche
harrt, die ganze Hitze und Heftigkeit des Volksthums, das sich gleich
ihm in der Versenkung ins Eine, Göttliche, in der religiösen Andacht
abkühlen soll. Er der Sohn eines gebildeten Naturvolks, topographisch
ausserhalb des Gebiets der neueuropäischen Menschheit gestellt, sollte
den zu erwartenden Naturvölkern Weg und Steg ihrer ersten Cultur weisen
dürfen.'

\[<a href="#text03" id="footnote03">3</a>\] H. Reuter, *Augustinische
Studien,* p. 121 *n. '*Das ganze Werk *De Civitate* bewegt sich auf dem
scharf gefassten Gegensatz des Diesseits und Jenseits, der Gegenwart und
der Zukunft als auf seiner Basis.'

\[<a href="#text04" id="footnote04">4</a>\] Reuter, *Augustinische
Studien,* p. 45. ' Nicht indem er "Die Heilsbedeutung" der Kirche
verteidigte ist er ein Neuerer geworden, sondern durch die Art, wie er
diese nach Massgabe seines Begriffs der *gratia* erörtert.

'Nicht in dem Kirchenbegriffe ist die prinzipale Diff erenz zwischen dem
System Augustin's und dem der Pelagianer zuhöchst zu suchen, sondern in
dem Begriffe der Gnade.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Philosophy of History](chap02)
