[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm02.md) 
[Next](cdm04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE GESTE OF FRAOCH

\[*Wherein is told the hero's origin, his wooing of Find-abair, his
killing of the monster that guarded the rowan-tree, and his
betrothal*.\]

1\. Fraoch, son of Idad <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) of
Connaught, was a son of Bébinn from the *Sídh*, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40) whose sister hight Boyne (*Bofind*.md). Of
the heroes of Erin and of Alba the most beautiful man was he, save only
that he was short-lived. Twelve cows his mother gave him from the
*Sídh;* white with red ears were they. For seven years he kept household
without taking to himself a wife. The number of his household was fifty
princes, in age and dignity his equals, as to form and feature and
bearing alike.

2\. Find-abair, daughter of Ailill and Mève, from hear-say regarding
him, gave him love, of which report was brought him at his place. Erin
and Alba were full of his fame and story.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

He accordingly bethought him of going to bespeak the girl, and then he
talked of the matter with his folk. And his folk said: "Let word too be
sent to thy mother's sister that she may give thee somewhat of raiment
of the rare treasure of the *Sídh*.

3\. To the sister Boyne (Bofind) he thereupon went to the plain of
Bregia or Moy Breg. She gave him fifty mantles of dark blue, each for
hue like to a beetle's back, with four black-grey brooch-rings on each,
and each with a pin of red gold: with fifty pale white tunics having
animal figures chased in gold. Also fifty silver shields edged with
gold. For each man's hand a lance like to a candle such as befitted a
palace, <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md) each having fifty rivets of
white-bronze, with knobs of burnished gold: the spear-points from below
were of carbuncle inwrought, while the front irons of the spears were
chased with precious stones, so that night shone as ’twere by the rays
of the sun.

Further, fifty swords with hilts of gold, and for each rider a dark grey
steed with bits of gold. Around each horse's neck was a plate of silver
with bells of gold; fifty leather caparisons in purple with threads of
silver, with buckles of gold and silver, and animal devices for
ornament. Fifty whips in white bronze, with a golden hook on the handle
of each. Seven grey-hounds in chains of silver, with an apple of gold
a-piece, each having greaves of bronze. There was no colour which the
hounds had not.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Accompanying them
in garments of diverse colours were seven trumpeters, with trumpets
golden and silver, and golden pale yellow tresses, and they had plaids
that glistened like the Shee. In front of them went three jesters having
silver diadems and gilt about. Each had shields engraved with devices,
with crested staves and ribs of white metal along the sides. Opposite
them were three harpists, each of kingly presence. And in that guise
they set out for Cruachan.

4\. On coming into the Plain of Cruachan the watchman perceives them
from the *Dūn*. And he spake:

"I behold a host coming towards the fort in their numbers; a troop more
beautiful or splendid never came to Ailill and Mève since they assumed
sovereignty, nor ever will. It is as if my head were in a wine-vat with
the wind that goes over me: I have never seen the equal of the feats and
frolic (the games and gestures) of the hero. His play-rods he casts with
a shot from him, and the seven grey-hounds with their seven silver
chains are at them ere they fall to earth.

5\. Then the folks came to view them from the *Dūn* of Cruachan,
insomuch that they smother one another, and sixteen are killed while
looking on.

On alighting at the door of the *dūn* they unyoked their horses and set
loose the grey-hounds, which chase to Rath Cruachan seven hinds, seven
foxes, seven hares, and seven wild boars, and these the youths kill on
the lawn of the fort. Thereafter the dogs dashed into the Brei and
caught seven others, which

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

they deposited at the said entrance to the door of the chief *rath*,
where Fraoch and his folk sat.

6\. King Ailill sent word to them, and enquired whence they had come.
They accordingly name themselves after their true names, which they
gave.

"Here," said they, "is Fraoch, son of Idad." <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

This the steward declares to the king and queen.

"An illustrious young hero," quoth Ailill, "let him come into the
*Liss*." <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md)

And quarters were allotted them.

7\. The plan of the house was thus: seven apartments it had from fire to
wall all around, decorated with gold, each with a fronting of bronze,
and partition carvings of red yew variegated by fine planing withal.
Three layers of bronze in the arched skirting of each apartment, with
seven layers of brass from where the shields rested to the roof-tree. Of
pine the house was made, and it had a covering of shingle on the
outside. Sixteen windows it had with brass shuttings in each, and a
brass yoke across the roof-light. Four beams of brass in the apartment
of Ailill and Mève, all adorned with bronze and in the very centre of
the house. Two silver frontings it had, and overlaid with gold; and by
the fronting facing Ailill there was a silver wand that would reach the
mid "hips" of the house, so as to command the inmates at all times and
circuit the house all around from one door to the other. Having hung up
their arms within,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

they make the circle of the house and were made welcome.

8\. "Welcome are ye!" quoth Ailill and Mève.

"It is for that we have come," quoth Fraoch.

"Not a journey for boasting shall this be," quoth Mève.

Thereafter Ailill and Mève arrange the chessboard. Fraoch then takes to
playing chess with a man of their company.

The most beautiful of chess-boards it was: it had a board of white metal
with four ear-handles, and gold edgings. A candlestick of precious stone
gave them light. The chess-men were of gold and silver.

"Get ye food in readiness for the braves," quoth Ailill.

"That is not what I wish," quoth Mève. "I want to have a game with
Fraoch."

"It liketh me well," quoth Ailill, "get up and go to him."

Mève then goes to Fraoch and at chess they play.

9\. Fraoch's folk in the meantime were a-roasting the animals of the
chase.

"Let thine harpers play for us!" quoth Ailill to Fraoch.

"Let them play in sooth!" quoth Fraoch.

Harp-bags they had of otter-skins mounted with ruby, adorned with gold
and silver, and roe-skins, white as snow around the middle, with
black-grey "eyes" in the centre. Gold and silver and bronze in the
harps, which were chased with figures of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

serpents and birds and hounds in silver and gold. With the movement of
the strings the figures would move all about. The harpers having played,
twelve of Ailill and of Mève's folk died of sorrow and of grief.

10\. Gentle and melodious this Triad; theirs were the chants of
child-birth. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) Three noble brothers
were they: Sorrow-strain, Joy-strain, Sleep-strain, and Boyne from the
Shee (*Sídhe*) their mother: it is of this music which Uaithne the
Dagda's harp played that the three are named. What time children were
being born its strain was sorrow and travail from the soreness of
birth-pangs beginning; next a strain of glee and of joy it played
because of the pleasure of bringing the two sons to the birth; the
strain played by the last son was one soothing and soft because of the
heaviness of birth, so that it is from him that the third of the music
has been named.

Boyne then awoke out of sleep.

"I receive," she said, "thy three sons, O Uaithne of full ardour, since
Sorrow-strain, Joy-strain, Sleep-strain are on kine and women who shall
fall by Mève and Ailill. Men shall fall on hearing the strains being
played."

Thereupon the playing ceased.

"Splendidly has it come off!" said Fergus.

11\. "Apportion us the food," said Fraoch to his folk. "Bring it in."

Lothar, having stepped within, divides them the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

food. On his hand used he to divide each joint with his sword, leaving
neither shred nor skin; since he took to dividing he never hacked the
meat under his charge.

Three days and three nights, then, were Mève and Fraoch playing chess,
by reason of the abundance of precious stones with Fraoch's folk.
Thereafter Fraoch addressed Mève.

"Well have I played against thee: I take not thy stake from the
chess-board that there be to thee no decay of honour."

"Since ever I have been in this *dūn*," said Mève, it is this day that I
feel the longest."

"Yea, certainly indeed," quoth Fraoch, "three days and three nights have
we been playing chess."

12\. At this Mève starts up. She felt shame at the warriors being
without food. And she goes and tells this to Ailill.

"An extraordinary deed have we done—the warriors outside who have
arrived to be without food!"

"Dearer to thee is chess-playing," quoth Ailill.

"It hinders not food being distributed throughout the house to his
suite. Three days and three nights are they there without our having
perceived the night through the glare of the precious stones within."

"Tell them then," said Ailill, to cease the lamentations they make until
food be served them."

Thereupon food is served them and it pleased

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

them well; and they stayed there three days and three nights a-feasting.

And thereafter Fraoch was called to the hall of audience to converse
with Ailill and Mève. They ask him his errand.

"It pleases me in sooth to visit you," said he.

Your company is indeed not displeasing to the household," said Ailill.
"Your arrival is preferable to your departure. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)"

"We shall stay with you another week, then," said Fraoch.

They stay until the end of a fortnight at the *dūn*; every day they go
to the chase and hunt. And the men of Connaught used to come to view
them.

13\. It was, however, a trouble with Fraoch not to have converse with
the daughter, for it was that "benefit" that had specially brought him.

Night at end he got up one day to bathe in the river. It was at the same
time that she with her maid went to bathe.

He takes her hand. "Stay to speak with me, it is for thee I have come,"
he said.

"Pleased am I," said the girl, "but if I come I could do nothing for
thee."

"Would’st thou not elope?" he queried.

"I will not elope," she said, "I am a king and queen's daughter. Thine
estate is not so humble that thou would’st not get me from my people,
and it is my choice too to go to thee, for it is thou whom I

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

have loved. And do thou take this ring of gold with thee," said the
girl, "and it shall ever be a token between us. My mother gave it me to
put by; I will say that I mislaid it."

They each then part.

14\. "I am fearing indeed," quoth Ailill, "the eloping of yon daughter
with Fraoch.

"’Twere not in vain <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) even should she
be given him; he would come to us with his cattle to aid us at the
*Tāin*," said Mève.

Fraoch goes to the audience chamber. "Is it a secret ye are speaking
of?" he quoth.

"Though it were a secret, thou would'st fit in," said Ailill.

"Will ye give me your daughter?" said Fraoch.

"She will be given thee," said Ailill, "if thou give me her
purchase-price <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md) which I shall name."

"[Thou](errata.htm#0.md) shalt have it," said Fraoch.

"Sixty black-grey steeds to me," said Ailill, "with their bridle-bits of
gold, and twelve milch-cows, each in milk, and each having a white
red-eared calf; and do thou come to me with all thy force and with thy
musicians for the bringing of the kine from Cuailnge—my daughter to be
given thee provided thou dost come to the Hosting."

"I swear," Fraoch spake, "by my shield, by my sword, and by mine arms, I
would not give that purchase-price even were it for Mève herself."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Then he marched out of the house.

15\. Mève and Ailill thereafter fell to conversing within, and said:

"Should he carry off the girl he will bring a host of the Kings of Erin
against us. What is good is, let us dash after him and slay him
forthwith ere he work us ruin."

That were <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) a pity and a loss of
honour to us," said Mève.

"It shall not be a loss of honour for us," said Ailill, "the way I shall
prepare it."

16\. Ailill and Mève go into the Palace.

"Let us set off," said Ailill, "that we may see the chase-hounds
a-hunting until midday, until they are tired."

Thereafter they set off to the river to bathe themselves.

"Fraoch! I am told," said Ailill, "thou art expert in water; get into
this *linn* <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md) that we may behold thy
swimming."

"What kind of *linn* is it?" said Fraoch.

"We know not any danger therein, and bathing in it is frequent," Ailill
said.

Fraoch then strips off his clothes and goes into the *linn;* his girdle
he leaves on shore. Ailill opens Fraoch's purse behind his back, and
finds therein the gold ring, which Ailill recognises.

"Come here, O Mève!" said Ailill.

Then Mève goes to the place where Ailill was.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

"Dost thou recognise that?" said Ailill.

"I do recognise it," said Mève.

Ailill casts the ring into the water.

Fraoch, however, perceived that, and saw how a salmon leaped to meet it
and took it into his mouth. Fraoch made a dash for the salmon, caught it
by the jowl, went to land and brought it to a hidden spot by the brink
of the river. He then proceeded to come out of the water.

17\. "Come not out of the water," said Ailill, "until thou bring me a
branch from yonder rowan-tree that is on the brink of the river:
beautiful I deem its berries."

He then goes off and breaks a branch from off the tree, and brings it on
his back across the water. And the remark of Find-abair was:

"Is that not beautiful that ye see?" Beautiful she thought it to see
Fraoch over the black linn: <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md) the body
of great whiteness, the hair of great loveliness, the face so well
formed; the eye of deep grey, and he a tender youth without fault,
without blemish; with his face small below and broad above; his build
straight and flawless; the branch with the red berries between the
throat and the white face. Find-abair was wont to say that she had not
seen aught that would come up to him half or third for beauty.

18\. Thereafter he throws them the branches out of the water. "Lovely
and beautiful are the berries; bring us more of them."

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

He goes off again; as he was in the middle of the *linn*, the monster
from out the water lays hold of him.

"Give me a sword," Fraoch cried, "The monster hath got hold of me."

There was not on land one who would dare give it to him for fear of
Ailill and of Mève.

Thereupon Find-abair strips off her clothes and gives a leap into the
water with the sword. Ailill casts a five-pronged spear at her from
above, a shot's length, so that it passes through her two tresses of
hair. Fraoch, however, caught the spear in his hand, shoots it to
landwards, the monster all the while being in his side. It was a
bow-cast, a species of champion's weapon-feat, so that it pierces
Ailill's purple robe and tunic. Thereupon the young braves who were in
Ailill's suite got up. Find-abair then gets out of the water, and leaves
the sword in Fraoch's hand. Fraoch cuts off the monster's head so that
it lay above on its rump, and Fraoch brings the monster to land. From
this is named *Duiblind Fráich*, Fraoch's Black-Linn (Black-Pool) on the
Brei in the lands of the men of Connaught. Thereafter Ailill and Mève go
to their *dūn*.

19\. "A great deed we have done!" quoth Mève.

"Of what we have done to the man we repent," says Ailill, "for he is not
to blame. As for the girl, on the other hand, her lips shall pale in
death ere the morrow's eve, nor shall her guilt be the bringing of the
sword. For this man do ye prepare a bath

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

of fresh-bacon broth and heifer-flesh minced in it with adze and
axe—Fraoch therein to be bathed." All that was done as he said.

20\. Then the Horn-blowers (or Trumpeters) preceded Fraoch to the *dūn*,
and such was their playing that thirty of Ailill's and of Mève's
friends-in-chief die from the magic music.

Fraoch was led into the *dūn*, and brought into the bath. And the
women-folk rise around him at the vat to rub him and to lave his head.
On being brought out of it a bed was made.

Then was heard the sore lament from over Cruachan drawing nigh, and
there were seen thrice fifty women in crimson tunics, with head-dresses
of green, and silver rings on their wrists.

One is sent to them for tidings to learn why they keen.

"For Fraoch son of Idad" (*Fraoch mac Idhaidh*), spake the Banshee, "in
south for the darling of the *Sídhe*—princess of Erin."

Thereat Fraoch hears that plaintive keen.

"Lift me out," said he to his folk, "this is the *keen* of my mother and
of the ladies of Boyne."

Thereupon he is lifted and brought out to them. The women come around
him and bring him off to the *Sídhe* (Shee) of Cruachan.

On the morrow at the ninth hour they saw him return, with fifty women
around him, and quite whole. Flawless and stainless—the women being
alike in age, shape, form, and loveliness, in beauty

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

and symmetry and figure alike in appearance as the women of the Sídhe,
so that there was no means of knowing the one from the other. Men all
but smothered one another \[as they pressed\] around them, until in the
door of the liss or outer court they separate. They raise their *keen*
at departure, so that they set the men in the liss beside themselves.
From this is named the Keen of the Banshee, a fairy-melody with the
musicians of Erin.

21\. Into the *dūn* goes Fraoch, and the hosts rise up before him, and
bid him welcome as if it were from another world he came.

Ailill and Mève arise and show they are penitent for the misdeed they
did him; they make full peace and betake themselves to feasting until
night.

Fraoch summons a servant of his suite and said:

"Get thee off to the spot where I went into the water: a salmon I left
there, bring it to Find-abair, and of it let herself take charge, and
let her broil it well. The gold-ring is in the salmon's middle. I expect
it will be asked of her to-night."

They become inebriated, and music and playing delight them.

22\. Quoth Ailill to his steward: "Bring me all my treasures."

They were brought him and were before him.

"Wonderful, wonderful!" they all exclaimed.

"Call ye Find-abair to me," said Ailill.

With a train of fifty maidens she comes in.

"Well, daughter," Ailill spake, "the ring which

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I gave thee last
year is it in thy possession? Bring it me that the warrior-braves may
see it; thou shalt have it again."

"I do not know," she said, what has become of it."

"Well, find out," said Ailill, it must be sought, else the soul must
part with thy body."

"It is unworthy to say so; there is much that is fine besides," said the
warrior-braves. And Fraoch spake:

"I possess no treasure which I would not give up on behalf of the girl,
for she has brought me the word to save my life." <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

"Of treasures thou hast none which can save her if she bring not the
ring back," Quoth Ailill.

"I have no power to give it," said the girl, do with me what thou wilt."

"By the god of my folk," said Ailill, thy lips shall pale in death if
thou return it not. Why it is asked of thee is because of the
impossible. Until the dead come back who died since the world began,
from where it was flung I know it doth not return."

"Verily, not for reward or longing shall the wished for treasure
return," said the girl. "Since, however, thou dost long for it so
pressingly I go to bring it thee."

"Go, indeed, thou shalt not," said Ailill, but let some one go from thee
to fetch it."

And the girl sent her maid.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

"I swear by my people's god," she said, "should anyone be found to
protect me from the tyrant's stroke, <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)
I shall no longer be in thy power should the ring be found."

Should the ring be found," said Ailill, "I shall certainly not prevent
thee, should it even be with the groom (stable-boy) that thou should’st
go."

23\. The maid then brought into the palace the dish with the broiled
salmon thereon, well prepared with honey dressing. Over the salmon lay
the golden ring.

Ailill and Mève view it.

Let me see!" said Fraoch, "and he looked for his purse."

"Meseemeth, it is for a testimony that I left my girdle behind," said
Fraoch. "Declare on thy Royal Word what thou hast done with the ring!"

"Yea I will not conceal it from thee," Ailill said. "Mine is the ring
which was in the purse, and I knew it was Find-abair who gave it thee.
On this account I flung it into the Black Linn. On thy word of honour,
and by thy soul, declare O Fraoch, how it has happened to be brought
out."

Fraoch spoke: "I will not conceal it from thee. On the first day I found
the thumb-ring at the door of the Liss, and I knew it was a lovely gem;
therefore I carefully put it by in my purse. On the day that I went to
the water I heard how the girl had gone

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

out to seek it. I said to her: 'What reward shall I have from thee for
finding it?'

"She told me that she would give me a year's love. It chanced that I had
not got it with me; I had left it behind me in the house. We met not
until we met as she gave the sword into my hand in the river. And
thereafter I saw when thou didst open the purse, and didst fling the
thumb-ring into the water, and I saw the salmon spring to meet it so
that it took it into its mouth. Then I caught the salmon, took it up on
the bank and put it into the girl's hand. It is that salmon then which
is on the dish."

24\. At these tales the household were struck with astonishment and they
marvelled.

"I shall not bestow my thought on another youth in Erin after thee,"
said Find-abair.

"Betroth thee to him," said Ailill and Mève, "and do thou come to us
with thy kine to the raid of the kine of Cualnge: on thy return once
more from the east with thy kine, ye twain shall wed that same night,
thou and Find-abair."

"I will do so," Fraoch replied.

They are there until the following day, when Fraoch with his companions
got ready and bade farewell to Ailill and to Mève. They then set out for
their own bounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[1:1](cdm03.htm#fr_39.md) mc̄ Idaid (Book of the Dun
Cow, facsimile, p. 63<sup>b</sup>, line 27); Idaith (Book of Leinster);
Fiduig (Egerton, 1782); Idhaig (Edinburgh, MS. XL.); m<sup>c</sup>
Fei<sup>t</sup> (Book of Dean of Lismore). Hence nominative Idad,
genitive Idaid, the form of the oldest manuscript, seems preferable: it
would readily yield the other variants in regular development. Fraoch
may be pronounced as Fraech.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[1:2](cdm03.htm#fr_40.md) Pronounce *Shee*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[2:1](cdm03.htm#fr_41.md) For brightness, *i.e.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[4:1](cdm03.htm#fr_42.md) Mac Idhuidh—Egerton,
1782.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[4:2](cdm03.htm#fr_43.md) Outer court.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[6:1](cdm03.htm#fr_44.md) Uaithne.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[8:1](cdm03.htm#fr_45.md) Lit., "Your addition is
better than your diminution."

<span id="fn_46"></span>[9:1](cdm03.htm#fr_46.md) "Love's labour lost."

<span id="fn_47"></span>[9:2](cdm03.htm#fr_47.md) Dowry from the
bridegroom; *cf*. marriage-settlement.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[10:1](cdm03.htm#fr_48.md) Lit., is.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[10:2](cdm03.htm#fr_49.md) Pool.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[11:1](cdm03.htm#fr_50.md) Eg. version adds: *in
the Brei*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[15:1](cdm03.htm#fr_51.md) Lit., in pledge for my
soul.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[16:1](cdm03.htm#fr_52.md) This rendering only
paraphrases the original, where *sarol mogreiss* seems to convey the
ideas of oppression and servility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Fraoch](cdm04.md)
