[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm05.md) 
[Next](cdm07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Fisher.</span>

<span id="an_p_9">9</span>. On the next day it was the same thing. The
old man fished from sunrise to sundown, and never a bite got he till the
time of dusk and lateness; and

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

then in the mouth of the night, a fish laid on the hook. He hauled up
cheerily, and when the head was by the side of the boat he gripped the
fish fast by the throat.

"Are you going to take me?" said the fish.

"I am," said he, "I won't let you go any more."

"Well," said the fish, "it can't be helped. Have you any man to your
clan?"

"No," said he, "I have in the whole wide world but my wife, my mare, and
my dog."

Then the fish spoke once more and said:

“Thou shalt let no one split me, but do it thyself. Thou shalt put into
the pot but a morsel of my liver and a bit of my heart to boil for
thyself, and for thy wife, and for thy mare, and for thy dog to eat.

“Three bones thou wilt find at the side of my head. Go out and bury them
in the garden.

“Thy wife will bear three sons.

“Thy mare will cast three foals.

“Thy dog will litter three whelps.

“When they are born dig up my bones and keep them.

“Three trees will sprout where the bones are buried, and they will be in
leaf and budding, in sap and growing, summer and winter, spring and
autumn, every day for ever, so long as the clan shall live.

“They will droop or wither or die as they do.”

<span id="an_p_10">10</span>. Home went the fisherman with the fish, and
he did as he was bid. He split the fish himself, and he put a bit of the
heart and a morsel of liver into the pot

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

to boil, some for himself, some for his wife, some for his mare, some
for his dog to eat; and when they had supped he buried the bones in the
garden and went to bed and slept sound.

<span id="an_p_11">11</span>. At the end of thrice three months the wife
was brought to bed and she bore three sons.

"Oh my husband," said she, "what is here?"

"Three sons," said he.

"That were well," said she, "if there were aught to give them."

"That there is," said the old man.

Then he cast his eyes around, and the mare had cast three foals, and the
hound had littered three whelps, and three trees had sprouted up in the
garden. So he went out and dug up the bones and laid them aside as the
fish had said.

<span id="an_p_12">12</span>. "So time went on and the children grew,
and the old man fished as usual, and he got plenty of fish. But as the
third year came near its end he grew sorrowful and failed day by day. At
the end of the third year, in the gloaming, the mermaid rose at the side
of his boat and she said:

"Have you brought your eldest son?"

"No," said he. "I forgot that this was the day. I did not bring the
lad."

"Well, well," said the mermaid, "you may keep him four years more to see
if it be easier to part with him. See, here is his like for age. Is
yours as fine as mine?" and she held up a big bouncing baby.

<span id="an_p_13">13</span>. Home he went full of delight that he had
four

<span id="img_03800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Well, well, said
the mermaid, you may keep him four years more to see if it be easier to
part with him. See, here is his like for age. is yours as fine as mine?
and she held up a big bouncing baby.](tn/03800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03800.jpg.md)  
“Well, well,” said the mermaid, “you may keep him four years more to see
if it be easier to part with him. See, here is his like for age. is
yours as fine as mine?” and she held up a big bouncing baby.  
</span>

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

more years of his eldest son, and he kept on fishing and catching plenty
of fish till the end of the second term was near. Then he grew sad and
heavy, and failed daily. But when the end of the seven years had come he
went to sea without his boy. The mermaid rose at the side of the boat
and she said:—

"Have you brought me your eldest son?"

"Oh! I forgot him," said the old man.

"Go home," said the mermaid, "and keep your son for seven years more;
but at the end of that time you will be sure to remember me. It will be
no easier then to part with your son, but you shall have plenty of fish
till then."

And down she dived into the deep sea.

<span id="an_p_14">14</span>. So the old man cheered up and went home
joyful, because he had got seven more years of his eldest son. He
thought he would be dead before the term ended, and that he would never
see the mermaid again. But time went on, and the end of fourteen years
drew near, and the old man grew heavier and heavier, and weaker and
weaker day by day, and his wife and his sons could not make out what
ailed him.

"What is troubling you, father?" said the eldest son one day.

"The matter that does not concern thee touch it not," said the old
fisher.

"But that which makes you sad concerns me," said the boy. "I must know
what it is."

So the old fisher told his son how the whole

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

matter stood between him and the mermaid, and how he was promised to the
mermaid at the end of the fourteen years.

"Don't let that trouble you, father," said the boy. "I won't oppose
you."

"No, my son," said he, "though I never get fish again for ever, I will
not give you to the mermaid."

<span id="an_p_15">15</span>. Now the sons had grown to great strength
and wisdom, and the eldest son said to his father:

"If I may not go with you to sea any more, I will go out into the world
to seek my fortune."

"That is but a poor prospect for me," said the old man. "It was long
before I saw you, and it may be longer before I see you again. But if
you must go you must not go empty. You must have a horse and a hound and
a weapon to wield."

<span id="an_p_16">16</span>. “A black horse was foaled when you were
born. Here take this halter and this little rusty bit, and go out to the
hill and shake the bridle, and the horse will come and put his nose into
it.

<span id="an_p_17">17</span>. “A black whelp was littered when the horse
was foaled. Here take this cake and go out to the wood, and when the
black hound comes baying openmouthed, give him the cake and he will
follow you.

<span id="an_p_18">18</span>. “I will go to the smithy and forge you a
weapon myself.”

<span id="an_p_19">19</span>. Now this lad had grown so great and stout
and strong, that his like was not to be found for size and strength and
courage and goodly seeming, so he took the little rusty bit and the old
ragged halter and

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

strode up the hill to seek the black palfrey. He had not got far on the
moor when the wild, shaggy, prancing, black palfrey came galloping down
with clattering hoofs and shining eyes and streaming mane and snorting
blood-red nostrils and open streaming mouth, rushing as if to trample
the lad under foot and tear him; but the lad shook the bit till it
clinked and rang, and the black steed came and put his nose into the
halter, and they were good friends at once.

<span id="an_p_20">20</span>. He took the halter in his hand and led the
steed down to the forest. When they got there a great shaggy black hound
came baying furiously out of the wood, with fiery eyes and blood-red
tongue and glittering white savage teeth, glancing as if to seize and
tear them. But the lad was not a bit afraid. He pulled out the little
cake that his father had given him, and thrust it into the hound's open
throat; and then the black dog was as tame as the black horse, and both
followed the lad home to his father's hut.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Weapon](cdm07.md)
