[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm01) 
[Next](cdm03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span id="img_front"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![If the king's
daughter is not here to-morrow at this same hour the realm shall be
ravaged by me,](tn/front.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/front.jpg)  
If the king's daughter is not here to-morrow at this same hour the realm
shall be ravaged by me,  
</span>

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">Between</span> the years 1870 and 1884 the late
Mr J. F. Campbell of Islay was repeatedly attracted by a series of
legends current in the Highlands and Isles, which made special appeal to
him as a storyologist. After reading a dozen versions of the stories, he
found that no single title fitted so well as that of the *Dragon Myth*.
"It treats of water, egg, mermaid, sea-dragon, tree, beasts, birds,
fish, metals, weapons, and men mysteriously produced from sea-gifts. All
versions agree in these respects; they are all water myths, and relate
to the slaying of water monsters."

As early indeed as 1862, while fresh from work, he had taken incidents
from three versions and compared them with versions in other languages.
Several journeys in the Highlands followed, as also in Japan, China, and
Ceylon. While in the East, it was part of his pastimes to make sketches
of the Dragons of the Orient, his mind being all the while full of the
legends of the West. He regarded this as one of the most important of
myths, and the most difficult to deal with. It is the State Myth of
England, Russia, and Japan. He found it in the "Rig Veda," and he
concluded generally that it is Eur-Aryan in the widest sense.

Of his own work he expressly says that it is free

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

translation. "I take the story from the Gaelic and tell it in my own
words generally where the scribe's language is prosy. But when passages
occur which seem worth preservation—bits of recitation and quaint
phrases—I have translated carefully. This is work honestly done while my
head was full of the subject. I think that it might interest a large
number of readers… ." The manuscript is among the Campbell of Islay
Collection in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh, to the Curators of
which I am beholden for their courtesy, of which I now make public
acknowledgment, in enabling me to complete at Glasgow University Library
the transcription which I had begun many years ago.

For him the subject had two distinct aspects: first, the story is
amusing for children; secondly, it has a scientific interest for a large
and growing number of scholars. He had heard in London Mr Ralston give
his lectures upon Russian stories, and found that the children in the
audience were much amused. But amongst the audience were also Thomas
Carlyle, Professor Owen, Sir R. Murchison, Reeve, Lady Ashburton, Miss
Dempster of Skibo, and a number of learned people who wanted to know
"the philosophy of the subject." For Mr Campbell thought there was a
great deal of philosophy in it, and he states: "I want readers, wise and
foolish, to be equally well treated. The foolish may read the story, the
wise may read both story and notes."

He had read parallel stories in Swedish, German,

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

French, Italian, English, and had heard outlines of Russian versions
which seemed to him more mythical and nearer the original shape. He even
found a part of the story in a book of Swahili tales told at Zanzibar.

<span class="small">"Theoretically," he remarks in 1876, this looks like
serpent worship, and the defeat of serpent worship by some mythical
personage. Many of the incidents which are not in Gaelic, but are in
Swedish, can be traced, and are explained in the Russian version, e.g.,
a well is a serpent, an apple tree is another serpent, a cushion in á
meadow is a third serpent transformed. Three brothers are concerned in
Russian. In Swedish the serpent-slaying heroes are born of maidens who
in one instance drink of a well, and in the other eat an apple. Three
brothers are concerned in the adventures in Gaelic in one case, and
incidents enough for three are in the several versions; if they were
combined, Gaelic Swedish and Russian together would make something like
a fragment of mythology, but the Gaelic versions give the largest
quantity of materials."</span>

The incidents, which number about 440, or deducting what are but
variants, about 200, were put together from the following Gaelic
versions or stories (of which some specimens are given in this book)
collected between January 1856 and January 1861. They are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *Sea-Maiden*, No. IV., Popular Tales of the West Highlands, p. 72.
Hector Urquhart and John Mackenzie, Inveraray.

</div>

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

2\. *The Three Roads*. Hector Maclean and B. Macaskill, Berneray. MS.

3\. *The Fisher's Son and The Daughter of the King of the Golden
Castle*. John Dewar; J. MacNair, Clachaig, Cowal. MS.

4\. *The Five-headed Giant*. B. Macaskill, Berneray; and Hector Maclean.
MS.

5\. *The Smith's Son*. Same sources. MS.

6\. *The Fisher*. Hector Maclean and Alexander MacNeil, Ceanntangaval,
Barra. MS.

7\. *The Gray Lad*. Hector Maclean and John Smith, Polchar, S. Uist. MS.

8\. *The Second Son of the King of Ireland and The Daughter of the King
of France*. J. Dewar; J. MacNair, Clachaig, Cowal. MS.

9\. *The Sea Maiden*. MS. notes by J. F. C., and John MacPhie, vol. i.,
Popular Tales. Interleaved copy, second recitation.

10\. *The Sea Maiden*. Pp. 328, 346 of English Collection by J. F. C.
Notes and MSS.

11\. *Notes* from an Irish blind fiddler on the Loch Goil Head steamer.
Interleaved copy. Popular Tales, vol i., p. 71.

</div>

Then came further Gaelic versions noted in 1870 and later:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

12\. *Notes* in Journal, Aug. 17, 1870, pp. 1-10, from Lachlan
MacNeill, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) 5 Maxwellton Street,
Paisley.

13\. Aug. 22, 1870. "John Mackenzie, fisherman,

</div>

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

can repeat the story as printed from his telling in my book. Kenmore,
Inveraray."

14\. *Iain Beag Mac An Iasgair* (Little John the Fisher's Son); p. 42 of
J. F. C.'s Journal for Sept. 1, 1870. From Malcolm MacDonald, fisherman,
Benmore Cottage, Mull.

15\. *Fionn Mac A Bhradain agus Donnchadh mac a’ Bhradain*. From —
Maclean, fisherman, Bunessan, Ross of Mull.

</div>

It will be seen that the legends ranged over a wide Highland area; were
thoroughly popular, and of the people. In Ireland there are references
to the Dragon story also in Hyde's *Sgeulaidhe*, and one may compare
Synge's *The Aran Isles* (pp. 40, 46, 24, 55). Parallel tales of
contests with water-monsters are world-wide, and the story of St George
and the Dragon, as told in Palestine, is very similar to that current in
the Highlands. At Beyrût is shown the very well into which he cast the
slain monster, and the place where the saint washed his hands
thereafter. The story is:—

<span class="small">"There was once a great city that depended for its
water-supply upon a fountain without the walls. A great dragon,
possessed and moved by Satan himself, took possession of the fountain
and refused to allow water to be taken unless, whenever people came to
the spring, a youth or maiden was given to him to devour. The people
tried again and again to destroy the monster, but though the flower of
the city cheerfully went forth against it, its breath was so
pestilential that</span>

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

they used to drop down dead before they came within bowshot.

The terrorised inhabitants were thus obliged to sacrifice their
offspring, or die of thirst; till at last all the youths of the place
had perished except the king's daughter. So great was the distress of
their subjects for want of water that the heart-broken parents could no
longer withhold her, and amid the tears of the populace she went out
towards the spring where the dragon lay awaiting her. But just as the
noisome monster was going to leap on her, Mar Jiryis appeared, in golden
panoply upon a fine white steed, and spear in hand. Riding full tilt at
the dragon, he struck it fair between the eyes and laid it dead. The
king, out of gratitude for this unlooked-for succour, gave Mar Jiryis
his daughter and half of his kingdom." <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

In the folk-lore of China there is a popular legend that the Chien Tang
River was once infested by a great *kiau* or sea-serpent, and in 1129
A.D. a district graduate is said to have heroically thrown himself into
the flood to encounter and destroy the monster. Formerly two dragons
were supposed by the Chinese to have been in a narrow passage near
Chinaye: they were very furious, and upset boats. According to the Rev.
Mr Butler of the Presbyterian Mission in Ningpo, "they had to be
appeased by the yearly offering of a girl of fair appearance and

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

perfect body. At last one of the *literati* determined to stop this. He
armed himself and jumped into the water; blood rose to the surface. He
had killed one of the dragons. The other retired to the narrow place. A
temple was erected to the hero at Peach Blossom ferry." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

In Japan <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) one of the dragon legends
recounts how a very large serpent with eight heads and eight tails came
annually and swallowed one person. A married couple who had eight
children have at last only one girl left. They are in great grief. The
hero, *So-sa-no-o no mikoto*, went to the sources of the river
Hi-no-ka-mi at Idzumo and found an old man and woman clasping a young
girl. "If you will give that girl to me I will save her." The mikoto
changed his form and assumed that of the girl: he divided the room into
eight divisions, and in each placed one saki tub. The serpent
approached, drank the saki, got intoxicated, and fell asleep, whereupon
the mikoto drew his sword and cut the serpent into pieces! Which proves
the unwisdom of the Japanese serpent in drinking saki, and the observant
mind of So-sa-no-o!

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

In China the dragon is the emblem of imperial power: a five-clawed
dragon is embroidered on the Emperor's robes, with two legs pointing
forwards and two backwards. Sometimes it has a pearl in one hand and is
surrounded with clouds and fire. The chief dragon is thought to have its
abode in the sky, whence it can send rain or withhold it. Its power is
symbolised in the Emperor.

Literature abounds in references to dragon-monsters. Homer describes the
shield of Hercules as having the scaly horror of a dragon coiled, with
eyes oblique, that askant shot gleaming fire. Ovid locates the dragon
slain by Cadmus near the river Cephisus, in Bœotia. Arthur carries a
dragon on his helm, a tradition referred to in the Faerie Queen.
Shakespeare, too:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                        "Peace, Kent;  
Come not between the Dragon and his wrath!"</span>

</div>

Ludd's dominion was infested by a dragon that shrieked on May-Day Eve.
In Wales, St Samson is said to have seized the dragon and thrown it into
the sea. Among the Welsh, indeed, a pendragon came to mean a chief, a
dictator in times of danger. And if we surveyed the lives of the saints,
it would be tedious to enumerate the number who figure as
dragon-slayers—all of them active long ere the days of the modern
Mediterranean shark!

Over the linguistic area covered by the Celtic branches of the
Indo-European peoples, legends of contests with monsters have been
current from early

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

times. As to their origin, it is difficult to be certain as to how far
they may have been transmitted from one people to another. Possibly
external influence may be traced in the *Bruden Dâ Derga*, a Gadhelic
text from about the eighth century, which speaks of

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In leuidán timchella inn domon" <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)  
 (The Leviathan that surrounds the world).</span>

</div>

The Cymric book of Taliessin tells of

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"That river of dread strife hard by *terra*
\[earth\],  
 Venom its essence, around the world it goes." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5)</span>

</div>

*The Early Lives of the Saints* have parallel references. In an
eighth-century chronicle concerning St Fechin, we hear of evil powers
and influences whose rage is "seen in that watery fury, and their
hellish hate and turbulence in the beating of the sea against the
rocks." Pious men are often afraid to approach the shore, fearing to
encounter the like hellish influence. Of a great storm we read of "the
waves rising higher and higher—Satan himself doubtless assisting from
beneath." <span id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6) The Life of the Irish Saint
Abban tells how from his ship he saw a beastly monster on the sea,
having a hundred heads of divers forms, two hundred eyes, and as many
ears; it extended itself to the clouds and set the waters in such
commotion that the ship was almost lost. The sailors feared greatly. St
Abban prayed against the monster, the beast fell as if dead, and

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

there was a calm. But strange to relate, the body of the monster could
be seen neither on sea nor on land (*et in hoc apparet quod dyabolus
fuit*). <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) In Adamnan's Life of
Colum-Cille <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) there is a chapter
concerning the repulse of a certain aquatic monster (*aquatilis bestia*)
by the blessed man's prayer. The incident occurred somewhere by the
river Ness. The inhabitants were burying one who had been bitten while
swimming. To fetch a coble from the opposite bank, one of Columba's
companions, Lugne Mocumin, cast himself into the water. And Adamnan
relates:—

<span class="small">"But the monster, which was lying in the river bed,
and whose appetite was rather whetted for more prey than sated with what
it already had, perceiving the surface of the water disturbed by the
swimmer, suddenly comes up and moves towards the man as he swam in
mid-stream, and with a great roar rushes on him with open mouth, while
all who were there, barbarians as well as brethren, were greatly
terror-struck. The blessed man seeing it, after making the Salutary sign
of the cross in the empty air with his holy hand upraised, and invoking
the name of God, commanded the ferocious monster, saying: 'Go thou no
further, nor touch the man; go back at once.' Then, on hearing this word
of the saint, the monster was terrified, and fled away again more
quickly than if it had been dragged off by ropes, though it had
approached Lugne as he swam so</span>

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

<span class="small">closely that between man and monster there was no
more than the length of one punt pole."</span>

The whole incident reflects some natural fact, together with the human
belief in the possible occurrence of such. "The belief," says Bishop
Reeves, "that certain rivers and lakes were haunted by serpents of a
demoniacal and terrible character was current among the Irish at a very
remote period, and still prevails in many parts of Ireland." St Molua
and St Colman of Dromore are recorded to have saved people from such
monsters. As to the modern Irish belief, let Mr W. R. Le Fanu's *Seventy
Years of Irish Life* be evidence:—

<span class="small">"The dreadful beast, the wurrum—half fish, half
dragon—still survives in many a mountain lake—seldom seen, indeed, but
often heard. Near our fishing quarters in Kerry there are two such
lakes, one the beautiful little lake at the head of the Blackwater
River, called Lough Brin, from Brin or Bran as he is now called, the
dreadful wurrum which inhabits it. The man who minds the boat there
speaks with awe of Bran; he tells me he has never seen him, and hopes he
never may, but has often heard him roaring on a stormy night. On being
questioned what the noise was like, he said it was like the roaring of a
young bull.' … Some miles further on, between Lough Brin and Glencar,
there is another lake from which a boy while bathing was driven and
chased by the dreadful wurrum which dwells in it. It bit him on the back
and hunted</span>

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="small">him all the way home, where he arrived naked and
bleeding."</span>

In the Life of St Mochua of Balla it is recounted that no one ventured
to pursue a wounded stag that fled to an island in Lough Ree, on account
of a horrible monster that infested the lake and was wont to destroy
swimmers. A man was at last persuaded to swim across, but as he was
returning the beast devoured him.

In the *Altus* of St Colum-Cille he refers to a great slimy dragon,
terrible and most horrible, that slimy serpent more subtle than all the
beasts:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Draco magnus deterrimus terribilis et antiquus qui
fuit serpens lubricus sapientior omnibus bestiis… ."</span>

</div>

Nor is a similar belief yet extinct in the Highlands. The late Miss
Dempster of Skibo records in her manuscript a legend of St Gilbert and
the Dragon, with a note that some say that this was not a dragon, but a
witch from Lochlin—a variant to be expected in Sutherland:—

<span class="small">"There lived once upon a time in Sutherland a great
dragon, very fierce and strong. It was this dragon that burnt all the
fir woods in Ross, Sutherland, and the Reay country, of which the
remains, charred, blackened, and half-decayed, may be found in every
moss. Magnificent forests they must have been, but the dragon set fire
to them with his fiery breath, and rolled over the whole land.</span>

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Men fled from before his face, and women fainted when his
shadow crossed the sky-line. He made the whole land desert. And it came
to pass that this evil spirit, whom the people called the 'beast' and
'Dubh Giuthais,' <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) came nigh to Dornoch
as near as Lochfinn, and when he could see the town and spire of St
Gilbert, his church—'Pity of you, Dornoch,' roared the dragon. 'Pity of
you, Dornoch,' said St Gilbert, and taking with him five long and sharp
arrows, and a little lad to carry them, he went out to meet the 'beast.'
When he came over against it he said, 'Pity of you,' and drew his bow.
The first arrow shot the beast through the heart. He was buried by the
towns-people. Men are alive now who reckoned distance by so or so far
from the 'stone of the beast' on the moor between Skibo and Dornoch. The
moor is planted, and a wood called Carmore waves over the ashes of the
destroying dragon."</span>

This church, Miss Dempster notes, was built between 1235-45, burnt 1570,
and rebuilt 1614; it was repaired in 1835 by the Duchess, Countess of
Sutherland. While the work was going forward the tomb of the founder,
Gilbert, Bishop of Caitness, called St Gilbert, was discovered. The
saying went in Sutherland that when this happened, the cathedral would
fall at mid-day the following Sunday; and Mrs Dempster well remembered
seeing a third of the congregation (Gaelic) camped out on the hill above
the town, expecting to see the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

fall of the roof; nor did many of the oldest inhabitants go to church
for several following Sundays.

In addition to legends of the *beithir-nimh* (venomous serpent) and
*uile-bheist* (dragon; also *a’ bheisd)*, there are endless tales of the
water-horse (*each-uisge*) associated with Highland lochs. There is
hardly a district without some legend of a *Linne na Baobh* (Badhbh):
very often the water-horse is represented as a kind of creature covered
all over with rags and ribbons, typifying the wind-tossed surface of the
waves. His appearance is a portent of a drowning soon to follow.

I n the poem of *Tristan and Iseult*, by Gottfried of Strassburg, a
German poet who wrote about the year 1210, working on sources found by
him in a poem by Thomas of Brittany, there is an account of the fight
with the dragon, strangely analogous to that in Highland tradition. The
hero overcomes a monster, and is about to be robbed of the credit of his
exploit by a traitor who claims the princess as his guerdon. It is a
widespread Aryan tale. A similar adventure is ascribed to Lancelot in
*Le cerf au pied blanc*, and in the Dutch poem of *Morien*. At least
three of the printed prose versions of Tristan retain the dragon
fight, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) whether it formed originally
a part of the tale or not. Gottfried of Strassburg introduces it thus:—

<span class="small">"Now, the story tells us that there was at
that</span>

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

time in Ireland a monstrous dragon which devoured the people and wasted
the land; so that the king at last had sworn a solemn oath that whoever
slew the monster should have the Princess Iseult to wife; and because of
the beauty of the maiden and the fierceness of the dragon, many a
valiant knight had lost his life. The land was full of the tale, and it
had come to Tristan's <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) ears, and in
the thought of this had he made his journey.

"The next morning, ere it was light, he rose and armed himself secretly,
and took his strongest spear, and mounted his steed, and rode forth into
the wilderness. He rode by many a rough path till the sun was high in
the heavens, when he turned downwards into a valley, where, as the geste
tells us, the dragon had its lair. Then he saw afar off four men
galloping swiftly over the moor where there was no road. One of them was
the queen's seneschal, who would fain have been the lover of the
Princess Iseult, but she liked him not. Whenever knights rode forth bent
on adventures, the seneschal was ever with them for nothing on earth
save that men might say they had seen him ride forth, for never would he
face the dragon, but would return swifter than he went.

"Now, when Tristan saw the men in flight he knew the dragon must be near
at hand, so he rode on steadily, and ere long he saw the monster coming
towards him, breathing out smoke and flame from its open jaws. The
knight laid his spear in rest, and

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

set spurs to his steed, and rode so swiftly, and smote so strongly, that
the spear went in at the open jaws, and pierced through the throat into
the dragon's heart, and he himself came with such force against the
dragon that his horse fell dead, and he could scarce free himself from
the steed. But the evil beast fell upon the corpse and partly devoured
it, till the wound from the spear pained it so sorely that it left the
horse half-eaten, and fled into a rocky ravine.

"Tristan followed after the monster, which fled before him, roaring for
pain till the rocks rang again with the sound. It cast fire from its
jaws and tore up the earth around, till the pain of the wound overcame
it, and it crouched down under a wall of rock. Then Tristan drew forth
his sword, thinking to slay the monster easily, but ’twas a hard strife,
the hardest Tristan had ever fought, and in truth he thought it would be
his death. For the dragon had as aids smoke and flame, teeth and claws
sharper than a shearing knife; and the knight had much ado to find
shelter behind the trees and bushes, for the fight was so fierce that
the shield he held in his hand was burnt well-nigh to a coal. But the
conflict did not endure over-long, for the spear in the vitals of the
dragon began to pain him so that he lay on the ground, rolling over and
over in agony. Then Tristan came near swiftly and smote with his sword
at the heart of the monster so that the blade went in right to the hilt;
and the dragon gave forth a roar so grim and terrible that it was as if
heaven and earth fell together, and the cry was heard far and wide
through the land. Tristan himself was well-nigh terrified, but as he saw
the beast was dead he went

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

near, and with much labour he forced the jaws open, and cut out the
tongue; then he closed the jaws again, and put the tongue in his bosom.
He turned him again to the wilderness, thinking to rest through the day,
and come again to his people secretly in the shadows of the night; but
he was so overcome by the stress of the fight and the fiery breath of
the dragon that he was well-nigh spent, and seeing a little lake near at
hand into which a clear stream flowed from the rock, he went towards it,
and as he came to the cool waters the weight of his armour and the venom
of the dragon's tongue overpowered him, and he fell senseless by the
stream.

"Iseult and her mother afterwards found Tristan, and drew him out of the
water, whereupon the dragon's tongue fell from his breast. And when all
the folk came together to know the end of the seneschal's matter,
Tristan spake—

"'Lords all, mark this marvel, I slew the dragon, and cut this tongue
from out the jaws, yet this man afterwards smote it a second time to
death.'

"And all the lords said, 'One thing is clear, he who came first and cut
out the tongue was the man who slew the monster.' And never a man said
nay." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

Wales, too, has its legends of dragons, serpents, and snakes. It seems
to have been an old Welsh belief that all lizards were formerly
women. <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) Every Welsh farmhouse had two
snakes. They never

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

appeared until just before the death of the master or mistress of the
house; then the snakes died." Parallel with this, perhaps, is the number
of river names within the Celtic area that seem to contain the names of
goddesses or nymphs of the stream. Such are met with in Lōchy, the Nigra
Dea (black goddess) of Adamnan; in Affric, both a lake and river name,
also a personal female name, from *aith bhric* (root), as in *breac*
(spotted); in Nevis, where Dr MacBain rightly detected some nymph name
like Nebestis; Aberdeen, Gaelic *Obair-dhea’oin*, with a strongly
trilled *r*, showing that *dh* of old *deuona* (goddess, etc.) has been
assimilated to the preceding word for estuary, deuona itself being a
divine name, and exemplifying in a river name what Ausonius tells us was
the case with sacred springs in Gaul—*fons addite divis* (they were
dedicated to the gods) . To be included in the number is the name of the
river Boyne, which under the form *Bofind* (white cow) yields Boyne, the
name of Fraoch's mother's sister from the Sídh (Shee) or Faëry. The form
Boand (genitive Bóinde), also that in the phrase *in* (*h*)*ostio
Boindeo* (at the mouth of the Boyne) goes back on some such form as
Boouinda (white cow). This recalls an Irish name for the Milky
Way—*bóthar bó finne* (the way or path of the cow of whiteness) . But in
Uist I met with the name *Sliochd Uis* (Milky Way), meaning seemingly
"the path or way of whiteness or brightness," the root of which recurs
again in Uisne (Uisnech).

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

But the survey of the theme would not be complete in the form in which
the more modern tradition leaves it. I have therefore given the story of
Fraoch from the Book of the Dean of Lismore, and also the first part of
the old and important tale known as the *Táin Bó Fráich*, of which the
following manuscripts exist: The Book of Leinster; The Yellow Book of
Lecan; Edinburgh Advocates’ Library Gaelic MS. XL.; Egerton 1782
(British Museum). This old story has been edited with all the important
variants, with his wonted care and skill, by Professor Kuno Meyer in the
*Zeitschrift für Celtische Philologie* for 1902. In making my
translation I tried to select from among the best of the variant
readings. The last seven sections of the *Táin Bó Fráich* I have not
translated here: they are apart from the Geste of Fraoch, and bring the
hero of the narrative on further adventures elsewhere. This tale is one
of the oldest of our secular narratives in Gadhelic: it belongs to about
the ninth century, a period when the Scoto-Celtic idiom of Alba was one
with the language of Erin. A translation was made by the late Mr J.
O’Beirne Crowe, which appeared in the Royal Irish Academy Proceedings
for 1870, but subsequent studies have necessitated many changes.

The name Fraoch (Fraech) is very ancient. It survives in the place name
Clonfree (Cluain Fraeich), Strokestown, Roscommon. On an Ogham stone it
occurs in *Netta Vroicci maqi muccoi Trenaluggo* at Donaghmore, Kildare;
also in *Vraicci maqi Medvi* on

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

an Ogham from Rathcroghan, Roscommon. In this last it stands for (the
stone) of Fraoch, son of Medb. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)
Another account of the death of Fraoch than that given in what I term
the Geste of Fraoch is met with in the *Táin Bó Cuailnge*, where he
meets his death at the hands of Cuchulainn. It is noticeable that his
fairy origin is pointed to, and that his death is associated with water.
This episode is at a later stage in his story than that in *Táin Bó
Fráich*, which gives the serpent encounter. He had by this time
accompanied Mève's forces as recounted in the Cattle-Raid of Cuailnge
(*Táin Bó Cuailnge*), and his healing at the hands of the folk of Fiery
is to be presupposed: here again they intervene, and we hear of Fraoch's
fairy-mound. Here is the *Táin Bó Cuailnge* version of the death of
Fraoch, or Fraech:—

"They are there till next morning; then Fraech is summoned to them.
'Help us, O Fraech,' said Medb (Mève). 'Remove from us the strait that
is on us. Go before Cuchulainn before us, if perchance you shall fight
with him.'

"He set out early in the morning with nine men, till he reached Ath
Fuait. He saw the warrior bathing in the river.

"'Wait here,' said Fraech to his retinue, 'till I come to the man
yonder; not good is the water,' said he.

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

"He took off his clothes, and goes into the water to him.

"'Do not come to me,' said Cuchulainn. 'You will die from it, and I
should be sorry to kill you.'

"'I shall come indeed,' said Fraech, 'that we may meet in the water; and
let your play with me be fair.'

"'Settle it as you like,' said Cuchulainn.

"'The hand of each of us round the other,' said Fraech.

"They set to wrestling for a long time on the water, and Fraech was
submerged. Cuchulainn lifted him up again.

"'This time,' said Cuchulainn, 'will you yield and accept your life?'

"'I will not suffer it,' said Fraech.

"Cuchulainn put him under it again, until Fraech was killed. He comes to
land; his retinue carry his body to the camp. Ath Fraich, that was the
name of that ford for ever. All the host lamented Fraech. They saw a
troop of women in green tunics <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) on
the body of Fraech mac Idaid; they drew him from them into the mound.
Sid Fraich was the name of that mound afterwards."

Ailill's plan in compassing the death of Fraoch recalls his episode with
Fergus, son of Rōg. Keating <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) tells
how, when Fergus was in banishment in Connaught, it happened that he was
with

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ailill and Mève in
Magh Ai, where they had a fortress; and one day, when they went out to
the shore of a lake that was near the *lios* (or outer court), Ailill
asked Fergus to go and swim in the lake, and Fergus did so. While
swimming, Mève was seized by a desire of swimming with him; and when she
had gone into the lake with Fergus, Ailill grew jealous, and he ordered
a kinsman of his to cast a spear at Fergus, which pierced him through
the breast; and Fergus came ashore on account of the wound caused by
that cast, and extracted the spear from his body and cast it in the
direction of Ailill; and it pierced a gray hound that was near his
chariot, and thereupon Fergus fell and died and was buried on the shore
of the same lake.

Rhys points out that Ailill (written Oilill in Keating) seems cognate
with Welsh *ellyll* (an elf or demon), and that Mève's Ailill belongs to
a race which is always ranged against the Tuatha Dé Danann. Mève he
associates with the goddesses of dawn and dusk, who are found at one
time consorting with bright beings and at another with dark ones, and
they commonly associate themselves with water. Curious too that Mève's
sisters Eithne and Clothru are associated the one with the river Inny
(Eithne) in Westmeath, the other with Clothru's Isle (Inis Clothraun) in
Loch Ree.

Eochaidh Feidhlioch, monarch at Tara, was Mève's father. He had three
sons and three daughters—namely, Breas and Nar and Lothar,

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

the three sons; Eithne Uathach, Clothra, and Mève of Cruachan, the three
daughters, as the poet says in this quatrain:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Three daughters had Eochaidh Feidhlioch,  
        Fame on a lofty seat:  
Eithne Uathach, fair Mève of Cruachan,  
        And Clothra." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)</span>

</div>

O’Curry remarks of Mève that she seemed more calculated to govern many
men than to be governed by one man. She soon abandoned Conchobar, and
returned to her father, the monarch Eochaidh Feidhlioch, to Tara, who
shortly after set her up as the independent queen of the province of
Connaught. Through jealousy and hatred, fierce war raged between her and
her former husband, Conchobar, who finally was killed by a Connaught
champion, Cét Mac Magach. This Conchobar, King of Ultonia, is spoken of
as being a terrestrial god among the Ultonians. His mother's name was
Ness, hence he is known as Mac Nessa. This goddess name is connected
with that in Loch *Ness*, and points to her as having been conceived of
at first as a water-nymph. This does not prejudice what reflex of
historic movements these stories may imply. Curiously, the death of
Mève, no less than that of Fraoch, is associated with water.
Keating's <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) account is as follows:—

<span class="small">"When Olill had been slain by Conall Cearnach, Mève
went to Inis Clothrann, on Lough Ribh (Ree), to live; and while she
resided there, she was under</span>

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

<span class="small">an obligation (*ba geis di*, *i.e.* under a taboo or
*gessa*) to bathe every morning in the well which was at the entrance to
the island. And when Forbuidhe, son of Conchobar (her former husband)
heard this, he visited the well one day alone, and with a line measured
from the brink of the well to the other side of the lake, and took the
measure with him to Ulster, and practised thus: he inserted two poles in
the ground, and tied an end of the line to each pole, and placed an
apple on one of the poles, and stood himself at the other pole, and kept
constantly firing from his sling at the apple that was on the top of the
pole till he struck it. This exercise he practised until he had grown so
dexterous that he would miss no aim at the apple. Soon after this there
was a meeting of the people of Ulster and Connaught at both sides of the
Shannon at Inis Clothrann; and Forbuidhe came there from the east with
the Ulster gathering. And one morning, while he was there, he saw Mève
bathing, as was her wont, in the fore-mentioned well; and with that he
fixed a stone in his sling and hurled it at her, and struck her in the
forehead, so that she died on the spot, having been ninety-eight years
on the throne of Connaught, as we have said above." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)</span>

Of Fraoch's mother Boand, elsewhere spoken of as from the Sídhe, the
Bodleian Dindshenchus gives the following account: <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20)—

<span class="small">"Bóann, wife of Nechtán, son of Labraid, son
of</span>

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nama, went with
the cupbearers to the well-of-the-green of the fortress. Whoever went
alone to it came not from it without disgrace. Now these were the names
of the cupbearers whom Nechtán had, even Flesc and Lesc and Luam. Unless
the cupbearers went to the well, no human being would come from it
without disgrace.

"Then, with pride and haughtiness, the queen went alone to the well, and
said that it had no secret or power unless it could disgrace her shape.
And she went round the well withershins thrice, to perceive the well's
magic power. Out of the well three waves break over her, and suddenly
her right thigh and her right hand and her right eye burst, and then she
fled out of the fairy mound, fleeing the disgrace and fleeing the well,
so that she reached the sea with the water of the well behind her. And
the Inber Bóinne (river-mouth of Boyne) drowned her. Hence 'Bóann' and
'Inber Bóinne.'"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"One day Boyne of the mark of Bregia  
 Broke every fence as far as the White Sea;  
 Bóann was the name on that day  
 Of the wife of Nechtán, son of Labraid."</span>

</div>

Nechtán, the mythic owner of the fairy precinct now called Trinity Well,
into which one could not

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

gaze with impunity, and from which the river Boyne first burst forth in
pursuit of the lady who insulted it, may be cognate, Rhys thought, with
Neptune, which certainly seems cognate with Irish Nuada *Necht*. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

How rivers came to be personified may be illustrated by an enigma which
a poet puts to Finn in the tale of the Fairy-Palace of the Quicken
Trees: <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I saw to the south a bright-faced queen  
 With couch of crystal and robe of green;  
 A numerous offspring sprightly and small,  
 Plain through her skin you can see them all;  
 Slowly she moves, and yet her speed  
 Exceeds the pace of the swiftest steed!  
 Now tell me the name of that wondrous queen,  
 With her couch of crystal and robe of green."</span>

</div>

To this Finn answers: "The queen you saw is the river Boyne, which flows
by the south side of the palace of Bruga. Her couch of crystal is the
sandy bed of the river; and her robe of green the grassy plain of
Bregia, through which it flows. Her children, which you can see through
her skin, are the speckled salmon, the lively pretty trout, and all the
other fish that swim in the clear water of the river. The river flows
slowly indeed; but its waters traverse the whole world in seven years,
which is more than the swiftest steed can do."

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

A booklet entitled *The Death of Fraoch*, a Gaelic poem, was printed at
Iona in 1887, by J. MacCormick and W. Muir, and published there by F.
Ritchie. In 1888 a copy of the same appeared at Iona, with illustrations
by W. C. Ward. For a perusal, after my own rendering was finished, of
these now rare editions I have to thank Mrs MacMillan, the Manse, Iona.
The Preface is of special interest, as telling that the events narrated
"occurred in Mull, in the district surrounding Loch Laich.… The local
tradition is that Fraoch lived at Suidhe, near the village of Bunessan.
Opposite him, in an oblique direction on the other side of the loch,
lived Mev, through whose treachery Fraoch was slain; the place is still
known as *larach tigh Meidhe*. The island where the rowan tree grew is
called after her, Eilean Mhain <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) (the
isle of Main). It is right opposite to Bunessan.

"The local tradition asserts that the monster which guarded the rowan
tree, and by which Fraoch was slain, was a great serpent; but we take
leave to doubt this, because great serpents were not known in Scotland.
We think that the creature was the *torc nimhe* (wild boar), which
undoubtedly was common in the Highlands. Some who possess the tradition
say that Fraoch was found dead with the heart of the beast in his hand,
on the strand of the 'Bay of

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

the heart' (*Camus A’ Chridhe*). The bay is there to witness this, but
we do not read in the poem that the monster's heart was really torn
out." The writers take exception to translating *Cruachan* in the third
verse by Ben Cruachan, Loch Awe, and simply render *cruachan soir* "the
hill in the east." They hope this rendering "effectually" dissipates
"that myth"—*i.e.*, of associating the scene with Loch Awe. They have no
recollection of the celebrated Cruachan in Roscommon. Fraoch they
associate with *energy:* "Fraoch is seen to be an appropriate name for
an eager, impetuous, generous, affectionate, strong, young man." The
writers add that the strength of Fraoch is still proverbial. It is
common yet to say *nam bithinn-sa cho làidir ri Fraoch spionainn craobh
as a bun*—*i.e.*, "were I as strong as Fraoch, I could pull a tree from
its roots."

A tune is added "as it was sung in Mull fifty years ago," on the
authority of Mr Neil MacCormick of Fionn-phort—the first verse being
repeated after each of the others, as a chorus. "It has the strain of a
lament, and the tune to which it is sung is most melodious and
melancholy." The air there noted is different to that given in the
Appendix to Dr K. N. Macdonald's *Gesto Collection*. In Scotland the
legend is also localised at Loch Freuchie, near Amulree, Perthshire; and
at Loch Awe, Argyll, where the legend has been moralised in poetic
treatment at the hands of Mr P. G. Hamerton in his *Isles* 

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

*of Loch Awe* (1855). Mr Hamerton compares the Celtic Myth to that of
Hercules: he depicts both Fraoch and the lady as dying after the tasting
of the poisonous fruit:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">         "Both their faces were in deepest shade  
Close to each other. Thus the pair were found."</span>

</div>

Mr Hamerton draws a moral:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"There are fables full of truth  
 Fraoch's tale is sadly true!  
 For how many in their youth,  
 Bitten by the serpent's tooth,  
 Die or only live to rue!"</span>

</div>

A free rendering of the eighteenth-century Lay of Fraoch, which really
does not belong to the Ossianic Cycle, was given by Jerome Stone,
(1727-1756) in the *Scots Magazine*, with a letter dated Dunkeld, Nov.
15, 1755. He made an unwarrantable change in heading the poem *Sir Albin
and the Daughter of Mey*.

In Hamerton the fruit is poisonous: Fraoch and the "Lady of Loch Awe"
both die of it. The eating of the fruit of the Tree of Life brings
death. Medb could not live without the fruit; Fraoch could not taste of
it, or even go through the perils of getting it, without dying. Fraoch
must not go near the water; otherwise there will be a conflict which
will issue in his death. Boand (Boyne), his mother's sister, cautions
Fraoch's mother against

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

the water, according to a poem in the *Book of Fermoy*—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Let him not swim Black Water,  
 For therein he shall shed his blood."</span>

</div>

According to the Highland Lays, Fraoch dies by the serpent, and
Findabair laments him. In the *Táin Bó Fraich* there is only a promised
betrothal with Findabair. According to the *Book of Fermoy*, his wife is
Treblann, a foster-child to Coirpre mac Rossa, who belonged to Faëry. In
the *Táin Bó Fráich* his healing came from the Sídhe, and he survived to
take part with Medb on the foray of the *Táin Bó Cuailnge*, when he fell
at the hands of Cuchulainn. In either case his death is connected with
water. Medb was previously wife of Conchobar, who, according to a gloss
in the *Book of the Dun Cow*, was formerly a god upon earth (*día
talmanda*). In another account we find Conchobar as the name of a
river. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) Medb's first husband would
thus seem to have been a water-god. One might hazard the suggestion that
in old Druidic teaching, Medb herself may have been a sort of
sea-mother, if indeed their thought on ultimate things may have got the
length of postulating a mother of mankind. The berries for which she
craved were from the Tree of Life, the food of the gods, the eating of
which by mortals brings death. Rowan hurdles were used

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

in Druidic divination: <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) the rowan was
a magic medicine; a monster was thought to haunt the roots of a rowan,
and typified the guardian spirit of the tree. The thought is old among
the Celts; on the second altar of Notre Dame there is a figure of the
Celtic Hercules killing a serpent, <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26)
which the late Monsieur D’Arbois de Jubainville tried to explain by
episodes from Gadhelic myth. The dragon may be thought of as the
confiner that holds captive the fruit-bearing Tree of Life. On this view
he may be the winter-monster which Hildebrandt sees in the Indian
Vritra, the "confiner" that holds captive the rivers, while Indra is the
spring or summer sun which frees them from the clutches of the winter
dragon. The rage of the sun-god may be conceived of as manifested
against the cloud-dragon, or the winter-dragon, or the sea-dragon.
Fraoch may thus be the Celtic Hercules Furens, the name being the same
in root as *fraoch* (wrath), early Irish *fraech* (fury, rage), which is
cognate with Cymric *gwrug*. <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27) His
quest may be a solar journey; and he is swallowed by the monster as the
sun is swallowed by the sea. On this view the dragon myth should portray
the hero as being devoured by a fish, as on Semitic ground, for which
the reader should consult the great Bible Dictionaries, which treat of
Bel and the Dragon

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

and allied themes. In *Fraoch* the hero is slain, which is parallel to
his being swallowed by the sea; if not cast up again, he is healed at
the hands of the Sídhe. May we not infer that the myth is an endeavour
to shadow forth some aspects of the external world, a picture, not yet
moralised, of the cosmic process, an eternal tragedy of nature?

So far as Fraoch's conflict is comparable with that of Herakles and the
Hydra, I should like to emphasise a trait in Euripides (Ion, v. 192)
where Herakles kills the hydra with golden sickles: Λερναῖον ὕδαν
ἐναιρει χρυσέαις ἅρπαις ὁ Διὸς παῖς. On an Attic vase there is depicted
the conflict of Herakles against the Centaur Nessos, in reality, a
river-god. Perhaps if we had the Celtic Myth in its earliest stage we
should find Medb herself to have been a sort of serpent or
water-monster.

The idea of a paradise or elysium among the Celts, as with the Greeks,
assumes two aspects—either that of the hollow-hill (*sídhe*), that is,
the fairy-mound, or that of the over-sea elysium. This contrast may have
some relation to the civilisation and home of the Celts; the former
pointing, as to its origin, to their continental home, the latter to
their insular and maritime abode. The berries of the rowan tree are the
berries of the gods, and as connected with the other world are parallel
to the idea attached to Emain Ablach, Emain rich in apples, which, from
the *Book of Fermoy* and from the *Voyage of Bran*, Professor Kuno Meyer
has pointed out is connected

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

with the Isle of the Blessed, and parallel to the idea attached to the
Vale of Avalion (Avalon), where "falls not hail, nor rain, nor any
snow." Underlying the whole is the idea of the Island of the Blessed,
*insula promorum quae fortuna vocatur*. As to Fraoch's exploit, in so
far as it may be parallel to that of Herakles, Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,
in his Commentary on the Herakles of Euripides, has pointed out that the
garden of the gods, with the tree which carries the apples of life, is
really quite independent of the Herakles saga, while a highly archaic
variant of that story is that Herakles leaps into the jaws of a
sea-monster, the jaws of death. On Celtic ground, too, we have the
contest of a hero with a water-monster quite apart from Fraoch, and the
rowan tree guarded by the dragon. The continuation of the *Táin Bó
Fráich* brings the hero across the sea to the Alps and to the
Langobardi. Here Fraoch is represented as being of the Ultonians: after
high exploits he and his friends came to the territory of the
Cruithen-tuath, the Pictish people, and later on he joined Ailill and
Medb on the *Táin Bó Cuailnge*. It is impossible to be sure whether we
have not here a hint that Fraoch was a hero of the Picts, the people
whom the Gael called Cruithne (Cruithen-tuath), a word cognate in root
with Cymric *pryd* in Ynys Prydain, and pointing to the pre-Gadhelic
population of these isles as a people who practised tatooing.

Apart from the accessory of the Tree of Life, the

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

parallel that is closest of all is the rescue of Andromeda by Perseus.
On a hydria in the Berlin Museum there is a representation of Perseus in
conflict with the monster fish, where there is present Andromeda,
Kepheus, and another woman (Jope?). The whole story of the Geste of
Fraoch is there minus the rowan tree and the serpent, which is replaced
by the monster fish. Among the Greeks it formed the subject of a lost
drama of Euripides, but we know the theme from the pseudo-Apollodorus.
Perseus, on having come to Æthiopia, the kingdom of Kepheus, found the
king's daughter Andromeda about to be exposed to a sea-monster.
Kassiepeia, the wife of Kepheus, had boasted of her beauty, and thus
fell into strife with the Nereids, or water-nymphs. This brought on her
the anger of the Nereids and of Poseidon, who sent a flood and a monster
to her father's realm. The oracle of Ammon gave out that the disaster to
the kingdom would be averted if the king abandoned his daughter
Andromeda to be devoured of the monster. Pressed by the Æthiopians,
Kepheus had his daughter bound to a rock; in this state she was found by
Perseus, who, smitten with love, promised Kepheus to slay the monster on
condition that he would have the king's daughter, on her deliverance, to
be his wife. This condition was agreed to, and thereafter Perseus went
to meet the monster, killed it, and rescued Andromeda. This is another
version of the Herakles-Hesione saga, which briefly is as follows.
Poseidon and Apollo came in

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

human form to Laomedon, King of Troy, and promised, for a certain
reward, to gird his city with walls. The king would not fulfil his
promise when the work was ended; whereupon Apollo sent a pest, and
Poseidon a sea-monster which used to carry off the people working on the
fields. Laomedon sought the advice of an oracle, which counselled him,
in penance for his guilt, to deliver his daughter Hesione to the
monster. In consequence of this divine judgment, Hesione was chained to
a rock. As Herakles came the way he offered to free the maiden if
Laomedon would give him the horses which he formerly received from Zeus
on account of Ganymede. Which being agreed to, Herakles slew the monster
and freed the maid. But the stubborn king endeavoured to deceive
Herakles also, which drew upon him the vengeance whereby Troy is said to
have been first of all destroyed.

It is at Joppa, in Phoenicia, that the story of Andromeda has been
localised of old. Pliny <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) tells us
that the Phoenician Joppa is older than the flood, that it lies on a
hill, in front of which is a rock where traces of the fetters of
Andromeda are pointed out. And St Jerome, in his Commentary on Jonah,
writes: "Here (at Joppa) is the place where on the strand are pointed
out to this day the rocks to which Andromeda was bound, and from which
she is said to have been freed by the help of Perseus. And on an Attic
vase is a representation of Jason being vomited

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

from out of the belly of a sea-monster or dragon at the command of
Athene."

While we have no reference as to Fraoch having been swallowed by the
dragon, the fisher's first son was swallowed by the mermaid, who is
induced from her love of music to cast him forth once more. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) It is also noticeable that the impostor
incident, so common in the dragon stories, alongside of the rescuer, is
lacking in Fraoch. But the impostor incident must have been known of old
among the Celts, for we find it alluded to in the Rescue of Derforgaill,
or Dervorgoil, a variant of a folk-tale introduced into the "Wooing of
Emer," a text of the Cuchulainn Cycle. On coming to the dwelling of
Ruad, King of the Isles, at Hallowe’en, Cuchulainn hears wailing in the
fort. The king's daughter Derforgaill has been assigned in tribute to
the Fomori, and she is exposed on the seashore, awaiting their coming.
Cuchulainn kills three Fomori (or sea-giants) in single combat, but his
last opponent wounds him at the wrist. The girl gives a strip from her
raiment to bind his wound, and her rescuer goes off without making
himself known. "The maiden came to the *dūn* and told her father the
whole story… . Many in the *dūn* boasted of having killed the Fomori,
but the maiden did nor believe them." On a test having been applied, the
maiden recognised Cuchulainn, it is to be inferred, from the piece from
off her raiment on his wound. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In Brittany the
impostor figures as a charcoal-burner, who professes to have killed the
seven-headed serpent to which the king's daughter was to have been
sacrificed, and he carries off the heads. But the herd had cut out the
seven tongues, and these are tokens of the true victor. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

In Highland folk-tales the rescuer appears in the character of
herd, <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) and the impostor as a
squint-eyed, <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) carroty-headed cook.
Its parallel in Ireland is *The Thirteenth Son of the King of
Erin* <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34); here the hero also hires
himself as cow-herd, and rescues a king's daughter from an *úr-feíst*, a
great serpent of the sea, a monster which must get a king's daughter to
devour every seven years. While he slept in the maiden's lap, she took
three hairs from his head and hid them in her bosom. He has three
conflicts with the monster, and each time he is victor. On the third
trial the hero Sean Ruadh takes a brown apple, given him by a giant's
housekeeper, and threw it into the monster's mouth, "and the beast fell
helpless on the strand, flattened out, and melted away to a dirty jelly
on the shore." The girl was able to identify her

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

rescuer by one of his blue-glass boots. The hero finally put the
claimants to death, and wedded the maid.

This story has been identified in Brittany and among the Basques. Mr E.
Sidney Hartland says: "The indications point to a Celtic or Iberian
population as the originators of the *Herdsman* type <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) … a highly specialised type, differing
considerably from any form of the classical story, and peculiar to the
West of Europe. We have no direct evidence as to the date when the
stories of the *Herdsman* type arose; but it will be recollected that
there is reason to think the type belongs to the Celto-Iberian race, and
therefore is of prehistoric age. Nor will the reader fail to note that
the Rescue of Derforgaill (Dervorgoil, Dervorgilla) from the Fomori
appears to be an offshoot of the same type that it is found among one of
the branches of the same Celto-Iberian race, and that it is one of the
oldest —nay, perhaps the oldest—post-classical variant in Europe of the
Perseus group. All these considerations make for its independence of the
classical tale; and their cumulative weight may fairly be called
decisive." <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36)

On this account alone the old story is worthy of a place in our esteem.
It conduces to thought, if not to

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

thoughtfulness. Whatever its full origin may be, I suggest that human
sense-perception conjoined with racial memories of contest with the raw
environment of Nature, and the memory of human ills entailed upon our
race by monsters of the prime, <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) along
with human phantasy and imagination acting upon the reports of sense,
ought to be allowed their due claims to account for some moments of the
tale. But folk-tales have a compound-complex origin. I am not in favour
of needlessly multiplying hypotheses. Some moments may be due to other
races. Nor ought we to close our eyes to the background of the heavens.
If the berries from the rowan tree have aught in common with the golden
apples of the Hesperides, fetched by Herakles, it is proper to recollect
that worthy scholars read herein the remains of a saga connected with
the moon. Siecke <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) explains that,
according to some ancients, Herakles himself plucked the apples after he
had slain the snake that guarded the tree; that he fetched the golden
apple or the three apples from the extreme West, as was the case with
the bull and the girdle of the Amazons. He holds that these are the
expression of indubitable perceptions. "Who has not seen, where the sun
declines, the golden horns of the bull, the golden girdle, the apple of
gold?" says Siecke. All of them for a while had vanished, but Herakles

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

brings them back; truly not forever; Athene or some other divinity will
bring them to their place, and into the power of the dragon, for the
World Order cannot be altered. Yet the hero kills the dragon anew, and
fetches the golden apples once more. And so, I would add, with Fraoch.

There are dragons still to be slain. May the recital of an old tale
kindle the mind to new adventures. Here are materials for poets and
painters. It is we who are living now. Let us mould them to express
ourselves. The ancients have expressed themselves through similar tales;
nor will we fulfil ourselves by entirely disregarding our ancestral past
and our wealth of complex tradition.

Let me express my heartfelt thanks to Miss Rachel Ainslie Grant Duff,
Delgaty Castle, for the kindness which prompted her to make beautiful
illustrations for this book. It helps to make it so much more human, and
has given me indefinable pleasure, which will communicate itself to
other artists. And if anyone should paint Medb, let them remember an
early description in the *Táin:* a beautiful, pale, long-faced woman,
with long flowing golden-yellow hair, having a crimson cloak fastened
with a brooch of gold over her breast, a straight-ridged spear flaming
in her hand.

The theme is largely identical with that of St George and the Dragon,
which meets us in the Golden Legend of Jacques de Voragine, and appears

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

in the office books of the Church in the Middle Ages:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O Georgi Martyr inclyte*  
 *Te decet laus et gloria*  
 *Predolatum militia*  
 *Per quem puella regia*  
 *Existens in tristitia*  
 *Coram Dracone pessimo*  
 *Salvata est!"</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiv:1](cdm02.htm#fr_0) The reciter of *Leigheas
Cois’ O Céin*, published by me in the *Transactions of the Gaelic
Society of Inverness*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvi:1](cdm02.htm#fr_1) J. E. Hanauer's
*Folk-Lore of the Holy Land*, p. 56. Arculf's stories of St George,
learned in Constantinople, reached Iona in the seventh century (v.
Adamnan: *De Sanctis Locis*).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xvii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_2) Gould's Mythical
Monsters, p. 306 (London: W. H. Allen & Co., 1886). As a naturalist,
this writer considers the dragon no mere offspring of fancy, but infers
it to be a long terrestrial lizard, with much in common with *Draco
volans*, *Moloch horridus*. Fond of bathing and basking in the sun.
Habitat, highlands of Central Asia. For the rest he gives interesting
accounts by Mr Maclean, minister of Eigg, in 1809, and by Mr Macrae,
minister of Gleneig, in 1872, of the so-called Norwegian Sea-Serpent in
the West Highlands.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xvii:2](cdm02.htm#fr_3) *Cf*. Campbell's
Circular Notes, I., 326.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xix:1](cdm02.htm#fr_4) Leabhar Na h-Uidhri,
85*b*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xix:2](cdm02.htm#fr_5) Rhys, *Arthurian Legend*,
157.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xix:3](cdm02.htm#fr_6) *Nineteenth Century*,
March 1895, p. 422.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xx:1](cdm02.htm#fr_7) *Vitae Sanctorum
Hiberniae*, ed. Plummer, Tomus Primus, p. 15.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xx:2](cdm02.htm#fr_8) Bk. II., c. 27 (trans. W.
Huyshe). For a dragon contest, see Nennius,. *Historia*, xl.-xlv.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxiii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_9) There is still an old
pronunciation with *t* hard, and not *th*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxiv:1](cdm02.htm#fr_10) Löseth, *Le Roman en
prose de Tristan*. For variants of the dragon fight, *v*. Hartland's
*Legend of Perseus*, vol. iii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxv:1](cdm02.htm#fr_11) Tristan and his uncle
Mark, Zimmer thinks, are ninth-century Pictish chieftains. Iseult he
takes to be the daughter of the Viking King of Dublin.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxvii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_12) From Gottfried von
Strassburg's *Tristan and Iseult*, by J. L. Weston, I., 89, 98, 123.
*Cf*. also Bedier's French retelling, Englished by Mr Belloc.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxvii:2](cdm02.htm#fr_13) Trevelyan, *Folk-Lore
and Folk-Stories of Wales*, p. 165.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxx:1](cdm02.htm#fr_14) MacAlister's *Irish
Oghams*, pt. 3, p. 213; *Journ. Roy. Soc. Antiq. Ireland*, 5 ser.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxxi:1](cdm02.htm#fr_15) W. Faraday's
translation of The Cattle-Raid of Cuailnge, in Nutt's Grimm Library, p.
35. Fraech was descended from the people of the Sid, his mother Bebind
being a fairy woman. Her sister was Boinn (the river Boyne).

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxxi:2](cdm02.htm#fr_16) Ed. Dinneen, ii., 209.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxxiii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_17) Dinneen's Keating,
ii., 215.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxxiii:2](cdm02.htm#fr_18) Ed. Dineen, ii.,
213. c

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxxiv:1](cdm02.htm#fr_19) But see Book of
Leinster, 1246, 125a, where the story differs considerably from that
given by O’Curry, who evidently quoted Keating.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxxiv:2](cdm02.htm#fr_20) Trans. by Stokes, p.
34 of reprint from *Folk-Lore*, iii., 1892. Bóann <span
id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span> now the river Boyne, which rises at the
foot of Síd Nechtain, a hill in the barony of Carbury, co. Kildare. The
story is versified in the Book of Leinster, 191*a*. See also Rhys,
*Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 123, 556. The origin of rivers and lochs is
often ascribed to mortals intruding upon secret wells. Truth lies deep
at the bottom of a well, and in allegory will not be gazed upon. It is
enough to eat of the fruit of the tree which is nourished by the spring.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxxvi:1](cdm02.htm#fr_21) Rhys, Hibbert
Lectures, 123.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxxvi:2](cdm02.htm#fr_22) Joyce's Old Celtic
Romances, 2nd ed., p. 587.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxxvii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_23) *Cf.* Maine, son of
Ailill, in the Táin Bó Cuailnge, folio 66*b*, 67*a*, 69*a* of facsimile
of *Book of the Dun Cow*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xl:1](cdm02.htm#fr_24) *Rev. Celtique*, 6, 173.
With Conchobar's mother Ness, apparently seen as a goddess-name in Loch
Ness, compare the Attic-Bœotian dialect Netos-Nessos: λίμνη Νεσσωντίς in
Thessaly. And compare Hesiod, *Theog*. 341.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xli:1](cdm02.htm#fr_25) For references, see
Plummer's *Vitæ Sanctorum Hiberniæ*, I., cliv.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xli:2](cdm02.htm#fr_26) S. Reinach, *Catalogue
Sommaire du musée de Saint Germain*, p. 33, n. 354.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xli:3](cdm02.htm#fr_27) For the Welsh, see
Rhys, notes to *Twrc Trwyth*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xlv:1](cdm02.htm#fr_28) *Natur. Hist.*, V., 13.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xlvi:1](cdm02.htm#fr_29) Pp. 78-80 of
Campbell's retelling.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xlvi:2](cdm02.htm#fr_30) E. Hull, *The
Cuchulainn Saga*, pp. 81-82 (trans. by K. Meyer.)

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xlvii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_31) Quoted in Hartland's
*Legend of Perseus*, iii., 6.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xlvii:2](cdm02.htm#fr_32) *Cf*. also Maclnnes,
Folk and Hero Tales from Argyll: *Lod the Farmer's Son* (properly the
*Ploughman's* son, *aoirean*; Ir. *oireamh*, genitive *oireamhan*
(ploughman); root as in L. *aro*; Ir. *arathar* (plough); Welsh
*arddwr*; E. *ear* (the soil). *Cf*. the racial name Eremon, Airem(on),
with which Aryan has been compared, Skr. Arjaman.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xlvii:3](cdm02.htm#fr_33) *Claon*. Hector
Maclean's spelling claghann I would ask the reader to delete in favour
of *claon*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xlvii:4](cdm02.htm#fr_34) Curtin, *Myths and
Folk-Lore of Ireland*, 157; Larminie, *West Irish Tales and Romances*,
196; quoted in Hartland, *ibid*. iii., 4-6.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xlviii:1](cdm02.htm#fr_35) Hartland, Legend of
Perseus, iii., 10.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xlviii:2](cdm02.htm#fr_36) *Ibid*., 177-178. I
have already pointed out that Fraoch's own people are spoken of as the
Cruithne (Picts), who may be supposed to have absorbed an Ivernian
strain.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xlix:1](cdm02.htm#fr_37) *Cf*. H. N.
Hutchinson, *Extinct Monsters* (Chapman and Hall, 1910). "But none of
the giant reptiles of the secondary period were contemporary with man,"
observes Mr Hartland.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xlix:2](cdm02.htm#fr_38) *Drachenkämpfe*,
Leipzig (Heinrich), 1907, p. 91.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Geste of Fraoch](cdm03)
