[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm09.md) 
[Next](cdm11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Mermaid.</span>

<span id="an_p_76">76</span>. Then as usual the old herd met him and
counted the cows, and said:

"Did anything happen to frighten you to-day? "No," said the herd,
"nothing. What should happen?"

<span id="an_p_77">77</span>. "I have news for you this day," said the
herd.

"What's that?" said the Gray Lad.

The great "Biast" is coming out of the sea to take away the king's
daughter, and unless he gets her the whole realm will be ravaged.

"I should care much more if evil befel our brown cow, than if it happens
to the king's daughter," said the herd's boy; and home he sauntered to
the herd's hut, and went to rest.

<span id="an_p_78">78</span>. If the dawn came early next day, the herd

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

rose earlier, and he took the cows and the brown cow at their head, and
went straight to the first park. He opened the door of the park, and put
them in, because there was no giant there now to meddle with or molest
them. Then he tucked up the skirts of his gray garment, and up he went
to the copper castle, and took out his copper whistle and played on it,
and blew a shrill blast. The ruddy brown-russet servant came out and
said:

"What's your will, master?"

"Meat and drink, horse and dress, arms and armour," said the lad.

That was ready, and when he had eaten and drunk his fill, he mounted and
started.

<span id="an_p_79">79</span>. Now when the king found that his only
daughter had to be early out on the deep-dyed dark green hills, where
the sun rises betimes and sets so late; and when he could find no man to
guard her from the great sea monster that was to come out of the sea but
the cock-eyed carrotty cook, who carved the meat with a great big knife
in the king's kitchen, he sent them both off to the strand before
sunrise, and fourteen full-armed, worthy warriors with them. When they
got there, the king's daughter sat on a green mound by the seaside, and
the cook went to the shore and flourished his carving-knife. He dug it
into the sand and shouted:

"Though all the monsters in the sea, and all the warriors in Sorcha
should come, thus will I do to them."

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

When he was tired he came to the king's daughter, and laid his head on
her lap.

"Comb my hair," said he.

"Comb your filthy hair?" said the Princess, "you wretched scullion, not
I."

<span id="an_p_80">80</span>. Then they saw a shower coming from the
West, and the sun in the East, and a glittering warrior with a flashing
sword, with a ruddy russet dress, and a red horse riding swiftly from
the eastern sky. And when they saw him, the fourteen full-armed worthy
warriors fled to hide, and the cock-eyed carrotty-headed cook with the
carving-knife ran away faster than they. And he hid in a dark hole where
no man could see him and where he could see all.

<span id="an_p_81">81</span>. Then the rider of the red palfrey came
down to earth and tied his steed to the branch of a tree and came to the
king's daughter, who sat sorrowful on the green mound by the deep-dyed
dark green hills by the sea-shore, and he said:

"There's gloom on your face, girl; what ails you? and why are you here?"

"No matter," said she. "I shall not be here long, for the dragon is
coming out of the sea for me, to take me away."

"I will stay with you," said the lad, "and keep you company for a
while."

Then he laid his head in her lap to sleep and rest, and she combed his
long hair.

<span id="an_p_82">82</span>. "But if you sleep," said she, "what will
rouse you?"

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

"If I sleep," said he, "nothing will rouse me but to cut off the tip of
my left ear. Do that when the dragon comes."

And so they sat on the green mound in the morning sun, and the king's
daughter combed the lad's long hair and he fell fast asleep.

<span id="an_p_83">83</span>. He had not slept long when the lady looked
and saw the dark squall coming from the West, the sea running East, and
the waves waxing; and she tried to waken the lad. She laid his sword on
his face and he stirred but slept on.

Then she saw the dragon coming in the squall with the rising tide and
the waxing waves, spouting and blowing spray and spindrift from mouth
and nose, and she was terribly frightened by the horrible noise of the
fearful beast. She took the lad's bright sword and cut off the tip of
his left ear, and up he rose and shook himself.

<span id="an_p_84">84</span>. Then he shook a little rusty shaggy bridle
that he had at his girdle and a black steed came and a black hound. He
mounted the horse, and down to the strand he rode with the black hound
at his heels.

<span id="an_p_85">85</span>. And the dragon came to the strand, and he
was so weighty that he sank in in the sand.

<span id="an_p_86">86</span>. Then they fell upon each other with hard
blows and much noise, rattling of stones, clashing of arms, baying and
neighing, and shouting and roaring, splashing of billows and turmoil of
wind and waves. Man and dog did the best they could, and the dragon

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

fought as well; sometimes the dragon rolled over the man, sometimes the
man rolled over the dragon.

<span id="an_p_87">87</span>. At last the man thought that he was far
from friends and near his foe, so he gathered his strength and clutched
his sword and smote off one of the monster's heads.

<span id="an_p_88">88</span>. "If I had a draught of fair water," said
the dragon, "I would tear you to pieces now."

"If I had a draught of good red wine I would slay you this day," said
the fisher's son.

<span id="an_p_89">89</span>. "If one head is off two are on," said the
dragon. "If the king's daughter is not here tomorrow at this same hour
the realm shall be ravaged by me."

<span id="an_p_90">90</span>. Then the dragon went back into the sea and
went out of the loch with the ebb tide and the swelling waves of the
ocean.

<span id="an_p_91">91</span>. Then the lad picked up the dragon's head
and tied it in a withy with a queer knot, and he sprang on his red horse
and rode off to the eastern sky and disappeared.

<span id="an_p_92">92</span>. Now the cook had hid in a place where no
one could see him and where he could see every one, and when the coast
was clear, out he came and seized the head and flourished his knife, and
threatened the king's daughter with instant death if she dared to say
that he did not do this deed of valour.

<span id="an_p_93">93</span>. The fourteen full-armed worthy warriors of
the king's guard when all was still came back, and found the cook with
the dragon's head on a withy,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

and the king's daughter unharmed. They all marched back to the palace
and boasted aloud.

<span id="an_p_94">94</span>. But the king's daughter had the tip of the
ear in her pocket.

<span id="an_p_95">95</span>. The fisher's son went back to the copper
castle and played on his copper whistle, and gave his red steed to be
stabled by the ruddy russet-brown servant, and his dress to be laid
aside. Meat he got and good red wine to drink, and when he had rested,
he tucked up the skirts of his gray garment and went to the park and
opened the gate, and let out the brown cow and the rest of the cattle,
and sauntered home as was his wont.

<span id="an_p_96">96</span>. "I have news for you to-day," said the old
herd when he met him.

"What's that?" said the Gray Lad.

"The cock-eyed carrotty cook has cut one head off the beast that was to
take away the king's daughter, but two heads are on yet, and they are to
meet tomorrow."

"I had rather our brown cow were well than the realm and the king's
girl," said the herd's boy.

<span id="an_p_97">97</span>. "Well," said the herd. "It will be said of
that cock-eyed cook: 'Many a good blade has a bad sheath.'"

"That's true enough," said the herd's boy, and home he went and slept in
his dark crib.

<span id="an_p_98">98</span>. If the day came soon, sooner than that the
herd was up, and off he set with the cows to the second park. He went to
the silver castle and

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

sounded his silver whistle, and the fine fair servant came out and said:
"What's your will, Master?"

"Meat and drink, horse and harness," said he.

That was ready, and when he had eaten and drunk he mounted and rode
through the air.

<span id="an_p_99">99</span>. The king's daughter, with the carrotty
cockeyed cook and the fourteen fine, full-armed, worthy warriors were at
the strand boasting and brandishing their blades as before.

<span id="an_p_100">100</span>. But when the sun rose they looked to the
East, and saw a gleaming, glittering warrior in silver armour riding
through the air on a milk-white steed, with a gleaming, glancing sword
of light in his right hand; and then they fled helter-skelter up to the
deep dyed dark green hills, and the cook hid in his dark hole as he did
before.

<span id="an_p_101">101</span>. The rider of the milk-white steed came
down to earth, and tied his horse to the branch of a tree and came to
the king's daughter; and without more ado he laid his head in her lap,
where she sat on the green knoll by the sea-shore, and there they talked
for a time and a while, while she combed his hair.

<span id="an_p_102">102</span>. "But," said she, "if you sleep how shall
you be roused?"

"Lay my sword upon my face," he said, "and if that won't rouse me, cut
off the tip of my little finger when the dragon comes."

<span id="an_p_103">103</span>. Then he slept while the lady sat and
combed his hair, and the cook looked out of the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

dark hole, where no one could see him and he could see all.

<span id="an_p_104">104</span>. He had not slept long when the West grew
dark with a coming squall, and the sea ran East and the waves waxed big
and gurly, and the tide rose on the strand. Then she laid the bright
steel on his face, and he stirred in his sleep but slept on.

Then she saw the dragon in the squall with the spindrift flying, blowing
clouds of spray and steam from his mouth and throat and nostrils, and
she seized the sword and shore off the tip of his right little finger,
and up he rose.

<span id="an_p_105">105</span>. He took from his girdle the little black
rusty bit and the shaggy headstall and shook it—and the black steed and
the black hound were at his side. He mounted, and to the strand he rode.

<span id="an_p_106">106</span>. Then the dragon landed and trailed
himself up, and he sank in the sand; he was so mighty and weighty, but
this time he sank less, for he was lighter by one head.

<span id="an_p_107">107</span>. "A hard fight for the king's daughter
today," roared the dragon.

"A hard fight," shouted the herd boy, and at it they went. Horse and
hound and man and monster rolled and roared, barked and bayed, and drove
the sand and stones into the air, bit and fought and panted till they
were tired. It was hard to say which had the best of the battle.

<span id="an_p_108">108</span>. At last the herd thought that he was far
from friend and too near a fearful foe, so he gathered

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

his might and heaved up the beast, and he put his shoulder under and
tossed him up and broke his ribs, and his shoulder-blade on the strand.

Then he grasped his shining steel sword and smote off a second head.

<span id="an_p_109">109</span>. If I had a draught of water I would win
yet," said the dragon.

"If I had a draught of good red wine I would slay you this day," said
the herd.

<span id="an_p_110">110</span>. One head is on if two are off," said the
dragon. "I will be here to-morrow to take the king's daughter. If she is
not here I'll ruin the realm."

<span id="an_p_111">111</span>. Then the dragon trailed himself back to
the sea, and went out with the ebb and the gurly waves of the dark west.
Then the herd bound the head on a withy, mounted his white steed and
went off swiftly.

<span id="an_p_112">112</span>. Then out came the cock-eyed carrotty
cook with his carving-knife, and danced and boasted and brandished his
blade and took the head in his hand.

<span id="an_p_113">113</span>. Then down came the worthy well-armed
warriors of the king's guard, and they took the king's daughter home in
triumph, and boasted and shouted more than ever they boasted before.

<span id="an_p_114">114</span>. The herd went back to his silver castle
and blew his whistle, and gave his milk-white steed and glittering
silver armour to his fine fair servant to stable and keep; he called for
meat and blood-red wine to drink, and when he had rested he donned his
gray garment and gathered the skirts, and opened

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the park gate and let out the brown cow, and followed the beasts home as
before.

<span id="an_p_115">115</span>. "I've got right good news," said the old
herd when he met the lad.

"What's that?" said he.

<span id="an_p_116">116</span>. "It will be often said of that
red-skulled cook that a good blade may have a bad sheath."

"What has he done now?" said the lad.

"He has brought home the dragon's second head and broken his ribs and
his shoulder-blade, and the king's daughter is safe; and all the realm
is rejoicing, for they hope to be rid of the dragon to-morrow."

"Is it so?" said the lad, and he went to the byre with the brown cow and
the rest of them and went to bed.

<span id="an_p_117">117</span>. Next morning long before dawn the herd
was up and off to the third park with the cows. He put them in and went
to his golden castle and played upon his golden whistle, and when the
yellow russet servant came out, he said: "What's your will, master?"

"Meat and drink, horse and harness for a hard fight," said he.

That was ready, and when he had enough he mounted and rode west.

<span id="an_p_118">118</span>. The king's daughter and all her company
were at the same place. They looked East and they looked West, and they
saw nothing but sky and sea.

<span id="an_p_119">119</span>. Then the boasters began to brandish
their weapons, and the carrotty, cock-eyed cook came to

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the king's daughter where she sat on the green knoll beside the
sea-shore by the deep-dyed dark-green hills of Greece, and he laid his
head on her lap.

<span id="an_p_120">120</span>. Louse my head," said he. "You filthy
scullion," said she. "Not I."

<span id="an_p_121">121</span>. Then they looked West and they saw the
squall, and they looked East and they saw the same. And they saw a rider
riding through the sky in a glittering green garment on a yellow
golden-brown palfrey, with a bright, glancing, glittering, bright sword
of light in his right hand, and when they saw him they all fled to their
lairs as was their wont.

<span id="an_p_122">122</span>. The rider of the golden steed came down
to earth and tied his horse to the branch and came to the king's
daughter, and laid his hand on her lap at once.

<span id="an_p_123">123</span>. "If I am hard pressed," he said, "give
me a draught of wine."

"And where shall I get wine here?" said she.

"Take this golden cup," he said, "and give to me when I am hard
pressed."

<span id="an_p_124">124</span>. "And what will wake you if you sleep?"
said she.

"Cut the size of a coin from the crown of my head," said he.

<span id="an_p_125">125</span>. Then he laid his head in her lap, and
she combed his long hair, and he slept for he was tired.

<span id="an_p_126">126</span>. Then the tide began to rise, and the
clouds to gather in the West, and the dark squall came down, and the sea
ran East, and the waves waxed

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

great and gurly green and blue and black. *The storm rose and the king's
daughter quaked for fear, but the lad slept on*.

<span id="an_p_127">127</span>. Then she saw the dragon coming up the
loch with the spindrift flying, steaming and spouting, roaring and
raving, and she took the sharp sword and shore a bit from the lad's
scalp, a lock of his hair, and a bit of his skin, and up he rose and
shook himself.

<span id="an_p_128">128</span>. He shook his little black rusty bit and
shaggy bridle-rein, and his black horse and hound were beside him.

<span id="an_p_129">129</span>. The dragon landed where he landed
before, and trailed himself up the sand, and sank in it, so vast and
heavy he was; but he did not sink nearly so far, and he did not go so
fast, for he was lighter and weaker.

<span id="an_p_130">130</span>. The lad rode to meet him.

"A hard battle to-day," said the dragon.

"A stout fight," said the lad, and at it they went once more. Horse and
hound, man and monster, neighing, baying, shouting and roaring, biting
and fighting, struggling and wrestling, at hand grips they made little
stones fly up, great rocks fall with the clatter of hard knocks. At last
they were so tired that they stopped for breath.

<span id="an_p_131">131</span>. "If I had a draught of water I would win
yet and tear you to bits," said the dragon.

"If I had a draught of good wine I would slay you," said the herd.

<span id="img_06800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The storm rose
and the king's daughter quaked for fear, but the lad slept
on.](tn/06800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06800.jpg.md)  
“The storm rose and the king's daughter quaked for fear, but the lad
slept on.”  
</span>

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span id="img_06900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![He cut off the
dragon's third head, and won the fight.](tn/06900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06900.jpg.md)  
He cut off the dragon's third head, and won the fight.  
</span>

Then the king's daughter took wine and ran to the lad, and he drank a
draught. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69.md)

<span id="an_p_132">132</span>. Then he thought of the wolf and he was a
wolf, and he tore at the dragon, and was a man and clutched his sword
and cut off the dragon's third head, and won the fight.

<span id="an_p_133">133</span>. And the dragon was a pool of water and a
heap of sand.

Then he tied the head on a withy with a curious knot, and sprang on his
golden steed and went the way he came.

<span id="an_p_134">134</span>. Out came the cook and flourished his
blade, and out came the well-armed worthy warriors of the king's guard,
and home they went with the princess in triumph, for the dragon was dead
and the cook had won the princess and half the realm; and when they got
home, all the realm rejoiced that the dragon had died on the shore and
would trouble them no further.

<span id="an_p_135">135</span>. The lad rode back to his golden castle,
and gave his green dress and his golden steed to the yellow-faced russet
servant to tend and feed. When he was rested and feasted, he gathered
the skirts of his gray garment and gathered his cows and followed them
home.

<span id="an_p_136">136</span>. The herd met him and said, "Good news
to-night, my lad."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

"What's that?" said he.

"The cook has killed the dragon and won the princess and half the realm,
and all the people are bidden to a great wedding-feast that the king
will give to-morrow. There is many a good blade in a bad sheath, and
that cock-eyed carrotty cook is one."

"You don't say so," quoth the Gray Lad, and he sauntered home with his
beasts, arid slept as if nothing had happened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[69:1](cdm10.htm#fr_70.md) From a Gaelic version
told by Dewar and Macnair. In Swedish, the princess aids by putting rags
on the necks of the monster, for the heads when they touch water gain
life and leap on again. This incident is in Gaelic also, and occurs at
the end of this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Way](cdm11.md)
