[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm13) 
[Next](cdm15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Meeting of the Fisher's Three Sons.</span>

<span id="an_p_395">395</span>. On a day of these days the fisher's
eldest son got early up and looked out of the window, and saw a little
black castle over against him, and he asked his wife what castle that
might be.

<span id="an_p_396">396</span>. She said it was but a castle that an
evil creature had, and that no one ever came back who went there.

<span id="an_p_397">397</span>. "No matter," said he, "I will go."

"There never went a man there that came back to tell a tale," said she.

"I will see who dwells there," said the fisher's eldest son.

So up he got and took his black horse and dog, and over he went to the
castle without more ado.

<span id="an_p_398">398</span>. He went in, and there he saw a woman
combing her hair.

"Whence comest thou, father of my fondness and mother of my love, come
up till thou tell me thy tale, come till I tell thee mine," quoth she.
With many flattering words she wiled him on till he went towards her.

<span id="an_p_399">399</span>. Then she snatched up her magic club and
smote him and made him a pillar of stone.

<span id="an_p_400">400</span>. She did the same to the horse and the
hound, and there they all lay.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span id="an_p_401">401</span>. Now the old fisherman looked every day
at his three trees in the garden, and one day he looked and saw that one
had lost its leaves.

"That's true," said he, "I have lost a son this day."

<span id="an_p_402">402</span>. "I," said the middle son, who had come
home, "I am going away to raise my brother's *éric* or blood-fine."

<span id="an_p_403">403</span>. He mounted his black horse, and his
black dog followed him. His father had put a fish-bone in his hand, and
it had grown into the gold-hilted glaive that hung at his side, and that
had given him learning and wisdom. Away he went; each road was crooked,
and every path smooth, and the black dog ran the track straight and
right to the herd's hut.

<span id="an_p_404">404</span>. There never were created two more alike
than he and his brother.

<span id="an_p_405">405</span>. "What made you stay away from your wife
and sweetheart last night?" said the old herd.

<span id="an_p_406">406</span>. He was sent up to the king's house. The
king's daughter went to meet him and to embrace him, believing him to be
her own husband.

<span id="an_p_407">407</span>. He did not know how in the world he
could manage to keep from his brother's chamber that night.

<span id="an_p_408">408</span>. So he told his brother's wife that he
had laid a heavy wager with a gentleman, so that he could not go to bed,
but he would sleep on a table in front of the bed. And he did so till
morning.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="an_p_409">409</span>. Then when he looked out, he saw the
little black castle, and said to her: "What is yonder castle?"

Said she: "Did I not tell you that last night?" And then she told him
all about it, and tried to keep him from going there.

<span id="an_p_410">410</span>. But he rose and went out, took his horse
and hound, and over he went to the castle.

<span id="an_p_411">411</span>. In he went, and as was done to his
brother, so was it done to him.

<span id="an_p_412">412</span>. The old fisher looked out in the
morning, and the leaves had fallen from the middle tree.

<span id="an_p_413">413</span>. "That's true," said the youngest
brother, who had come home in haste, "my brother is not alive. I will
begone to raise his *éric*." <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_87)

<span id="an_p_414">414</span>. He took his horse and hound and
gold-hilted sword which his father gave him with learning and wisdom,
and off he set. Each road was even and each path smooth for him, and he
rode, and ran right and straight up to the palace of the king of the
Greeks.

<span id="an_p_415">415</span>. The princess saw him out of the window,
and out she went to meet and welcome and embrace him, and took him home.

<span id="an_p_416">416</span>. "It was enough to stay away the first
night, without staying from me yesternight again," said she.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

"Many a man may have matters of moment with gentlefolks, so that it may
not be known when he will come," said the lad.

<span id="an_p_417">417</span>. They went to rest, and he laid a cold
sword between them.

<span id="an_p_418">418</span>. In the morning he cast his eyes away
from him, and saw the castle as his brothers had seen it, and asked what
castle that might be.

<span id="an_p_419">419</span>. "Did I not tell you that last night and
the night before?" said she, and then she told him.

<span id="an_p_420">420</span>. He arose, and took his horse and hound,
and over he went to the castle. In he went, and he too saw a woman
combing her hair.

<span id="an_p_421">421</span>. "Come up, treasure," <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88) said she, "son of the father of my desire,
and the mother of my love, till I tell thee my news, and thou tellest me
thine."

<span id="an_p_422">422</span>. He had no good notion of her, so he
sprang towards her and felled her, and put his cold sword-edge upon her
throat. "Death's overhead," said he, "what's your *éric?*"

<span id="an_p_423">423</span>. "That's much," said she. "A chest of
gold and a chest of silver."

"That's mine," said he, "and thy death." And he whipped off her head.

<span id="an_p_424">424</span>. But as he did, his sword flew out of his
hand.

<span id="an_p_425">425</span>. Then the old woman grasped her head in
both her hands and set it upon her throat where it was before.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span id="an_p_426">426</span>. The dog sprang at her, but she smote him
with the magic club, and down he fell.

<span id="an_p_427">427</span>. Then the lad gripped the crone, and they
wrestled and struggled, till he wrested the magic club from her hand.

<span id="an_p_428">428</span>. Then he smote her, and down she fell
dead.

<span id="an_p_429">429</span>. He took her keys from her and searched
the house.

<span id="an_p_430">430</span>. He found one chamber full of gold and
one full of silver.

<span id="an_p_431">431</span>. He found a chamber full of gentlefolks’
dresses.

<span id="an_p_432">432</span>. And one full of saddles, (433) and
bridles, (434) and one full of boots and shoes.

<span id="an_p_435">435</span>. He found a room full of men turned into
pillars of stone,

<span id="an_p_436">436</span>. and a vessel of balsam for bringing to
life again.

<span id="an_p_437">437</span>. Then he took and began to spill it upon
them till he revived them all; and amongst them were his own brothers.

<span id="an_p_438">438</span>. He gave his clothes and his own share to
every man that was there, and a lot of gold and silver, and when all
that was done the three brothers went off to the palace.

<span id="an_p_439">439</span>. Then the youngest said to the eldest,
"You have the best wife that the dew of heaven ever was shed upon."

<span id="an_p_440">440</span>. "How know you that?" said he.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

"I was with her last night," said the youngest brother.

<span id="an_p_441">441</span>. Then black jealousy struck the eldest,
and he turns to him and sweeps off his head with his sword.

<span id="an_p_442">442</span>. The old fisherman looked out at his
garden, and the tree of the youngest had fallen and the other two stood.

"That's true," said he. "The youngest is dead, and the other two live
again."

<span id="an_p_443">443</span>. The brothers stayed that night in the
palace, and in the morning they went away in a coach.

<span id="an_p_444">444</span>. They went home to their father's house,
and took him and their mother, and in the morning they put them in a
castle by themselves.

<span id="an_p_445">445</span>. The eldest brother got the realm, and
the king's daughter was his wedded wife, and there these two lived
happily, according to Alasdair mac Ruairidh Bhain.

<span id="an_p_446">446</span>. What became of the other and of the
castles which were won, and the kingdoms, this narrator cannot tell, but
some day or other he hopes to hear more about them out in the Isles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[125:1](cdm14.htm#fr_88) It occurs in the
"Ramayana," on the occasion of a great horse-sacrifice. In Swedish
stories too: *svennen lade ett blankt svärd pă bädden mellum sig och
henne*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[126:1](cdm14.htm#fr_89) *Fheudail*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes To Celtic Dragon Myth](cdm15)
