[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm10.md) 
[Next](cdm12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">First Way.</span>

<span id="an_p_137">137</span>. Now the king's daughter and the carrotty
cock-eyed cook were to have a hearty merry marriage-feast in the king's
house, but the lad got up as usual and went off with the cows to the
third park. <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70.md)

<span id="an_p_138">138</span>. He went to the golden castle and blew
his whistle; when the yellow russet lad came out he said: "What's your
will, master?"

That he told him, and when the time came he sauntered home as he used.

<span id="an_p_139">139</span>. "Well," said the old herd, "I have more
news."

"What's that?" said the lad.

The king's daughter says that she will marry no man unless he can loose
the knots on the withies on which the dragon's heads are strung. The
cook can't do it, and the fourteen fine, full-armed worthy warriors of
the king's guard have tried all they can, and no

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

man amongst them is able to loose the least of them. The king has bidden
all the realm to the feast, and they are all feasting now.

"Why did you not go to the feast with the rest?" said the lad.

"I would not go and leave you alone," said the old herd.

<span id="an_p_140">140</span>. "What a well-decked wedding-board the
king and his daughter have now," said the fisher's son. "I wish we had
it here in front of us."

<span id="an_p_141">141</span>. "Come here, my darling dog," said he,
"and stretch your legs, and don't be lazy. Run to the bride's room, and
fetch me the cloth that is spread on the board before the king and the
bride and the carrotty cock-eyed cook."

<span id="an_p_142">142</span>. Away ran the black dog, and up he went
and in he stole to the bride's room. He seized the cloth and gathered it
up before them all, and took it and ran to the herd's bothy and laid it
on the board between them.

<span id="an_p_143">143</span>. "Is there any one at all," said a
counsellor that the king had, "who is not here? It is long since I heard
it said: 'Strong is a whelp from a guiding breast.' <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_71.md) Send to the herds hut, and let us see if
he is within or if any one is with him."

<span id="an_p_144">144</span>. Away went three of the king's worthy
warriors, and when they got to the herd's hut, there they found the herd
and a stranger, and every bit

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

that ought to be on the king's board spread on a cloth between.

Back they went as fast as they could, and told their tale.

<span id="an_p_145">145</span>. "I said it once, and I say it now: 'A
whelp is strong from a guiding breast,'" said the king's counsellor. "It
was a pity to make such a grand wedding for that carrotty-headed cook
who can't loose these knots. Go back and fetch the herd."

<span id="an_p_146">146</span>. So the well-armed worthy warriors
trotted back, and brought the herd, but he could not loose the knots any
more than the rest.

<span id="an_p_147">147</span>. "I said it before, and I say it once
again," said the king's counsellor: "'A whelp is strong from a guiding
breast.' Go down and fetch the herd's boy."

<span id="an_p_148">148</span>. So three worthy warriors went down to
the herd's hut once more, and they said to the lad who sat there: "Who
told you to take away all that was on the king's table? Come to the
castle."

"I never took it, and I never stirred from here," said he, "and I don't
mean to stir."

So the worthy warriors trotted back, and told their tale.

<span id="an_p_149">149</span>. "Once more," said the counsellor, "I say
that I have heard it said often: 'Strong is a whelp from a guiding
breast.'"

"Get up you little band of worthy warriors from the king's guard, and go
down and fetch up the herd's boy bound."

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span id="an_p_150">150</span>. So the little band of warriors got up
and marched down to the herd's hut where the boy sat with his black dog.

"Who told you to take all that ought to be on the king's board?" said
they all. "You must come to the castle."

"I did not take the king's dinner," said the lad.

"If you did not take it, your dog did, and your dog is insolent,"
shouted all that little band of worthy warriors.

"Don't talk," said the captain, "but seize him and bind him, and take
him as you were told."

<span id="an_p_151">151</span>. "Arise, my puppy," said the fisher's
son, "and haul them with the rhyme, and drag them against the rhyme, and
out into the puddle at the door."

So the dog got up, and dragged them draggled through the puddle outside
the herd's door and the byre.

<span id="an_p_152">152</span>. Draggled as they were up went the little
band to tell their tale, and the counsellor said: "I don't believe that
that cock-eyed cook or the worthy warriors ever did that deed at all.
Have I not said it: 'Strong is a whelp from a guiding breast'? Go down,
you great band of fourteen well-armed worthy warriors of the king's
guard and the bridegroom at your head, and fetch the herd's boy and his
dog bound."

<span id="an_p_153">153</span>. So the cock-eyed carrotty cook got his
great carving knife, and the fourteen full-armed worthy

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

warriors of the king's guard put on their martial array and marched to
the herd's hut where the lad sat in his gray garment with his black dog.

<span id="an_p_154">154</span>. "Why did you dare to take all that was
on the king's board?" shouted all the great band.

"I did not," said the Gray Lad.

"If you did not your dog did, and he is insolent and ill-bred," said
they all at once. "Why did you draggle the worthy warriors who came to
fetch you?"

"I did not," said the fisher's son.

"Don't chatter with such a knave," said the bridegroom, "but bind him
and bring him as you were bid."

<span id="an_p_155">155</span>. "Arise my pup," said the herd's boy,
"and seize them, and haul and pull and drag them, with the rhyme, and
against the rhyme, and draggle them in the puddle that is outside."

<span id="an_p_156">156</span>. So the black dog got up and drove and
dragged and pulled and hauled the bridegroom with his bravery and his
big knife and the fourteen full-armed worthy warriors of the king's
great guard in all their martial array, with the rhyme and against, and
up and down and out into the puddle that was at the door of the herd's
byre outside.

<span id="an_p_157">157</span>. When they got back all dirty and
draggled the sage old counsellor said to the king: "Several times have I
said that I have often heard it said, and I say it again that it often
will be said: 'A pup is strong from a guiding breast.' I don't believe
that these draggled people slew the dragon."

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span id="an_p_158">158</span>. "Come you," said the king to his gille,
"and set in order the coach that we may send for the herd's boy."

<span id="an_p_159">159</span>. So the coach was set in order, and sent
to the herd's bothy where the lad sat with his black dog in his gray
garment.

<span id="an_p_160">160</span>. "Get up," said the gille, "the king
wants you, and here is the coach come to fetch you."

<span id="an_p_161">161</span>. So the lad got up and filled the coach
with big stones and muck, and the gille had to go back.

<span id="an_p_162">162</span>. Down came the king to see who was in his
coach, and he opened the door. But if he did the stones and the muck
tumbled out and nearly smothered him. I won't say what I have said,"
quoth the counsellor, but the best thing to be done now is to go
yourself and fetch the herd's boy. So the coach was cleaned, and the
king and the king's daughter and the counsellor got into it, and down
they drove in state to the herd's hut.

<span id="an_p_163">163</span>. When the Gray Lad saw that the king had
come, he got up and got into the coach and drove to the king's castle.
He got out and tucked up the skirts of his gray garment, and in he went
to the room where all in the realm that were able to walk had been
gathered, and there lay the dragon's three heads upon three withies,
fastened with three knots which no one could loose.

<span id="an_p_164">164</span>. So the swarthy, rough-skinned fisher's
son, the herd's boy in his gray garment, walked up to the heads, and
many who looked at the draggled-tailed

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

gray garment sniggered and laughed and mocked him as he passed.

<span id="an_p_165">165</span>. "Is there no one who can loose these
knots?" said he.

Then he took the withies and loosed the knots one after the other, and
the cook and the warriors began to quake. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_72.md)

<span id="an_p_166">166</span>. "Stop," said the king's daughter. "The
man that slew the dragon and that I am to marry wants the tip of an ear,
and the point of a finger, and a patch from the crown of his head. Sit
still and quiet all that are set here about this chamber."

<span id="an_p_167">167</span>. She went round the room from man to man,
and all put out their hands and felt their ears and scratched their
polls, but she never stopped till she got to the lad with the gray
garment, who had his hand in his bosom.

<span id="an_p_168">168</span>. "Put out your hand," said she.

"My hand is hurt," said he.

<span id="an_p_169">169</span>. So the king's daughter snatched his hand
and drew it out, and put her own into a pouch, and took out the tip of a
little finger, and the tip of an ear, and a lock of hair with the skin
of a scalp as big as a coin, and they all fitted.

<span id="an_p_170">170</span>. "That's truth," said she. "It was you
who slew the dragon, and you who rescued me, and I will never have any
other to be bridegroom and lover. I am yours and half the realm while
the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

king lives, and all the realm when he dies." And everybody shouted for
joy except the cook.

<span id="an_p_171">171</span>. The cook was hanged at once, and then
the lad was to marry the king's daughter.

<span id="an_p_172">172</span>. But he asked for two hours' grace, and
that he got. Out he went and shook his rusty bridle, and the black steed
came. He mounted and rode to the golden castle and blew the whistle, and
when the yellow-faced russet lad came out, he said, "What's your will,
master?"

<span id="an_p_173">173</span>. "The best horse and the best dress in
the castle," said the Gray Lad. That he got: the sky-blue pacing palfrey
that could fly through the sky, and the glittering glass dress that the
carlin had. He combed his hair with the golden comb till gold and silver
showered from either side. He washed in the golden basin, and combed his
locks with the fine side of the golden comb, and then he was the most
beautiful man that the world had seen.

<span id="an_p_174">174</span>. When he was thus arrayed, he mounted and
rode through the air to the king's castle, and the king's daughter came
out to meet him. They went to the castle hall. A churchman was got, and
they were married.

<span id="an_p_175">175</span>. A great and wonderful wedding was made
for them, and they sent me home and gave me neither welcome nor
guest-room there.

<span id="an_p_176">176</span>. Now, after the fisher's first son had
been married for some time to the king's daughter, it so

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

fell out that she longed greatly for dulse, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) and she asked the lad to go with her to
the strand to seek it. The lad forgot his promise to his father, and
they took their way to the sea-shore, where the brown sea-ware was
rising and sinking amongst the blue waves, below the deep-dyed
dark-green hills of Greece.

But while they were straying and playing and gathering dulse amongst
reefs and stones on the ebb, the mermaid rose and made a rush, and
seized the lad and shouted:

"It is many a day since you were promised to me, and now I have you
perforce," and then she swallowed him up alive.

<span id="an_p_177">177</span>. The bride, when she saw what had
happened, fled to shore, weeping and wailing in shadow and darkness, sad
and tearful and sorrowful for the loss of her married mate. She sat by
the shore wringing her hands till the tide rose, and then she went back
to the castle where the counsellor was, to ask his aid.

<span id="an_p_178">178</span>. What shall I do?" said she. "What shall
I do? For a mermaid has taken away my married man, and I am left alone.
How shall I find a way to get my man back?"

"This do," said the counsellor. "Go down with all the dresses and
braveries and jewellery that

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span id="img_07900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![She sat on a
green mound in the gloaming in the mouth of the evening, playing on her
harp.](tn/07900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07900.jpg.md)  
“She sat on a green mound in the gloaming in the mouth of the evening,
playing on her harp.”  
</span>

you have, and spread them out by the sea-shore. Take your harp and
play."

And much more he said which she did, and I omit in order to avoid
telling the story many times as reciters always do when they spin yarns.

<span id="an_p_179">179</span>. Down she went with all that she held
most precious—dresses and jewels and things of price—and she spread them
on the rocks by the sea. She sat on a green mound in the gloaming in the
mouth of the evening, playing on her harp beside them.

<span id="an_p_180">180</span>. She had not sat long there playing in
the dark when the mermaid rose outside the surf, for mermaids are fonder
of music than any other creatures, and there she floated, listening; but
when the king's daughter saw the mermaid, she stopped.

<span id="an_p_181">181</span>. "Play on," said the mermaid.

"No," said she, "not till I see my man again."

So the mermaid opened her great mouth and gaped, and showed the lad's
head, and the king's daughter knew that he was alive.

<span id="an_p_182">182</span>. "What fine things you have there!" said
the mermaid, as she swam close to the shore.

"Yes," said she. "I would give them for my husband."

"Well, then, play on," said the mermaid.

<span id="an_p_183">183</span>. So the lady sat on the green mound and
played, and the mermaid lay in the brown sea-ware and listened, and
opened her mouth and gaped, and showed the lad to the waist, and
swallowed him down again.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="an_p_184">184</span>. Then the lady stopped, and the mermaid
said again:

"What fine things you have there on the rocks!"

"Yes," said she, "I would give them all for my husband."

"Well, then, play on," said the mermaid.

<span id="an_p_185">185</span>. So the lady played on, and the mermaid
rolled amongst the brown sea-ware in the blue water amongst the waves,
and she opened her mouth once more and took out the lad altogether, and
placed him upon her open palm.

<span id="an_p_186">186</span>. But he, when he was free, thought of the
falcon, and was a falcon, and flew and darted to shore, and was free.

<span id="an_p_187">187</span>. But when the mermaid saw that her prey
was gone,, she made a snatch at the wife and took her away instead.

<span id="an_p_188">188</span>. When the lad saw that the mermaid had
taken away his wife, he was wild with grief, and mad with rage, and did
not know what to do, so he went to the counsellor and asked his aid.

<span id="an_p_189">189</span>. "Well," said the counsellor, "there is
but one way to win your wife, and that is to take the mermaid's life."

"And how is that to be done?" said the lad.

"The mermaid's life," said the counsellor, "is not in her, and it is
easy to take. It is in an egg, which is in a fish, which is in a duck,
which is in a ram, which is in a wood, under a house on an island, in a
lake."

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span id="an_p_190">190</span>. Now the lad thought that the first thing
to be done was to get to the loch. So he went to his golden castle and
donned his glittering glass dress, and mounted the sky-blue palfrey, and
took his gold-hilted glaive of light in his hand, and his dress became
him well.

<span id="an_p_191">191</span>. He rode and rode till he reached the
loch, and then at a bound the horse was in the island.

<span id="an_p_192">192</span>. He found the house in a wood, and he dug
under the stance, and found a flag-stone.

<span id="an_p_193">193</span>. He raised it and out rushed a ram.

<span id="an_p_194">194</span>. So he thought of the wolf, and was a
wolf, and he chased the ram all round the island, and caught and slew
it.

<span id="an_p_195">195</span>. But when the ram was slain and torn
open, a duck flapped out of his inside, and flew swiftly off to the sky.

<span id="an_p_196">196</span>. Then he thought of the falcon, and was a
falcon, and flew a swift flight till he soared over the loch above the
duck, and then he stooped and struck.

<span id="an_p_197">197</span>. But as he did, a fish fell from the duck
out into the loch, and the falcon flew to shore, and was a man.

<span id="an_p_198">198</span>. But the lad could not think what to do
next.

<span id="an_p_199">199</span>. So he thought of the fox, and was a fox,
and he found out an otter's den on the island, and seized the
cubs. <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span id="an_p_200">200</span>. "Let go my cubs," said the otter to the
fox, "and I will be your faithful ally for ever."

"Well, then," said the fox, "fetch me the fish that fell in the loch
from the duck just now."

<span id="an_p_201">201</span>. So the otter dived out into the water
like an oiled stick, and rose quickly with a trout.

<span id="an_p_202">202</span>. But out of the trout's mouth rolled an
egg, and the lad seized it, and set his foot on it amongst the stones on
the shore.

<span id="an_p_203">203</span>. Then the mermaid rose in the loch, and
roared a roar, and screamed a yell, and cried out: "Break not the egg,
and you shall have all you ask."

<span id="an_p_204">204</span>. "Give back my wife," said the lad. So
the mermaid swam to shore and opened her mouth, and the wife sprang on
dry land, safe and sound.

<span id="an_p_205">205</span>. When he got her hand in his, he crushed
the egg with his foot against the stones, and the mermaid was a heap on
the rocks.

<span id="an_p_206">206</span>. There was joy and delight in the king's
castle that night, for the king's daughter was safe, and the dragon was
slain, and the mermaid dead, and when the lad told how he had slain the
great carlin, and the three big giants with their five heads and five
humps and five throttles apiece, and how he had saved the king's cattle,
and gained three castles, then the king gave him great honour and half
his realm, and he was a mighty man with the monarch from that day forth,
and, as they say in the Highlands, there I left them, but only to come
back to them after awhile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[70:1](cdm11.htm#fr_71.md) From the Fisher and the
Gray Lad (with a bit inserted).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71:1](cdm11.htm#fr_72.md) *Is làidir cuilean a
uchd treòir*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[76:1](cdm11.htm#fr_73.md) In another version, he
loosens three sons of the King of Sorcha (light) whom he had conquered
and bound.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[78:1](cdm11.htm#fr_74.md) A fucus which grows upon
rocks and upon other sea-ware, and comes above water at low tide. It is
good to eat, and tastes somewhat like nuts and sea-water.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[81:1](cdm11.htm#fr_75.md) As Donald Macphie
related.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Way](cdm12.md)
