[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](w2n02)  [Next](w2n04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040460417X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Way to Nirvana*, by L. de la Vallée Poussin, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER I

### INDIAN DISCIPLINES OF SALVATION

I. Religions and disciplines of salvation. II. Old Āryan beliefs, the
dead, gods, sacrifice. III. Brahman speculation, theology, ritualism,
're-death,' *ātman*.

#### I

General definitions are always somewhat misleading and give rise to
discussion. But some definition of the title of these lectures is
necessary. 'Buddhism as a discipline of salvation' is to be contrasted
with 'Buddhism as a religion.'

There are and there have been in India, since the beginning, a number of
religions, religions properly so called. They present an endless
variety; they often differ essentially one from another; they belong to
distinct types of civilisation. But, although some are polytheistic,
some monotheistic, and a larger number tinged with pantheism; although
some are pagan, dishonest, superstitious and magical, and some lofty and
pure in every respect, some logical and cold, and some mystical and
passionate,—all of them

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

nevertheless come under the concept of religion as this word is
generally understood by modern students of religious history. Whatever
be their diversity, all were 'made' to meet, and they do meet in some
manner, the needs of Man living in society, needs supernatural, moral
and secular, needs individual and social. They teach a superhuman power,
whatever be the nature and the dignity of this power; they explain the
duties of Man towards it, or, more uncompromisingly, the right *modus
vivendi* of Man with it; they have prayers or formulas, sacrifices,
sacraments. They are concerned with the welfare of the dead, and also
with personal welfare in this life; they have devices and ceremonies for
the work and the anxieties of everyday life, for illnesses and for sins,
which are often another kind of illness. They teach a general rule of
conduct, and penetrate the Law of family or of tribe, for there is no
clear and constant distinction between profane and sacred things.

Although the religions of India are usually quite Indian, quite Hindu,
parallels are to be found to each of them outside India. Hindu is the
word we use to emphasize the special and composite character of the
Indian civilisation.

There is no Sanskrit word which covers the

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

whole field of beliefs and practices that the word 'religion' suggests.
But if we examine the many words which convey a religious meaning,
*yajña*, 'sacrifice,' magical to some extent, *pūjā*, 'worship,' often
idolatrous, *bhakti*, 'devotion,' *dharma*, moral and social rule, 'law'
and virtue, we see that, while Indian 'sacrifice,' 'cult,' 'devotion,'
'law,' are quite Hindu, and are unlike the Semitic sacrifice, the
Egyptian cults, the Christian love of God, the Roman *jus majorum*, they
are nevertheless simply human (*humain tout court*) as far as their
leading motive and their 'philosophy' are concerned.

For instance, the gods and the rites of the Vedic religion are quite
Hindu; they differ largely from the Iranian types, not to mention the
other religions of the Ancient World. Nevertheless Vedism is clearly a
branch of the Indo-European tradition; it is akin to all naturalistic
and patriarchal beliefs the world over, while it is contaminated to a no
small extent with the common fancies of the old and always living
paganism.

 

Side by side with the religions properly so called, there arose in India
from about the seventh century B.C.—to last for many centuries,
attracting thousands of adherents and exercising a strong influence on
the Indian religions—a

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

number of 'disciplines' with a special character of their own.

They cannot be exactly described either as philosophies or as religions.
We have to see what name is the right name for them.

They are 'disciplines,' that is bodies of doctrines and practices,
together with a rule of life, aiming at a practical end,—the Indian word
is *mārga*, 'path,' or *yāna*, 'vehicle,'—and, from this point of view,
they are something more than philosophies, theories, or scholasticisms.
But it is doubtful whether they can be styled 'religions.'

In contrast with religions, the disciplines are made for ascetics, for
ascetics only. Further they are purely personal or individualistic, that
is they do not care for one's neighbour or for the dead. They are
unsocial and often antisocial: they deprecate and often prohibit
marriage. As a rule, they originate sects or orders and it may be
churches, but such social formations are not essential to them: even in
Buddhism, where the Master and the Church are all important, a belief
exists that, in the days to come, when the Master is forgotten, the
Church dissolved and Buddhism extinct, there will arise, from time to
time, 'individual saints' (*pratyekabuddha*) who will be, by themselves,
perfect Buddhists, living

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

alone in the wilderness, like a rhinoceros, without companions or
pupils.

Another feature of the disciplines is that they are not concerned with
mundane ends at all. The Buddhist teaching is clear to this effect: any
action which aims at any advantage whatever in the present life, is bad.

These two characters may be found in some institutions of the West.
There are, for instance, Christian sects or orders which are practically
unconcerned with social and mundane interests;—and so far the Indian
Paths could be described as 'individualist transcendent religions.' But
they present a third character, in respect of which all non-Indian
parallels prove inadequate, except the Sūfis, the best instance of a
sect of Indian spirit outside India—a third character, in respect of
which our western nomenclature is deficient.

Either the Indian ascetic does not believe in God; or, when he believes
in God, he says, as the outspoken Sūfi or as Spinoza: "There is nothing
but God. I am God." But the attitude of the Indian ascetic is not the
attitude of the western philosopher, a Lucretius or a modern monist. For
he has beliefs of his own, foreign to his occidental brothers. To put it
shortly, he believes in transmigration and transmigration

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

he dreads. His positivist or monist philosophy is therefore combined
with a discipline, a Path, for he has to save himself, to liberate
himself from transmigration.

Man migrates from existence to existence, driven by the wind of his
actions: there must be a Path to deliverance from rebirth and death.
This Path must be a certain knowledge or esoteric wisdom, or a certain
sacrifice, or a certain asceticism, or a certain ecstatic meditation.

 

It is difficult to state accurately the position of prayer or worship
and of morality in the disciplines.

Prayer or worship is never an essential part of the path. But it happens
that an ascetic—for instance the Buddhist of the Mahāyāna
school—believes that gods or divinised saints may help him towards the
path, or even in climbing along the first slopes of the path: prayer and
worship are, in such a case, useful or even necessary, but they have to
be given up once the ascetic has somewhat advanced.

As concerns morality, no discipline admits that an immoral man can reach
the path: a purgative process is deemed necessary <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0). But all disciplines are fond of stating
that a saint is beyond merit and demerit, good deed and sin: no merit
can accrue to him; no sin can soil him. In Mahāyāna Buddhism, active
morality, gifts, self-sacrifice for the welfare of one's neighbour, are
an essential part of the path. A saint is by definition

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

a 'giver,' a 'compassionate': but his gifts are to be 'perfumed' with
the knowledge of the transcendent truth that in reality there is no
giver, no gift, no receiver (see below [p. 78](w2n05.htm#page_78)) <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1).

 

By this Path, through this Ford (*tīrtha*), the ascetic will cross the
ocean of transmigration, as well as the worlds of the gods or paradises.
The ascetic believes in such worlds—for he is not a sceptic, he
willingly admits the whole of the traditional or popular mythology—but
he despises them; he despises, as a philosopher would say, every
contingent' existence; he aims at something that is beyond the worlds,
that is 'hypercosmical' (to translate the Buddhist idiom, *lokottara*),
a mysterious somewhere, a somewhere that is eternal and 'free from
sorrow,' and which is called sometimes 'deliverance' (*mokṣa*, *mukti*,
*apavarga*), sometimes happiness' (*nirvṛti*, *naiḥśreyasa*), sometimes
Nirvāṇa, that is 'refreshment' or 'peace.'

Such are the common features of these thoroughly Hindu institutions. In
many respects, they are widely different one from another. Some are
monist, pantheist or mystical (Upaniṣads, Vedānta, Yoga); some purposely
atheist and rationalist (Jainism, Buddhism, Sāṃkhya). But

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

they are sisters born from the same parents, namely disgust with life
and love of mystery. If they do not agree concerning deliverance and the
path to deliverance, they all pursue deliverance. The right name for
them seems to be 'disciplines of salvation' or 'paths to
deliverance <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2).'

 

The time of Śākyamuni was an epoch of spiritual effervescence. Brahmans
taught new doctrines. There were discussions and ideological
tournaments. Scores of ascetics claimed to be discoverers of the Path,
literally 'ford-makers,' who had found a ford across transmigration, or
they claimed to be *buddhas*, that is 'awakened,' 'enlightened.' There
was a large following for the leaders: people complained that, by their
lessons and their example, "they caused the fathers to beget no sons,
the wives to become widows and the families to die out." So large was
the number of the candidates for deliverance: noblemen, merchants and
treasurers, the *jeunesse dorée*, priests and men of priestly parentage,
women, girls and wives and widows of good family, members of low caste
or outcasts, Cāpā,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the daughter of a deer-stalker, Puṇnā and Puṇṇikā, slave girls. And
there was no resistance to whatever the supreme interest of deliverance
could demand. Some—especially the Brahmans—preferred a solitary life in
the forest; some formed groups of wandering mendicants. All abandoned
the most sacred traditions, sacrifices, and the cult of the dead. All
accepted the most stringent rule of life. To quote an extreme case, the
disciple of the Jina practises a strict abstinence, and fears even to
disturb the vermin; he objects to hot water and to hot meals, because
the caldron harms the spirit of fire: such is his respect for life; he
destroys his sins by extraordinary penances; finally, he starves himself
to obtain salvation. Nothing can be too hard in the Path, if only the
Path leads to the end.

This time was an epoch of exaltation, of serious and sagacious
exaltation.

We know the story of two noble and fervent young men, Śāriputra, the
future philosopher of Buddhism, and Maudgalyāyana, the future
thaumaturge <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3). They had given their word
to each other: "He who first discovers the Path to immortality shall
tell the other." Their good

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

luck led them to the great man for whom the common name or adjective,
*buddha*, enlightened, has become a proper name, to Śākyamuni, the
originator of the most celebrated among the Indian Paths of salvation.

We shall follow in their steps and respectfully hear the doctrine to
which they clung. If, with the best will in the world, we cannot accept
this doctrine, it is none the less worth considering.

But before becoming the disciples of Śākyamuni, it is necessary to study
the origin of the ideas on which Buddhism—as well as the other
disciplines of salvation—is built; and this inquiry will be our task for
the present.

#### II

The disciplines of salvation arose from about the eighth to the sixth
century B.C., in the middle and upper valley of the Ganges. At this time
and in this place, there had been already a long and intimate
intercourse between the two elements of the Hindu population.

On the one hand, were the aborigines, concerning whom we lack any direct
information. It has been usual to assume that all the elements of the
later Hindu civilisation which are not Āryan, or do not look Āryan, are
due to their influence.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> However this may
be, modern inquiry as to the non-hinduized populations of India has been
fruitful. For instance we know that the aborigines, as is the case with
many savages, believed in reincarnations; they explained conception by
the descent of some disincarnated spirit who had previously inhabited a
human or an animal body or even a tree.

On the other hand, the Āryas, the Indo-European invaders of India, who,
after settling in North West India, had in time reached the valley of
the Ganges, bringing with them their language—which had already split up
into dialects—their Book or Bible, the Veda, and their own civilisation,
which was every day modified owing to an evolution due to manifold
factors.

We are to study some aspects of this evolution, taking as our starting
point the Āryan beliefs.

 

The Ārya is a member of a strongly organized body, the family of men in
close relations with the gods, especially with the eternal domestic
fire, and with the dead.

The whole fabric of domestic and social life is built on the beliefs
concerning the dead. The

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

destiny of the dead depends strictly on the services rendered to them by
their descendants in the male line, born in legitimate wedlock and
properly initiated into the religious rites of the family. Hence a
strict obligation to marry, not only to ensure a man's personal
happiness after death, but also that of his ancestors. Hence too a
strict obligation to pass through a series of ceremonies of a
sacramental character which affect the whole of a man's life from
conception to initiation—with a period of study in the house of a
preceptor—from marriage to death. No one is entitled to fulfil the
funeral rites, the fortnightly banquets and the daily offerings for the
dead, if he is not a member of the religious body. No one can hope for
happiness after death if the rites are not properly performed for him at
his death and in the ages to come by a member of this body.

Such were the conditions of welfare after death according to the oldest
ideas of our race.

 

Superstitions connected with the belief that the dead are living in the
grave, depending for this shadowy life on the offering poured on the
grave, are not abolished in the Vedic civilisation. The general view is
nevertheless an

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

altogether hopeful one. The dead, who are called the Fathers, do not
envy the living as did Achilles.

Some of them are now gods. The first of the mortals, Yama, "who first
went over the great mountains and spied out a path for many, who found
us a way of which we shall not be frustrated," Yama the King sits under
a tree with Varuṇa the righteous god. The Fathers are gathered around
him, drinking nectar, enjoying the libations of the living, enjoying
also—and this point is worthy of notice—their own pious works, their
sacrifices and their gifts, especially their gifts to the priests <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4).

The abode of the Fathers is an immortal, unending world: "There make me
immortal," says the Vedic poet, "where exist delight, joy, rejoicing,
and joyance, where wishes are obtained." It is not a spiritual paradise.
Whatever poetical descriptions we may find, 'supreme luminous regions,
middle sky, third heaven, lap of the red dawns,' the pleasures of the
Fathers are essentially mundane ones: rivers of mead, milk and waters,
pools of butter with banks of honey, also Apsarases or celestial
damsels.

The dead were happy; their life was worthy

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

to be lived. The men of these old Āryan days might have said what the
philosophers said later: "Man has three births: he is born from his
mother, reborn in the person of his son, and he finds his highest birth
in death."

While the ascetic—the learned ascetic—does not expect anything from the
gods or fear anything from the demons, with the old Āryas happiness in
this life depends on the goodwill of the gods and the deprecation of
malignant spirits. A. Barth said eloquently <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5): "The connexion between man and the gods is
conceived as a very close one. Always and everywhere he feels that he is
in their hands and that all his movements are under their eye. They are
masters close at hand, who exact tasks of him and to whom he owes
constant homage. He must be humble, for he is weak and they are strong;
he must be sincere towards them, for they cannot be deceived. Nay, he
knows that they in turn do not deceive, and that they have a right to
require his confidence as a friend, a brother, a father. . . . Sacrifice
is often an act of affection and gratitude towards the gods, through
which man acknowledges their sovereignty, renders thanks to

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

them for their benefits and hopes to obtain others in the future either
in this life or after death."

The Vedic gods, except in a few instances, are not regarded as
'transcendent'; to a certain extent, they depend on man. As the dead are
fed by funeral oblations, so the gods need sacrificial oblations. A.
Barth continues: "In the grossest sense, sacrifice is a mere bargain.
Man needs things which the god possesses, such as rain, light, warmth
and health, while the god is hungry and seeks offerings from man; there
is giving and receiving on both sides: 'As at a stipulated price, let us
exchange force and vigour, O Indra! Give me and I shall give thee; bring
me, and I shall bring thee.'"

 

Malignant spirits, if not in the Rigveda itself, at least in the Vedic
religion, are no less important than the gods. All the movements of
daily life as well as all the ceremonies of religion are to be made safe
from their attacks. Illnesses and mishaps of every description are their
work. Therefore they must be propitiated, and it is an old formula that
"every supernatural being (*yakṣa*) has a right to his own offering."

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

#### III

Such were the fundamental ideas of the Āryan religion and life. The
Ārya, without being δεισιδαιμονέστερος, did love and respect his gods;
he used meat and even cow's flesh; he sacrificed to obtain male
offspring and a life of a hundred autumns; he hoped after death to join
the Fathers and to enjoy, with them, the offerings of his sons. Life is
serene, joyful, active, not in any way spiritual or intellectual.

One sees how radical a change was necessary for asceticism and the
disciplines of salvation to be possible. The inborn feelings of the
Āryas had to be destroyed to make room for an altogether different
conception of life and human destiny.

What were the causes of this change? They certainly were many and
manifold.

To begin with, we must not forget that the Sanskrit-speaking people, the
priestly and feudal aristocracy who created the disciplines of
salvation, were no longer of unmixed Āryan race, as the old poets of the
Veda, but a mixture of Āryas and of the aborigines. Oldenberg has laid
much stress on this fact: we should not venture, in our present state of
knowledge, to base too much upon it. But it is certain that the
'intellectual

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Āryas, at the time
of the compilation of the Rigveda and later on, did not see and feel as
their ancestors did. They had acquired, as A. Barth says, "a love of
mystery, an extreme subtlety of mind, a fearlessness of inconsequences
and absurdities," together with the *sérieux*, the disinterestedness and
the strength of mystical research that are, through history, such
prominent marks of the Hindu mind.

On the other hand, this aristocracy was likely to borrow from the
aborigines, and from the mass of the Āryan people in daily contact with
the aborigines, many superstitions or beliefs—confused notions connected
with penance, ecstasy, reincarnations—as well as the principle of
*ahiṃsā*, 'respect for life'; a sort of cult of the cow; new gods,
obscene and cruel; phallic worship; idolatry, and so on. Such notions,
it is certain they borrowed: this can be proved in many cases.

But however profound and large the influence of new ethnic and climatic
surroundings, the Sanskrit-speaking people, especially the Brahmans,
were the heirs and the faithful preservers of the Āryan tradition and
mind. The notions they borrowed were at once elaborated into
rationalistic and fairly coherent doctrines. That

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

again may be proved in many cases, and we shall quote an instance which
is of special interest for us. The belief in reincarnations was a purely
savage surmise, liable to be organized into what is called totemism, an
unprogressive and absurd paganism, and no more: to be sure of it, we
have only to open the books of Tylor or Durckheim. Brahmans and
Buddhists borrowed this belief, which was altogether new to the Āryan
tradition; but they found no difficulty in adapting it either to the
dogma of the reward of good and evil deeds, or to a monism as rigid as
that of the Eleatic school.

The change we are studying is, to a large extent, not a revolution, but
an evolution; and the safest way to understand it is perhaps to describe
it as an autonomous alteration of the genuine Āryan beliefs and notions.
The Brahmans, endowed with an equal genius for conservation and
adaptation, were the workers of the change.

 

A word on the Brahmans and their probable origin.

The old rites of the family, offerings to the domestic fire, had, in the
beginning and for a long time, no professional priest. The father and
the mother were the priests at their fire <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6). But a certain ritual, which is as old as
the period when the ancestors of the Iranians and of the Vedic Indians
lived together, the ritual of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soma-Haoma, had
from of old a clergy of its own. And, by a slow progress, the members of
certain clans, better provided than others with technical knowledge in
formulas and in rites, became the masters of the altar and the
acknowledged intermediaries between gods and men. They were the
ancestors of the Brahmans.

 

The Brahmans were, by profession, busied with gods, sacrifice, and
ritual. After a time, before even the Rigveda was compiled, they became
philosophers and they made many striking discoveries. Four are worthy of
notice.

1\. The most ancient, if not the most important: the traditional gods
are not the self-existent and individual beings whom the poets of old
praised so ardently.

Each of them had long been credited with the features and the
characteristic powers of his colleagues—the so-called 'henotheism,'
which is not, as Max Müller said, a stage in the making of the gods,
but, on the contrary, a stage towards their disintegration.

Polytheism pure and simple was not crushed, and it remains as living in
the India of to-day as it was thirty centuries ago; but another theology
crept behind and below it, and was admitted, first among thinkers, then
by the great public, as an esoteric and more scientific view of the
universe.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The gods, the gods we know, are not real gods. Who then is the true god,
the unknown god? The texts permit us to trace different lines in the
development of the theological inquiry.

We meet sometimes in the Veda lofty expressions of a moral
monotheism,—and, throughout history, they are re-echoed from time to
time. Varuṇa, for instance, is more than once a sort of Jehovah of the
Far East: he has established the sun and made a path for it; it is in
accordance with his order or his rule that the moon and the stars go
their changeless course; he loves truth and hates iniquity; he pardons
the sinner who repents. But there is no evidence that this monotheism is
a product of philosophical speculation; we are inclined to think that it
is rather the spontaneous expression of religious feeling, a devotion
rather than a doctrine. As a matter of fact, the theology of the later
Veda tends to become a pallid deism, coupled with pantheistic tendencies
which become stronger as time goes on.

The true god is a generator, an architect of the cosmos, as were the
majority of the old gods, each in his turn ('henotheism'). But the
changes in the divine nomenclature show the evolution

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

of the philosophical thought. Instead of Agni, the omnipresent but
visible fire, or Indra, holder of the thunderbolt, or Varuṇa, 'who is
the ocean and is contained in a drop of water,' the Vedic poets now
prefer new names, Prajāpati, the Lord of creatures, Viśvakarman, the
fabricator of the universe, the great Asura or Great Spirit, Svayambhū,
the self-existing Being, Parameṣṭhin, the Supreme.

Little personality is attached to these gods, who have no history as
Indra or Heracles has, and who are not 'natural gods' as the Fire or the
Sky. While the old gods, the gods of the sacrifice, the heavenly heroes
endowed with cosmical powers, *les dieux à biographie*, fade before
them, they themselves appear as mere shadows of a more abstruse reality,
or rather as the mere names of an impersonal anonymous force, a
universal principle.

"The gods are only one single Being under different names,"

*ekaṃ sad viprā bahudhā vadanti*.

Is this Being a god or a force? Is the universe born from a principle
possessed of name and form (*sat*), or from a liquid and
undifferentiated mass (*asat*)? Did the gods come first and the universe
afterwards? The poet professes to

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

ignore the right answer: "The god that is above knows it, or he does not
know"; but the real thought of the poet is not doubtful: the primeval
force is styled Heat, Order, Truth, Waters, Golden Germ (first born of
the Waters), Kāma or Desire, the starting point in the evolution of
being, Kāla or Time, creator and destroyer, or, with a name which is
destined to have a marvellous fortune, Brahman.

Brahman is a new god, but an old word: it meant prayer or sacred
formula. How did the word acquire a new meaning of this kind? Because
the sacred formula came to be regarded as the great creative power.

2\. While speculation on the gods and on cosmogony leads to the
substitution, for the divine heroes of yore, of abstract and obscure
forces, the speculation on sacrifice leads to a like result.

Victor Henry is inclined to believe that the Indo-Iranian sacrifice of
Soma-Haoma, from which the Vedic sacrifice of Soma is derived, was
originally a magical rite for rain. This view is only a conjecture. But
two points seem to be ascertained. (1) While magical notions are always
lurking in old rituals, the oldest theologians of the Veda—the authors
of the Hymns—

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

saw in the sacrifice of Soma more than a mere act of oblation: "To
sacrifice is to stir up, actually to beget, two divinities of first
rank, the two principles of life *par excellence*, Agni, the Fire, and
Soma, the Oblation <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)." (2) On the other
hand, the magical conception of sacrifice was, for a long time and to a
large extent, checked by the lofty idea the Āryan had of his gods. Later
on this conception underwent an enormous development in the circle of
the professional sacrificers.

Indians—sorcerers, priests, philosophers or poets—are not a little
ambitious: *ils voient grand*. The Vedic priests ventured to think that
their hymns, formulae and rites were, not only the invigorating power
that helps the gods in the struggle for light and waters, but "the
condition even of the normal course of things." Sacrifice prevents the
world from lapsing into chaos. Further, if sacrifice is the actual
cosmical agency, it must probably at the beginning have been the
cosmogonical factor. It was by sacrifice that the gods delivered the
world from chaos; it was by sacrifice that the gods became immortal, and
why should not Man also become immortal by sacrifice?

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Sacrifice to whom? To no one. Rites and formulae are, in themselves,
efficient.

In short, the universe was conceived as a huge ritual, the quintessence
of which is the Veda, the eternal and productive Word. Vāc, the Voice,
is praised in some passages as another Logos, but this Logos is magical
sound, not reason.

3\. The fading away of the living gods, the rise of pantheistic gods,
the mechanical conception of a cosmic sacrifice,—all these
transformations of the old ideology went hand in hand with another and
possibly more important transformation. The beliefs concerning the
destiny of Man were utterly modified. The Vedic Indians discovered—step
by step—the doctrine of transmigration (*saṃsāra*).

How they made this discovery, that the Fathers die in the heaven whither
they have been brought by funeral ceremonies, that the dead are reborn
as men or as animals, that animals may be reborn as men—how they came to
accept these ideas which were as foreign to their ancestors and to their
sacred folk-lore as they are to us—is a long history <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8). It is the history of a radical change in
mental and

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

moral habits. We shall only point out some of the doctrinal factors that
seem to have been decisive.

The starting point is the admission of the 're-death' (*punarmṛtyu*) of
the dead. Death was deemed no less powerful a force than Desire or Time.
There is a multiplicity of deadly forces which pursue Man everywhere,
some in the worlds on this side, some in the worlds beyond. Therefore
the dead, although they are made half-divine, die again.

On the other hand, the philosophers, who dared to inquire into the
origin of the gods and the universe, could not be long satisfied with
the traditional eschatology. Could they admit that the Fathers possess,
for ever, a perfect happiness, enjoying every pleasure of a magnified
human life? "Whatever Man attains, he desires to go beyond it; if he
should reach heaven itself, he would desire to go beyond it." An eternal
paradise of Mahomet or a Walhalla seems unlikely to a philosophical
mind; it would be, in any case, an altogether wrong paradise, as says
Andrew Lang, for philosophers.

4\. The speculation, which has in this way dispelled or abandoned the
hope of immortality, cannot stop at this conclusion. It is everywhere

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the rōle of philosophy to destroy natural beliefs, and to rebuild them
according to some new pattern. This second task of a philosophy the
Vedic philosophy did not fail to fulfil.

Psychology began. The following distinction was made.

There is, on the one hand, the body with the vital energies that seem in
a closer relation with the body, and which savages often explain by a
number of souls. There is, on the other hand, the truly living principle
(*jīva*) that constitutes the true self of Man. This principle, which is
an entity, really a 'noumenon,' is called either *puruṣa*, 'man,'
'spirit,' or *ātman*, etymologically 'breath' (?), literally 'Self,' the
reflexive pronoun and the noun.

The *puruṣa* or *ātman* is eternal. It has inhabited various bodies and
is destined to inhabit new ones; but its natural aim is to reach an
eternal, changeless abode; free from any created or generated body, it
will live by itself, either conscious or unconscious, either formless or
wrapped in a form of its own, according to the preferences of the
philosophers. There have been many diverging conceptions of the Self.

But the solution, which is by far the most

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

popular among the Brahmans, is to identify the Self with the universal
god then in process of discovery, with Brahman.

The inquiry as to the gods and the universe has shown that the true god
is a nameless, universal agent, the self or breath of the world.
Therefore the god who blows in the wind and shines in the sun is the
same principle that breathes through the human mouth and keeps the
living body warm. The universal self is the true self of Man, as it is
the life and the essence of Nature: "It directs the eye and the ear; it
is the ear of the ear, the mind of the mind, the breath of the breath,
the speech of the speech, the eye of the eye." "This Breath (*ātman*) is
the guardian of the world, the Lord of the world: he is my Self."

Such an admission: "I am that Being," "I am Brahman," was a bold and a
decisive move. In short, that was the great discovery which has remained
for at least twenty-five centuries the capital and the most cherished
truth of the Indian people. It is much more than an academical theory.

 

There is only one Self, for the self of man is not a creation, an
emanation or a part of the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Self of the
universe: it is this very Self. "The unique and indivisible Self is
immortal, happy, unqualified, unconscious; but he animates the body, he
becomes, as it were, man. As such he experiences pain and desire, he
accumulates merit and demerit, he migrates from existence to existence,
always unhappy because he is always a prey to ever recurring death,—and
without any hope of deliverance, as long as he does not withdraw himself
from the not Self. But as soon as the individualized Self has acquired
the perfect immediate certainty that he is the universal Self, he no
longer experiences doubt, desire or suffering. He still acts, as the
wheel of the potter continues to revolve when the potter has ceased to
turn it. Death, at last, abolishes what no longer exists for him, the
last appearance of duality <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)."

That is perfect bliss,—which we sometimes experience in dreamless sleep,
when the Self is withdrawn from not Self,—and unconsciousness: for,
"where there is a duality, one can see the other, one can smell the
other, one can address the other, one can hear the other, one can think
of the other, one can grasp the other. But where for each everything has
turned into his

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

own self, by whom and whom shall he see, smell, address, hear, think or
grasp <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)?"

 

That the doctrines of transmigration, of the Self, of the merging of the
individual self in the great self, were antagonistic to the traditional
beliefs in the gods, the sacrifice, the paradises, and aimed directly at
the destruction of the whole fabric of social life, is self-evident.

The times were ripe for asceticism and the disciplines of deliverance to
arise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[6:1](w2n03.htm#fr_0) "As a clean cloth free from
stain duly takes the dye, so in Yasa, the noble youth, arose a pure,
unstained insight into the doctrine."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[7:1](w2n03.htm#fr_1) An exposé of this intricate
doctrine may be found in Hastings, *E.R.E.*, see 'Bodhisattva,'
'Mahāyāna,' 'Nihilism.'

<span id="fn_2"></span>[8:1](w2n03.htm#fr_2) On the notion of
deliverance, see Mrs Rhys Davids’ article 'Mokṣa,' in Hastings, *E.R.E.*
<span class="smallcaps">viii</span>, pp. 770-774.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[9:1](w2n03.htm#fr_3) See Rhys Davids’ article on
'Moggallāna,' Hastings, *E.R.E.* <span class="smallcaps">viii</span>, p.
769.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[13:1](w2n03.htm#fr_4) Oldenberg (tr. V. Henry),
*Religion du Véda*, pp. 453, 457.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[14:1](w2n03.htm#fr_5) *Religions of India*, p.
35 foll.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[18:1](w2n03.htm#fr_6) P. Oltramare, *Le rōle du
Yajamāna dans le sacrifice*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[23:1](w2n03.htm#fr_7) Barth, *Religions*, *loc.
cit.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[24:1](w2n03.htm#fr_8) See A. M. Boyer, 'Étude
sur l’origine de la doctrine du Saṃsāra,' *J. As.* 1901, 1, p. 451.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[28:1](w2n03.htm#fr_9) A. Barth, *Religions of
India*, p. 78. See below, [p. 161](w2n08.htm#page_161).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[29:1](w2n03.htm#fr_10) *Bṛhadāsaṇyaka*, II, 4,
13; compare iv, 3, 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Buddhist Soul](w2n04)
