[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly02)  [Next](lly04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It is the purpose of this little volume to create and foster in the
Yosemite visitor an interest in that fast dying race the Western Indian;
in his mode of life, his customs, his religious beliefs and legends, in
the days before the coming of the white man sounded the death knell of
his people.

In the compilation of the information presented in the following pages
the writer has supplemented the knowledge gained while living in the
mountains of California and from his friendship with the Indians, by
liberal reference to other writings notable among which are, "The Dawn
of the World," Professor C. Hart Merriam; "Indians of the Yosemite,"
Galen Clark; "In the Heart of the Sierras," J. M. Hutchings; "The
Discovery of the Yosemite," Dr. L. H. Bunnell; "History of Fresno
County," W. W. Elliot & Co.; "The Yosemite," John Muir; and "Trees of
California," Willis L. Jepson; "The Story of the Yosemite Valley," F. E.
Matthes; "Geology Physical and Historical," H. F. Cleland Ph.D.

The writer wishes to make it clear, however, that this is in no sense to
be considered a scientific treatise of the subject; rather has it been
the design to supply simply written information.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

The chapters on the Yosemite Valley the Big Tree, and Geology are
included with the hope that they may play some small part in instilling
in the heart of the reader an interest in and a love for our National
Park, and an appreciation of the efforts of the men who have made it
possible as well as those who so efficiently administer its affairs.

HERBERT EARL WILSON.

Yosemite, California,  
   April 21, 1925.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Coming of the White Man to Yosemite](lly04)
