[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly18)  [Next](lly20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HAPPY ISLES

Here is Yosemite's favorite picnic ground. Situated in the far eastern
end of the Valley, at the mouth of Merced Canyon, within easy walking
distance of hotels and camps, and on the Valley auto road, this is a
favorite haunt of those for whom the mountain trails are too strenuous,
or those who wish a day of rest after more fatiguing work on the harder
trails. Here every day during the season will be found scores of people.
By auto, horse, and on foot they come, bringing their lunches with them,
to while away the long sunshiny hours, to revel in the beauty
surrounding them on every hand, and even to be lulled by the songful
music of the tumbling water into a restful nap on the bosom of old
mother earth. No matter how high the mercury may climb in other parts of
the Valley, this shady island retreat, fanned by zephyrs cooled by their
frolic with the leaping cascades of the river, is always refreshingly
cool. An afternoon spent there serves to convince one of the truth of
the statement that there seems to be no spot in the Valley from which
one hasn't some inspiring view spread before him, no foot of ground that
does not hold some novelty to charm.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

\[paragraph continues\] John Muir called the Merced River "One of the
world's most songful streams." And to look upon "the laughing waters of
Happy Isles," to watch the foam-crested waves and curling eddies of the
whirling river, and listen to the deep refrain of its tumultuous song as
it rushes recklessly down its boulder strewn course, is only another
proof of this beloved old man's faculty for bestowing appropriately
descriptive titles.

In the early spring when the river is swollen by rains and melting snow
in the high Sierras, and the waters come pouring out of Merced Canyon to
split around the isles and go rushing by, the roar of their passage over
the rocky bed around the isles drowns the sound of the human voice. But,
regardless of how high the stream may rise, and it comes up sometimes
with almost incredible swiftness, the water is seldom muddy. This is due
to the fact that the watershed of the Merced is almost solid granite.
July is especially a happy month at Happy Isles, as it is during this
month the white azaleas are in bloom. Here, too, is the beginning of
that pathway of wonders, the trail to the high Sierras, which takes its
winding way up past Vernal and Nevada Falls. From a point a short half
hour walk up this trail one commands a splendid view of Illilouette
Fall, one of the most beautiful and picturesque in the region.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mirror Lake](lly20)
