[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly30)  [Next](lly32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### THE LEGEND OF PI-WY-ACK

Each year when the leaves turned to red and gold and were falling from
the trees to be picked up and whirled about by the winds of Ah-wah-nee,
a great feast was held in the Valley, to which came the neighboring
tribes. As the time for this feast drew near the chief of the
Ah-wah-nee-chees would send a runner across the mountains to the shores
of Mo-no Lake, bearing to the Mo-no tribe an invitation to be the guests
of himself and his people. This runner carried with him a bundle of
small willow sticks, bound about with thongs of deerskin, and
corresponding in number to the suns that must set before the day of the
feast. For each sun that sank into the west while the brave made his
journey he discarded one of these sticks.

One year when the time for the feast had arrived and the tribes were
gathered about the campfires enjoying the generous hospitality of the
Ah-wah-nee-chees, a young brave of Ah-wah-nee smiled upon a maiden of
the Mo-no tribe. He saw upon her face and hands signs of the recent
application of pitch and ashes, that she had put there as a sign of
mourning for the death of her sweetheart, a Mo-no brave. But, she was
young and fair, and the Ah-wah-nee-chee made every effort to win some
response to his ardent wooing, but her heart was still sad with longing
for her dead lover, and his advances brought no answering smile to her
face. When the Mo-nos returned across the mountains to their home on the
shores of Mo-no Lake, the maiden went with them.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 

<span id="img_08400"></span> [![TENAYA CANYON AND THE OVERHANGING ROCK
ON HALF DOME&lt;BR&gt; &lt;I&gt;Photo A. C.
Pillsbury&lt;/I&gt;](tn/08400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08400.jpg)  
TENAYA CANYON AND THE OVERHANGING ROCK ON HALF DOME  
*Photo A. C. Pillsbury*  

 

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

After the maiden had gone the young Ah-wah-nee-chee was broken-hearted,
and wandered about all winter, disconsolate and alone. But in the
spring, when the flowers were blooming in, Ah-wah-nee, and The Great
Spirit had melted the snows from the mountains, he made his way across
to the shores of Mo-no Lake, and there, in the dead of night, stole the
maiden from her home. That the Mo-no braves might not track her and thus
return her to her people, he carried her for a great distance in his
arms. Then he put her down and she walked obediently before him back to
Ah-wah-nee, and to the o-chum that he had prepared for her. That she
might be happy and content to stay in her new home he had furnished the
o-chum with the robes of the grizzly bear, and the skins of the deer,
with beads and baskets, ornaments and shells; with everything dear to
the heart of the Indian bride.

Here for five moons he guarded her closely and then, thinking that she
was content to stay, he left the o-chum to join the men around the
campfire, as befitted a young brave. But, as he sat listening
respectfully to the words of wisdom that fell from the lips of the old
men, he was seized with a premonition that all was not well with his
bride, and returned hastily to his o-chum, only to find that the maiden
had fled. Hot with anger he gathered four or five young braves of his
tribe and started swiftly in pursuit. As they neared the top of
Pi-wy-ack (Vernal Fall) they saw the maiden hurrying up the trail.
Increasing their speed they rushed toward her, whereupon she

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

plunged into the Emerald Pool and struck bravely out for the opposite
shore. She soon reached the middle of the stream, but the rushing
current was too much for her frail strength and she was carried farther
and farther down until the hurrying waters whirled her over the fall and
dashed her to her death on the rocks below.

Thus did a maiden of the Mo-nos prove her devotion to the memory of her
dead sweetheart, and thus did the angry waters of Pi-wy-ack deprive a
young brave of the Ah-wah-nee-chees of an unwilling bride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Loi-ya](lly32)
