[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lly61)  [Next](lly63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE PRESENT DAY INDIAN IN YOSEMITE

The tourist who visits the Indian camp in Yosemite expecting to find a
village patterned after those of long ago is doomed to disappointment.
The encroaching civilization of the white man has pushed all of that
into the background, or entirely into the discard. The present day
Indian wears the garb of the white man, cheap and dirty though it
usually is. As a rule he eats the food of the white man, reverting to
his acorn bread and other primitive dishes only on occasion of feast,
and as a sort of memoriam to the good old days that are gone. The
younger generation are being still further trained in the ways of the
white man by attendance at his schools. The younger generation will
usually be found to be neatly and cleanly, though more often, cheaply
dressed, and living in clean if poor surroundings. The men who spend
their summers in the Valley are employed by the government as laborers
on the trails and roads, as guides and teamsters, and some of them on
other work for which special training has fitted them. Some of the women
are employed at the hotels as kitchen help and chambermaids.

The Indians deep in their hearts still harbor a resentment against the
whites, although each year they receive

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

many visitors to their camps with seeming indifference. It is well to be
sincere in dealing with the Indians as they have an intuitive
understanding of and a wholesome contempt for two-facedness. The old
supposition, or saying, that an Indian has no place in his heart for
gratitude could not be more untrue. They are appreciative of favors and
quick to reciprocate a kindness. It takes a long time, a great deal of
diplomacy and tact, coupled with at least a little understanding of
Indian character, to establish yourself on terms of intimate friendship
with the Indian, and always there are hidden recesses in his heart to
which the white man will never be admitted.

The traditional honesty of their race is upheld by the present day
Indians, although there are, of course, exceptions. Occasionally one
will steal from a white man, occasionally from another Indian of his own
tribe, but more often, through a queer feeling of jealousy of
possession, from a member of another tribe. There are at present making
the Valley their summer home very few descendants of the original
Ah-wah-nee-chees or Yo-sem-i-tes, most of them being of mixed origin, or
half breeds. Most of them will, when they can procure the necessary
liquor, get drunk, all, or nearly all, of them gamble, and occasionally
one beats his wife or engages in a quarrel or fight with some of his
neighbors. But they are in the main a quiet, peaceful, and law-abiding
people, preferring to be left alone to work out their own salvation
along such lines as they themselves may choose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Retrospection and Prophecy](lly63)
