[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc101) 
[Next](motc103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 102. The False Warriors Of Chilhowee

Some warriors of Chilhowee town, on Little Tennessee, organized a war
party, as they said, to go against the Shawano. They started off north
along the great war trail, but when they came to Pigeon river they
changed their course, and instead of going on toward the Shawano country
they went up the river and came in at the back of Cowee, one of the
Middle settlements of their own tribe. Here they concealed themselves
near the path until a party of three or four unsuspecting townspeople
came by, when they rushed out and killed them, took their scalps and a
gun belonging to a man named Gûñskäli'skï, and then

*p. 376*

hurriedly made their way home by the same roundabout route to Chilhowee,
where they showed the fresh scalps and the gun, and told how they had
met the Shawano in the north and defeated them without losing a man.

According to custom, preparations were made at once for a great scalp
dance to celebrate the victory over the Shawano. The dance was held in
the townhouse and all the people of the settlement were there and looked
on, while the women danced with the scalps and the gun, and the returned
warriors boasted of their deeds. As it happened, among those looking on
was a visitor from Cowee, a gunstocker, who took particular notice of
the gun and knew it at once as one he had repaired at home for
Gûñskäli'skï. He said nothing, but wondered much how it had come into
possession of the Shawano.

The scalp dance ended, and according to custom a second dance was
appointed to be held seven days later, to give the other warriors also a
chance to boast of their own war deeds. The gunstocker, whose name was
Gûlsadihï', returned home to Cowee, and there heard for the first time
how a Shawano war party had surprised some of the town people, killed
several, and taken their scalps and a gun. He understood it all then,
and told the chief that the mischief had been done, not by a hostile
tribe, but by the false men of Chilhowee. It seemed too much to believe,
and the chief said it could not be possible, until the gunstocker
declared that he had recognized the gun as one he had himself repaired
for the man who had been killed. At last they were convinced that his
story was true, and all Cowee was eager for revenge.

It was decided to send ten of their bravest warriors, under the
leadership of the gunstocker, to the next dance at Chilhowee, there to
take their own method of reprisal. Volunteers offered at once for the
service. They set out at the proper time and arrived at Chilhowee on the
night the dance was to begin. As they crossed the stream below the town
they met a woman coming for water and took their first revenge by
killing her. Men, women, and children were gathered in the townhouse,
but the Cowee men concealed themselves outside and waited.

In this dance it was customary for each warrior in turn to tell the
story of some deed against the enemy, putting his words into a song
which he first whispered to the drummer, who then sang with him,
drumming all the while. Usually it is serious business, but
occasionally, for a joke, a man will act the clown or sing of some
extravagant performance that is so clearly impossible that all the
people laugh. One man after another stepped into the ring and sang of
what he had done against the enemies of his tribe. At last one of the
late war party rose front his seat, and after a whisper to the drummer
began to sing of how they had gone to Cowee and taken scalps and the
gun, which he carried as he danced. The chief and the people, who knew
nothing of the treacherous act, laughed, heartily at what they thought
was a great joke.

*p. 377*

But now the gunstocker, who had been waiting Outside with the Cowee men,
stripped off his breechcloth and rushed naked into the townhouse.
Bending down to the drummer--who was one of the traitors, but failed to
recognize Gûlsadihï'--he gave him the words, and then straightening up
he began to sing, "*Hi!* Ask who has done this!" while he danced around
the circle, making insulting gestures toward every one there. The song
was quick and the drummer beat very fast.

He made one round and bent down again to the drummer, then straightened
up and sang, "*Yu!* I have killed a pregnant woman at the ford and
thrown her body into the river!" Several men started with surprise, but
the chief said, "He is only joking; go on with the dance," and the
drummer beat rapidly.

Another round and he bent down again to the drummer and then began to
sing, "We thought our enemies were from the north, but we have followed
them and they are here!" Now the drummer knew at last what it all meant
and he drummed very slowly, and the people grew uneasy. Then, without
waiting on the drummer, Gûlsadihï' sang, "Cowee will have a ball play
with you!"--and everyone knew this was a challenge to battle--and then
fiercely: "But if you want to fight now my men are ready to die here!"

With that he waved his hand and left the townhouse. The dancers looked
at each other uneasily and some of them rose to go. The chief, who could
not understand it, urged them to go on with the dance, but it was of no
avail. They left the townhouse, and as they went out they met the Cowee
men standing with their guns ready and their hatchets in their belts.
Neither party said anything, because they were still on friendly ground,
but everyone knew that trouble was ahead.

The Cowee men returned home and organized a strong party of warriors
from their own and all the neighboring Middle settlements to go and take
vengeance on Chilhowee and on Kuwâ'hï, just below, which had also been
concerned in the raid. They went down the Tennessee and crossed over the
mountains, but when they came on the other side they found that their
enemies had abandoned their homes and fled for refuge to the remoter
settlements or to the hostile Shawano in the north.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 103. Cowee Town](motc103)
