[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc090) 
[Next](motc092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 91. The Two Mohawks

"In the year 1747 a couple of the Mohawk Indians came against the lower
towns of the Cheerake, and so cunningly ambuscaded them through most
part of the spring and summer, as to kill above twenty in different
attacks before they were discovered by any party of the enraged and
dejected people. They had a thorough knowledge of the most convenient
ground for their purpose, and were extremely swift and long-winded.
Whenever they killed any and got the scalp they made off to the
neighboring mountains, and ran over the broad ledges of rocks in
contrary courses, as occasion offered, so as the pursuers could by no
means trace them. Once, when a large company was in chase of them, they
ran round a steep hill at the head of the main eastern branch of Savana
river, intercepted, killed, and scalped the hindmost of the party, and
then made off between them and Keeowhee. As this was the town to which
the company belonged, they hastened home in a close body, as the proper
place of security from such enemy wizards. In this manner did those two
sprightly, gallant savages perplex and intimidate their foes for the
space of four moons in the greatest security, though they often were
forced to kill and barbecue what they chiefly lived upon, in the midst
of their watchful enemies. Having sufficiently revenged their relations'
blood and gratified their own ambition with an uncommon number of
scalps, they resolved to captivate one and run home with him as a proof
of their having killed none but the enemies of their country.
Accordingly, they approached very near to Keeowhee, about half a mile
below the late Fort Prince George. Advancing with the usual caution on
such an occasion, one crawled along under the best cover of the place
about the distance of a hundred yards ahead, while the other shifted
from tree to tree, looking sharply every way. In the evening, however,
an old, beloved man discovered them from the top of an adjoining hill,
and knew them to be enemies by the cut of their hair, light trim for

*p. 358*

running, and their, postures. He returned to the town and called first
at the house of one of our traders and informed him of the affair,
enjoining him not to mention it to any, lest the people should set off
against them without success before their tracks were to be discovered
and he be charged with having deceived them. But, contrary to the true
policy of traders among unforgiving savages, that thoughtless member of
the Choktah Sphynx Company busied himself, as usual, out of his proper
sphere, sent for the headmen, and told them the story. As the Mohawks
were allies and not known to molest any of the traders in the paths and
woods, he ought to have observed a strict neutrality. The youth of the
town, by order of their headmen, carried on their noisy public
diversions in their usual manner to prevent their foes from having any
suspicion of their danger, while runners were sent from the town to
their neighbors to come silently and assist them to secure the prey in
its state of security. They came like silent ghosts, concerted their
plan of operation, passed over the river at the old trading ford
opposite to the late fort, which lay between two contiguous commanding
hills, and, proceeding downward over a broad creek, formed a large
semicircle from the river bank, while the town seemed to be taking its
usual rest. They then closed into a narrower compass, and at last
discovered the two brave, unfortunate men lying close under the tops of
some fallen young pine trees. The company gave the war signal, and the
Mohawks, bounding up, bravely repeated it; but, by their sudden spring
from under thick cover, their arms were useless. They made desperate
efforts, however, to kill or be killed, as their situation required. One
of the Cheerake, the noted half-breed of Istanare \[Ustäna'lï\] town,
which lay 2 miles from thence, was at the first onset knocked down and
almost killed with his own cutlass, which was wrested from him, though
he was the strongest of the whole nation. But they were overpowered by
numbers, captivated, and put to the most exquisite tortures of fire,
amidst a prodigious crowd of exulting foes.

One of the present Choktah traders, who was on the spot, told me that
when they were tied to the stake the younger of the two discovered our
traders on a hill near, addressed them in English, and entreated them to
redeem their lives. The elder immediately spoke to him, in his own
language, to desist. On this, he recollected himself, and became
composed like a stoic, manifesting an indifference to life or death,
pleasure or pain, according to their standard of martial virtue, and
their dying behaviour did not reflect the least dishonor on their former
gallant actions. All the pangs of fiery torture served only to refine
their manly spirits, and as it was out of the power of the traders to
redeem them they, according to our usual custom, retired as soon as the
Indians began the diabolical tragedy."--Adair, American Indians, p. 383,
1775.

*p. 359*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 92. Escape Of The Seneca Boys](motc092)
