[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc102) 
[Next](motc104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 103. Cowee Town

Cowee', properly Kawi'yï, abbreviated Kawi', was the name of two
Cherokee settlements, one of which existed in 1755 on a branch of Keowee
river, in upper South Carolina, while the other and more important was
on Little Tennessee river, at the mouth of Cowee creek, about 10 miles
below the present Franklin, in North Carolina. It was destroyed by the
Americans in 1876 (*sic: possibly 1776?--Editor*), when it contained
about a hundred houses, but was rebuilt and continued to be occupied
until the cession of 1819. The name can not be translated, but may
possibly mean "the place of the Deer clan" (Ani'-Kawï'). It was one

*p. 378*

of the oldest and largest of the Cherokee towns, and when Wafford
visited it as a boy he found the trail leading to it worn so deep in
places that, although on horseback, he could touch the ground with his
feet on each side.

There is a story, told by Wafford as a fact, of a Shawano who had been a
prisoner there, but had escaped to his people in the north, and after
the peace between the two tribes wandered back into the neighborhood on
a hunting trip. While standing on a bill overlooking the valley he saw
several Cherokee on an opposite hill, and called out to them, "Do you
still own Cowee?" They shouted in reply, "Yes; we own it yet." Back came
the answer from the Shawano, who wanted to encourage them not to sell
any more of their lands, "Well, it's the best town of the Cherokee. It's
a good country; hold on to it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 104. The Eastern Tribes](motc104)
