[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc058.md) 
[Next](motc060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 59. The Smaller Reptiles--fishes And Insects

There are several varieties of frogs and toads, each with a different
name, but there is very little folklore in connection with them. The
common green frog is called *walâ'sï*, and among the Cherokee, as among
uneducated whites, the handling of it is thought to cause warts, which
for this reason are called by the same name, *walâ'sï*. A solar eclipse
is believed to be caused by the attempt of a great frog to swallow the
sun, and in former times it was customary on such occasions to fire guns
and make other loud noises to frighten away the frog. The smaller
varieties are sometimes eaten, and on rare occasions the bullfrog also,
but the meat is tabued to ball players while in training, for fear that
the brittleness of the frog's bones would be imparted to those of the
player.

The land tortoise (*tûksï'*) is prominent in the animal myths, and is
reputed to have been a great warrior in the old times. On account of the
stoutness of its legs ball players rub their limbs with them before
going into the contest. The common water turtle (*säligu'gï*), which
occupies so important a place in the mythology of the northern tribes,
is not mentioned in Cherokee myth or folklore, and the same is true of
the soft-shelled turtle (*u\`länä'wä*), perhaps for the reason that both
are rare in the cold mountain streams of the Cherokee country.

There are perhaps half a dozen varieties of lizard, each with a
different name. The gray road lizard, or *diyâ'hälï* (alligator lizard,
*Sceloporus undulatus*), is the most common. On account of its habit of
alternately puffing out and drawing in its throat as though sucking,
when basking in the sun, it is invoked in the formulas for drawing out
the poison from snake bites. If one catches the first diyâ'hälï seen in
the spring, and, holding it between his fingers, scratches his legs
downward with its claws, he will see no dangerous snakes all summer.
Also, if one be caught alive at any time and rubbed over the bead and
throat of an infant, scratching the skin very slightly at the same time
with the claws, the child will never be fretful, but will sleep quietly
without complaining, even when sick or exposed to the rain. This is a
somewhat risky experiment, however, as the child is liable thereafter to
go to sleep wherever it may be laid down for a moment, so that the
mother is in constant danger of losing it. According to some authorities
this sleep lizard is not the diyâ'hälï, but a larger variety akin to the
next described.

The *gigä-tsuha'\`lï* ("bloody mouth," *Pleistodon*?) is described as a

*p. 307*

very large lizard, nearly as large as a water dog, with the throat and
corners of the mouth red, as though from drinking blood. It is believed
to be not a true lizard but a transformed *ugûñste'lï* fish (described
below) on account of the similarity of coloring and the fact that the
fish disappears about the time the gigä-tsuha'\`lï begins to come out.
It is ferocious and a hard biter, and pursues other lizards. In dry
weather it cries or makes a noise like a cicada, raising itself up as it
cries. It has a habit of approaching near to where some person is
sitting or standing, then halting and looking fixedly at him, and
constantly puffing out its throat until its head assumes a bright red
color. It is thought then to be sticking the blood of its victim, and is
dreaded and shunned accordingly. The small scorpion lizard (*tsâne'nï*)
is sometimes called also "blood taker" It is a striped lizard which
frequents sandy beaches and resemble the diyâ'hälï, but is of a brown
color. It is believed also to be sucking blood in some mysterious way
whenever it nods its head, and if its heart be eaten by a dog that
animal will be able to extract all the nutrient properties from food by
simply looking at those who are eating.

The small spring lizard (*duwë'\`gâ*), which lives in springs, is
supposed to cause rain whenever it crawls out of the spring. It is
frequently invoked in the formulas. Another spring (?) lizard, red, with
black spots, is called *dägan'\`tû'* or *aniganti'skï* "the rain maker,"
because its cry is said to bring rain. The water dog (*tsuwä'* mud
puppy, *Menopoma* or *Protonopsis*) is a very large lizard, or rather
salamander, frequenting muddy water. It is rarely eaten, from an
unexplained belief that if one who has eaten its meat goes into the
field immediately afterward the crop will be ruined. There are names for
one or two other varieties of lizard as well as for the alligator
(*tsula'skï*), but no folklore in connection with them.

Although the Cherokee country abounds in swift-flowing streams well
stocked with fish, of which the Indians make free use, there is but
little fish lore. A number of "dream" diseases, really due to
indigestion, are ascribed to revengeful fish ghosts, and the doctor
usually tries to effect the cure by invoking some larger fish or
fish-eating bird to drive out the ghost.

Toco creek, in Monroe county, Tennessee, derives its name from a mythic
monster fish, the Däkwä', considered the father of all the fish tribe,
which is said to have lived formerly in Little Tennessee river at that
point (see story, "The Hunter and the Däkwä'). A fish called
*ugûñste'lï*, "having horns," which appears only in spring, is believed
to be transformed later into the giga-tsuha'\`lï lizard, already
mentioned. The fish is described as having horns or projections upon its
nose and beautiful red spots upon its head, and as being attended or
accompanied by many smaller red fish, all of which, including the
ugûñste'lï, are accustomed to pile up small stories in the water. As the
season

*p. 308*

advances it disappears and is believed then to have turned into a
giga-tsuha'\`lï lizard, the change beginning at the head and finishing
with the tail. It is probably the *Campostoma* or stone roller, which is
conspicuous for its bright coloring in early spring, but loses its tints
after spawning. The meat of the sluggish hog-sticker is tabued to the
ball player, who must necessarily be active in movement. The fresh-water
mussel is called *dägû'nä*, and the same name is applied to certain
pimples upon the face, on account of a fancied resemblance. The ball
player rubs himself with an eel skin to make himself slippery and hard
to hold, and, according to the Wahnenauhi manuscript, women formerly
tied up their hair with the dried skin of an eel to make it grow long. A
large red crawfish called *tsiska'gïlï* much resembling a lobster, is
used to scratch young children in order to give them a strong grip, each
band of the child being lightly scratched once with the pincer of the
living animal. A mother whose grown son had been thus treated when an
infant claimed that he could hold anything with his thumb and finger. It
is said, however, to render the child quarrelsome and disposed to bite.

Of insects there is more to be said. The generic name for all sorts of
small insects and worms is *tsgâya*, and according to the doctors, who
had anticipated the microbe theory by several centuries, these tsgâya
are to blame for nearly every human ailment not directly traceable to
the *asgina* of the larger animals, or to witchcraft. The reason is
plain. There are such myriads of them everywhere on the earth and in the
air that mankind is constantly destroying them by wholesale, without
mercy and almost without knowledge, and this is their method of taking
revenge.

Beetles are classed together under a name which signifies "insects with
shells." The little water-beetle or mellow-bug (*Dineutes discolor*) is
called *dâyuni'sï*, "beaver's grandmother," and according to the genesis
tradition it brought up the first earth from under the water. A certain
green-headed beetle with horns (*Phanæus carnifex*) is spoken of as the
dog of the Thunder boys, and the metallic-green luster upon its forehead
is said to have been caused by striking at the celebrated mythic
gamblers Ûñtsaiyï', "Brass" (see the story). The June-bug (*Allorhina
nitida*), another green beetle, is tag , but is frequently called by the
curious name of *tu'ya-dï'skalaw\`sti'skï* "one who keeps fire tinder
the beans." Its larva is the grubworm which presided at the meeting held
by the insects to compass the destruction of the human race (see the
story, "Origin of Disease and Medicine"). The large horned beetle
(*Dynastes tityus*?) is called *tsistû'na*, "crawfish," *a\`wï'*,
"deer," or *gälägi'na*, "buck," on account of its branching horns. The
snapping beetle (*Alaus oculatus*?) is called *tûlsku'wa*, "one that
snaps with his head."

When the *lâlû* or jar-fly (*Cicada auletes*) begins to sing in
midsummer

*p. 309*

they say: "The jar-fly has brought the beans," his song being taken as
the signal that beans are ripe and that green corn is not far behind.
When the katydid (*tsïkïkï'*) is heard a little later they say, "Katydid
has brought the roasting-ear bread." The cricket (*täla'tü'*) is often
called "the barber" (*ditastaye'skï*), on account of its habit of
gnawing hair from furs, and when the Cherokee meet a man with his hair
clipped unevenly they sometimes ask playfully, "Did the cricket cut your
hair?" (see story, "Why the Possum's Tail is Bare"). Certain persons are
said to drink tea made of crickets in order to become good singers.

The mole cricket (*Gryllotalpa*), so called because it tunnels in the
earth and has hand-like claws fitted for digging, is known to the
Cherokee as *gûl\`kwâgï*, a word which literally means "seven," but is
probably an onomatope. It is reputed among them to be alert, hard to
catch, and an excellent singer, who "never makes mistakes." Like the
crawfish and the cricket, it plays an important part in preparing people
for the duties of life. Infants slow in learning to speak have their
tongues scratched with the claw of a gûl\`kwâgï, the living insect being
held in the hand during the operation, in order that they may soon learn
to speak distinctly and be eloquent, wise, and shrewd of speech as they
grow older, and of such quick intelligence as to remember without effort
anything once heard. The same desirable result may be accomplished with
a grown person, but with much more difficulty, as in that case it is
necessary to scratch the inside of the throat for four successive
mornings, the insect being pushed down with the fingers and again
withdrawn, while the regular tabus must be strictly observed for the
same period, or the operation will be without effect. In some cases the
insect is put into a small bowl of water overnight, and if still alive
in the morning it is taken out and the water given to the patient to
drink, after which the gûl\`kwâgï is set at liberty.

Bees are kept by many of the Cherokee, in addition to the wild bees
which are hunted in the woods. Although they are said to have come
originally from the whites, the Cherokee have no tradition of a time
when they did not know them; there seems, however, to be no folklore
connected with them. The cow-ant (*Myrmica*?), a large, red, stinging
ant, is called properly *dasûñ'tälï*, "stinging ant," but, on account of
its hard body-ease, is frequently called *nûñ'yunu'wï*, "stone-dress,"
after a celebrated mythic monster. Strange as it may seem, there appears
to be no folklore connected with either the firefly or the glowworm,
while the spider, so prominent in other tribal mythologies, appears in
but a single Cherokee myth, where it brings back the fire from across
the water. In the formulas it is frequently invoked to entangle in its
threads the soul of a victim whom the conjurer desires to bring under
his evil spells. From a fancied resemblance in appearance the name for
spider, *kä'näne'skï*, is applied also

*p. 310*

to a watch or clock. A small yellowish moth which flies about the fire
at night is called *tûñ'täwû*, a name implying that it goes into and out
of the fire, and when at last it flits too near and falls into the blaze
the Cherokee say, "Tûñ'täwû is going to bed." On account of its affinity
for the fire it is invoked by the doctor in all "fire diseases,"
including sore eyes and frostbite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. Why The Bullfrog's Head Is Striped](motc060.md)
