[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc100.md) 
[Next](motc102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 101. The Last Shawano Invasion

Perhaps a year after the raid upon Tïkwäli'tsï, the Shawano again, under
the same leader, came down upon the exposed settlement of Kanuga, on
Pigeon river, and carried off a woman and two children whom they found
gathering berries near the town. Without waiting to make an attack they
hastily retreated, with their prisoners. The people of Kanuga sent for
aid to the other settlements farther south, and a strong party was
quickly raised to pursue the enemy and recover the captives. By this
time, however, the Shawano had had several days' start and it was
necessary for the Cherokee to take a shorter course across the mountains
to overtake them. A noted conjurer named Kâ'lanû, "The Raven," of
Hiwassee town, was called upon to discover by his magic arts what
direction the Shawano had taken and

*p. 375*

how far they had already gone. Calling the chiefs together he told them
to fill the pipe and smoke and he would return with the information
before the pipe was smoked out. They sat down in a circle around the
fire and lighted the pipe, while he went out into the woods. Soon they
heard the cry of an owl, and after some interval they heard it again,
and the next moment the conjurer walked out from the trees before yet
the first smoke was finished.

He reported that he had trailed the Shawano to their camp and that they
were seven days ahead. The Cherokee at once followed as The Raven
guided, and reached the place in seven days and found all the marks of a
camp, but the enemy was already gone. Again and once again the conjurer
went ahead in his own mysterious fashion to spy out the country, and
they followed as he pointed the way. On returning the third time he
reported that their enemies had halted beside the great river (the
Ohio), and soon afterward he came in with the news that they were
crossing it. The Cherokee hurried, on to the river, but by this time the
Shawano were on the other side. The pursuers hunted up and down until
they found a favorable spot in the stream, and then waiting until it was
dark they prepared to cross, using logs as rafts and tacking with the
current, and managed it so well that they were over long before daylight
without alarming the enemy.

The trail was now fresh, and following it they soon came upon the camp,
which was asleep and all unguarded, the Shawano, thinking themselves now
safe in their own country, having neglected to post sentinels. Rushing
in with their knives and tomahawks, the Cherokee fell upon their
sleeping foe and killed a number of them before the others could wake
and seize their arms to defend themselves. Then there was a short,
desperate encounter, but the Shawano were taken at a disadvantage, their
leader himself being among the first killed, and in a few moments they
broke and ran, every man for himself, to escape as best he could. The
Cherokee released the captives, whom they found tied to trees, and after
taking the scalps from the dead Shawano, with their guns and other
equipments, returned to their own country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 102. The False Warriors Of Chilhowee](motc102.md)
