[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc001.md) 
[Next](motc003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 2. The First Fire

In the beginning there was no fire, and the world was cold, until the
Thunders (Ani'-Hyûñ'tïkwälâ'skï), who lived up in Gälûñ'lätï, sent their
lightning and put fire into the bottom of a hollow sycamore tree which
grew on an island. The animals knew it was there, because they could see
the smoke coming out at the top, but they could not get to it on

*p. 241*

account of the water, so they held a council to decide what to do. This
was a long time ago.

Every animal that could fly or swim was anxious to go after the fire.
The Raven offered, and because he was so large and strong they thought
he could surely do the work, so he was sent first. He flew high and far
across the water and alighted on the sycamore tree, but while he was
wondering what to do next, the heat had scorched all his feathers black,
and he was frightened and came back without the fire. The little
Screech-owl (*Wa'huhu'*) volunteered to go, and reached the place
safely, but while he was looking down into the hollow tree a blast of
hot air came up and nearly burned out his eves. He managed to fly home
as best he could, but it was a long time before he could see well, and
his eyes are red to this day. Then the Hooting Owl (*U'guku'*)and the
Horned Owl (*Tskïlï'*) went, but by the time they got to the hollow tree
the fire was burning so fiercely that the smoke nearly blinded them, and
the ashes carried up by the wind made white rings about their eyes. They
had to come home again without the fire, but with all their rubbing they
were never able to get rid of the white rings.

Now no more of the birds would venture, and so the little Uksu'hï snake,
the black racer, said he would go through the water and bring back some
fire. He swam across to the island and crawled through the grass to the
tree, and went in by a small hole at the bottom. The heat and smoke were
too much for him, too, and after dodging about blindly over the hot
ashes until he was almost on fire himself he managed by good luck to get
out again at the same hole, but his body had been scorched black, and he
has ever since had the habit of darting and doubling on his track as if
trying to escape from close quarters. He came back, and the great
blacksnake, Gûle'gï, "The Climber," offered to go for fire. He swam over
to the island and climbed up the tree on the outside, as the blacksnake
always does, but when he put his head down into the hole the smoke
choked him so that he fell into the burning stump, and before he could
climb out again he was as black as the Uksu'hï.

Now they held another council, for still there was no fire, and the
world was cold, but birds, snakes, and four-footed animals, all had some
excuse for not going, because they were all afraid to venture near the
burning sycamore, until at last Känäne'skï Amai'yëhï (the Water Spider)
said she would go. This is not the water spider that looks like a
mosquito, but the other one, with black downy hair and red stripes on
her body. She can run on top of the water or dive to the bottom, so
there would be no trouble to get over to the island, but the question
was, How could she bring back the fire? "I'll manage that, said the
Water Spider; so she spun a thread from her body and wove it into a
*tusti* bowl, which she fastened on her back. Then she crossed over to
the island and through the grass to where the fire was

*p. 242*

still burning. She put one little coal of fire into her bowl, and came
back with it, and ever since we have had fire, and the Water Spider
still keeps her tusti bowl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Kana'tï And Selu: The Origin Of Game And Corn](motc003.md)
