[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc049) 
[Next](motc051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 50. The Uktena And The Ulûñsû'tï

Long ago--*hïlahi'yu*--when the Sun became angry at the people on earth
and sent a sickness to destroy them, the Little Men changed a man into a
monster snake, which they called Uktena, "The Keen-eyed," and sent him
to kill her. He failed to do the work, and the Rattlesnake had to be
sent instead, which made the Uktena so jealous and angry that the people
were afraid of him and had him taken up to Gälûñ'lätï, to stay with the
other dangerous things.\[1\] He left others behind him, though, nearly
as large and dangerous as himself, and they hide now in deep pools in
the river and about lonely passes in the high mountains, the places
which the Cherokee call "Where the Uktena stays."

Those who know say that the Uktena is a great snake, as large around as
a tree trunk, with horns on its head, and a bright, blazing crest like a
diamond upon its forehead, and scales glittering like sparks of fire. It
has rings or spots of color along its whole length, and can not be
wounded except by shooting in the seventh spot from the head, because
under this spot are its heart and its life. The blazing diamond is
called *Ulûñsû'tî* "Transparent," and he who can win it may become the
greatest wonder worker of the tribe, but it is worth a man's life to
attempt it, for whoever is seen by the Uktena is so dazed by the bright
light that he runs toward the snake instead of trying to escape.

\[1. See "The Daughter of the Sun."\]

*p. 298*

Even to see the Uktena asleep is death, not to the hunter himself, but
to *his family*.

Of all the daring warriors who Have started out in search of the
Ulûñsû'tî only Âgän-uni'tsï ever came back successful.\[1\] The East
Cherokee still keep the one which he brought. It is like a large
transparent crystal, nearly the shape of a cartridge bullet, with a
blood-red streak running through the center from top to bottom. The
owner keeps it wrapped in a whole deerskin, inside an earthen jar hidden
away in a secret cave in the mountains. Every seven days he feeds it
with the blood of small game, rubbing the blood all over the crystal as
soon as the animal has been killed. Twice a year it must have the blood
of a deer or some other large animal. Should he forget to feed it at the
proper time it would come out from its cave at night in the shape of
fire and fly through the air to slake its thirst with the lifeblood of
the conjurer or some one of his people. He may save himself from this
danger by telling it, when he puts it away, that he will not need it
again for a long time. It will then go quietly to sleep and feel no
hunger until it is again brought out to be consulted. Then it must be
fed again with blood before it is used.

No white man must ever see it and no person but the owner will venture
near it for fear of sudden death. Even the conjurer who keeps it is
afraid of it, and changes its hiding place every once ill a while so
that it can not learn the way out. When he dies it will be buried with
him. Otherwise it will come out of its cave, like a blazing star, to
search for his grave, night after night for seven years, when, if still
not able to find him, it will go back to sleep forever where he has
placed it.

Whoever owns the Ulûñsû'tî is sure of success in hunting, love,
rainmaking, and every other business, but its great use is in life
prophecy. When it is consulted for this purpose the future is seen
mirrored in the clear crystal as a tree is reflected in the quiet stream
below, and the conjurer knows whether the sick man will recover, whether
the warrior will return from battle, or whether the youth will live to
be old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51. Âgän-uni'tsï's Search For The Uktena](motc051)
