[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc079) 
[Next](motc081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 80. The Spirit Defenders Of Nïkwäsï'

Long ago a powerful unknown tribe invaded the country from the
southeast, killing people and destroying settlements wherever they went.
No leader could stand against them, and in a little while they had
wasted all the lower settlements and advanced into the mountains. The
warriors of the old town of Nïkwäsï', on the head of Little Tennessee,
gathered their wives and children into the townhouse and kept scouts
constantly on the lookout for the presence of danger. One morning just
before daybreak the spies saw the enemy approaching and at once gave the
alarm. The Nïkwäsï' men seized their arms and rushed out to meet the
attack, but after a long, hard fight they found themselves overpowered
and began to retreat, when suddenly a stranger stood among them and
shouted to the chief to call off his men and he himself would drive back
the enemy. From the dress and language of the stranger the Nïkwäsï'
people thought him a chief who had come with reinforcements from the
Overhill settlements in Tennessee. They fell back along the trail, and
as they came near the townhouse they saw a great company of warriors
coming out from the side of the mound as through an open doorway. Then
they knew that their friends were the Nûñnë'hï, the Immortals, although
no one had ever heard before that they lived under Nïkwäsï' mound.

The Nûñnë'hï poured out by hundreds, armed and painted for the

*p. 337*

fight, and the most curious thing about it all was that they became
invisible as soon as they were fairly outside of the settlement, so that
although the enemy saw the glancing arrow or the rushing tomahawk, and
felt the stroke, he could not see who sent it. Before such invisible
foes the invaders soon had to retreat, going first south along the ridge
to where joins the main ridge which separates the French Broad from the
Tuckasegee, and then turning with it to the northeast. As they retreated
they tried to shield themselves behind rocks and trees, but the Nûñnë'hï
arrows went around the rocks and killed them from the other side, and
they could find no hiding place. All along the ridge they fell, until
when they reached the head of Tuckasegee not more than half a dozen were
left alive, and in despair they sat down and cried out for mercy. Ever
since then the Cherokee have called the place Dayûlsûñ'yï, "Where they
cried." Then the Nûñnë'hï chief told them they had deserved their
punishment for attacking a peaceful tribe, and he spared their lives and
told them to go home and take the news to their people. This was the
Indian custom, always to spare a few to carry back the news of defeat.
They went home toward the north and the Nûñnë'hï went back to the mound.

And they are still there, because, in the last war, when a strong party
of Federal troops came to surprise a handful of Confederates posted
there they saw so many soldiers guarding the town that they were afraid
and went away without making an attack.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

There is another story, that once while all the warriors of a certain
town were off on a hunt, or at a dance in another settlement, one old
man was chopping wood on the side of the ridge when suddenly a party of
the enemy came upon him--Shawano, Seneca, or some other tribe. Throwing
his hatchet at the nearest one, he turned and ran for the house to get
his gun and make the best defense that he might. On coining out at once
with the gun he was surprised to find a large body of strange warriors
driving back the enemy. It was no time for questions, and taking his
place with the others, they fought hard until the enemy was pressed back
up the creek and finally broke and retreated across the mountain. When
it was over and there was time to breathe again, the old man turned to
thank his new friends, but found that he was alone--they had disappeared
as though the mountain had swallowed them. Then he knew that they were
the Nûñnë'hï, who had come to help their friends, the Cherokee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 81. Tsul'kälû, The Slant-eyed Giant](motc081)
