[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc024.md) 
[Next](motc026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 25. Flint Visits The Rabbit

In the old days Täwi'skälä (Flint) lived up in the mountains, and all
the animals hated him because he had helped to kill so many of them.
They used to get together to talk over means to put him out of the way,
but everybody was afraid to venture near his house until the Rabbit, who
was the boldest leader among them, offered to go after Flint and try to
kill him. They told him where to find him, and the Rabbit set out and at
last came to Flint's house.

*p. 275*

Flint was standing at his door when the Rabbit came up and said,
sneeringly, "*Siyu'!* Hello! Are you the fellow they call Flint?" "Yes;
that's what they call me," answered Flint. "Is this where you live?"
"Yes; this is where I live." All this time the Rabbit was looking about
the place trying to study out some plan to take Flint off his guard. He
had expected Flint to invite him into the house, so he waited a little
while, but when Flint made no move, he said, "Well, my name is Rabbit;
I've heard a good deal about you, so I came to invite you to come and
see me."

Flint wanted to know where the Rabbit's house was, and he told him it
was down in the broom-grass field near the river. So Flint promised to
make him a visit in a few days. "Why not come now and have supper with
me?" said the Rabbit, and after a little coaxing Flint agreed and the
two started down the mountain together.

When they came near the Rabbit's hole the Rabbit said, "There is my
house, but in summer I generally stay outside here where it is cooler."
So he made a fire, and they had their supper on the grass. When it was
over, Flint stretched out to rest and the Rabbit got some heavy sticks
and his knife and cut out a mallet and wedge. Flint looked up and asked
what that was for. "Oh," said the Rabbit, "I like to be doing something,
and they may come handy." So Flint lay down again, and pretty soon he
was sound asleep. The Rabbit spoke to him once or twice to make sure,
but there was no answer. Then he came over to Flint and with one good
blow of the mallet he drove the sharp stake into his body and ran with
all his might for his own hole; but before he reached it there was a
loud explosion, and pieces of flint flew all about. That is why we find
flint in so many places now. One piece struck the Rabbit from behind and
cut him just as he dived into his hole. He sat listening until
everything seemed quiet again. Then he put his head out to look around,
but just at that moment another piece fell and struck him on the lip and
split it, as we still see it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. How The Deer Got His Horns](motc026.md)
