[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc042) 
[Next](motc044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 43. The Race Between The Crane And The Hummingbird

The Hummingbird and the Crane were both in love with a pretty woman. She
preferred the Hummingbird, who was as handsome as the Crane was awkward,
but the Crane was so persistent that in order to get rid of him she
finally told him he must challenge the other to a race and she would
marry the winner. The Hummingbird was so swift--almost like a flash of
lightning--and the Crane so slow and heavy, that she felt sure the
Hummingbird would win. She did not know the Crane could fly all night.

They agreed to start from her house and fly around the circle of the
world to the beginning, and the one who came in first would marry the
woman. At the word the Hummingbird darted off like an arrow and was out
of sight in a moment, leaving his rival to follow heavily behind. He
flew all day, and when evening came and he stopped to

*p. 291*

roost for the night he was far ahead. But the Crane flew steadily all
night long, passing the Hummingbird soon after midnight and going on
until he came to a creek and stopped to rest about daylight. The
Hummingbird woke up in the morning and flew on again, thinking how
easily he would win the race, until he reached the creek and there found
the Crane spearing tadpoles, with his long bill, for breakfast. He was
very much surprised and wondered how this could have happened, but he
flew swiftly by and soon left the Crane out of sight again.

The Crane finished his breakfast and started on, and when evening came
he kept on as before. This time it was hardly midnight when he passed
the Hummingbird asleep on a limb, and in the morning he had finished his
breakfast before the other came up. The next day he gained a little
more, and on the fourth day he was spearing tadpoles for dinner when the
Hummingbird passed him. On the fifth and sixth days it was late in the
afternoon before the Hummingbird came up, and on the morning of the
seventh day the Crane was ' a whole night's travel ahead. He took his
time at breakfast and then fixed himself up as nicely as he could at the
creek and came in at the starting place where the woman lived, early in
the morning. When the Hummingbird arrived in the afternoon he found he
had lost the race, but the woman declared she would never have such an
ugly fellow as the Crane for a husband, so she stayed single.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 44. The Owl Gets Married](motc044)
