[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc007.md) 
[Next](motc009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 8. The Moon And The Thunders.

The Sun was a young woman and lived in the East, while her brother, the
Moon. lived in the West. The girl had a lover who used to come every
month in the dark of the moon to court her. He would come at night, and
leave before daylight, and although she talked with him she could not
see his face in the dark, and he would not tell her his name, until she
was wondering all the time who it could be. At last she hit upon a plan
to find out, so the next time he came, as they were sitting together in
the dark of the *âsi*, she slyly dipped her hand into the cinders and
ashes of the fireplace and rubbed it over his face, saying, "Your face
is cold; you must have suffered from the wind," and pretending to be
very sorry for him, but he did not know that she had ashes on her hand.
After a while he left her and went away again.

The next night when the Moon came up in the sky his face was covered
with spots, and then his sister knew he was the one who had been

*p. 256*

coming to see her. He was so much ashamed to have her know it that he
kept as far away as he could at the other end of the sky all the night.
Ever since he tries to keep a long way behind the Sun, and when he does
sometimes have to come near her in the west he makes himself as thin as
a ribbon so that he can hardly be seen.

Some old people say that the moon is a ball which was thrown up against
the sky in a game a long time ago. They say that two towns were playing
against each other, but one of them had the best runners and had almost
won the game, when the leader of the other side picked up the ball with
his hand--a thing that is not allowed in the game--and tried to throw it
to the goal, but it struck against the solid sky vault and was fastened
there, to remind players never to cheat. When the moon looks small and
pale it is because some one has handled the ball unfairly, and for this
reason they formerly played only at the time of a full moon.

When the sun or moon is eclipsed it is because a great frog up in the
sky is trying to swallow it. Everybody knows this, even the Creeks and
the other tribes, and in the olden times, eighty or a hundred years ago,
before the great medicine men were all dead, whenever they saw the sun
grow dark the people would come together and fire guns and beat the
drum, and in a little while this would frighten off the great frog and
the sun would be all right again.

The common people call both Sun and Moon *Nûñdä*, one being "Nûñdä that
dwells in the day" and the other "Nûñdä that dwells in the night," but
the priests call the Sun *Su'tälidihï'*, "Six-killer," and the Moon
*Ge'\`yägu'ga*, though nobody knows now what this word means, or why
they use these names. Sometimes people ask the Moon not to let it rain
or snow.

The great Thunder and his sons, the two Thunder boys, live far in the
west above the sky vault. The lightning and the rainbow are their
beautiful dress. The priests pray to the Thunder and call him the Red
Man, because that is the brightest color of his dress. There are other
Thunders that live lower down, in the cliffs and mountains, and under
waterfalls, and travel on invisible bridges from one high peak to
another where they have their town houses. The great Thunders above the
sky are kind and helpful when we pray to them, but these others are
always plotting mischief. One must not point at the rainbow, or one's
finger will swell at the lower joint.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. What The Stars Are Like](motc009.md)
