[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc035) 
[Next](motc037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 36. The Ball Game Of The Birds And Animals

Once the animals challenged the birds to a great ballplay, and the birds
accepted. The leaders made the arrangements and fixed the day, and when
the time came both parties met at the place for the ball dance, the
animals on a smooth grassy bottom near the river and the birds in the
treetops over by the ridge. The captain of the animals was the Bear, who
was so strong and heavy that he could pull down anyone who got in his
way. All along the road to the ball ground he was tossing up great logs
to show his strength and boasting of what he would do to the birds when
the game began. The Terrapin, too--not the little one we have now, but
the great original Terrapin--was with the animals. His shell was so
hard, that the heaviest blows could not hurt him, and he kept rising up
on his hind legs and dropping heavily again to the ground, bragging that
this was the way he would crush any bird that tried to take the ball
from him. Then there was the Deer, who could outrun every other animal.
Altogether it was a fine company.

The birds had the Eagle for their captain, with the Hawk and the great
Tlä'nuwä, all swift and strong of flight, but still they were a little
afraid of the animals. The dance was over and they were all pruning
their feathers up in the trees and waiting for the captain to give the
word when here came two little things hardly larger than field mice
climbing up the tree in which sat perched the bird captain. At last they
reached the top, and creeping along the limb to where the Eagle captain
sat they asked to be allowed to join in the game. The captain looked at
them, and seeing that they were four-footed, he asked why they did not
go to the animals, where they belonged. The little things said that they
had, but the animals had made fun of them and driven them off because
they were so small. Then the bird captain pitied them and wanted to take
them.

But how could they join the birds when they had no wings? The Eagle, the
Hawk, and the others consulted, and at last it was decided

*p. 287*

to make some wings for the little fellows. They tried for a long time to
think of something that might do, until someone happened to remember the
drum they had used in the dance. The head was of ground-hog skin and
maybe they could cut off a corner and make wings of it. So they took two
pieces of leather from the drumhead and cut them into shape for wings,
and stretched them with cane splints and fastened them on to the
forelegs of one of the small animals, and in this way came *Tla'mehä*,
the Bat. They threw the ball to him and told him to catch it, and by the
way he dodged and circled about, keeping the ball always in the air and
never letting it fall to the ground, the birds soon saw that he would be
one of their best men.

Now they wanted to fix the other little animal, but they had used up all
their leather to make wings for the Bat, and there was no time to send
for more. Somebody said that they might do it by stretching his skin, so
two large birds took hold from opposite sides with their strong bills,
and by pulling at his fur for several minutes they managed to stretch
the skin on each side between the fore and hind feet, until they had
Tewa, the Flying Squirrel. To try him the bird captain threw up the
ball, when the Flying Squirrel sprang off the limb after it, caught it
in his teeth and carried it through the air to another tree nearly
across the bottom.

When they were all ready the signal was given and the game began, but
almost at the first toss the Flying Squirrel caught the ball and carried
it up a tree, from which he threw it to the birds, who kept it in the
air for some time until it dropped. The Bear rushed to get it, but the
Martin darted after it and threw it to the Bat, who was flying near the
ground, and by his dodging and doubling kept it out of the way of even
the Deer, until he finally threw it in between the posts and won the
game for the birds.

The Bear and the Terrapin, who had boasted so of what they would do,
never got a chance even to touch the ball. For saving the ball when it
dropped, the birds afterwards gave the Martin a gourd in which to build
his nest, and he still has it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 37. How The Turkey Got His Beard](motc037)
