[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index.md) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc026.md) 
[Next](motc028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 27. Why The Deer's Teeth Are Blunt

The Rabbit felt sore because the Deer had won the horns (see the last
story), and resolved to get even. One day soon after the race he
stretched a large grapevine across the trail and gnawed it nearly in two
in the middle. Then he went back a piece, took a good run, and jumped up
at the vine. He kept on running and jumping up at the vine until the
Deer came along and asked him what he was doing?

"Don't you see?" says the Rabbit. "I'm so strong that I can bite through
that grapevine at one jump."

The Deer could hardly believe this, and wanted to see it done.. So the
Rabbit ran back, made a tremendous spring, and bit through the vine
where he had gnawed it before. The Deer, when he saw that, said, "Well,
I can do it if you can." So the Rabbit stretched a larger grapevine
across the trail, but without gnawing it in the middle.

Deer ran back as he had seen the Rabbit do, made a spring, and struck
the grapevine right in the center, but it only flew back and threw him
over on his head. He tried again and again, until he was all bruised and
bleeding.

"Let me see your teeth," at last said the Rabbit. So the Deer showed him
his teeth, which were long like a wolf's teeth, but not very sharp.

"No wonder you can't do it," says the Rabbit; "your teeth are too blunt
to bite anything. Let me sharpen them for you like mine. My teeth are so
sharp that I can cut through a stick just like a knife." And he showed
him a black locust twig, of which rabbits gnaw the young shoots, which
he had shaved off as well as a knife could do it, in regular rabbit
fashion. The Deer thought that just the thing. So the Rabbit got a hard
stone with rough edges and filed and filed away at the Deer's teeth
until they were worn down almost to the gums.

*p. 277*

"It hurts," said the Deer; but the Rabbit said it always hurt a little
when they began to get sharp; so the Deer kept quiet.

"Now try it," at last said the Rabbit. So the Deer tried again, but this
time he could not bite at all.

"Now you've paid for your horns," said the Rabbit, as he jumped away
through the bushes. Ever since then the Deer's teeth are so blunt that
he can not chew anything but grass and leaves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. What Became Of The Rabbit](motc028.md)
