[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc033) 
[Next](motc035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 34. The Wolf's Revenge--the Wolf And The Dog

Kana'tï had wolves to hunt for him, because they are good hunters and
never fail. He once sent out two wolves at once. One went to the east
and did not return. The other went to the north, and when he returned at
night and did not find his fellow he knew he must be in trouble and
started after him. After traveling on some time he found his brother
lying nearly dead beside a great greensnake (*sälikwa'yâ'yï*) which had
attacked him. The snake itself was too badly wounded to crawl away, and
the angry wolf, who had magic powers, taking out several hairs from his
own whiskers, shot them into the body of the snake and killed it. He
then hurried back to Kana'tï, who sent the Terrapin after a great doctor
who lived in the west to save the wounded wolf. The wolf went back to
help his brother and by his magic powers he had him cured long before
the doctor came from the west, because the Terrapin was such a slow
traveler and the doctor had to prepare his roots before he started.

\*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

In the beginning, the people say, the Dog was put on the mountain and
the Wolf beside the fire. When the winter came the Dog could not stand
the cold, so he came down to the settlement and drove the Wolf from the
fire. The Wolf ran to the mountains, where it suited him so well that he
prospered and increased, until after a while he ventured down again and
killed some animals in the settlements. The people got together and
followed and killed him, but his brothers came from the mountains and
took such revenge that ever since the people have been afraid to hurt a
wolf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. The Bird Tribes](motc035)
