[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc004) 
[Next](motc006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 5. The Daughter Of The Sun

The Sun lived on the other side of the sky vault, but her daughter lived
in the middle of the sky, directly above the earth, and every day as the
Sun was climbing along the sky arch to the west she used to stop at her
daughter's house for dinner.

Now, the Sun hated the people on the earth, because they could never
look straight at her without screwing up their faces. She said to her
brother, the Moon, "My grandchildren are ugly; they grin all over their
faces when they look at me." But the Moon said, "I like my younger
brothers; I think they are very handsome "--because they always smiled
pleasantly when they saw him in the sky at night, for his rays were
milder.

The Sun was jealous and planned to kill all the people, so every day
when she got near her daughter's house she sent down such sultry rays
that there was a great fever and the people died by hundreds, until
everyone had lost some friend and there was fear that no one would be
left. They went for help to the Little Men, who said the only way to
save themselves was to kill the Sun.

The Little Men made medicine and changed two men to snakes, the
Spreading-adder and the Copperhead, and sent them to watch near the door
of the daughter of the Sun to bite the old Sun when she came next day.
They went together and bid near the house until the Sun came, but when
the Spreading-adder was about to spring, the bright light blinded him
and he could only spit out yellow slime, as he does to this day when he
tries to bite. She called him a nasty thing and

*p. 253*

went by into the house, and the Copperhead crawled off without trying to
do anything.

So the people still died from the heat, and they went to the Little Men
a second time for help. The Little Men made medicine again and changed
one man into the great Uktena and another into the Rattlesnake and sent
them to watch near the house and kill the old Sun when she came for
dinner. They made the Uktena very large, with horns on his head, and
everyone thought he would be sure to do the work, but the Rattlesnake
was so quick and eager that he got ahead and coiled up just outside the
house, and when the Sun's daughter opened the door to look out for her
mother, he sprang up and bit her and she fell dead in the doorway. He
forgot to wait for the old Sun, but went back to the people, and the
Uktena was so very angry that he went back, too. Since then we pray to
the rattlesnake and do not kill him, because he is kind and never tries
to bite if we do not disturb him. The Uktena grew angrier all the time
and very dangerous, so that if he even looked at a man, that man's
family would die. After a long time the people held a council and
decided that he was too dangerous to be with them, so they sent him up
to Gälûñ'lätï, and he is there now. The Spreading-adder, the Copperhead,
the Rattlesnake, and the Uktena were all men.

When the Sun found her daughter dead, she went into the house and
grieved, and the people did not die any more, but now the world was dark
all the time, because the Sun would not come out. They went again to the
Little Men, and these told them that if they wanted the Sun to come out
again they must bring back her daughter from Tsûsginâ'ï, the Ghost
country, in Us'ûñhi'yï, the Darkening land in the west. They chose seven
men to go, and gave each a sourwood rod a hand-breadth long. The Little
Men told them they must take a box with them, and when they got to
Tsûsginâ'ï they would find all the ghosts at a dance. They must stand
outside the circle, and when the young woman passed in the dance they
must strike her with the rods and she would fall to the ground. Then
they must put her into the box and bring her back to her mother, but
they must be very sure not to open the box, even a little way, until
they were home again.

They took the rods and a box and traveled seven days to the west until
they came to the Darkening land. There were a great many people there,
and they were having a dance just as if they were at home in the
settlements. The young woman was in the outside circle, and as she swung
around to where the seven men were standing, one struck her with his rod
and she turned her head and saw him. As she came around the second time
another touched her with his rod, and then another and another, until at
the seventh round she fell out of the ring, and they put her into the
box and closed the lid fast. The other ghosts seemed never to notice
what had happened.

*p. 254*

They took up the box and started home toward the east. In a little while
the girl came to life again and begged to be let out of the box, but
they made no answer and went on. Soon she called again and said she was
hungry, but still they made no answer and went on. After another while
she spoke again and called for a drink and pleaded so that it was very
hard to listen to her, but the men who carried the box said nothing and
still went on. When at last they were very near home, she called again
and begged them to raise the lid just a little, because she was
smothering. They were afraid she was really dying now, so they lifted
the lid a little to give her air, but as they did so there was a
fluttering sound inside and something flew past them into the thicket
and they heard a redbird cry, "*kwish! kwish! kwish!*" in the bushes.
They shut down the lid and went on again to the settlements, but when
they got there and opened the box it was empty.

So we know the Redbird is the daughter of the Sun, and if the men had
kept the box closed, as the Little Men told them to do, they would have
brought her home safely, and we could bring back our other friends also
from the Ghost country, but now when they die we can never bring them
back.

The Sun had been glad when they started to the Ghost country, but when
they came back without her daughter she grieved and cried, "My daughter,
my daughter," and wept until her tears made a flood upon the earth, and
the people were afraid the world would be drowned. They held another
council, and sent their handsomest young men and women to amuse her so
that she would stop crying. They danced before the Sun and sang their
best songs, but for a long time she kept her face covered and paid no
attention, until at last the drummer suddenly changed the song, when she
lifted up her face, and was so pleased at the sight that she forgot her
grief and smiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. How They Brought Back The Tobacco](motc006)
