[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc005) 
[Next](motc007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 6. How They Brought Back The Tobacco

In the beginning of the world, when people and animals were all the
same, there was only one tobacco plant, to which they all came for their
tobacco until the Dagûl\`kû geese stole it and carried it far away to
the south. The people were suffering without it, and there was one old
woman who grew so thin and weak that everybody said she would soon die
unless she could get tobacco to keep her alive.

Different animals offered to go for it, one after another, the larger
ones first and then the smaller ones, but the Dagûl\`kû saw and killed
every one before he could get to the plant. After the others the little
Mole tried to reach it by going under the ground, but the Dagûl\`kû saw
his track and killed him as he came out.

At last the Hummingbird offered, but the others said he was entirely too
small and might as well stay at home. He begged them to let him try, so
they showed him a plant in a field and told him to let them see

*p. 255*

how he would go about it. The next moment he was gone and they saw him
sitting on the plant, and then in a moment he was back again, but no one
had seen him going or coming, because he was so swift. "This is the way
I'll do," said the Hummingbird, so they let him try.

He flew off to the east, and when he came in sight of the tobacco the
Dagûl\`kû were watching all about it, but they could not see him because
he was so small and flew so swiftly. He darted down on the
plant--*tsa!*--and snatched off the top with the leaves and seeds, and
was off again before the Dagûl\`kû knew what had happened. Before he got
home with the tobacco the old woman had fainted and they thought she was
dead, but he blew the smoke into her nostrils, and with a cry of
"*Tsâ'lû!* \[Tobacco!\]" she opened her eyes and was alive again.

#### SECOND VERSION

The people had tobacco in the beginning, but they had used it all, and
there was great suffering for want of it. There was one old man so old
that he had to be kept alive by smoking, and as his son did not want to
see him die he decided to go himself to try and get some more. The
tobacco country was far in the south, with high mountains all around it,
and the passes were guarded, so that it was very hard to get into it,
but the young man was a conjurer and was not afraid. He traveled
southward until he came to the mountains on the border of the tobacco
country. Then he opened his medicine bag and took out a hummingbird skin
and put it over himself like a dress. Now he was a hummingbird and flew
over the mountains to the tobacco field and pulled some of the leaves
and seed and put them into his medicine bag. He was so small and swift
that the guards, whoever they were, did not see him, and when he had
taken as much as he could carry he flew back over the mountains in the
same way. Then he took off the hummingbird skin and put it into his
medicine bag, and was a man again. He started home, and on his way came
to a tree that had a hole in the trunk, like a door, near the first
branches, and a very pretty woman was looking out from it. He stopped
and tried to climb the tree, but although he was a good climber he found
that he always slipped back. He put on a pair of medicine moccasins from
his pouch, and then he could climb the tree, but when he reached the
first branches he looked up and the hole was still as far away as
before. He climbed higher and higher, but every time he looked up the
hole seemed to be farther than before, until at last he was tired and
came down again. When he reached home he found his father very weak. but
still alive, and one draw at the pipe made him strong again. The people
planted the seed and have had tobacco ever since.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. The Journey To The Sunrise](motc007)
