[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc051) 
[Next](motc053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 52. The Red Man And The Uktena

Two brothers went bunting together, and when they came to a good camping
place in the mountains they made a fire, and while one gathered bark to
put up a shelter the other started up the creek to look for a deer. Soon
he heard a noise on the top of the ridge as if two animals were
fighting. He hurried through the bushes to see what it might be, and
when he came to the spot he found a great uktena coiled around a man and
choking him to death. The man was fighting for his life, and called out
to the hunter: "Help me, nephew; he is your enemy as well as mine." The
hunter took good aim, and, drawing the arrow to the head, sent it
through the body of the uktena, so that the blood spouted from the hole.
The snake loosed its coils with a snapping noise, and went tumbling down
the ridge into the valley, tearing up the earth like a water spout as it
rolled..

The stranger stood up, and it was the Asga'ya Gi'gägeï, the Red Man of
the Lightning. He said to the hunter: "You have helped me, and now I
will reward you, and give you a medicine so that you can always find
game." They waited until it was dark, and then went down the ridge to
where the dead uktena had rolled, but by this time

*p. 301*

the birds and insects had eaten the body and only the bones were left.
In one place were flashes of light coming up from the ground, and on
digging here, just under the surface, the Red Man found a scale of the
uktena. Next he went over to a tree that had been struck by lightning,
and gathering a handful of splinters he made a fire and burned the
uktena scale to a coal. He wrapped this in a piece of deerskin and gave
it to the hunter, saying: "As long as you keep this you can always kill
game." Then he told the hunter that when he went back to camp he must
hang up the medicine on a tree outside, because it was very strong and
dangerous. He told him also that when he went into the cabin he would
find his brother lying inside nearly dead on account of the presence of
the uktena's scale, but he must take a small piece of cane, which the
Red Man gave him, and scrape a little of it into water and give it to
his brother to drink and he would be well again. Then the Red Man was
gone, and the hunter could not see where he went. He returned to camp
alone, and found his brother very sick, but soon cured him with the
medicine from the cane, and that, day and the next, and every day after,
he found game whenever he went for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 53. The Hunter And The Uksu'hï](motc053)
