[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc009) 
[Next](motc011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 10. Origin Of The Pleiades And The Pine

Long ago, when the world was new, there were seven boys who used to
spend all their time down by the townhouse playing the gatayû'stï game,
rolling a stone wheel along the ground and sliding a curved stick after
it to strike it. Their mothers scolded, but it did no good, so one day
they collected some gatayû'stï stones and boiled them in the pot with
the corn for dinner. When the boys came home hungry their mothers dipped
out the stones and said, "Since you like the gatayû'stï better than the
cornfield, take the stones now for your dinner."

The boys were very angry, and went down to the townhouse, saying, "As
our mothers treat us this way, let us go where we shall never trouble
them any more." They began a dance--some say it was the Feather
dance-and went round and round the townhouse, praying to the spirits to
help them. At last their mothers were afraid something was wrong and
went out to look for them. They saw the boys still dancing around the
townhouse, and as they watched they noticed that their feet were off the
earth, and that with every round they rose higher and higher in the air.
They ran to get their children, but it was too late, for then, were
already above the roof of the townhouse--all but one, whose mother
managed to pull him down with the gatayû'stï pole, but he struck the
ground with such force that he sank into it and the earth closed over
him.

The other six circled higher and higher until they went up to the

*p. 259*

sky, where we see them now as the Pleiades, which the Cherokee still
call Ani'tsutsä (The Boys). The people grieved long after them, but the
mother whose boy had gone into the ground came every morning and every
evening to cry over the spot until the earth was damp with her tears. At
last a little green shoot sprouted up and grew day by day until it
became the tall tree that we call now the pine, and the pine is of the
same nature as the stars and holds in itself the same bright light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The Milky Way](motc011)
