[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](motc073) 
[Next](motc075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 74. The Tsundige'wï

Once some young men of the Cherokee set out to see what was in the world
and traveled south until they came to a tribe of little people called
*Tsundige'wï*, with very queer shaped bodies, hardly tall enough to
reach up to a man's knee, who had no houses, but lived in nests scooped
in the sand and covered over with dried grass. The little fellows were
so weak and puny that they could not fight at all, and were in constant
terror from the wild geese and other birds that used to come in great
flocks from the south to make war upon them.

Just at the time that the travelers got there they found the little men
in great fear, because there was a strong wind blowing from the south
and it blew white feathers and down along the sand, so that the
Tsundige'wï knew their enemies were coming not far behind. The Cherokee
asked them why, they did not defend themselves, but they said they could
not, because they did not know how. There was no time to make bows and
arrows, but the travelers told them to take sticks for clubs, and showed
them where to strike the birds on the necks to kill them.

The wind blew for several days, and at last the birds came, so many that
they were like a great cloud in the air, and alighted on the sands. The
little men ran to their nests, and the birds followed and stuck in their
long bills to pull them out and eat them. This time. though, the
Tsundige'wï had their clubs, and they struck the birds on the neck, as
the Cherokee had shown them, and killed so many that at last the others
were glad to spread their wings and fly away again to the south.

The little men thanked the Cherokee for their help and gave them the
best they had until the travelers went on to see the other tribes. They
heard afterwards that the birds came again several times, but that the
Tsundige'wï always drove them off with their clubs, until a flock of
sandhill cranes came. They were so tall that the little men could not
reach up to strike them on the neck, and so at last the cranes killed
them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 75. Origin Of The Bear: The Bear Songs](motc075)
