[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci02)  [Next](mrci04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### *San Luis Rey*.

The language of this mission is called Lamancus. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

Fights arise over any sort of trifle, and they readily kill one another.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

They throw seeds, beads, and other objects into the fire in which they
burn their dead.

 

We have not observed any other idolatry among these Indians than that
connected with certain birds which they call azuts, which really are a
kind of very large vulture. <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) At the
right time, while still small, they take them from the nest (according
to what they say there are never more than two), and he who has captured
them presents them with many carabanas to the chief of the village. The
chief raises them with much attention and care until they are grown up;
when, being of good size, the Indians make their great festival with the
following ceremonies.

The night before the festival they put the azuts or vultures in the
middle of a large circle of themselves. While they dance and sing a very
miste song, and while old men and old women are blowing out towards all
points of the compass, and making a thousand strange faces and grimaces,
they very slowly kill the birds. When they are dead, they extinguish the
fire and all break out in wails, shouts, and outcries, as if they were
crazy, waving firebrands and striking blows as if they were furious, in
such a way as to cause horror and confusion. After a considerable space
of time during which this extravagance lasts, they again light (atizar)
the fire. They skin the birds and throw their flesh on the fire.
Meanwhile they begin to sing again, and with somewhat more suavity. They
keep the feathers of the birds with much escovra and veneration until
the following day, when they make a sort of skirt of them. This skirt
they put on a boy during the days that the ceremony lasts. Wearing this
skirt, he dances in

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

the middle of a great circle of Indians, who make turns (dan vueltas,
make short excursions) in time to the measure to which the boy is
dancing in the center. They make this dance at intervals, and other boys
who have been assigned to this take the place of the first boy. After
the ceremony the chief of the village keeps the skirts with great
veneration or a species of idolatry. We made the most careful efforts to
ascertain the purpose of this ritual, but we have never been able to
extract anything else than that thus their ancestors made it.

 

In order to win in their games of obligations (empeño) they drink a
liquid which they call mani, made from the root of toloache pounded and
mixed with water. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) This drink
renders them inebriated, and at times they give forth what they have in
the stomach. In the state of intelligence, from which they depart with
this nonsense, they say that because the other fasted and drank
more. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

 

These Indians do not use any sort of unusual drink, other than that made
from toloache or mani. This drink does them so much damage, that if they
drink a quantity, and do not vomit, they die in their intoxication,
foaming at the mouth.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

When there is an eclipse of the sun or of the moon they shout with very
loud outcries, making noises by clapping their hands and in other ways.
On being asked the reason, they have always answered us that they
believe that an animal was trying to eat the sun or the moon, and that
they did these extreme things in order to frighten him, thinking that if
he ate them they would all perish. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

 

The method observed by these Indians in their illnesses is as follows:
For external matters, such as wounds, they make a tight bandage above
the wound, with the end that the illness may not go up higher. In
addition they most commonly use one of the following remedies: a plaster
of tule leaves, which they call pibut, cooked and chewed; at other times
they use the wild onion, queheyaguis, chewed and made into a plaster.
There is another herb which occurs on the seashore. This they burn and
put the ashes on the wound. We do not know the name of this plant, but
they call it chaeca. If the wound is a burn (quemadosa) they follow the
same treatment as regards the ligature, but in addition they put on
powdered prickly pear (tuna) leaves, naboi, or more often powdered
excrement of the jackrabbit or rabbit, tosoyat posa. Others use leaves
of sage (salvia), cosil. If the trouble is the bite of a poisonous
animal, they use, again in addition to the ligature, a stone similar to
lapis, xaclul. This stone they soak in the mouth, and when it has become
wet they apply some of the moisture to the wound. They do the same for
wounds from poisoned arrows. If the sickness is a swelling, they still
do not forget the ligature, and in addition anoint with ointment or oil
of the seed of the gourd (chilicote), ennuix, until it rabierta or
esparrama. In the case of internal illnesses they tie up very tight the
part of the body which most hurts them, which we have observed to be
most commonly the capa. They use also certain powdered roots, which they
drink mixed with water and with the following: the root of the mangle
(mangrove?), hechis; of the elder (sahuco), crita; of the wild rose of
Castile, husla; of wild

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

cane, hiquix; and of the plant called hial. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) They say that these drinks are all
purgatives, and the root of the mangle also very provocative to
vomiting. They do not make use of blood-letting. They have certain
doctors (curanderos), who suck the sick person wherever he feels most
pain, and presently they extract from the mouth blood, or sometimes
pebbles, sticks, bones, or bits of skin, which they have deceitfully
provided themselves with before. Making the patient believe that this
was the sickness, they presently blow towards the four winds, and the
sick man remains well satisfied, although sicker than before. They make
him keep diet so rigorously that ordinarily they do not give him
anything to eat unless he asks for it. They also practice the
superstitions of dances, songs, and breathings for the sick, while a
wizard makes a thousand faces over him. Thus, when the first remedies do
not avail, and one of these medicine-men is employed, he does not give
over until he has killed the patient and made of him a martyr to the
demon. In short, in the matter of their superstitions regarding
sickness, idolatry, and witchcraft, they are so rare (raros), full of
deceit, and reserved, that although I have been among them since the
foundation of this mission, that which I can most readily manifest
regarding these matters, is my ignorance of them. They never confess
more than what they cannot deny.

 

They have an idea of a rational soul, which they call chamson, and
believe that when they die this goes below to tolmar, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) where all come together and live forever
in much happiness. With this they have, however, no idea of reward or
punishment. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](mrci03.htm#fr_14) With San Luis Rey we
enter Shoshonean territory, in which the three following missions were
also situated. The Luiseño are the only group of California Indians
besides the Diegueño to have been brought under mission control and to
survive in any numbers. The account here given is probably from the pen
of Father Antonio Peyri, who was for many years identified with San Luis
Rey. Father Geronimo Boscana, author of the important account of the
religion and customs of the neighboring San [Juan](errata.htm#0)
Capistrano Indians (in A. Robinson, Life in California, 1846), was at
San Luis Rey from 1812 to 1813. The name Lamancus is not known. The only
native name ordinarily given for this language, or the allied dialect of
San Juan Capistrano, is Ne-tela, my speech, or Cham-tela, our speech.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[7:16](mrci03.htm#fr_15) Azuts are really not
vultures, that is, condors, but eagles. Ashwut is Luiseño for eagle,
yungavaiwot for condor. The author's Luiseño and Diegueño informants
always mentioned the eagle as the bird connected with this ceremony.
Boscana, however, describes the bird as much resembling the common
buzzard, but larger, which clearly makes it the condor. It is not
unlikely that both species were used. The annual eagle ceremony, the
central feature of which is the slow pressing to death of an eagle in
the course of the night, has already been mentioned as one form of
mourning ritual practiced by most of the mission tribes of Southern
California. Boscana, in the dialect of San Juan Capistrano, calls both
ceremony and bird panes. The dance in the eagle-feather skirt, paelt,
Luiseño palat, is also described by Boscana. A Luiseño dance made in
remembrance of a chief, in which one man wearing the palat dances alone,
is called Morahash. The boys here described as wearing the eagle-feather
skirt were probably initiates of the puberty ceremonials.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[8:17](mrci03.htm#fr_16) The drinking of *Datura
meteloides*, the common jimson-weed, Spanish toloache, is the most
important act of an initiation ceremony for boys, held formerly by
probably all the Indians of California that today are known as Mission
Indians. A somewhat similar ceremony is practiced by the Yokuts Indians
of the southern San Joaquin valley. The Mohave and Chumash used the
plant for religious purposes, but are not known to have employed it
specifically in connection with an initiation ceremony. The religious
importance of jimson-weed among the Indians of Southern California, may
be judged from the fact that almost all their public rituals are either
mourning ceremonies, or puberty initiation ceremonies related to this
one. The effect of jimson-weed is sometimes loosely compared to that of
alcohol, but differs in that it quickly produces unconsciousness and
visions, and if taken in excess not infrequently causes death, as our
missionary informant states. In the jimson-weed ceremony the young men
received knowledge of the religious beliefs and practices of their
tribe. The plant was also used as a medicine, especially in the case of
broken bones. The Cahuilla say that it was taken by them for practical
motives like that here mentioned, namely, to become rich and be
successful in worldly matters. The plant is called mani, manit, or
manich by all the Shoshoneans of Southern California, except the
Cahuilla, who name it kiksawal.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[8:18](mrci03.htm#fr_17) The manuscript reading
is confused here, apparently through an omission: cuya bevida los pone
ebrios y veces provocan quanto tienen en el estomago, en la
inteligencia, que se con este disparate pierden, dicen que porque el
otro ayunó y bevió mas.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[9:19](mrci03.htm#fr_18) Compare the same
statement below regarding the San Juan Capistrano Indians, and what
Boscana says on page 298. Compare also the prayer or formula sung by the
Tachi Yokuts at an eclipse of the sun, present series, II, 374.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[10:20](mrci03.htm#fr_19) The Luiseño dictionary
of P. S. Sparkman gives pivut, a rush, *Juncus mertensianus;* kashil,
white sage; navut, prickly pear; enwish, chilicothe, *Echinocystis
macrocarpa;* kutpat, elder; ushla, wild rose; huikish, *Elymus
condensatus*, a species of cane used for arrows.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[10:21](mrci03.htm#fr_20) Chamson means "our
heart," from cham-, the possessive prefix of the first person plural,
and -sun or -shun, heart. The analogous term nu-shun was given the
writer by a Luiseño informant as meaning my soul, "alma mia." Boscana,
317, gives pu-suni, his heart, as the San Juan Capistrano term for soul.
The Sparkman Luiseño dictionary translates tolmal as a place in the
center of the earth where some people go after death.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[10:22](mrci03.htm#fr_21) In which they agree
with almost all Indians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: San Juan Capistrano](mrci04)
