[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mrci06)  [Next](mrci08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Mission Record of the California Indians*, by A.L. Kroeber, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### *Santa Barbara*. <span id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36)

They bury the dead with all their pots and other poor jewels. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

They do not have chiefs (caziques), but in every village or town there
are one or more who are called captains (capitanes). Not, however, that
they have any authority over the rest, nor do these obey them or
recognize them in any matter. Only he \[is chief\] who has charge of
gathering the people when there is a prospect of a fight with another
village, and to said chiefs the rest give beads at the dances or feasts
which they sometimes make.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[15:36](mrci07.htm#fr_36) With Santa Barbara the
Shoshoneans are left behind, and the territory of the Chumash is
entered. The missions of Santa Ynez and San Luis Obispo, as well as
those of San Buenaventura and Purisima which are not here represented,
were also in Chumash territory, and recruited chiefly from the Chumash
Indians of the mainland and of the northern Santa Barbara islands. The
fathers of Santa Barbara about the time this report was written were
Luis Gil y Taboada and Marcos Amestoy.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[15:37](mrci07.htm#fr_37) This is the first
mission we have encountered where burial is the native mode of disposal
of the dead. The practice continues as far as San Luis Obispo, after
which cremation is again in practice as far as San Francisco, and in
fact to the north of it beyond the sphere of mission influence. It is
accordingly evident that the custom of cremation was distinctive of the
Indians in the mission portion of the California coast, except only the
Chu-mash. Archaeological investigations confirm the statements of early
eyewitnesses. Numerous graves have been found in the Chumash region, but
scarcely any in the regions to the north and south; except in certain
layers of the shellmounds bordering San Francisco bay, in which region
both cremation and burial seem to have been practised according to
circumstances or period.—By "pots" are meant steatite vessels, not
pottery, which has not been found so far north on the coast. The same
explanation may apply to the "pots" mentioned above by the San Fernando
informant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Santa Ynez](mrci08)
