[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hoo00)  [Next](hoo02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE.

THERE is doubtless a revolution in the literary, correspondent to that
of the natural world. The face of things is continually changing; and
the perfect, and perpetual harmony of the universe, subsists by the
mutability of its parts. In consequence of this fluctuation, different
arts and sciences have flourished at different periods of the world: but
the complete circle of

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

human knowledge has I believe, never subsisted at once, in any nation or
age. Where accurate and profound researches, into the principles of
things have advanced to perfection; there, by a natural consequence, men
have neglected the disquisition of particulars: and where sensible
particulars have been the general object of pursuit, the science of
universals has languished, or sunk into oblivion and contempt.

Thus wisdom, the object of all true philosophy, considered as exploring
the causes and principles of things, flourished in high perfection among
the Egyptians first, and afterwards in Greece. Polite literature was the
pursuit of the Romans; and experimental enquiries, increased without

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

end, and accumulated without order, are the employment of modern
philosophy. Hence we may justly conclude, that the age of true
philosophy is no more. In consequence of very extended natural
discoveries, trade and commerce have increased; while abstract
investigations, have necessarily declined: so that modern enquiries,
never rise above sense; and every thing is despised, which does not in
some respect or other, contribute to the accumulation of wealth; the
gratification of childish admiration; or the refinements of corporeal
delight. The author of the following translation, therefore, cannot
reasonably expect, that his labours will meet with the approbation of
the many: since these Hymns are too ancient, and

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

too full of the Greek philosophy, to please the ignorant, and the
sordid. However, he hopes they will be acceptable to the few, who have
drawn wisdom from its source; and who consider the science of
universals, as first in the nature of things, though last in the
progressions of human understanding.

The translator has adopted rhyme, not because most agreeable to general
taste, but because, be believes it necessary to the poetry of the
English language; which requires something as a substitute, for the
energetic cadence, of the Greek and Latin Hexameters. Could this be
obtained by any other means, he would immediately relinquish his
partiality for

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

rhyme, which is certainly when well executed, far more difficult than
blank verse, as the following Hymns must evince, in an eminent degree.

And, here it is necessary to observe, with respect to translation, that
nothing is more generally mistaken in its nature; or more faulty in its
execution. The author of the Letters on Mythology, gives it as his
opinion, that it is impossible to translate an ancient author, so as to
do justice to his meaning. If he had confined this sentiment, to the
beauties of the composition, it would doubtless have been just; but to
extend it, to the meaning of an author, is to make truth and opinion,
partial and incommunicable. Every person, indeed,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

acquainted with the learned languages, must be conscious how much the
beauty of an ancient author generally suffers by translation, though
undertaken by men, who have devoted the greatest part of their lives to
the study of words alone. This failure, which has more than any thing
contributed to bring the ancients into contempt with the unlearned, can
only be ascribed to the want of genius in the translators for the
sentiment of Pythagoras is peculiarly applicable to such as these that
many carry the Thyrsis, but few are inspired with the spirit of the God.
But this observation is remarkably verified, in the translators of the
ancient philosophy, whose performances are for the most part without
animation; and consequently

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

retain nothing of the fire and spirit of the original. Perhaps, there is
but one exception to this remark, and that is Mr. Sydenham: whose
success in such an arduous undertaking can only be ascribed to his
possessing the philosophical genius, and to his occasionally
paraphrasing passages, which would otherwise be senseless and inanimate.

Indeed, where languages differ so much as the ancient and modern, the
most perfect method, perhaps, of transferring the philosophy from the
one language to the other, is by a faithful and animated paraphrase:
faithful, with regard to retaining the sense of the author; and
animated, with respect to preserving the fire of the original;

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

calling it forth when latent, and expanding it when condensed. Such a
one, will every where endeavour to improve the light, and fathom the
depth of his author; to elucidate what is obscure, and to amplify, what
in modern language would he unintelligibly concise.

Thus most of the compound epithets of which the following Hymns chiefly
consist, though very beautiful in the Greek language; yet when literally
translated into ours, lose all their propriety and force. In their
native tongue, as in a prolific soil, they diffuse their sweets with
full-blown elegance; but shrink like the sensitive plant at the touch of
the verbal critic, or the close translator. He who would

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

preserve their philosophical beauties, and exhibit them to others in a
different language, must expand their elegance, by the supervening and
enlivening rays of the philosophic fire; and, by the powerful breath of
genius, scatter abroad their latent but copious sweets.

If some sparks of this celestial fire shall appear to have animated the
bosom of the translator, he will consider himself as well rewarded, for
his laborious undertaking. The ancient philosophy, has been for many
years, the only study of his retired leisure; in which he has found an
inexhaustible treasure of intellectual wealth, and a perpetual fountain
of wisdom and delight. Presuming that such a

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

pursuit must greatly advantage the present undertaking, and feeling the
most sovereign contempt for the sordid drudgery of hired composition, he
desires no other reward, if he has succeeded, than the praise of the
liberal; and no other defence if he has failed, than the decision of the
candid, and discerning few.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section I](hoo02)
