[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh05)  [Next](ehh07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### THE BOOK AM-TUAT AND THE BOOK OF GATES.

"AM-TUAT," or SHAT AM-TUAT, i.e., the "Book of what is in the Tuat," is
the name given by the Egyptians to the large funeral book in which the
priests of Amen describe the Other World according to the views of their
order, and the passage of their god Amen-Ra, through the mysterious
country which he traversed during the hours of the night. Its object, in
the first place, was to impress the followers of Amen and others with
the idea of the absolute supremacy of that god in the realms of the
dead, and to show that all the gods of the dead in every place of
departed spirits throughout Egypt rendered to him homage in one form or
another, and in return received benefits from him. And in the second
place, the book, being an actual "guide" to the Underworld, with
pictures of its various divisions and of the gods and demons of every
kind that were to be met with in them, was invaluable for the faithful,
who were able to learn from it, whilst they were living upon earth, how
to find their way from this world to the next, and how to identify the
beings who would attempt to bar their way, and what to say to

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

them. The BOOK AM-TUAT was a very lengthy work, and a complete copy of
it occupied much space whether on walls or on papyrus, and, as poor folk
could not afford tombs with chambers and corridors sufficiently large to
hold all its texts and pictures, they were obliged to be content with
sections, and smaller extracts from it. The need of a shortened form of
the work was felt at a comparatively early period after it came into
general use, and it is therefore not suprising to find that the priests
collected all the facts, which were absolutely essential for the soul
that had to travel by itself through the Other World, into a small book
that may for convenience be called the "SUMMARY OF AM-TUAT." In this
"Summary" all the lengthy speeches of Amen-Ra, and the answers of the
gods, and, of course, all pictures are omitted.

The oldest copies of the BOOK AM-TUAT are found in the tombs of Thothmes
III., Amen-hetep II., and Amen-hetep III., at Thebes. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) The most complete and best illustrated
copy is that which is found on the walls of

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the tomb of Seti I. at Thebes; here we have eleven out of the twelve
sections of the BOOK AM-TUAT, and the first six divisions of the SUMMARY
of the work. The texts and pictures of this fine copy have been
completely published by M. Lefébure, assisted by MM. Bouriant,
Loret, <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) and Naville, and M. Maspero
has translated and discussed the work at length in one of the most
important of his luminous dissertations on Egyptian mythology. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) The next fullest copy is found in the tomb
of Rameses VI., <span id="fr_30"></span>[3](#fn_30) and provides us with
eleven divisions, but the drawings are less careful, and the texts are
less accurate, and contain numerous additions which appear to represent
beliefs of a later period. The history of the Book AM-TUAT shows us that
the Egyptians treated it as they treated their older Books of the Dead;
they first copied it on the walls of tombs, then on the sides of stone
sarcophagi and wooden coffins, and next on rolls of papyrus. We have
seen how the kings of the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties had it copied on
the walls of their tombs, and it must now be noted that Rameses III.
decorated his red granite sarcophagus with scenes relating to the course
of the sun in the Other World. <span id="fr_31"></span>[4](#fn_31) This
sarcophagus is preserved in the Museum

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

of the Louvre in Paris, and its cover is in the Fitzwilliam Museum,
Cambridge. Among other sarcophagi inscribed with text and pictures from
the BOOK AM-TUAT may be mentioned those of: 1. Horus, son of
Tarut-en-Sekhet; <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) 2. Tchet-hra, a
priest of Ptah;  <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) 3. Qem-Hap, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34) the son of Takhaau; and Nekht-neb-f. Now,
whilst on the walls of tombs, and on the side of sarcophagi, divisions
Nos. I.-XI. are found, the only divisions which are met with on papyrus
are Nos. IX.-XII. Thus the Louvre Papyrus, No. 3071, which formed the
subject of a special study by Devéria <span
id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35) and Pierret, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[5](#fn_36) and the Turin Papyrus, published by
Lanzone <span id="fr_37"></span>[6](#fn_37) and the Leyden Papyrus T.
71, <span id="fr_38"></span>[7](#fn_38) contain each the last four
divisions only. The Leyden Papyrus T. 72 <span
id="fr_39"></span>[8](#fn_39) contains divisions X., XL, and XII., the
Berlin Papyrus No. 3001 contains divisions IX., X. and XII., and the
Berlin Papyrus No. 3005 contains divisions X. and XI. only. There are
several papyri in the British Museum inscribed with similar selections.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

The principal authorities for the text of the SUMMARY of AM-TUAT are
those which M. Jéquier consulted when preparing his edition, viz., the
Berlin Papyrus No. 3001, the Leyden Papyrus T. 71, the Louvre Papyrus
No. 3071, the Papyrus of Turin, published by Lanzone, and, of course,
the tomb of Seti I., which gives the text of the first six divisions.
The most valuable of all these is the Leyden Papyrus T. 71, of which an
excellent fac-simile, with a complete translation, was published by Drs.
Pleyte and Boeser in 1894; <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) in this
papyrus the text of the SUMMARY only fills 119 short columns, and the
great popularity of the work is attested by the fact that the priests of
Amen were induced to compress all the most important portions of Am-Tuat
into so small a compass.

Similar in many details, but widely different from the BOOK AM-TUAT in
point of fundamental doctrine, is the great funeral work to which the
names "Book of the Lower Hemisphere," <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) "Book of Hades," "Livre de l'Enfer," have
been given. A glance at the pictures which accompany the texts of this
Book is sufficient to show that it deals with the passage of the Sun-god
through the Other World during the hours of the night, but, as M.
Maspero pointed out long ago, it is wrong to

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

call the region through which the god passes by the name of "Lower
Hemisphere," for it suggests that it is below the surface of our earth,
which is not the case. There is much to be said also against the titles
"Book of Hades," and "Book of Hell," and as among the prominent
characteristics which distinguish it from the BOOK AM-TUAT is a series
of gates, it will be convenient and more correct to call it the "BOOK OF
GATES." The form in which we first know this work is, clearly, not older
than the XVIIIth or XIXth Dynasty, but many parts of it are very much
more ancient. As the BOOK AM-TUAT was composed with the view of
asserting the absolute supremacy of Amen-Ra in the Other World, so the
BOOK OF GATES was compiled to prove that, in spite of the pretensions of
the priests of Amen-RA, Osiris, the ancient god of the dead, was still
the over-lord of the Underworld, and that his kingdom was everlasting.
The BOOK AM-TUAT practically ignores Osiris, and is silent even
concerning the doctrines of the Judgment and Sekhet-Hetepet, and in fact
about all the fundamental principles of the religion of Osiris as
regards the dead, which had been universally believed throughout Egypt
for thousands of years.

The most complete copy of the BOOK OF GATES known to us is found
inscribed on the alabaster sarcophagus of Seti I, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) king of Egypt about B.C. 1375,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

and it consists of two parts:--1. A series of texts and pictures which
describe the progress of the Boat of the Sun-god to the kingdom of
Osiris, the Judgment of the Dead, the life of the beatified in
Sekhet-Hetepet, the punishment of the wicked, and the foes of the
Sun-god. 2. A series of texts and pictures which represent the magical
ceremonies that were performed in very ancient times with the view of
reconstructing the body of the Sun, and of making him rise each day.
That the BOOK OF GATES embodied many of the most. ancient Egyptian
religious beliefs and traditions is evident, but it is. quite certain
that it never became as popular as the BOOK AM-TUAT; it must always be a
matter for wonder that Seti I., having covered several walls in his tomb
with the texts of this Book, should fill several more with sections of
the BOOK OF GATES, and then have a complete copy of it cut and inlaid on
the sides of his alabaster sarcophagus and its cover!

We may now consider the region through which the Sun-god passed during
the hours of the night, and the descriptions of its divisions and their
inhabitants which are furnished by the BOOK AM-TUAT

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and the BOOK OF GATES. This region was called by the Egyptians "Tat," or
"Tuat," or "Tuaut"; the oldest form of the name, and that which is met
with in the earliest of the Pyramid Texts is "Tat;" the chief god of the
Tuat was called "Tuat," or "Tuaut," and the beings who lived therein
were called "Tuatiu." The meaning of the name Tat, or Tuat, is unknown,
and it is useless to speculate upon it or to invent etymologies for it;
it was applied to the home of the beatified spirits and the damned, no
doubt in predynastic times, and the exact meaning which it conveyed to
the minds of those who first used it has been lost. To describe its
general situation is less difficult, but not many details as to its
exact extent are forthcoming.

To find a word which shall at once describe the situation and character
of the Tuat is impossible, for the reason that the Egyptian conception
of the place of departed spirits is unique. The Tuat is not the "Lower
Hemisphere," because it is not under the ground, and though for want of
a better word I have frequently used "Underworld," when speaking of

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

the Tuat, it is unsatisfactory, for unless it is specially defined to
mean the place of departed spirits in general, it produces a wrong
impression in the mind. Again, the word Tuat must not be rendered by
"Hades," or "Hell," or "Sheol," or "Jehannum," for each of these words
has a limited and special meaning. On the other hand, the Tuat possessed
the characteristics of all these names, for it was an "unseen" place,
and it contained abysmal depths of darkness, and there were pits of fire
in it wherein the damned, i.e., the enemies of Osiris and Ra, were
consumed, and certain parts of it were the homes of monsters in various
shapes and forms which lived upon the unfortunate creatures whom they
were able to destroy. On the whole, the word Tuat may be best rendered
by "The Other World," <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) or
"Underworld," always provided that it be clearly understood that the
Egyptians never believed it to be under the earth.

In inventing a situation for the Tuat the Egyptians appear to have
believed that the whole of the habitable world, that is to say, Egypt,
was surrounded by a chain of mountains lofty and impassable, just like
the Jebel Kaf <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) of Muhammadan writers;
from one hole in this mountain the sun rose, and in another he set.
Outside this chain of mountains, but presumably quite close to them, was
the region of the Tuat; it ran parallel with

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the mountains, and was on the plane either of the land of Egypt or of
the sky above it. On the outside of the Tuat was a chain of mountains
also, similar to that which encompassed the earth, and so we may say
that the Tuat had the shape of a valley; and from the fact that it began
near the place where the sun set, and ended near the place where he
rose, it is permissible to say that the Tuat was nearly circular in
form. That this is the view taken by the Egyptians themselves is proved
by the scene which is reproduced in the BOOK OF GATES (page 303). Here
we have the body of Osiris bent round in a circle, and the hieroglyphics
enclosed within it declare that it is the Tuat. With the identification
of Osiris with the Tuat we need not deal here, but it is important for
our purpose to note that in the time of Seti I. the Egyptians assigned a
circular form to the Tuat. The view put forward by Signor Lanzone to the
effect that the Tuat was the place comprised between the arms of the god
Shu and the body of the sky-goddess Nut, whom, according to the old
legend, he raised up from the embrace of her husband the Earth-god Seb,
so forming the earth and the sky, thus appears to be untenable. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

Now as the Tuat was situated on the other side of the mountains which
separated it from Egypt, and from the sun, moon, and stars which lighted
the skies of that country, it follows that it must have been a region
which was shrouded in the gloom and darkness of night,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and a place of fear and horror. At each end of the Tuat was a space
which was neither wholly darkness nor wholly light, the western end
being partially lighted by the setting sun, and the eastern end by the
rising sun. From the pictures in the BOOK AM-TUAT and the BOOK OF GATES
we learn that a river flowed through the Tuat, much as the Nile flowed
through Egypt, and we see that there were inhabitants on each of its
banks, just as there were human beings on each side of the Nile. At one
place the river of the Tuat joined the great celestial waters which were
supposed to form the source of the earthly Nile.

How, or when, or where the belief arose it is impossible to say, but it
seems that at a very early period the inhabitants of Egypt thought that
the souls of the dead when they departed from this world made their way
into the Tuat, and took up their abode there, and long before the
Dynastic Period the Tuat was regarded throughout Egypt as the kingdom of
the dead. Certain sections of it were considered to belong by
traditional right to certain cities, e.g., Heliopolis, Memphis,
Herakleopolis, Abydos, etc., each possessing its own "Other World" and
gods of the dead, and all these had to be considered by the theologians
who formulated general plans of the Tuat. How the Egyptians imagined the
dead to live in the Tuat, or upon what, is not clear, but they seem to
have thought that all their wants could be provided for by the use of
words of power, amulets, talismans, etc. In the earliest times of all
the souls of

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

the dead remained in the "Other World" which belonged to their town or
city, but when Osiris attained to the supreme power over the dead, it
was only natural that departed spirits should flock from all parts of
Egypt to his kingdom, wherein the beatified enjoyed a life very much
like that which they had lived upon earth. The celestial kingdom of
Osiris, that is to say, Sekhet-Hetepet or Sekhet-Aaru, was originally a
copy of some very fertile region in the Delta, and, to the very end of
the period of native Egyptian rule, the Egyptian Paradise consisted of
green fields intersected by streams of living, i.e., running water, with
abundant crops of wheat and barley, and its appearance represented a
typical middle-Delta landscape. So long as Osiris had his kingdom in the
Delta, probably near the ancient city of Mendes, the souls of the dead
travelled from south to north, but at a later period, when Osiris had
absorbed the position and attributes of KHENT-AMENTI, perhaps the oldest
god of the dead of Abydos, departed spirits made their way from north to
south, so that they might enter the Tuat by the "Gap" in the mountains
there. Still later, the Egyptians reverted to their old belief as to the
situation of the domain of Osiris, and the books which deal with the
Tuat always assume that it lies far away to the north, and were intended
to guide souls on their way to it.

The ultimate fate of the souls of human beings who had departed to the
Tuat must always have been a matter of speculation to the Egyptians, and
at the best

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

they could only *hope* that they had traversed the long, dark, and
dangerous valley in safety. The same may be said of numbers of the gods,
who in very early times were believed to possess a nature which closely
resembled that of men and women, and to be in danger of extermination in
the Tuat. Of the gods the only one about whose successful passage of the
Tuat there was no doubt was Ra, or according to the priests of Amen,
Amen-Ra, for he rose each morning in the East, and it was manifest to
all that he had overcome whatsoever dangers had threatened him in the
Tuat during the past night. This being so, it became the object of every
man to obtain permission to travel in the boat of Ra through the Tuat,
for those who were followers of Osiris could disembark when it arrived
at his kingdom, and those who wished to remain with Ra for ever could
remain in it with him. To each class of believer a guide to the Tuat was
necessary, for up to a certain place in that region both the followers
of Osiris and the followers of Ra required information about the
divisions of the Tuat, and knowledge of the names of the Halls and
Gates, and of the beings who guarded them and who were all-powerful in
the land of darkness. For the worshippers of Amen, or Amen-Ra, the BOOK
AM-TUAT was prepared, whilst the followers of Osiris pinned their faith
to the BOOK OF GATES. From each of these Books we find that the Sun-god
was not able to pass through the Tuat by virtue of the powers which he
possessed as the great god of the world, but

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

only through his knowledge of the proper words of power, and of magical
names and formulae, before the -utterance of which every denizen of the
Tuat was powerless. Osiris had, of course, passed through the Tuat, and
seated himself on his throne in the "House of Osiris," but even he would
have been unable to perform his journey in safety through the Tuat
without the help of the words of power which Horus, the son of Isis, the
son of Osiris," had uttered, and the magical ceremonies which he had
performed. Words and ceremonies alike he learned from Isis, who,
according to a later tradition, obtained the knowledge of them from
Thoth, the Divine Intelligence. Now if Osiris and Ra had need of such
magical assistance in their passage through the Tuat, how much greater
must have been the need of man!

The Tuat was, according to the authors of the funeral works of the
XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, divided into twelve portions, some of which
are called "SEKHET," i.e., "Field," others "NUT," i.e., "City," others
"ARRIT," i.e., "Hall," and others "QERRET," i.e., "Circle." The first
indicates that the region to which it was applied was believed to
consist of cultivated lands, the second suggests a place where there
were many buildings and houses, the third a territory which was vast and
spacious, and which, in some respects, represented

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

an empty courtyard, or hall, or compound of a house, and the fourth
probably describes the circular form of some divisions. Now since the
Tuat was traversed by the sun-god during the hours of the night,, the
Egyptians regarded each of these divisions as the equivalent of an hour,
and hence it came that the sections of the Books of the Tuat were often
called "Hours," the First Hour corresponding to the First Division, and
so on up to the Twelfth Hour. It will, however, be urged that during the
summer in Egypt the night is not twelve hours long, but the answer to
this objection is that the first division is in reality only the
ante-chamber of the Tuat, and the twelfth the ante-chamber of the sky of
this world, into which the Sun-god enters to begin the new day. The
divisions II. to XI. of the Tuat have an entirely different character
from the ante-chamber of the Tuat and that of the sky.

It has already been said that a river flows from one end of the Tuat to
the other, and its existence can only be explained in one way. At a very
early period of their history the Egyptians believed that the Sun-god
passed over the sky, which they held to be a vast watery mass, in some
kind of boat; the belief in the existence of such a boat was absolutely
necessary, for unless the fire of the sun was protected from contact
with the water of the sky, it would, they argued, be extinguished. So
far back as the period when the Pyramids of Giza were built, the
existence of two boats was assumed; in one, called MATET, the Sun-god
sailed from the time he rose

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

until noon, and in the other, called SEKTET, he sailed from noon to
sunset. When the conception of the existence of the Tuat was evolved,
and the belief that the Sun-god passed through it each night gained
credence, it became necessary to find some means of transport for the
god. It was impossible to remove him from his boat, which was, like
himself, eternal, hence its name, "Boat of Millions of Years," and even
if it had been possible the difficulty remained either of taking his
boat back from the place of sunset to the place Of sunrise, so that it
might be ready for him on the following morning when he emerged from the
Tuat, or of providing him with a new boat each day. The simplest way was
to assume in the Tuat the existence of a river which was in direct
communication with the watery mass of the sky on which Ra sailed by day,
and to make the Sun-god to enter the Tuat on it. This was the natural
way out of the difficulty, for apart from the fact that no other means
of transport for the god could be devised, it was consistent with
experience that kings, and nobles, and high officials, always travelled
through Egypt by water. No animal and no chariot could convey the god
through the Tuat, for, even had animals or chariots suitable for the
purpose existed, they must have been consumed by the god's fire. We
shall see later that there was one division of the Tuat through which
the Sun-god could not pass even in his boat, and that he was obliged to
leave it and travel on the back of a serpent.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

From the titles of the BOOK AM TUAT, as it is found in the tomb of Seti
I., we may gather that the pictures accompanying the texts were supposed
to be exact copies of the divisions of the Tuat as they actually existed
in AMENTI, i.e., the "hidden place," or the "Other World," and the texts
were supposed to give the traveller in the Tuat all the information he
could possibly require concerning the "souls, the gods, the shadows, the
spirits, the gods of the Tuat, the gates of the Tuat, the hours and
their gods, and the gods who praise Ra, and those who carry out his
edicts of destruction." The divisions of the Tuat according to this work
are:--

Division I. *Names*--MAATI, and NET-RA.

Warder--ARNEBAUI.

Hour-goddess--USHEM-HATIU-KHEFTIU-NU-RA.

Division II. *Name*--URNES.

Warder--AM-NEBAUI.

Hour-goddess--SESHET-MAKET-NEB-S.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Division III. *Name*--NET-NEB-UA-KHEPER-AUT.

Warder--KHETRA.

Hour-goddess--TENT-BAIU.

Division IV. *Name*--ANKHET-KHEPERU.

Name of the gate of this Circle--AMENT-SETHAU

Hour-goddess--URT-EM-SEKHEMU-S.

Division V. *Name*--AMENT.

Name of the gate of this Circle--AHA-NETERU.

Hour-goddess--SEKMET-HER-ABT-UAA-S.

Division VI. *Name*--METCHET-NEBT-TUAT.

Name of the gate of this City--SEPT-METU.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Hour-goddess--MESPERIT-AR-AT-MAATU.

Division VII. *Name*--TEPHET-SHETAT.

Name of the gate of this City--RUTI-EN-ASAR.

Hour-goddess--KHESFET-HAU-HESQETU-NEHA-HRA.

Division VIII. *Name*--TEBAT-NETERU-S.

Name of the Gate--AHA-AN-URT-NEF.

Hour-goddess--NEBT-USHA.

Division IX. *Name*--BEST-ARU-ANKHET-KHEPERU.

Name of the Gate--SA-EM-KEB. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Hour-goddess--TUATET-MAKTET-EN-NEB-S.

Division X. *Name*--METET-QA-UTCHEBU.

Name of the Gate--AA-KHEPERU-MES-ARU.

Hour-goddess--TENTENIT-UHETES-KHAK-AB.

Division XI. *Name*--RE-EN-QERERT-APT-KHATU.

Name of the Gate--SEKHEN-TUATIU.

Hour-goddess--SEBIT-NEBT-UAA-KHESFET-SEBA-EM-PERT-F.

Division XII. *Name*--KHEPER-KEKIU-KHAU-MEST.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Name of the Gate--THEN-NETERU.

Hour-goddess--MAA-NEFERT-RA.

The divisions of the Tuat according to the BOOK OF GATES are usually
marked by Gates, which are guarded by serpents; they are as follows:--

Division I. *Name of Guardian Gods*.--SET and TAT.

Name of the Region.--SET-AMENTET, Western Vestibule.

Division II. *Name of the Serpent*--SAA-SET.

Division III. *Name of the Serpent*--AQEBI.

Name of the Gate--SEPTET-UAUAU.

Division IV. *Name of the Serpent*--TCHETBI.

Name of the Gate--NEBT-S-TCHEFAU.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Division V. *Name of the Serpent*--TEKA-HRA.

Name of the Gate--ARIT.

Division VI. At the entrance to this division is the Judgment Hall of
Osiris.

Name of the Serpent--SET-EM-MAAT-F.

Name of the Gate--NEBT-AHA.

Division VII. *Name of the Serpent*--AKHA-EN-MAAT.

Name of the Gate--PESTIT.

Division VIII. *Name of the Serpent*--SET-HRA.

Name of the Gate--BEKHKHI.

Division IX. *Name of the Serpent*--AB-TA.

Name of the Gate--AAT-SHEFSHEFT.

Division X. *Name of the Serpent*--SETHU.

Name of the Gate--TCHESERIT.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Division XI. Name of the Serpent--AM-NETU-F.

Name of the Gate--SHETAT-BESU.

Division XII. Names of the Serpents--SEBI, and RERI.

Name of the Gate--TESERT-BAIU, Eastern Vestibule.

From the above lists it is clear that in the BOOK AM-TUAT the actual
divisions of the Tuat are considered without any reference to Gates,
even if such existed in the scheme of the priests of Amen-Ra, and that
according to the Book of Gates, the Gates of the divisions in the Tuat
are the most important and most characteristic features. The absence of
Gates in the BOOK AM-TUAT is not difficult to explain; the compilers of
this work, wishing to exalt Amen-Ra, did away with the Gates, which were
the most important features of the kingdom of Osiris, so that the
necessity for Amen-Ra to seek permission of their warders, who were
appointed by Osiris, was obviated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[81:1](ehh06.htm#fr_27) The tombs of Amen-hetep
II. and Thothmes III. were discovered by M. Loret in 1898, and,
according to the description of them published in the French journals,
the copies of Am-Tuat on their walls were in a good state of
preservation. The copy of the work in the tomb of Amen-hetep III.,
written in hieratic, was well preserved in Champollion's time, but is
now illegible; see Champollion, *Lettres*, 13<sup>e</sup> Lettre; and
Champollion, *Monuments*, iii. 232-234. The text of the Third Hour was
published by Lepsius, *Denkmäler*, iii. 78 and 79. See also *Description
de l'Égypte*, Antiq. tom. iii. 193, tom. x., 218, and plates, tom. ii.,
80, 81; and Lefébure in *Mémoires Mission Arch. Française*, tom. iii.,
p. 172.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[82:1](ehh06.htm#fr_28) See *Mémoires publiés
par les membres de la Miss. Arch. Française*, tom. ii., Paris, 1886.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[82:2](ehh06.htm#fr_29) See *Études de
Mythologie et d'Archéologie Egyptiennes*, in *Bibliothèque
Égyptologique*, tom. ii., p. 1 ff., Paris, 1893.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[82:3](ehh06.htm#fr_30) See Lefébure, *op.
cit.*, tom. iii., fasc. 1, p. 48 ff.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[82:4](ehh06.htm#fr_31) See E. de Rougé, *Notice
Sommaire des Monuments Égyptiens exposés dans les Galeries du Musée du
Louvre*, Paris, 1876, p. 51.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[83:1](ehh06.htm#fr_32) See E. de Rougé, *Notice
Sommaire*, p. 52. It contains the figures of the eleven divisions, with
very few inscriptions; see Jéquier, *Le Livre de ce qu'il y a dans
l'Hades*, p. 25.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[83:2](ehh06.htm#fr_33) See E. de Rougé, *Notice
Sommaire*, p. 52. This sarcophagus is made of basalt, is beautifully
cut, and was brought to France by Champollion. See also Sharpe,
*Egyptian Inscriptions*, vol. ii., plates 1-24.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[83:3](ehh06.htm#fr_34) See Schäfer in Jéquier,
*op. cit.*, p. 26, notes 3 and 4.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[83:4](ehh06.htm#fr_35) See *Catalogue des
Manuscrits Égyptiens*, Paris, 1881, p. 15.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[83:5](ehh06.htm#fr_36) See Pierret, *Études
Égyptologiques*, tom. ii., p. 103-148.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[83:6](ehh06.htm#fr_37) See Lanzone, *Le
Domicile des Esprits*, Paris, 1879, folio.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[83:7](ehh06.htm#fr_38) See *Catalogue du Musée
Égyptien de Leyde*, pp. 253-255.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[83:8](ehh06.htm#fr_39) See Jéquier, *op. cit.*,
p. 27.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[84:1](ehh06.htm#fr_40) *Papyrus Funéraire
Hiéroglyphique, Sha-am-Tua* (T. 71). Publié dans la 32ième Livraison des
*Monuments Égyptiens du Musée*, Leyden, 1894.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[84:2](ehh06.htm#fr_41) See Devéria, Catalogue,
Sect. ii., *Le Livre de L'Hémisphère Inférieur*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[85:1](ehh06.htm#fr_42) See *The Alabaster
Sarcophagus of Oimenepthah I., King of Egypt, now in Sir John Soane's
Museum, Lincoln's Inn Fields, drawn* <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> *by
Joseph Bonomi, and described by Samuel Sharpe*, London, 1864. A
description of the pictures and texts was given by M. Pierret in the
*Revue Archéologique* for 1870; small portions of the text were
discussed by Goodwin and Renouf in *Aeg. Zeit.*, 1873, p. 138, and 1874,
p. 101; and an English rendering of the whole text was given by E.
Lefébure, in the *Records of the Past*, vol. x., p. 79 ff., vol. xii.,
p. 1 ff.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[88:1](ehh06.htm#fr_43) See Maspero, *Études de
Mythologie*, tom. ii. p. 27.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[88:2](ehh06.htm#fr_44) See Yakut's Geographical
Dictionary, ed. Wüstenfeld, tom. iv., page 18.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[89:1](ehh06.htm#fr_45) See Lanzone, *Le
domicile des Esprits*, p. 1.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[98:1](ehh06.htm#fr_46) Or, SA-AKEB.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Contents of the Book Am-Tuat and the Book of Gates
Compared. The Western Vestibule or Antechamber of the Tuat](ehh07)
