[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh02)  [Next](ehh04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

#### THE

# EGYPTIAN HEAVEN AND HELL

## CHAPTER I.

### ORIGIN OF ILLUSTRATED GUIDES TO THE OTHER WORLD.

THE inhabitants of Egypt during the Dynastic Period of their history
possessed, in common with other peoples of similar antiquity, very
definite ideas about the abode of departed spirits, but few, if any,
ancient nations caused their beliefs about the situation and form, and
divisions, and inhabitants of their Heaven and Hell, or "Other World,"
to be described so fully in writing, and none have illustrated the
written descriptions of their beliefs so copiously with pictorial
representations of the gods and devils, and the good and evil spirits
and other beings, who were supposed to exist in the kingdom of the dead.
It is now generally admitted that Egyptian Dynastic History covers a
period of nearly five thousand years, but it must not

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

be assumed for one moment that it is at present possible to describe in
a connected or complete form all the views and opinions about their
Other World which were held by the theologians and the uneducated
classes of Egypt during this long space of time, and it must be said at
once that the materials for such a work are not forthcoming. All that
can be done is to collect from the copies that have come down to us of
the books which relate to the state and condition of the dead, and to
the abode of departed spirits, the beliefs which are enunciated or
referred to therein, and, taking them so far as possible in
chronological order, to piece them together and then make deductions and
draw general conclusions from them. We must always remember that the
texts of the various Books of the Dead are far older than the
illustrations found in the later recensions of them which are now in our
hands, and that such illustrations, in matters of detail at least,
reflect the opinions of the priestly class that held religious supremacy
at the time when they were drawn or painted. In cases where archetypes
were available the artist was careful to follow in all general matters
the ancient copies to which he had access, but when new beliefs and new
religious conceptions had to be illustrated, he was free to treat them
pictorially according to his own knowledge, and according to the wishes
of those who employed him.

The oldest Books of the Dead known to us, that is to say, the religious
compositions which are inscribed

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

on the walls of the chambers and corridors of the pyramids of kings
Unas, Teta, Pepi I., Mer-en-Ra, and Pepi II., are without illustrations
of any sort or kind, and it is not easy to account for this fact. That
the Egyptians possessed artistic skill sufficient to illustrate the
religious and general works which their theologians wrote or revised,
under their earliest dynasties of kings of all Egypt, is evident from
the plain and coloured bas-reliefs which adorn the walls of their
*mastabas*, or bench-shaped tombs, and we can only point out and wonder
at the fact that the royal pyramids contain neither painted nor
sculptured vignettes, especially as pictures are much needed to break
the monotony of the hundreds of lines of large hieroglyphics, painted in
a bluish-green colour, which must have dazzled the eyes even of an
Egyptian. The reason, however, why such early texts are not illustrated
is probably not far to seek. Professor Maspero has proved that the
"pyramid texts" contain formulae and paragraphs which, judging from the
grammatical forms that occur in them, it is easy to see must have been
composed, if not actually written down, in the earliest times of
Egyptian civilization. These formulae, &c., are interspersed with others
of later periods, and it seems as if, at the time when the "pyramid
texts" were cut into stone, these religious compositions were intended
to contain expressions of pious thought about the hereafter which would
satisfy both those who accepted the ancient indigenous beliefs,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

and those who were prepared to believe the doctrines which had been
promulgated by the priests of the famous brotherhood of Ra, the Sun-god,
who had made their head-quarters in Egypt at Annu, i.e., On, or
Heliopolis. The old native beliefs of the country were of a more
material character than the doctrines which the priests of Heliopolis
taught, but it was found impossible to eradicate them from the minds of
the people, and the priests therefore framed religious works in such a
manner that they might be acceptable both to those who believed in the
old animal-gods, tree-gods, plant-gods, &c., of Egypt, and those who
preferred a purely solar cult, such as that of the worship of the
Sun-god Ra. The oldest Books of the Dead, in fact, represent the
compromise arrived at under the IVth, Vth, and VIth Dynasties, between
the priests of the old and the new religions. This being so, the
religious texts of the period represent too much a patch-work belief for
purposes of systematic illustration, and in the result, and perhaps also
through the funeral customs of the day, the growth in men's minds of the
wish for illustrated guides to the Underworld was retarded.

When the glory of sovereignty departed from the kings who held court at
Memphis after the end of the rule of the VIth Dynasty, the system of
solar theology, which had been promulgated in Lower Egypt by the priests
of Heliopolis, began to make its way into Upper Egypt, and wherever it
came it assumed a

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

leading position among the religious systems of the day. The kings of
the VIIth and VIIIth Dynasties, like those of the IIIrd, IVth, and VIth,
came from Memphis, but they had comparatively little power in the land,
and, so far as we know, they did not build for themselves pyramids for
tombs, and there is no evidence forthcoming to show that they filled the
walls of their sepulchres with religious texts. They carried on neither
wars nor building operations of any importance, and it seems that their
tombs were neither large nor magnificent. Owing to their feeble rule the
governors of Suten-henen, or Herakleopolis, and those who ruled in the
provinces near that city, succeeded in gaining their independence, and
the kings of the IXth and Xth Dynasties were Herakleopolitans; their
rule gradually extended to the south, and the religious influence of
their priests was so great that they succeeded in forcing many of their
mythological legends and beliefs into the accepted religion of the
country, and these subsequently became part and parcel of the great
Recension of the Theban Book of the Dead. The dominion of the
Herakleopolitans, however, was of comparatively short duration, and it
collapsed under the attacks of the bold and vigorous governors of the
Thebaïd, whose capital was at Thebes. Judging from the historical
evidence concerning the period which lies between the VIth and the XIth
Dynasties, neither the two last Memphitic nor the two Herakleopolitan
Dynasties of kings did anything to

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

improve the general condition of the country, and it seems as if they
found it necessary to employ all their energies to maintain their
position and the little real power in the country which they possessed.

As this was the case, we need not wonder that all magnificence
disappeared from funeral rites and ceremonies, and that the tombs of the
period were small and unimportant. The gods were worshipped and the dead
were buried as matters of course, but it goes without saying that kings,
whose authority was not consolidated, and whose power was ineffective
except in the immediate neighbourhood of the towns in which they lived,
who were unable to wage wars in Syria and Sinai and to bring back much
spoil, could neither establish Colleges of priests nor endow new
temples; for in ancient Egypt, as elsewhere, the fortunes of the gods
and the wealth of their sanctuaries increased or declined according as
the inhabitants of the land were prosperous or otherwise. Similarly
also, when the community was suffering from the evil effects of a long
period of civil wars, and business was at a standstill, and farmers were
unable to carry on the usual agricultural operations on which both the
government and the priesthood ultimately depended for support, it was
impossible for men to bury their dead with all the pomp and ceremony
which were the characteristics of funerals in times of peace and
prosperity. The innate conservatism of the Egyptians made them cling to
their ancient beliefs during this period of stress, but

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

no important pyramids were built, and very few private funeral chapels
were maintained at expensive rates, and the souls of the dead were
committed to such protection as could be obtained by the prayers of
their relatives and friends, and by the utterance of religious formulae,
and by inexpensive amulets.

With the rise to power of the Princes of Thebes, things took a turn for
the better so far as worship in the temples and the care for the dead
were concerned. So soon as they had overcome their enemies the Princes
of Herakleopolis, and their confederates the Princes of Asyut, and had
firmly established themselves on the throne of Egypt, they sent men to
reopen the quarries in the First Cataract and in the Wadi Hammamat near
Coptos. This is a sure proof that the new line of kings, most of whom
bear the name of Menthu-hetep, had need of large quantities of granite,
and of sandstone of various kinds, and such materials can only have been
required for the building of temples and palaces, and funeral altars and
stelae, sarcophagi, &c. The fact that the work was begun again in the
quarries also proves that the authority of the Menthu-heteps was well
established. Menthu-hetep II., we are told by an inscription set up in
the Wadi Hammamat by his officer Amen-em-hat, caused to be quarried a
block of stone which measured eight cubits, by four cubits, by two
cubits, i.e., about thirteen feet six inches long, six feet six inches
wide, and three feet six inches thick, and it is probable that he
required

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

this for a sarcophagus. This king is also famous as the maker of a well
in the desert, the mouth of which was about sixteen feet six inches
square; and at one time he employed several thousands of men, including
three thousand carriers or boatmen, in his stone-works. His successor,
Menthu-hetep III., continued the work in the quarries, and built himself
a pyramid, called Khu-ast, in the mountain of Tchesert at Thebes, which
may now be identified with that portion of the great Theban cemetery to
which the name Der al-Bahari was given by the Arabic-speaking Egyptians.

This building is mentioned in the great Abbott Papyrus preserved in the
British Museum (No. 10,221), where it is declared to have been found
unviolated by the members of the Commission which was appointed to
inquire into the condition of the royal tombs, after the robberies which
had taken place in them about the period of the rule of the priest-kings
of Thebes, B.C. 1,000. The remains of the tomb of Menthu-hetep III. have
been recently discovered, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and though
at the time of writing it has not been completely excavated, sufficient
has been done to show that it is a very remarkable building. It is clear
that the lower part of it is rectangular, and that it was surrounded by
a colonnade; the outside is eased with limestone slabs, behind which is
a "wall of rough and heavy nodules

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

of flint, and the middle is filled with rubbish and loose stones." On
this rectangular building, or base, a small pyramid probably stood, at
least, this is what we should expect. The remains already excavated
prove that this base was surrounded by a triple row of columns, which
supported a ceiling and formed a hypostyle passage or colonnade, which
"must have been quite dark, or nearly so (like the ambulatories
surrounding the shrines in later temples), for the outside was closed by
a thick wall." Between this wall and the edge of the platform on which
the building stood was an outer colonnade of square pillars, but the
pillars no longer exist. In the rock below the pavement of this
colonnade a number of tombs were hewn; each consisted of a pit from
twelve to fifteen feet deep, which led to a small rectangular chamber,
wherein originally stood a limestone sarcophagus. In these tombs women
who were both priestesses of Hathor and members of the royal *harim*
were buried, and further excavations will no doubt reveal the fact that
Menthu-hetep's high officers of state were buried in somewhat similar
tombs in the immediate neighbourhood of the remarkable monument which
the Egypt Exploration Fund has brought to light through the exertion of
Prof. E. Naville and Mr. H. R. Hall.

The facts given above indicate that Menthu-hetep III. built a splendid
tomb at Thebes, and it seems that in certain particulars he copied the
royal pyramid tombs of the IVth, Vth, and VIth Dynasties. It is

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

unlikely that the superstructure which he set upon the rectangular base,
to which reference has been made above, and which is assumed to have
been in the form of a pyramid, was as large as any of the important
pyramids of Giza, and the base on which it rested is "a new and
interesting fact in Egyptian architecture"; but when he set his funeral
monument on the rocky platform in the mountain of Tchesert it is more
than probable that either he or his architect had in mind the rocky
platform on which the great Pyramids of Giza stand, and it seems as if
he built it on a massive rectangular base, so that it might appear
conspicuous and imposing from a distance. Like the earlier royal
builders of pyramids, Menthu-hetep built a funeral temple in connexion
with his pyramid, and established an order of priests, who were to
perform the services and ceremonies connected with his worship, and he
allowed the ladies of his court to be buried round about it, just as did
the kings of old who reigned at Memphis. The great feature of
Menthu-hetep's monument, which has no parallel in the older pyramids in
the north of Egypt, is the ramp, with a double row of square columns on
each side of it, which he built on the front or eastern face of the
temple platform.

Now whilst Menthu-hetep III. was employed in building his pyramid and
funeral temple, the hereditary governors and nobles of important
provinces in Upper Egypt were not slow to avail themselves of the
opportunity which peace and the renewed prosperity of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the country gave them, and they began to make rock-hewn tombs for
themselves and the members of their families in the hills, and to cause
their bodies to be buried in elaborately inscribed or painted wooden
coffins. Of coffins of this period, one of the oldest examples is that
of AMAMU which was purchased by the Trustees of the British Museum so
long ago as 1834. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) On the inside of
this coffin is inscribed in black ink in the hieratic character a series
of texts which are extracts from the Heliopolitan Recension of the Book
of the Dead; these are enclosed within a coloured border, formed of
rectangles, painted in blue, green, yellow, and red. Above the texts are
carefully drawn, and painted as nearly as possible in their natural
colours, representations of most of the objects which the deceased hoped
he would use in the Underworld, and these pictures prove that the
knowledge of the elaborate funeral rites and ceremonies, which were
observed at Memphis under the IVth Dynasty, had descended in a complete
state to the period when Amamu's coffin was made and ornamented.

In connection with Amamu's coffin reference must be made to a large
group of coffins which was excavated a few years ago at Al-Barsha, a
place situated on the north side of a rocky valley, just behind the
modern Coptic village of Der An-Nakhla, near Shekh Abada

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

(the ancient Antinoë), in Upper Egypt. All the coffins found here are
rectangular in shape, and have so much in common with the coffin of
Amamu, in respect of shape, and in the arrangement of their texts and
pictures, including the representations of *mastaba* doors, that it
seems impossible to assign to them a date much earlier or later than the
period of the XIth Dynasty. For our present purpose, however, whatever
be their exact date, they are of the greatest importance, for on the
insides of the panels of some of them are painted the oldest known
illustrations of certain sections of Books of the Dead. The texts
inscribed on them contain extracts from the Heliopolitan Recension of
the Book of the Dead, of which we know so much from the selections given
in the Pyramids of Unas, Teta, and other kings, but side by side with
these are copies of chapters belonging to Books of the Dead, which seem
to have been originally composed at some anterior period, and which were
intended to reflect the more popular and more materialistic religious
views and beliefs. Among such books must be mentioned the "Book of Two
Ways," or the "Two Ways of the Blessed Dead," of which a version
inscribed on a coffin in the Berlin Museum has been recently
published. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) The rubrical directions of
this work show that it was compiled when implicit belief existed in the
minds of the Egyptians as to the efficacy of

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

certain "words of power" (*hekau*) and of pictures of the gods, and it
is clear that many portions of it are purely magical, and were intended
to produce very material results. Thus concerning one passage a rubric
says, "Whosoever knoweth this Chapter may have union with women by night
or by day, and the heart (or, desire) of the woman shall come to him
whensoever he would enjoy her." This rubric follows a text <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) in which the deceased is made to pray for
power of generation similar to that possessed by the god Beba, and for
the will and opportunity of overcoming women, and it was to be written
on a bandlet which was to be attached to the right arm. Moreover, the
soul which had knowledge of certain sections of the work would "live
among the living ones," and would "see Osiris every day," and would have
"air in his nostrils, and death would never draw nigh unto him." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) The illustrations which accompany the texts
on the coffins from Al-Barsha make it evident that under the XIth
Dynasty the Egyptian theologian had not only divided the Under-world in
his mind into sections, with doors, &c., but that he was prepared to
describe that portion of it which belonged to the blessed dead, and to
supply a plan of it! Besides the sections from the "Pyramid Texts," to
which reference has already been made, and the "Book of the Two Ways,"
the coffins of Al-Barsha

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

contain a number of texts of various lengths, many of which have titles,
and resemble in form the Chapters of the great Theban Recension of the
Book of the Dead. Examples of these have been published in Prof.
Maspero's *Recueil de Travaux*, tom. xxvi., p. 64 ff., by M. P. Lacau,
e.g., "Chapter of the Seven Addresses of homage to the goddess Meh-urt";
\[Chapter of\] "the reassembling of the kinsfolk of a man in
Neter-khert"; "Chapter of driving back Kebka"; "Chapter of setting out
for Orion," &c.

From the considerations set forth above it is quite clear that the
practice of illustrating certain sections of Books of the Dead existed
under the XIth Dynasty, and there is no good reason for doubting that it
continued to be observed during the prosperous rule of the kings of the
XIIth Dynasty. Under the IVth, Vth, and VIth Dynasties the selections of
extracts from Books of the Dead which were intended to benefit royal
souls in the Underworld were cut upon the walls of the chambers and
corridors of their pyramids, and in the case of private individuals
texts intended to produce the same effect were usually cut into the
walls of the chambers wherein their stone sarcophagi were placed. The
pyramids of the kings of the XIth and XIIth Dynasties, whether in the
north or south of Egypt, are not, so far as the information at present
available goes, characterized by lengthy extracts from Books of the
Dead, and officials and men of rank in general were content to dispense
with the cutting of religious

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

inscriptions into the sides of stone sarcophagi, and into the walls of
the passages and chambers of their tombs in the mountains, and to
transfer them to the sides of their brightly painted, rectangular wooden
coffins. The practical advantages of this change are obvious. Wooden
coffins were easier to obtain and cheaper than stone sarcophagi, longer
and fuller selections from religious texts could be easily and quickly
traced upon them in the hieratic character, which an expert scribe
could, no doubt, write at a rapid rate, the expense of adding coloured
drawings was small, and, above all, the deceased would have close to his
mummy the sacred writings on which he so greatly relied for assistance
in the Other World. The coffin which was fully inscribed could easily be
made to hold copies of all the texts deemed to be of vital importance to
the dead, and such a coffin when, as was frequently the case, it was
placed in a massive, outer, wooden coffin, served the purpose of the
large rolls of papyri inscribed with religious and funeral texts, and
illustrated with elaborately painted vignettes, which were buried with
the dead from the XVIIIth to the XXVIth Dynasty.

After the death of Amen-em-bat III., who was perhaps the greatest king
of the XIIth Dynasty, the whole country fell into a state of confusion,
and the kings of Thebes ceased to be masters of all Egypt. The kings of
the XIIIth Dynasty were Theban and reigned at Thebes, and appear to have
maintained their hold

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

in a considerable degree upon Upper Egypt; but the kings of the XIVth
Dynasty reigned at Xoïs, in the Delta, and many of them were
contemporaries of the kings in Upper Egypt. The kings of the XVth and
XVIth Dynasties were Hyksos, or "Shepherd Kings," and their rule was
overthrown by Seqenen-Ra, III., a king of the XVIIth Dynasty, and a
Theban, probably about B.C. 1800. In the interval between the XIIth and
the XVIIIth Dynasties the ceremonies connected with the worship of the
gods in their temples, and the funerals of kings and officials, lost the
magnificence which had characterized them under the XIIth Dynasty, and
the building of pyramids and the making of rock-hewn tombs ceased for a
period of some hundreds of years. With the rise to power of the Theban
kings, who formed the XVIIIth Dynasty, a marvellous development of
temple and funeral ceremonies took place, and, thanks chiefly to the
vast quantities of spoil which were poured into Thebes by the victorious
armies of Egypt on their return from Western Asia, the cult of the gods
and of the dead assumed proportions which it had never reached before in
Egypt.

The chief deity of Thebes was Amen, the "Hidden," or perhaps "unknown,"
god, in whose honour a shrine was built to the north of the city, in a
place called "Ap," or "Apt," by the Egyptians, and "Karnak" by the
modern inhabitants of Luxor. It is impossible to say at present exactly
when the first sanctuary of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

this god was built at Thebes, but the discovery of the large collection
of 457 votive statues of kings and officials and other objects, made by
M. Legrain <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) in 1901-2, indicates that
the foundation of the sanctuary of Amen dates from a very early period
of Dynastic History. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md) Be this as it
may, the god Amen seems to have enjoyed no special importance or
popularity in Egypt until the XIIth Dynasty, when his sanctuary appears
to have been rebuilt and enlarged; but so long as his priests were
dependent for maintenance upon the revenues of Upper Egypt alone neither
they nor their god can have enjoyed any very great wealth. When
Seqenen-Ra III. defeated the Hyksos, and made himself master of all
Egypt, and when Aahmes I. (Amasis) drove the Hyksos out from their
stronghold Avaris, in the Delta, thus completing the work of the
deliverance of the country from a foreign yoke, which Seqenen-Ra III.
had begun, they attributed the success of their arms to their god Amen,
who was from this time forward regarded not only as the principal god of
the Egyptians, but as the "king of the gods." Soon after Amen-hetep I.,
the successor of Aahmes I., came to the throne, he made war against the
Nubians, and became master of the gold-producing districts of the
Eastern Sudan. His next care was to rebuild, or perhaps to repair and
add to, the sanctuary

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of Amen, and he founded the famous College of priests of Amen, whose
counsels guided, both for good and for evil, the destinies of Egypt for
several hundreds of years. He richly endowed these priests and their god
and his temple, and on many of the coffins of this brotherhood are
representations of members of the order in the act of worshipping his
names, and of pouring out libations before his cartouches. The priests
of Amen had, no doubt, good reason for worshipping Amen-hetep with such
devotion.

It is unnecessary to describe in detail the growth of the cult of Amen
under the XVIIIth Dynasty, and it will suffice to say that the history
of his cult is, practically, the history of Egypt for nearly one
thousand years. His priests made him possessor of the principal
attributes and titles of all the ancient gods of Egypt, and their
absolute power enabled them to modify the old systems of belief of the
country. They introduced the primitive gods of the land into their own
system of theology, but assigned to them subordinate positions and
powers inferior to those of Amen, or Amen-Ra, as he was called, and the
new editions of most of the old religious works which appeared at Thebes
bore the traces of having been edited in accordance with their views and
opinions. In many of its aspects the cult of Amen was less material than
that of many of the old gods, and the religion of the priests themselves
ruthlessly rejected many of the primitive beliefs which survived among
the populace

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

in general. They were obliged to tolerate and respect the universal
belief in Osiris as the judge, king, and god of the dead, for they, of
course, found it impossible to eliminate from the minds of the people
the effect which the traditions of a material heaven, handed down for
untold generations, had made upon. them. Among the servants of Amen and
his temple, however, there were some who preferred to put their faith in
the religious writings which had satisfied their ancestors many
centuries before, and to these we owe the great collection of religious
and funeral texts called PER EM HRU, "\[The Book of\] Coming forth by
Day," which is now commonly known as the Theban Recension of the Book of
the Dead.

It is true that the subject matter of many of the texts is older than
the IVth Dynasty, and that the phraseology of some dates from the period
of the Vth and VIth Dynasties, and that the forms in which most of them
are cast are not more recent than the XIth or XIIth Dynasty, but it is
equally true that the editing and arrangement of them by the Theban
priests, to say nothing of the addition of supplementary hymns,
Chapters, and coloured illustrations, produced a very decided change in
the general teachings of the collection.

"The Book of Coming Forth by Day," in its Theban form, was an
illustrated guide to the kingdom of Osiris, but its teachings did not
satisfy the strict followers of Amen-Ra, and they brought into use a
Recension of a work in which they were able to promulgate the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

particular ideas of their order as to the future state of the dead. The
followers of Osiris believed that the righteous dead would find their
everlasting abode in the kingdom of that god, and would enjoy in a
fertile land, with running streams, a life very like that which the
well-to-do Egyptian lived upon earth. The followers of Amen-Ra aimed at
securing a place in the boat of the Sun-god, i.e., the "Boat of Millions
of Years," so that they might sail over the sky with him each day, and
enjoy the sight of the earth on which they had lived, and might, under
his all-powerful protection, pass through the regions of darkness by
night, and emerge in heaven, being reborn each day. In the kingdom of
Osiris the beatified dead ate bread-cakes made from one wonderful kind
of grain, and drank beer made from another kind, and enjoyed conjugal
intercourse, and the company of their relations and friends; all their
material comforts were supplied by the use of words of power, &c., by
which they even obtained entrance into that kingdom.

Entrance to the Boat of Millions of Years was likewise obtained by the
knowledge of magical words and formulae, and of the secret names of the
great gods, but the food on which lived the beatified souls who
succeeded in securing a place in the Boat consisted of the emanations of
the god Ra, or, according to the priests of Amen, Amen-Ra. In other
words, the beatified souls in the Boat became beings formed of the light
of Ra, on which they subsisted. The belief

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

that the souls of the righteous flew into the Boat of Ra is a very old
one, but the doctrine in the form in which it was developed by the
priests of Amen can never have been universally accepted in Egypt, for
it was not sufficiently material to satisfy any but the educated
classes. The great kings of the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, being
convinced that their military successes were due to the influence and
operation of Amen-Ra, dutifully accepted the instructions of the priests
of the god in all matters relating to his worship, and they permitted
them to prepare tombs for them in the Valley of Biban al-Muluk at
Thebes, which were built and ornamented according to the views held by
the followers of Amen-Ra concerning the Other World. The oldest tombs
here, i.e., those of the XVIIIth Dynasty, are usually entered by means
of long, sloping corridors that lead down into the chambers which held
the sarcophagi, and into smaller halls which adjoin the large chambers;
in the later tombs the corridors are often very long, and it is this
characteristic which caused certain Greek writers to call them Σύριγγες,
i.e., "shepherd's pipes." Of the forty-five tombs in this valley (Strabo
mentions forty only), the oldest royal tomb appears to be that of
Thothmes I., and the most recent that of Rameses XII., of the XXth
Dynasty. These tombs vary greatly in details, just as they do in size
and in the arrangement and number of their chambers, but it seems that
each tomb was intended to represent the Underworld, and that the
ceremonies,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

which were performed in it as. the mummy was taken from the entrance to
the last chamber in which it was to rest, were highly symbolical, and
that the progress of the body through the tomb was, so far as it was
possible, made to resemble that of the Sun-god through the hours of the
night in the Other World.

The religious texts with which the walls of the royal tombs are
decorated do not consist of extracts from the funeral works of the
Ancient and Middle Empires, but of sections from a work entitled
AM-TUAT, i.e., \[The Book of\] "what is in the Tuat," or Underworld, and
many of these are illustrated more or less fully with coloured pictures
of the gods, mythological scenes, &c. The rubrics show that portions of
this work belong to remote antiquity, and many of the beliefs which
appear in it are the products of the period when the Egyptians were
partly, if not wholly, savages. In the book itself numbers of gods and
mythological beings are mentioned whose names are not found elsewhere in
Egyptian literature. As we find it in the tombs of the royal followers
of Amen, the Book "Am-Tuat" contains all the dogmas and doctrines which
the priests of Amen held concerning the future life and the state. and
condition of the dead, and it is quite easy to see that the great object
of those who compiled it was to prove that Amen-Ra was not only the head
of the gods in heaven, and the ruler of the world which he had created,
but also the king of all the gods of the dead, and the master of all the
beings who were in the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Underworld. In other words, the priests of Amen
asserted the absolute sovereignty of their god, and their own religious
supremacy. It is, however, interesting to note that certain kings did
not entirely shake off their belief in Osiris, and in the efficacy of
the Chapters of the Book of Coming Forth by Day, for Thothmes III. was
swathed in a linen sheet on which was written a copy of the CLIVth
Chapter, and Amen-hetep III. was rolled up in sheets whereon extracts
from several Chapters of that work were inscribed. Seti I. went a good
deal further, for although fully illustrated copies of Divisions I.-XI.
of the Book "Am-Tuat" were painted on the walls of his tomb, he took
care to have a complete copy of the Book of Gates, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) with full illustrations, and copies of the
LXXIInd and LXXXIXth Chapters of the Book of Coming Forth by Day cut on
his alabaster sarcophagus.

The Chapter which Thothmes III. believed to be all-powerful is entitled
"Chapter of not letting the body perish," and if its words really
express his convictions, he must have been terrified at the idea of his
material body falling into dust and decay, and must have hoped for its
resurrection through Osiris. The Chapters which Seti I. had cut on his
sarcophagus are entitled the "Chapter of Coming Forth by Day, and of
making a way through Ammehet," and the "Chapter of causing the soul to
be united to its body in the Underworld." In the former he declares that

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

he knows the names of the gods who preside over the Other World, and
also the proper words of power, and because he has this knowledge he
demands admission into Sekhet-Aaru, a portion of Osiris's kingdom of
Sekhet-hetepet, and a constant and abundant supply of wheat (for bread),
barley (for beer), incense, unguents, &c., and the power to assume any
form he pleases at will. In the latter he calls upon certain gods to
make his soul rejoin its body, and, addressing the gods who tow the Boat
of Millions of Years, he asks them to cause him to be born from the womb
of the Sky-goddess Nut in the eastern horizon of heaven, \[daily,\] for
ever.

It has already been said that a complete illustrated copy of the Book of
Gates was also inscribed on the sarcophagus of Seti I., and it is not
easy to explain this fact until we remember the important position which
it makes Osiris to hold in the Other World. That the book is formed of
very ancient materials is evident from the last sections, which
certainly contain magical texts and pictures specially prepared with the
object of making the sun to rise, and there is little doubt that the
latter are representations of the ceremonies which the, primitive
Egyptians actually, performed to produce that most desirable effect. The
earlier sections of the Book are, full of magical ideas, but scattered
among them are expressions of beliefs which, it seems, must belong to a
later period of civilization, and passages which impress the reader

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

with the idea that they were composed by men who believed that the
righteous would be rewarded and the wicked punished in the world to
come. Special prominence is given to the conception of the Judgment,
wherein Osiris is the Judge of the dead. As the result of this Judgment
the righteous have allotments of land meted out to them, which vary in
size according to their deserts, and the wicked are slain, and their
bodies cut in pieces, and their souls destroyed. In many particulars the
views of the Book of Gates concerning the future state agree closely
with those of the Book of Coming Forth by Day.

The net result of the facts stated in the last two paragraphs proves
that Seti I. relied for salvation upon the protection, part magical and
part religious, afforded by the sacred writings of two great schools of
religious thought, the leaders of which in his day preached opposing and
contradictory doctrines. It may be argued that by filling the walls of
his tomb and sarcophagus with the texts of such books he was merely
acting from the point of view of religious expediency, wishing to
indicate his impartiality in respect of the followers of Amen and the
followers of Osiris, and his respect for the ancient traditional
beliefs, however material, crude, and impossible they may have appeared
to him personally. This, however, is unlikely to have been the case, and
it is far more probable that he believed every religious or funeral text
to have its own special value as a means of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

salvation, and that he selected for inscribing on the walls of his tomb
and sarcophagus those which he thought would bc the most likely to
secure for him in the next world an existence which would be at once
happy and everlasting. Therefore Seti I. provided himself with amulets,
*ushabtiu* figures, magical formulae, pictures of gods and fiends to be
used in working sympathetic magic, religious formulae and copies of
hymns and funeral works, an inscribed tomb and sarcophagus, &c.; in
fact, he was painfully anxious to omit nothing from the inscriptions in
his tomb which would propitiate any god, or appease the wrath and turn
aside the opposition of any of the fiends wherewith he had filled his
Underworld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[8:1](ehh03.htm#fr_0.md) See a letter in the *Times*
of June 22nd, 1905 (p. 4), on the "Most Ancient Temple at Thebes," by
Prof. E. Naville and Mr. If. R. Hall.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[11:1](ehh03.htm#fr_1.md) See Birch, *Ancient
Egyptian Texts front the Coffin of Amamu in the British Museum*, London,
1886.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[12:1](ehh03.htm#fr_2.md) Schack-Schackenburg, *Das
Buch von den Zwei Wegen des Seligen Toten*, Leipzig, 1903.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[13:1](ehh03.htm#fr_3.md) See page 49, l. 9-p. 51,
l. 11.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[13:2](ehh03.htm#fr_4.md) See page 49, ll. 4-9.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[17:1](ehh03.htm#fr_5.md) See Maspero's *Recueil de
Travaux*, tom. xxvii., p. 67.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[17:2](ehh03.htm#fr_6.md) According to M. Legrain,
the IIIrd Dynasty (*Recueil*, tom. xxvii., p. 67).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[23:1](ehh03.htm#fr_7.md) See within, Chapter IV.,
[p. 85](ehh06.htm#page_85.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Earliest Egyptian Conception of the Other
World.](ehh04.md)
