[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh00)  [Next](ehh02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

# PREFACE

THE present work is the outcome of two lectures on the Books of the
Tuat, i.e., the Egyptian Underworld, or "Other World," which I had the
honour to deliver at the Royal Institution in the spring of 1904, and it
has been prepared at the suggestion of many who wished to continue their
inquiries into the beliefs of the Egyptians concerning the abode of the
departed, and the state of the blessed and the damned.

The object of all the Books of the Other World was to provide the dead
with a "Guide" or "Handbook," which contained a description of the
regions through which their souls would have to pass on their way to the
kingdom of Osiris, or to that portion of the sky where the sun rose, and
which would supply them with the words of power and magical names
necessary for making an unimpeded journey from this world to the abode
of the blessed. For a period of two thousand years in the history of
Egypt, the Books of the Other World consisted of texts only, but about
B.C. 2500

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

funeral artists began to represent pictorially the chief features of the
"Field of Peace," or "Islands of the Blessed," and before the close of
the XIXth Dynasty, about 1300 years later, all the principal books
relating to the Tuat were profusely illustrated. In the copies of them
which were painted on the walls of royal tombs, each division of the
Tuat was clearly drawn and described, and each gate, with all its
guardians, was carefully depicted. Both the living and the dead could
learn from them, not only the names, but also the forms, of every god,
spirit, soul, shade, demon, and monster which they were likely to meet
on their way, and the copious texts which were given side by side with
the pictures enabled the traveller through the Tuat--always, of course,
provided that he had learned them--to participate in the benefits which
were decreed by the Sun-god for the beings of each section of it.

In primitive times each great city of Egypt possessed its own Other
World, and, no doubt, the priests of each city provided the worshippers
of their gods with suitable "guides" to the abode of its dead. In the
beginning of the Dynastic Period, however, we find that the cult of
Osiris was extremely popular, and therefore it was only natural that
great numbers of people in all parts of Egypt should hope and believe
that their souls after death would go to the kingdom in the Other World
over which he reigned. The beliefs connected with the cult of Osiris
developed naturally

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

out of the beliefs of the Predynastic Egyptians, who, we have every
reason to think, dealt largely in magic both "Black" and "White." Many
of the superstitions, and most of the fantastic and half-savage ideas
about the gods and supernatural powers enshrined in the great collection
of religious texts called PER-EM-HRU, were inherited by the Dynastic
Egyptians from some of the oldest dwellers in the Nile Valley. Those who
died in the faith of Osiris believed in the efficacy of the Book
PER-EM-HRU, and were content to employ it as a "Guide" to a heaven which
was full of material delights; the number of those who were "followers"
of Osiris was very large under every dynasty in Egypt. On the other
hand, from the IVth Dynasty onwards there was a very large class who had
no belief in a purely material heaven, and this being so, it is not
surprising that Books of the Other World containing the expression of
their views should be composed.

The principal Books of the Underworld in vogue under the XVIIIth and
XIXth Dynasties were:--1. PER-EM-HRU, or, "\[The Book\] of the Coming
Forth by Day." 2. SHAT ENT AM TUAT, or, "The Book of that which is in
the Tuat." 3. The composition to which the name "Book of Gates" has been
given. Now the first of these, which is commonly known as the "Theban
Recension of the Book of the Dead," has supplied us with much valuable
information about the beliefs which flourished in connection with an
early form of the ancient cult of Osiris in the Delta, and

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

with the later form of his worship, after he had absorbed the position
and attributes of Khenti-Amenti, an old local deity of Abydos. The two
other Books, however, are as important, each in its own way, as the
"Book of the Dead," for they throw considerable light on the development
of the material and spiritual elements in the religion of Egypt, and
commemorate the belief in the existence of numbers of primitive gods,
who are unknown outside these Books. The "Book Am-Tuat," in the form in
which we know it, was drawn up by the priests of the confraternity of
Amen-Ra at Thebes, with the express object of demonstrating that their
god was the overlord of all the gods, and the supreme power in "Pet Ta
Tuat," or, as we should say, "Heaven, Earth, and Hell." The Tuat, or
Other World, which they imagined included the Tuat of every great
district of Egypt, viz., the Tuat of Khenti-Amenti at Abydos, the Tuat
of Seker of Memphis, the Tuat of Osiris of Mendes, and the Tuat of
Temu-Kheper-Ra of Heliopolis.

In the BOOK AM-TUAT the god Amen-Ra was made to pass through all these
Tuats as their overlord and god, and his priests taught that all the
gods of the dead, including Osiris, lived through his words, and that
such refreshing as the beings of the Tuat enjoyed each day was due to
his grace and light during his passage through their regions and
Circles. Moreover, according to the dogmas of the priests of Amen-Ra,
only those who were fortunate enough to secure a place

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

in the divine bark of the god could hope to traverse the Tuat unharmed,
and only those who were his elect had the certainty of being re-born
daily, with a new supply of strength and life, and of becoming of like
nature and substance with him.

In the BOOK OF GATES the dogmas and doctrines of Osiris are far more
prominent, and the state of the beatified closely resembles that
described in the "Book of the Dead." In primitive times in Egypt men
thought that they would obtain admission into the kingdom of Hetep by
learning and remembering the secret name of this god and certain magical
formulae, and by pronouncing them in the correct way at the proper time.
The need for a consciousness of sin, and repentance, and a life of good
works, were not then held to be indispensable for admission into the
abode of the beatified. From the "Book of Gates," however, we learn that
in the later Dynastic Period a belief was prevalent that those who
worshipped the "great god" on earth, and made all the duly-appointed
offerings, and turned not aside to "miserable little gods," and lived
according to *maat*, i.e., uprightness and integrity, would receive a
good reward because they had done these things. The texts in these Books
state that the beatified live for ever in the kingdom of Osiris, and
feed daily upon the heavenly wheat of righteousness that springs from
the body of Osiris, which is eternal; he is righteousness itself, and
they are righteous, and they live by eating the body of their god daily.
On the other hand, the

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

wicked, i.e., those who did not believe in the great god or make
offerings, are hacked to pieces by the divine messengers of wrath, and
their bodies, souls, and spirits are consumed by fire once and for all.

The Egyptians had no belief in a purgatory. The fires of the Other World
were, it is true, occupied daily in burning up the damned and the
opponents of the Sun-god, but each day brought its own supply of bodies,
souls, spirits, demons, etc., for annihilation. In all the Books of the
Other World we find pits of fire, abysses of darkness, murderous knives,
streams of boiling water, foul stenches, fiery serpents, hideous
animal-headed monsters and creatures, and cruel, death-dealing beings of
various shapes, etc., similar to those with which we are familiar in
early Christian and mediæval literature, and it is tolerably certain
that modern nations are indebted to Egypt for many of their conceptions
of hell.

In the present work the object has been to give the reader the complete
hieroglyphic texts of the BOOK A-M-TUAT and the BOOK OF GATES, with
reproductions of all their illustrations in black and white, and English
translations and descriptions. The illustrations of the former work have
been specially traced from the plates of the excellent edition of the
tomb of Seti I. published by MM. G. Lefébure, U. Bouriant, V. Loret, and
E. Naville, in the second volume of the *Mémoires de la Mission
Archéologique Française au Caire*, Paris, 1886. The illustrations of the
BOOK OF GATES have

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

been traced from Bonomi's *Sarcophagus of Oimenepthah I*., London, 1864,
but for certain scenes I was permitted by the late Mr. G. Birch, Keeper
of Sir John Soane's Museum, to compare the tracings with the scenes on
the sarcophagi-is itself. A copy of the scene on the portion of the
cover, which I acquired for the Trustees of the British Museum a few
years ago, has also been included.

The plan followed has been to devote a chapter to each Division of the
Tuat, and to give the hieroglyphic texts, with short descriptions of the
various gods, &c., and translations, as near to the scenes to which they
refer as possible. With a view of making the edition as complete as
possible, I have added a transcript of the "Summary" of the BOOK AM-TUAT
from Dr. Pleyte's facsimile of the Leyden Papyrus, and a translation for
the convenience of the reader who may wish to compare the Divisions of
Am-Tuat with those of the BOOK OF GATES. The former have been printed in
one volume, and the latter in another; the full index given at the end
of the introductory volume will, it is hoped, make reference and
comparison easy. All general descriptions, and such explanations of the
scenes as are possible in the present state of our knowledge have been
given in a series of chapters in this volume, together with an account
of the origin and development of "guides" to the Other World, and a
rendering of a recently published and very important text from a coffin
at Cairo. This text proves that the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Egyptians believed in the reconstitution of
family life in the Other World, and thought that every man, and woman,
and child would possess such a measure of individuality that they would
know their relatives and friends in the Other World, and would be known
by them (see within, Chapter III).

The first translation of the BOOK AM-TUAT was published by Prof. G.
Maspero in the *Revue des Religions*, 1888, tom. xvii., pp. 251-310;
tom. xviii., pp. 1-67. This has been reprinted, with certain
modifications and additions, in his *Bibliothèque Égyptologique*, tom.
ii., pp. 1-181, Paris, 1893. The text chosen by him for elucidation was
that published by M. G. Lefébure in his edition of the tomb of Seti I.,
and this he supplemented with extracts from other versions of the work
given on sarcophagi, papyri, etc. The "Summary," or Short Form of
AM-TUAT, was first published in a complete form, with variant readings,
by M. G. Jéquier (see his *Le Livre de ce qu'il y a dans l'Hades*,
Paris, 1894). In Prof. Maspero's work mentioned above he also discussed
and analysed the earlier sections of the BOOK OF GATES, of which M. E.
Lefébure published a translation of the texts, as found on the
sarcophagus of Seti I., in the Records of the Past, vol. x., pp. 79-134,
London, 1878, and vol. xii., pp. 1-35, London, 1881. In preparing the
present edition of the two great Books of the Other World I have availed
myself of these works, and also of the valuable editions of the texts
from the royal tombs at Thebes,

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

which M. E. Lefébure has published in the first and second fasciculi of
the third volume of the *Mémoires de la Mission Archéologique Française
au Caire*, Paris, 1889.

E. A. WALLIS BUDGE.

LONDON,  
    *October*, 1905.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ehh02.md)
