[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh10)  [Next](ehh12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

#### II. THE KINGDOM OF KHENTI-AMENTI-OSIRIS ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF GATES.

Before AFU-RA can pass into the THIRD DIVISION it is necessary for him
to pass through a Gate which is protected by two strong walls, with a
passage running between them. This passage is swept by flames of fire
which proceed from two uraei; each end of it is guarded by a warder in
mummied form, and on the inner side of the inner wall is a company of
gods. The Gate is called SEPTET-UAUAU, and the name of its monster
serpent is AQEBI. So soon as the Boat enters the DIVISION or HOUR four
of the gods of the region appear, and take it in tow; the god is in the
same form as before, and has in no way suffered by his passage through
the Gate, because at the word of SA the Gate opened, the flames which
swept between the walls ceased, and the warders of the passage and the
guardian gods withdrew their opposition. In this DIVISION a serious
obstacle had to be overcome. Immediately in the fair way of the course
of AFU-RA is a group of eight gods, called FAIU-NETERU, who bear on
their shoulders a long pole-like object, each end of which terminates in
a bull's head. This object is,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

intended to represent the long tunnel in the earth, each end of which
was guarded by a bull, through which, according to one tradition, the
night-Sun passed on his journey from the place of sunset to the place of
sunrise. At intervals on the tunnel are seated seven gods called
NETERU-AMIU, i.e., the "gods who are within," and they are intended to
represent the guardians of the seven portions into which the tunnel was
divided; the name given to the tunnel is "UAA-TA," i.e., "Boat of the
Earth," but there is no doubt that it originally represented

 

<span id="img_12600"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/12600.jpg.md)  
The Boat of the Earth.

 

a kind of Tuat which was complete in itself, as the bulls' heads, one at
each end of it, prove.

The difficulty of passing through the "Boat of the Earth" is soon
overcome, for the gods of the Tuat tow AFU-RA through it, and we see
them at the other end of the Division still holding the tow-line in
their hands. In front of them are the four gods, whose arms and hands
are covered (vol. ii., p. 107), whom we have already seen in the BOOK
AM-TUAT (Vol. i., p. 48), where they were in charge of the four boats
which filled the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

picture. It is not difficult to explain why the "Boat of the Earth" was
omitted by the Theban priests from their composition; had they kept it
in it they would have been obliged to make their god AFU-RA, the night
form of AMEN-RA, to submit to being towed through an inferior Tuat, and
to being absorbed by the earth-god. The text which refers to this
remarkable scene tells us that AFU-RA addresses the eight gods who
support the "Boat of the Earth," and declares that he who is in it is
"holy," and in reply the being or beings ENNURKHA-TA (?) say, "Praised
be the BA," i.e., the ram-headed form of Osiris, which the god has
taken, "which the double bull has swallowed (or, absorbed); let the god
be at peace with that which he hath created." The gods also say,
"Praised be RA, whose BA hath set himself in order with the EARTH-GOD,"
Thus it is quite clear that the "Boat of the Earth" is the abode of the
"Earth-god."

To the right of AFU-RA, as he passes through this Division or Hour, are
the twelve "holy gods who are in the Tuat," each in his shrine, with its
doors thrown wide open; they are guarded by a huge serpent called SETI.
These gods are in mummied form, and represent a large class of the
beatified dead which exists in the realm of Osiris. According to the
text which refers to them AFU-RA finds the shrines closed when he
appears, and the gods within weeping and lamenting; at his word the
doors fly open, and the occupants of the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

shrines obtain air and food and adore him, but when he has passed on the
doors of the shrines close again, and the gods betake themselves to
lamentations until he reappears on the following night. Thus another
class of the dead owes its revivification, light, and food to the
beneficence of AFU-RA rather than to Osiris.

A little beyond the Twelve Shrines is a group of Twelve Gods, who are
partially immersed in the "Lake of Boiling Water"; in front of each is a
large plant. The waters of this lake have the peculiar property of
appearing cool to the taste and touch of the gods who live on it, and
who feed upon the plants which grow in it. It is important to notice
that the Lake is said to be boiling hot, and that "the birds betake
themselves to flight when they see the waters thereof, and when they
smell the stench which is in it." Now this description tells us at once
that the Lake of Boiling Water is no other than a collection of water
which resembles that of the famous "ASPHALTITIS LACUS," or ἀσφαλτῖτις
λίμην, which is described by Diodorus Siculus (ii. 48; xix. 98). The
water of this Lake is said to be very salt, and of an extremely noxious
smell, and the fire which burns beneath the ground, and the stench of
the bitumen render the inhabitants of the neighbouring country sickly
and short-lived. The country round about is nevertheless well fitted for
the cultivation of palms, wherever it is traversed by fresh water. It is
quite clear that the author of the Egyptian text cannot have borrowed
his

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

description of the Lake from later writers, and it is equally clear that
his account of it represents the tradition of the existence of some hot
sulphur spring or bituminous lake which existed in Egypt, probably in or
near one of the Oases. At Kharga, for example, there are several springs
the waters of which reach a temperature of 97° Fahrenheit. As we see in
the picture (vol. ii., p. 112) a large plant, or small tree, growing
before each of its inhabitants, it is evident that some kind of
vegetation flourished in the neighbourhood of the Lake, and the quaint
costume of the gods, who, of course, typified the inhabitants of the
region, suggests that they were not Egyptian. The dwellers in the LAKE
OF BOILING WATER entreat AFU-RA to come to them, saying, "Send forth thy
light upon us, O thou great god who hast fire in thine eye" (vol. ii.,
p. 113). In answer, the god decrees that their food shall consist of
loaves of bread and green, herbs, and that their beer shall be made from
the *kemtet* plant. This plant has not as yet been accurately
identified, but it is tolerably certain that it belonged to a species
which was characteristic of the neighbourhood of the Lake.

The beings who stand on the left hand of AFU-RA are divided into two
groups: the first consists of nine men, and the second of nine gods, and
each group is under the command of TEMU. Between TEMU and the first
company, who are called TCHATCHA we see (vol. ii., p. 114) coiled the
monster serpent APEP which has

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

collapsed as a result of the utterance of the word of power by TEMU.
This serpent tried to envelop the boat of AFU-RA with its folds, and
then to force a way into his boat; but the TCHATCHA, i.e., "Great
Chiefs," cut open its head, and slit its body in many places, and its
destruction was finished by TEMU. These TCHATCHA live upon the same food
as Ra, but they also partake of the offerings made upon earth to
KHENTI-AMENTI, the ancient god of the dead of Abydos. The nine gods who
follow these are called NEBU-KHERT, and their duty is to repulse the
serpents SEBA and AF (vol. ii., p. 115), and to enchant and to render
helpless and motionless APEP when he attempts to force the gates of
KHENTI-AMENTI. Their food is the same as that of the TCHATCHA, but they
possess a power of a remarkable character (which is represented by the
words "maat kheru"), for they know how to utter words in such a way, and
with such a tone of voice, that the effect which they wish them to have
must of necessity take place. Everything which Osiris possessed as god
and judge of the dead he owed to the "*maat* kheru," or "word of
*maat*." As the god AFU-RA passes out of the THIRD DIVISION both the
TCHATCHA and the NEBU-KHERT give themselves up to lamentation, and they
return to the entrance, and wait for the re-appearance of his boat on
the following night, when they will again attack SEBA, and AF, and APEP,
and overcome them. The exact place which was set apart for the souls of
human beings is nowhere described in the texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Fourth Division of the Tuat. I. The Kingdom of
Seker According to the Book Am-Tuat](ehh12.md)
