[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh11)  [Next](ehh13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

## FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

### I. THE KINGDOM OF SEKER ACCORDING TO THE BOOK AM-TUAT.

THE Boat of AFU-RA has now passed out of the dominions of KHENTI-AMENTI,
the ancient god of the dead of the city of Abydos, and has entered the
kingdom of SEKER, who is probably the oldest of all the gods of the dead
in Egypt. The dominions Of SEKER were situated in the deserts round
about Memphis, and were supposed to cover a large extent of territory,
and their characteristics were entirely different from those of the
regions ruled over by KHENTI-AMENTI near Abydos, and from those of the
kingdom of Osiris, the lord of Busiris and Mendes, in the Delta. The
kingdom of SEKER was shrouded in thick darkness, and, instead of
consisting of fertile plains and fields, intersected by streams of
running water, was formed of bare, barren, sandy deserts, wherein lived
monster serpents of terrifying aspect, some having two, and some three
heads, and some having wings. This region offered so many difficulties
to the passage of the boat of AFU-RA, that special means had to be found
for overcoming them, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

for enabling the god and his followers to proceed northwards to the
House of Osiris. As there was no river in the land of SEKER a boat was
useless to AFU-RA, and as the god was unable to travel through the
FOURTH DIVISION boldly, and to allow himself to be seen by all the
inhabitants thereof, it was arranged that he should pass through a
series of narrow corridors, which were provided with doors. The pictures
which illustrate the passage of the god through this DIVISION, or HOUR,
are arranged in three registers, but the actual corridors through which
he travelled are drawn across these obliquely.

The main corridor is called RE-STAU. At the end of the first section of
it is the door MATES-SMA-TA (Vol. i., p. 63), at the end of the second
section is the door MATES-MAU-AT (vol. i., p. 71), and at the end of the
third section is the door MATES-EN-NEHEH (vol. i., p. 75). An
inscription in this last tells us that it is the road by which the body
of SEKER enters and that his form is neither seen nor perceived; hence
it is clear that the road by which AFU-RA passed through this DIVISION
was supposed to be high up above the dominions Of SEKER, and that he
never saw that god at all. The name given to this DIVISION, or "CIRCLE,"
as it is called in the Summary, is ANKHET-KHEPERU, and that of its Gate
is AMENT-SETHAU.

the goddess of the Hour is called URT-EM-SEKHEMU-S. We may now consider
the means employed by AFU-RA

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

for passing through this HOUR. Looking at the middle register (vol. i.,
p. 63) we see that the god has discarded his ordinary boat, and that he
and his crew are standing in a boat which is formed of a two-headed
serpent; a serpent was the best means of transport for the god, because
it could glide easily along the sandy floor of the rocky corridor. From
the "mouth of the boat," which is drawn by four gods, rays of light are
emitted; this light is not strong enough to enable AFU-RA to see the
beings who are on each side of him (vol. i., p. 66), but knowing they
are there, he cries out to them, and they hear him. The hidden gods who
march in front of the boat are few in number, and the names of many of
them are unfamiliar; some of them are connected with Osiris, and all of
them are under the control of ANPU, or ANUBIS, and perform some act
which helps the boat along. Among them may be specially noted Thoth and
Horus, above whose outstretched hands is the Eye which is here
identified with SEKRI (vol. i., p. 75).

As AFU-RA journeys on his way there are on his right three serpents, a
scorpion, a uraeus serpent, a three-headed serpent with wings and human
legs, a few of the gods of the HOUR, a serpent with two necks and heads
proceeding from one body, and a tail which terminates in another head
(vol. i., pp. 67, 71, 75, 79). On his left are a few more gods and
goddesses, the serpents HETCH-NAU, AMEN, HEKENT, and the terrible
three-headed serpent MENMENUT, the face of which illumines the chamber
in which KHEPERA is born daily (vol. i.,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

p\. 79). Over the back of the last-named serpent are fourteen heads,
which, as M. Maspero has well shown, re resent the gods of the first
fourteen days of the month, and they are being carried by the serpent to
fill the EYE which THOTH and HORUS are bringing through RE-STAU. The
beings to the right and left of AFU-RA are ancient gods of the kingdom
of SEKER, and each guards some door or corridor in it which leads to the
hidden chamber of SEKER himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Division of the Tuat. I. The Kingdom of Seker According to
the Book Am-Tuat](ehh13)
