[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh12)  [Next](ehh14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

#### I. THE KINGDOM OF SEKER ACCORDING TO THE BOOK AM-TUAT.

This DIVISION, or HOUR, or CIRCLE, as it is described in the text, is
called AMENT, and it contains the secret ways, and the doors of the
hidden chamber of the holy place of the Land of SEKER, and his flesh,
and his members, and his body, in the forms which they had in primeval
times; the main gate is called AHA-NETERU, the gods are called
BAIU-AMMIU-TUAT, and the goddess of the HOUR is SEMIT-HER-ABT-UAA-S. The
Boat of AFU-RA is towed by seven gods and seven goddesses, and is
preceded by a few gods who are led by Isis (vol. i., pp. 87, 91, 95, 99,
100, 107, 111); the texts make it clear that AFU-RA continues his
journey by the help of KHEPERA. The corridor of RE-STAU through which he
travels now bends upwards, and passing by

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the secret abode of SEKER, by which it is hidden, once more descends to
its former level. The Land of Seker is in the form of an elongated
ellipse, and is enclosed by a wall of sand; it rests upon the backs of
two man-headed sphinxes, each of which is called AF and lives upon the
voice, or word, of the great god. The duty of these is to guard the
Image of Seker. The form in which this god is depicted is that of a
hawk-headed man, who stands between a pair of wings that project from
the back of a huge serpent having two heads and necks, and a tail
terminating in a bearded human head. The Land of Seker is covered by a
pyramid having its apex in the form of the head of a goddess, and above
it is the vault of night, from which emerges the Beetle of KHEPERA When
the Boat of AFU-RA comes to the pyramid, the Beetle ceases to converse
with the goddess of the apex, whose duty it is to pass on its words to
SEKER, and betakes itself to the Boat, and begins the revivification of
AFU-RA, who is led on without delay to the end of RE-STAU, where he is
received by the MORNING STAR and the light of a new day.

The IMAGE of Seker, which has been described above, lives in thick
darkness, and any light which is seen there proceeds from the "eyes of
the heads of the great god whose flesh sendeth forth light," and the god
himself lives upon the offerings which are made to the god TEMU upon
earth. When AFU-RA has passed by in his boat there is heard in the Land
of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Seker a mighty noise which is like unto that
heard in the heights of heaven when they are disturbed by a storm. On
one side of the Land of Seker is the serpent TEPAN (vol. i., p. 95),
which presents to the god the offerings made to him daily; on the other
is the serpent ANKHAAPAU, which lives upon its own fire, and remains
always on guard. Close by are the emblems of the various forms of Seker.
Behind the serpent TEPAN is a lake of boiling water, from which project
the heads of those who are being boiled therein. This lake or stream is
called NETU, and it is situated in the region of the kingdom of Seker
which is called AMMAHET, the unfortunate beings who are in the boiling
water weep when the Boat of AFU-RA has passed them by.

The gods who stand on the other side of the corridor through which
AFU-RA passes are all invoked by him, and they all are assumed to help
him on his way, not because they are in duty bound to do so, but because
he acknowledged their power by asking their help. Some of them he
appealed to because he had created them, but others are manifestly the
servants of Seker, and their duty it was to guard his kingdom. A number
of them are gods who were set over the waters which lay in the northern
part of the DIVISION, and it was all important for AFU-RA to have their
friendly help when he left the back of the serpent and rejoined his own
boat. In one portion of the region to the left of AFU-RA

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

we see the HETEP-NETERU, i.e., a company of eight prods, and the goddess
QETET-TENT; the work of these gods is to be present at the destruction
of the dead in the Tuat, and to consume their bodies by the flames which
they emit from their mouths, and the goddess lives partly on the blood
of the dead, and partly on what the gods give her. These gods are
provided with blocks on which they cut in pieces the dead, and when they
are not thus employed they sing hymns to their god, to the accompaniment
of the shaking of sistra; they exist by virtue of the word of power
which they have received, and their souls have been given to them (vol.
i., p. 110). The dead who are here referred to are those who have
succeeded in entering the dread realm of Seker, but who, for want of the
influence over the gods there, which could only be obtained by
sacrifices and offerings made upon earth, and by the knowledge of mighty
words of power, were unable to proceed to the abode of Seker.

When they arrived in the AMMAHET, some of them were cast into a lake of
liquid fire, or of boiling water, and others were first cut in pieces,
and then consumed by fire. Thus there is no doubt that there was a hell
of fire in the kingdom of Seker, and that the tortures of mutilation and
destruction by fire were believed to be reserved for the wicked. Of the
rewards of the righteous in this kingdom we have no knowledge
whatsoever, and it seems as if the scheme of the Other World of Seker
made no provision for the beatified

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

dead; at all events, it provided for them no fertile fields like the
Sekhet-Hetepet of Osiris, and no Boat of Millions of Years wherein as
beings of light they could travel in the company of the Sun-god for
ever. The religion of Seker proclaimed that the god lived in
impenetrable darkness, in a region of sand, closely guarded by terrible
monster serpents, and it had little in it to induce the worshippers of
the god to wish to be with him after their departure from this world.
The cult Of SEKER is one of the oldest in Egypt, and in its earliest
form it, no doubt, represents the belief as to the future life of some
of the most primitive inhabitants of the country; in fact, it must have
originated at a period when some influential body of priests taught that
death was the end of all things, and when snakes and bulls were the
commonest forms under which the gods of the neighbourhood of Memphis
were worshipped. The oldest presentment of the Land of Seker which we
have is, of course, not older than the XVIIIth or XIXth Dynasty, and it
must be remembered that it is the work of the priests of Thebes, who
would be certain to remove any texts, figures, or details which they
found inconvenient for their views. It is tolerably certain that the
form in which they depicted it is much shorter than that in which it
existed originally, and that the attributes and duties of many of the
gods have been changed to suit the necessities of the cults of Osiris
and Amen-Ra. Such changes have resulted in great confusion, and at the
present time it is impossible

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

to reduce these most interesting, but at the same time most difficult,
scenes and texts to their original forms. The priests of Amen-Ra found
it to be impossible to ignore entirely SEKER and his Land, when they
were depicting the various Underworlds of Egypt, but it is very
suggestive that they make the path of AFU-RA to be *over* and not
*through* his kingdom, and that AFU-RA had to go on his way without
entering the pyramid beneath which reposed the IMAGE of SEKER in the
deepest darkness of night, in fact without seeing SEKER at all. On the
other hand, they attached the greatest importance to the knowledge of
the pictures of the FOURTH and FIFTH DIVISIONS, and they believed that
it would enable the body of a man to rejoin his soul, and prevent the
goddess KHEMIT, from hacking it in pieces, and would secure for the
believer a share of the offerings made to Seker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Fourth Division of the Tuat. II. The Kingdom of
Khenti-Amenti-Osiris According to the Book Of Gates](ehh14.md)
