[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh09)  [Next](ehh11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

## THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

### I. THE KINGDOM OF KHENTI-AMENTI-OSIRIS, ACCORDING TO THE BOOK AM-TUAT.

THE Boat of AFU-RA, leaving the abode of the SOULS OF THE TUAT, now
enters that of the BAIU-SHETAIU, or the "SECRET SOULS," and we find that
a change has taken place as regards the crew. The goddess of the hour
called TENT-BAIU has taken charge of the Boat, a hawk-headed god acts as
steersman, and the number of the other gods is reduced to four. The
region now entered by Afu-Ra is called NET-NEB-UA-KHEPER-AUT, and it is
309 (or 480) *atru* or leagues in length, and 120 in width; it is, in
fact, a continuation of the domains of Osiris, and in it is the House of
Tet wherein the great god of the dead himself dwells. The Boat of AFU-RA
is preceded by three boats (vol. i., pp. 45-47) of a mystical character,
containing hawk-gods, and mummied forms of gods who are akin to Osiris.
Facing the boats are four forms of Osiris, with their arms and hands
covered. Having arrived in this Division, AFU-RA cries out to its god,
Osiris, who straightway creates these secret boats and sends them

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

to bring AFU-RA to the place where he is. The abode of Osiris is
situated on the NET-ASAR i.e., the "Stream of Osiris," a name given to
the river of the Tuat in the THIRD DIVISION, and it is at the head of
this river that the throne of Osiris rests according to some copies of
the Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead. The inhabitants who are
seen on both banks of the stream are called PERTIU, and they live on
lands which have been allotted to them by Afu-Ra; in return for these
they serve Osiris and defend him from the attacks of all his enemies. As
the boat in which AFU-RA stands and the three other boats move on, the
gods on the banks move with them and guard them, and when they have
escorted the great god to the end of their territory, they return to
their old places and await his coming on the following night.

On the right of AFU-RA are twenty-six gods, and of these eight are forms
of Osiris, four of Osiris of the North, and four of Osiris of the South;
all are under the rule of KHETRA, who is the "Warder of this Field"
(vol. i., p. 60), but it is only when they hear the words of AFU-RA that
they come to life. The work which they do in this region is to hew and
hack souls in pieces, to imprison the shadows of the dead, and to carry
out the sentence of death on those who are doomed to destruction in a
place of fire; they cause fires to come into being, and flames to burst
forth on the wicked.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Now in this case also the beings who are doomed
to be burned in a place specially set apart for this purpose cannot be
of the number of the gods who protect Osiris, for they were created by
Ra to serve this god in this Division of the Tuat, and to attend upon
himself as he made his journey through it each day! They must, then, be
the dead of olden time who have reached this Division, but who through
want of friends and relatives upon earth to make proper and sufficient
offerings daily, or through some other cause, have failed to find
nourishment and have perished in consequence. The realm of Osiris had to
be cleared of such beings, and the gods whose duty it was to protect him
destroyed them with fire. We may note, too, that in this Division the
shadows and souls of the dead were supposed to wander about, and though
we do not know how they arrived there, or exactly why they failed to
please Osiris, it is quite certain that they were regarded as a danger
to the god, and destroyed in consequence.

On the left of AFU-RA stands a row of deities (vol. i. p. 50 ff.), some
wholly in animal forms, who appear to have taken part in the burial
ceremonies which were performed for Osiris; the exact functions of many
of them are unknown, and the names of certain of them are not found
elsewhere. According to the text these gods are clothed with their own
bodies of flesh, and their souls speak from them, and their shadows are
joined to them. Having been addressed by

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

they sing praises to the god, and when he has passed from their Division
they, as well as the gods on the right of the BOAT, lift up their voices
and weep. In return for the lands which were given them by Osiris, in
the possession of which they were confirmed by AFU-RA, these gods have
certain duties to perform, viz., to take vengeance upon the fiend SEBA,
to make Nu to come into being, and to cause HAPI to flow. From this it
appears that SEBA possessed at times power over Nu, that is to say, the
great celestial watery mass which was the source of the river NILE in
Egypt; to destroy this fiend was all-important, for without water the
inhabitants of the Tuat could not live, and the cessation of the flow of
the NILE would cause the ruin and death of the people of Egypt. It is
interesting to note the connexion of the NILE with the chief domain of
Osiris, and it is, no doubt, a reminiscence of the period in the history
of the god when he was a water-god. A knowledge of the beings in these
pictures and of the texts of this DIVISION was considered of very great
importance for the deceased, for, knowing their forms and their names,
he would not be terrified by their "roarings," and would not in his
haste to escape from them fall headlong into their pits. In this
DIVISION of the Tuat we see that AFU-RA was absolute master, and that he
is made to create its inhabitants to serve Osiris, and Khenti-Amenti,
and himself, and to allot to them places to dwell in, and food to keep
them alive. When he withdraws his light from them they

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

weep, and sink into a state of inertness to await his return on the
following day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Division of the Tuat. II. The Kingdom of
Khenti-Amenti-Osiris According to the Book of Gates](ehh11.md)
