[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh26)  [Next](ehh28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ELEVENTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

#### II. KINGDOM OF TEMU-KHEPERA-RA ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF GATES.

The gate which leads into the ELEVENTH DIVISION, or HOUR, is called
SHETAT-BESU, and the name of the

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

monster serpent which guards it is AM-NETU-F. Mummied forms guard the
corridor between the walls .of the outworks, but the place of the
company of gods who usually stand outside is occupied by two sceptres,
or standards, one of which represents SAR, i.e., Osiris, and the other
HORUS. The god AFU-RA enters this DIVISION in the form in which he has
hitherto appeared, and he is towed by four gods who belong to it; we
see, however, that APEP has not been wholly removed from the path of the
god. The serpent lies here (vol. ii., p. 287) in fetters, and a company
of the servants of AFU-RA who live in this DIVISION stand ready to
attack him with the knives which they hold in their hands; their
sceptres betoken their position as chiefs in the DIVISION. Next come
four apes, each holding a large hand, and these stand, according to the
text, two on the right and two on the left of the abode of the god; they
hold up the Disk of the god, and sing praises to his soul when it looks
upon them. In front of these are the goddesses AMENTET and HERIT, and
the god SEBEKHTI, who presides over the entrance into the vestibule of
the world of light.

On the right of the path of the Boat of AFU-RA are gods and goddesses of
the South and North who stablish crowns on the head of Ra when he
appears in the sky; gods who give names to Ra and all his forms; gods
and goddesses who lament when Ra has gone out from Ament, and who drive
away Set; and gods with bowed heads who sing praises to Ra and keep
guard

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

over the Hidden Door. The souls of these gods follow after Ra, and
accompany him on his way, but their bodies stay always where we see
them. Their guardian is (vol. ii., pp. 296-299) the god called MATI, who
has the head of a cat or lion.

On the left of the path of the Boat of AFU-RA is a company of his
ministers who perform various important duties for him. Four of them
carry disks, and give the command to the Gate of AKERT So that the god
may be allowed to pass through and set himself in the sky. The mention
of AKERT in the text which refers to these is interesting, for it shows
that the ELEVENTH DIVISION of the BOOK OF GATES represents a portion of
the Kingdom of the Sun-god of Heliopolis. Four other gods carry stars,
and when AFU-RA passes out of this DIVISION, and is received into the
arms of Nu, the Sky-god, they shout hymns of praise. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) Before these are twelve gods with
sceptres, four having human heads, four the heads of rams, and four the
heads of hawks. The first four are the lords of the region, and stablish
the domains of Ra in the sky; the second four provide offerings of bread
and water for the god; and the third four set the shrine of Ra in the
Matet-Sektet Boat, and place in it the paddles whereby it is to be
paddled across the sky. The eight star-goddesses who sit upon uraei
belong to the abode of the great god, four coming from the East and four
from the West;

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

they invoke the Spirits of the East, and join with them in singing hymns
to the god, and in praising him after he has appeared in the sky. At the
head of the whole . company stands a god with the head of a crocodile
(vol. ii., pp. 290-293). The Kingdom of TEMU-KHEPERA-RA. differs from
other Tuats from the fact that, according to the BOOK OF GATES, it
contains no place specially set apart for the punishment of the enemies
of Osiris and Ra, and of the damned. The pictures which illustrate it
supply us with representations of the enemies of the Sun-god and of the
beings who vanquish them, and secure his triumphant progress. Having
arrived at the end of the ELEVENTH DIVISION the Boat comes to the end of
the Fourth Tuat; <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) AFU-RA has effected
his transformation as KHEPERA, and is now ready to appear in the sky of
this world as RA. How he effects this we shall see from the next
DIVISION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[190:1](ehh27.htm#fr_53.md) Compare Job xxxviii.
7--"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy."

<span id="fn_54"></span>[191:1](ehh27.htm#fr_54.md) The Four Tuats are the
Kingdoms of Khenti-Amenti-Osiris, Seker, Osiris of Mendes and Busiris,
and Temu-Khepera-Ra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Twelfth Division of the Tuat. I. Eastern Vestibule
of the Tuat, or the Antechamber of the World of Light According to the
Book Am-Tuat](ehh28.md)
