[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh21)  [Next](ehh23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EIGHTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

#### II. KINGDOM OF OSIRIS ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF GATES.

The Boat of AFU-RA next passes through the Gate of Bekhkhi, which is
guarded by the monster serpent

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

\[paragraph continues\] SET-HRA, and is towed over this DIVISION, or
HOUR, by the gods of the Tuat. The region is a remarkable one, and it
certainly forms part of the Kingdom of the Sun-god of ANNU, or
Heliopolis. At one end of the long Lake, or Pool, which represents the
celestial waters of Nu (vol. ii., pp. 225, 226) stands the god "who
dwelleth in Nu," and in the Lake itself we see four groups of beings in
human forms who are called "Bathers" (Herpiu), "Floaters" (Akiu),
"Swimmers" (Nubiu), and "Divers" (Khepau). The gods who tow the Boat
call on the dwellers in this DIVISION to praise the soul of RA, which is
in heaven, and his body, which is on earth; for heaven is made young
again by his soul, and earth by his body. Then, addressing the god in
the Boat, they declare that they will make his paths straight in AKERT,
and that they will make his Boat to pass over the beings who are
immersed in the waters of the Lake. The god "who dwelleth in Nu" then
calls upon the beings in the water to pay homage to Ra, and he promises
that they shall enjoy breath for their nostrils, and peace in their
cisterns of water. Their souls, which are upon earth, shall enjoy
offerings in abundance and shall never die, and shall be as fully
provided with food as is Ra, whose body is on earth, but whose soul is
in heaven.

On the left of the path of AFU-RA are twelve TCHATCHA, or "Great
Chiefs," and nine SOULS, who are adoring a god (vol. ii., pp. 227, 231);
before each Soul are a loaf of bread and some *sekemu* herbs. The
TCHATCHA

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

perform a very important duty in this DIVISION, for they distribute to
the SOULS who have been ordered by RA, to live by the fiery Lake SERSER
the food which has been allotted to them; in other words, they give the
SOULS the portion of food which it has been decreed they should receive
daily, and no more and no less, and the SOULS receive their destined
allowance, and have to be content therewith. Judging from the texts here
and elsewhere in the BOOK OF GATES it seems that there was some power in
the Tuat, probably KHENTI-AMENTI, or OSIRIS KHENTI-AMENTI, who decreed
that the beings therein should receive a regular, fixed, and unalterable
allowance of food-each day, and who appointed ministers, who are here
called TCHATCHA, to see that each being received his "ration," without
addition, and without diminution. The Sun-god in passing through the
Tuat confirms the "ration," and orders its continuance to each being
therein.

On the right of the path of AFU-RA is HORUS THE AGED, leaning on a
staff, and addressing a company of twelve of the enemies of Osiris (vol.
ii., pp. 232-234), who stand with their arms tied together behind their
backs in very painful attitudes. Before these is a huge serpent called
KHETI, belching fire into the faces of the enemies of Osiris; in each of
the seven undulations of the serpent stands a god, who is adjured by
Horus to aid in the work of destruction. From the text we learn that the
chief offences with which these enemies are charged is the "putting of
secret things behind

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

them, the dragging forth of the sacred object *sekem* from the secret
place, or sanctuary, and the profanation of certain of the hidden things
of the Tuat"; because of these things they are doomed to have their
bodies first hacked in pieces, and then burned, and their souls utterly
annihilated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Tenth Division of the Tuat. I. Kingdom of
Temu-Khepera-Ra According to the Book Am-Tuat](ehh23.md)
