[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15013)  [Next](cc15015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 46

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
46:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth; their
idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages *were*
heavy loaden; *they are* a burden to the weary *beast.*

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Incurvatus est *(vel, prostratus est)*
Bel; depressus est Nebo. Simulachra eorum bestiae et jumento erunt,
gestantia vos a vobis onerata, pondus ad lassitudinem.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** They stoop, they bow down together;
they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into
captivity.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Incurvata sunt, depressa sunt pariter,
(et) non potuerunt se subtrahere oneri; et anima eorum in captivitatem
abiit.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and
all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne *by me* from the
belly, which are carried from the womb:

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Audite me, domus Iacob, omnes reliquiae
domus Israel, qui gestamini ab utero, qui portamini a vulva.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And *even* to *your* old age I *am* he;
and *even* to hoar hairs will I carry *you:* I have made, and I will
bear; even I will carry, and will deliver *you*

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et usque ad senium ego idem, et usque
ad caniciem ego portabo. Ego feci, et ego feram, ego portabo et servabo.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** To whom will ye liken me, and make
*me* equal, and compare me, that we may be like?

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Cui similem me facitis, et aequatis,
et comparatis me, ut similis sim?

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6.** They lavish gold out of the bag, and
weigh silver in the balance, *and* hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a
god: they fall down, yea, they worship.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Promentes aurum ex sacculis, argentum
in statera ponderantes, conducent aurifabrum, ut ex eo faciant Deum, cui
se incurvent, et quem adorent.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7.** They bear him upon the shoulder, they
carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place
shall he not remove: yea, *one* shall cry unto him, yet can he not
answer, nor save him out of his trouble.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Portabunt super humerum, deferent,
ponent in loco suo; illic stabit, loco suo non movebitur. Adhaec, si
quis clamet ad eum, non respondebit, neque ex tribulatione ejus
liberabit eum.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**8.** Remember this, and shew yourselves
men: bring *it* again to mind, O ye transgressors.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Recordamini hoc, et erubescite *(vel,
roboramini;)* redite, praevaricatores ad cor.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**9.** Remember the former things of old: for
I *am* God, and *there is* none else; *I am* God, and *there is* none
like me;

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Recordamini priora a seculo; quia ego
Deus, et nullus praeterea Deus, et nihil mihi simile.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>**10.** Declaring the end from the beginning,
and from ancient times *the things* that are not *yet* done, saying, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Nuntians ab initio novissimum, et a
vetustate quae nondum facta erant; dicens, Consilium meum stabit, et
quicquid voluero faciam.

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**11.** Calling a ravenous bird from the
east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have
spoken *it,* I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed *it,* I will
also do it.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Vocans ab Oriente avem *(vel,
cogitationem,)* e terra longinqua virum consilii mei. Loquutus sum, ideo
adducam hoc; cogitavi, idem faciam.

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**12.** Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted,
that *are* far from righteousness:

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Audite me praefracti corde, qui
procul estis a justitia.

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>**13.** I bring near my righteousness; it
shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place
salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Appropinquare faciam justitiam meam,
nec elongabitur, et salus mea non morabitur. Et ponam in Sion salutem,
et in Ierusalem gloriam meam.

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span><span id="xv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>**1.** *Bel hath bowed down.* Isaiah
continues the same subject; for we need not trouble ourselves about the
division of chapters, which have not always been accurately divided; but
we ought to examine the statements themselves, which agree with each
other in the manner which I have pointed out. Yet if any prefer to view
this as the commencement of a new discourse, because immediately
afterwards he prophesies concerning the destruction of Babylon, I shall
not greatly quarrel with him.

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>*Nebo is cast down.* “Bel” and “Nebo” were
idols which were worshipped by the Babylonians, and probably were their
chief patrons; as idolaters always have some particular gods, under
whose protection, above all others, they consider themselves to be
placed. It may be conjectured that this “Nebo” was a sort of inferior
god that was added to the chief god “Bel,” as Mercury was to Jupiter.
Under their names he includes also the rest of the idols, and declares
that all the superstitions and false worship of the Gentiles shall be
overthrown, when God shall lay low and triumph over their worshippers;
because it shall then be manifest that he is the righteous avenger of
his Church.

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>*Their idols shall be on the beasts.* The
Babylonians having haughtily boasted of the protection of false gods,
the Prophet rebukes that vain confidence, because the God of Israel will
not only bring utter ruin on that wicked nation, but also will cast down
and treat disdainfully their gods. The reason why he says that they
shall be burdens of *“beasts”* is, that they shall be laid on waggons
and removed from one place to another, and shall even be huddled
together without any respect, as the waggoners think proper. This is
what is meant by “being cast down,” for the robbers shall collect into a
large heap those gods which formerly occupied an elevated station.

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>There can be no doubt, indeed, that this was
fulfilled when the Persians and Medes took Babylon by storm; for when
the monarchy was removed, these idols were taken away as a part of the
booty. But Isaiah, though he predicted this, looked farther, that is, to
the coming of Christ, who was to overtum and destroy all false worship;
for, when his kingdom has been established, all idols immediately fall
to the ground, and it is impossible that false religion and superstition
can exist along with the knowledge of him. By his brightness he dispels
all darkness, so as to leave no room for false gods or superstitions;
for, as Paul says,

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>“What hath Christ to do with Belial? What
hath light to do with darkness?”  
(<span id="xv.i-p34.2"></span>[2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="xv.i-p34.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>At the same time it ought to be observed,
that the Prophet had his eye on the time when the Jews were held in
captivity; for they saw the Babylonians offer incense to idols, and
ascribe to them supreme power, as if the government of affairs depended
on them; while the God of the Jews was treated with scorn, as if he
could not defend his people, or as if he cared nothing about them. For
this reason he shews that there will be so great a revolution, that the
gods of the Babylonians, which were elevated so high, shall be laid low,
and God, who appeared to he low, shall rise up and avenge his people.

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span><span id="xv.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>**2.** *They could not withdraw themselves
from the burden.* He ridicules the vanity of such gods as these, which
have neither strength nor motion, and cannot defend or support
themselves, and, in a word, who need the aid of beasts of burden to
carry them. There is, therefore, an implied contrast between idols and
the true God, who has no need of anything whatever. I interpret these
words as applied to beasts, but the Prophet heightens the disgrace by
saying that they were a heavy burden to the beasts themselves which
would willingly have cast them off, and consequently that the false
gods, besides being of no use to their worshippers, also wearied out the
beasts.

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>*And their soul hath gone into captivity.*
This is a Hebrew mode of expression, by which he ridicules those gods
which have neither “soul” nor understanding. He speaks ironically,
therefore, against useless and dumb idols, when he says that they shall
be carried into captivity along with their soul. But we must see if
these things cannot be retorted on the true God, whose ark, by which he
gave testimony of his presence, was taken by the Philistines; for in
this way it appeared as if the Lord were a captive. (<span
id="xv.i-p38.1"></span>[1Sa 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011.md)<span
id="xv.i-p38.1"></span>.) This objection may be easily answered; for,
although the Lord intended that the ark should be a testimony of his
presence, yet he forbade the Jews to fix their whole and exclusive
attention upon it, but commanded them to raise their eyes to heaven, and
there to seek and adore God. He wished to be always worshipped in a
spiritual manner, (<span id="xv.i-p38.2"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="xv.i-p38.2"></span>,.md)
and the ark was not adored instead of God, but was a symbol, by which
the people were led upwards, as by the hand, to God. The Gentiles, on
the other hand, fixed their attention on their idols, and attributed to
them divine power.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>It might even have been said that the
Philistines were at length punished for their wickedness, and
acknowledged that they had to deal with the true God. (<span
id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>[1Sa 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006.md)<span
id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>.) But that would not have been a sufficient
answer, because the Lord sometimes permitted his ark to be treated with
derision, as is evident from other passages of the history. The true
solution therefore is, that the Lord, though he holds intercourse with
us by symbols and sacraments, yet wishes to be sought in heaven. To this
must be added, that he had openly declared, by memorable predictions,
that he was not dragged as a captive by conquerors, but that of his own
accord he exposed his sanctuary to the sport of enemies, in order to
punish the sins of his people. Nor could the Jews, when the Temple had
been thrown down and bumt, and when the holy vessels were carried to
Babylon, doubt that the same God whom they had worshipped was the author
of this punishment, since he had so frequently threatened by his
prophets what then happened.

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span><span id="xv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span>**3.** *Hear me.* Here the Prophet
beautifully points out the vast difference between the true God and
idols. Having formerly said that the Babylonian gods must be drawn on
waggons and carts, because they consist of dead matter, he now ascribes
a widely different office to the God of Israel, namely, that he
“carries” his people, like a mother, who carries the child in her womb,
and afterwards carries it in her bosom. He addresses the Jews, that they
may return an answer from their experience; for this ought to have
powerfully affected them, when they actually felt that he bore them and
their burdens. He, therefore, makes use of a highly appropriate
contrast, and concludes from the preceding statements: “Acknowledge that
I am the true God, and that I differ widely from idols, which are
useless and dead weights; for you have known and experienced my power by
constant benefits, which I have not ceased to confer upon you from the
womb.” God is not only powerful in himself, but diffuses his power
through all the creatures; so that we feel his strength and energy.

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>*Who are carried from the womb.* This is a
very expressive metaphor, by which God compares himself to a mother who
carries a child in her womb. He speaks of the past time, when he began
to give them testimonies of his grace. Yet the words might be taken as
meaning simply that God kindly nourished that people, like an infant
taken from its mother’s womb, and carried it in his bosom, as the
Psalmist says,

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>“I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art
my God from my mother’s belly.”  
(<span id="xv.i-p43.2"></span>[Ps
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p43.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span>But as God did not only begin to act as the
father and nurse of his people from the time when they were born, but
also “begat them” (<span id="xv.i-p44.1"></span>[Jas
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)<span id="xv.i-p44.1"></span>.md)
spiritually, I do not object to extending the words so far as to mean,
that they were brought, as it were, out of the bowels of God into a new
life and the hope of an eternal inheritance.

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span>If it be objected, that God is everywhere
called “a Father,” (<span id="xv.i-p45.1"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009.md)<span id="xv.i-p45.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p45.2"></span>[Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="xv.i-p45.2"></span>,.md) and
that this title is more appropriate to him, I reply, that no figures of
speech can describe God’s extraordinary affection towards us; for it is
infinite and various; so that, if all that can be said or imagined about
love were brought together into one, yet it would be surpassed by the
greatness of the love of God. By no metaphor, therefore, can his
incomparable goodness be described. If you understand it, simply to mean
that God, from the time that he begat them, gently carried and nourished
them in his bosom, this will agree admirably with what we find in the
Song of Moses,

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span>“He bore them, and carried them, as an eagle
carrieth her young on her wings.” (<span id="xv.i-p46.1"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span id="xv.i-p46.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span>In a word, the intention of the Prophet is to
shew, that the Jews, if they do not choose to forget their descent,
cannot arrive at any other conclusion than that they were not begotten
in vain, and that God, who has manifested himself to be both their
Father and their Mother, will always assist them; and likewise, that
they have known his power by uninterrupted experience, so that they
ought not to pay homage to idols.

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span>*All the remnant of the house of Israel.* By
calling them a “remnant” he means, as we formerly remarked, that the
greater part had been alienated from the Church by their revolt, so that
the hope of deliverance belonged only to a very small number. On this
account he demands from them a hearing; for unbelievers, not less than
heathen nations, were utterly deaf to his voice. Now, although the
people were so far from being in their unbroken strength, that the
dispersion of them had left but a small number behind, yet God bids them
consider how wonderfully they have been hitherto preserved, that they
may not doubt that he will henceforth act towards them, as he has
hitherto acted, the part of both father and mother. And when he demands
that they shall listen to him, he shews that the true and indeed the
only remedy for our distresses and calamities is, to hang on his mouth,
and to be attentive to the promises of grace; for then shall we have
sufficient courage to bear every affliction; but if not, the way is
opened for despair, and we ought not to expect anything else than
destruction.

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span><span id="xv.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span>**4** *And even to old age.* Here I explain
the copulative <span id="xv.i-p50.1"></span>ו *(vau)* to mean
*therefore;* and the reasoning ought to be carefully observed, for he
argues thus, “I have begotten and brought you forth;” and again, “Even
when you were little children, I carried you in my arms, and therefore I
will be the guardian of your life till the end.” Thus also David
reasons,

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span>“Thou art he who brought me out of the womb;
I trusted in thee while I hung on my mother’s breasts; I was cast upon
thee from my birth; thou art my God from my mother’s womb.”  
(<span id="xv.i-p51.2"></span>[Ps
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p51.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span>He therefore promises that he will always be
a Father to the Jews; and hence we see that we ought to cherish assured
confidence of salvation from the time that the Lord hath once begun it
in us, for he wishes to continue his work till the end. “The Lord,” says
David, “will complete what he hath begun;” and again,

<span id="xv.i-p53"></span>“O Lord, thy loving-kindness is eternal, and
thou wilt not forsake the works of thy hands.” (<span
id="xv.i-p53.1"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008.md)<span
id="xv.i-p53.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p54"></span>*I am the same.* The Hebrew word <span
id="xv.i-p54.1"></span>הוא (*hu*) is, in my opinion, very emphatic,
though some interpreters render it simply by the demonstrative pronoun
He;  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) but it means that God is
always “the same” and like himself, not only in his essence, but with
respect to us, so that we ourselves shall feel that he is the same. When
he says, “Even to old age,”  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) it
might be thought absurd; for we ought to become full-grown men after
having been carried by God from infancy. But if any one shall examine it
properly, it will be found that we never make so great progress as not
to need to be upheld by the strength of God, for otherwise the most
perfect man would stumble every moment; as David also testifies,

<span id="xv.i-p57"></span>“Forsake me not in the time of old age,
withdraw not from me when my strength faileth.” (<span
id="xv.i-p57.1"></span>[Ps 71:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.i-p57.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p58"></span>*I have made and will carry.* He again argues
in the same manner. God does not regard what we deserve, but continues
his grace toward us; and therefore we ought to draw confidence from it,
“Thou didst create us, not only that we might be human beings, but that
we might be thy children; and therefore thou wilt continue till the end
to exercise continually toward us the care of a father and of a mother.”

<span id="xv.i-p59"></span><span id="xv.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p60"></span>**5.** *To whom will ye liken and compare
me?* Here the Prophet introduces the Lord as remonstrating with the
Jews, because they distrusted and doubted his power, and, in a word,
because they put him on a level with idols, and even placed idols above
him. When they saw the Babylonians enjoy prosperity, they thought that
their hope was gone, and that the remembrance of the covenant had faded
away, and hardly believed that God was in heaven or took any concern
about them. On this account the Lord complains that they ascribe some
power to idols, and that thus they east his power into the shade. This
subject was formerly discussed under the forty-second, forty-third, and
following chapters; and therefore it is unnecessary to repeat
observations in each word.

<span id="xv.i-p61"></span>In order that they may not estimate the power
of God by the present condition of things, he bids them raise their
minds higher. In like manner, when we see the Papists enjoy prosperity,
if we should entertain doubts whether or not they possessed the true
religion, we would need to be dissuaded by the same exhortation; for
this would be to compare God with idols. And we ought carefully to
observe this circumstance, the forgetfulness or disregard of which has
led many commentators absurdly to weaken this statement, by supposing
that the Prophet merely attacks superstitious persons who ascribe some
divine power to wood or stone, because this degrades the glory of God by
comparing him to dead things. But I have no doubt that he reproves that
sinful and wicked conclusion by which the people, when they were weighed
down by adversity, imagined that God was favorable to the Babylonians;
for, if he had been favorable to them, it would follow that he approves
of idolatry, and thus his honor would have been conveyed to dumb
creatures. We may likewise draw from it a general doctrine that God is
robbed of his glory, when he is compared to dumb and senseless things,
as Paul also applies the passage appropriately. (<span
id="xv.i-p61.1"></span>[Ac 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029.md)<span
id="xv.i-p61.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p62"></span><span id="xv.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p63"></span>**6.** *Lavishing gold out of bags.* The
Prophet had formerly said this, and he now repeats it, in order to fix
this doctrine more and more deeply on the hearts of men; for
superstition has struck its roots so deeply in their hearts, that it
cannot be torn out, unless the Lord entirely change our nature. Whatever
we have heard about this madness quickly passes out of our minds; for we
always carry about some seed of superstition, and there is nothing to
which we are more prone than to fall into it. He says, therefore, that
one person supplies the materials for manufacturing idols, and another
gives them a shape; and that in this way it may be said that there are
two fathers of such gods, that is, the rich man who lavishes out the
gold or silver, and the workman who adds the shape and makes the idol.
Thus he makes an open exposure of the madness of these who seek a deity
in their purses and in the hand of their workmen; for what means so
sudden a change, that they bow down before the metal, as soon as it has
assumed a different shape, and a shape, too, which has been regulated by
their own will or caprice? for it is exactly such a god as they have
been pleased to manufacture at their own expense.

<span id="xv.i-p64"></span>*They even adore.* The particle <span
id="xv.i-p64.1"></span>אף, (*aph*,) *even,* heightens the description of
this madness; for there might perhaps be some room for repentance, if
one who had been overtaken by a sudden mistake adored some false god;
but these men obstinately persevere in their error. This word therefore
draws attention more strongly to that obstinacy, and shews that they are
altogether blinded. Excessively foolish, as I have said, is this
stupidity, when men adore a god which they have made with their own
hands.

<span id="xv.i-p65"></span><span id="xv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p66"></span>**7.** *They shall carry them on the
shoulder.* The picture is still more heightened by the description
contained in this verse; for, since the idols have no feeling of any
kind, they who fly to them to ask assistance must be not only very
stupid but very obstinate.

<span id="xv.i-p67"></span><span id="xv.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p68"></span>**8.** *Remember this.* This verse may be
explained in two ways, either that the Lord addresses the Jews, or that
he addresses the Gentiles. Men who otherwise are not well instructed in
the Law are led into mistakes, because they extinguish that knowledge
which God kindles in their hearts; for there is no person who has not
some seed of religion implanted in him by nature, but men choke it by
their unbelief, or corrupt and debase it by their inventions. On this
account we might extend it to the whole human race. But I am more
disposed to adopt a different opinion, which is also demanded by the
context; for the Prophet will soon afterwards add what does not apply to
any but the Jews, whom he calls *transgressors,* because, having been
vanquished by a slight temptation, they revolted from the true God, as
if captivity ought to have obliterated from their hearts all the
benefits which he had bestowed on them. Since, therefore, they had
shaken off the true religion, he sharply rebukes their ingratitude in
having been so easily led away to sinful inventions.

<span id="xv.i-p69"></span>*Return to the heart.*  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) By giving them this injunction he
means that they are not of sound understanding. Others render it,
“Recall.” This is feeble and inappropriate, and, a little before, he had
bid them remember, and will immediately repeat the same thing. Now,
therefore, he rather bids them “return to the heart,” because
forgetfulness of God’s benefits was a sort of madness.

<span id="xv.i-p71"></span>*Blush.* Others render it, “Act a manly
part,” and derive the word from <span id="xv.i-p71.1"></span>איש*,
(ish.)* Others derive it from <span id="xv.i-p71.2"></span>אשיש,
*(ashish,)* which means “a foundation;” as if he had said, “Take
courage, do not despair of my assistance.” But I rather agree with
Jerome, who derives it from <span id="xv.i-p71.3"></span>אש, (*esh*;)
for it is more appropriate, when their disgrace has been exposed, to “be
ashamed” than to assume manly courage; though I leave it to every person
to form his own judgment. He therefore means that they *blush* for their
madness, ingratitude, and wickedness, so as to return to God.  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md)

<span id="xv.i-p73"></span><span id="xv.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p74"></span>**9.** *Remember the former things.* This is
an explanation of the preceding statement; for he expresses more fully
what he formerly meant, that is, that God hath testified of himself by
sufficiently numerous proofs, and hath shewed what is his nature and
greatness; and that not merely for two or three days, or for a few
years, but *at all times;* for he had continued his benefits, and had
incessantly bestowed his grace upon them. Hence he infers that the
manifestations of his divinity, being so clear, ought to prevent them
from giving their hearts to another.

<span id="xv.i-p75"></span>*That I am God.* In this passage the particle
<span id="xv.i-p75.1"></span>כי (*ki*) does not signify *for*, but
*that,* and introduces a clause which explains what goes before.
Besides, as we have formerly explained, God wishes not only that he may
be acknowledged, but that he alone may be acknowledged; and therefore he
wishes to be separated from all the gods which men have made for
themselves, that we may fix our whole attention on him; because, if he
admitted any companion, his throne would fall or shake; for either there
is one God or there is none at all.

<span id="xv.i-p76"></span><span id="xv.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p77"></span>**10.** *Declaring from the beginning.* He
now explains more fully in what manner he wishes the Jews to remember
the past time, namely, that they were taught by constant predictions, as
far as was necessary for their advantage. But from this preface he
immediately makes a transition to the hope of deliverance.

<span id="xv.i-p78"></span>*My counsel shall stand.* We ought not to
wonder that he repeats this so frequently, because it is very hard to
persuade men of the truth of it. The people were not only slow to
believe, but even obstinate; and therefore he reminds them that they had
learned long ago, and not on one occasion only, how safe it is to place
their confidence in God. Nor is it only his foreknowledge that is here
extolled by him, but he says that he has testified by his prophets what
he had decreed. Even the prophecies would have no certainty or solidity,
if the same God who declares that this or that thing shall happen had
not the events themselves in his power. At the same time, he states that
he speaks according to truth and brings forward his decrees in all the
prophecies, that the Jews may not hesitate to place a firm reliance, as
soon as the prophets have spoken. But as I have already explained these
subjects more largely, I now give nothing more than a brief view of
them.

<span id="xv.i-p79"></span><span id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p80"></span>**11.** *Calling a bird* or *a* *thought from
the east.* After having spoken of God’s foreknowledge and power, the
Prophet applies to his own purpose the general statement which he had
made. He intended to comfort the Jews, and to shew that they were not
led into captivity in such a manner as to leave no hope of deliverance;
and therefore he adds a specific instance, and promises that Cyrus shall
come, though it appeared to be incredible.

<span id="xv.i-p81"></span>The word <span id="xv.i-p81.1"></span>עיט
(ait,) which I have translated *thought,* is translated by the greater
part of interpreters *a bird;* and this is the true signification of the
word. But as we may learn from <span id="xv.i-p81.2"></span>[Da
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014.md)<span id="xv.i-p81.2"></span>,
that it sometimes denotes *counsel,* (for the insertion of a letter in
the noun <span id="xv.i-p81.3"></span>עיט is customary among the Chaldee
writers,) I choose rather to follow this interpretation, which is
approved by some Hebrew writers. Yet it is possible that he alludes to
*a bird,*  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) as if he had said
that his purpose would be sudden; and I do not deny that he alludes to
the swiftness of the approach of Cyrus.

<span id="xv.i-p83"></span>*The man of my counsel.* When he again calls
Cyrus “the man of his counsel,” this is a repetition very frequent among
Hebrew writers; and hence also it is evident that, in the former clause,
the noun <span id="xv.i-p83.1"></span>עית *(ait)* is put for “thought”
or “decree.” Now, he calls him “the man of counsel,” because he executes
the Lord’s decree.

<span id="xv.i-p84"></span>Yet if it be thought preferable to translate
it *bird,* I do not debate about it. The metaphor is beautiful; for the
approach of Cyrus was so sudden and unexpected, that he seemed to fly
like “a bird.” He suddenly invaded Babylon and took it by storm, even
when the Babylonians imagined that every entrance was closed against
him. It may also be said, if this interpretation of the word be
approved, that Isaiah alludes to auguries, to which the Babylonians were
greatly addicted. Accustomed to practice judicial astrology, they
observed the flight and chattering of birds, and looked upon this as a
certain knowledge of future events; but the Lord threatens that he will
send “a bird” which they had not foreseen. But I prefer the former
exposition, namely, that he alludes to the swiftness of Cyrus, and
declares that no roads shall be shut against him, and that no fortresses
shall hinder him from entering immediately into Babylon.

<span id="xv.i-p85"></span>When he says *from the east,* this not only
relates to the certainty of the promise, but is intended to inform us
that no distance or length of time can retard the work of God; and
accordingly, in the second clause, it is added by way of explanation,
*from a distant country* Let us learn from this what is the purpose to
which we ought to apply all that we read in Scripture concerning the
foreknowledge and power of God; for those statements are not made in
order to keep us in suspense, but that we may apply them to our own use.
Now, he makes an implied contrast between the counsel of God and our
thoughts; for he delivers his people in such a manner that the reason of
the deliverance cannot be comprehended by men. Thus, although that which
God promises appears to be incredible, yet he says that he will easily
open up a way, that we may not measure by our capacity his unsearchable
counsels.

<span id="xv.i-p86"></span>*I have thought.* Others render it *I have
formed;* but in this passage it appears to be more appropriate to view
<span id="xv.i-p86.1"></span>יצר *(yatzar)* as signifying “to think.” He
confirms what he formerly said, that this hath been determined by him,
and therefore shall be steadfast and unalterable.

<span id="xv.i-p87"></span>*I have spoken, and will accomplish.* These
words mean, that he has predicted nothing in vain, and that this
prediction, which he has commanded to be published, ought to be regarded
as fulfilled. To establish our faith in himself was the object of the
one clause, and in the other he connects his thoughts with the preached
word. This ought to be carefully observed; for we are distracted by a
variety of thoughts, and we doubt if God has spoken sincerely, and
suspect that he is like us, that is, that he is a hypocrite or
dissembler. But he declares that nothing proceeds from him but what he
formerly determined in his counsel.  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) so that the preaching of the word is
nothing else than a sure testimony of his hidden counsel, which he
commands to be revealed to us. As soon therefore as the Lord hath spoken
any word, we ought; to be certain of its accomplishment.

<span id="xv.i-p89"></span><span id="xv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p90"></span>**12.** *Hear me.* He again rebukes the
Israelites, because they could not place confidence in God, or receive
any consolation in adversity. That rebuke is indeed sharp and severe,
but was well deserved by those whose hearts were not soothed by any
promise, or by any invitation, however gracious, which God addressed to
them.

<span id="xv.i-p91"></span>We ought to observe the two epithets which he
employs here, *Hardened in heart* and *Far from righteousness* By these
expressions he means that poor distressed persons shut the door against
God’s assistance on account of their obstinacy; because by murmuring or
fretting they shake off the fear of God, and thus throw themselves into
despair, so that they openly rage against God. He addresses the Jews,
who, though they were almost overwhelmed, yet were swelled with pride
and insolence, and, having thrown off the fear of God, rose to more and
more outrageous madness; as frequently happens to many persons in the
present day, whom distresses and afflictions render more rebellious.
Accordingly, they refused to receive any medicine, any remedy for their
distresses. If any one prefer to consider the word *righteousness* to be
put for “the assistance of God,” as in the following verse, let him
enjoy his opinion, which indeed is not inappropriate; because obstinate
men, who refuse to believe the promises of God, drive God away from
them, and reject his grace; for they do not suffer God to confer
benefits upon them, though he offered to them his assistance.

<span id="xv.i-p92"></span><span id="xv.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p93"></span>**13.** *I* *will bring near my
righteousness.* If that interpretation which I mentioned a little before
be preferred, that those persons are called “far from righteousness” who
are incapable of receiving the grace of God, the meaning will remain
unaltered; but if we hold that the Jews were “far from righteousness,”
because, like desperate men, they were wholly abandoned to crimes, there
will be a beautiful contrast between the righteousness of men and the
righteousness of God. Although therefore the Jews revolted and were
estranged from all practice of godliness, yet God assures them that “his
righteousness is near;” as if he had said that unbelief is indeed a very
great obstacle, but yet that it is such an obstacle as cannot hinder God
from at length manifesting the power of his truth. “For the unbelief of
men,” as Paul says, “cannot make void the truth of God; and, though men
are liars, God will always be true.” (<span id="xv.i-p93.1"></span>[Rom.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="xv.i-p93.1"></span>..md) And
indeed, if he did not exceed the malice of men by his goodness, we
should all perish without exception, for who is there that receives God,
and makes use of his grace as he ought?

<span id="xv.i-p94"></span>Accordingly, the only reason why he does not
continue to bestow benefits upon us is, that we are estranged from “his
righteousness;” and yet, though we are reluctant and make resistance, he
approaches to us in order to display “his righteousness,” though we do
not deserve it. Now, he does this in such a manner that unbelievers
obtain no advantage at all from it; for the Prophet did not include
wicked apostates, as if they should be partakers of the salvation which
he promises, but he only says that God has at hand a method by which
“his righteousness” shall be made manifest. But here we must consider
what was the condition of the people to whom those things were spoken;
for everything had been corrupted by unbelief, and there were very few
who relied on the promises of God; and they who belonged to the number
of the elect sometimes shewed that they were obstinate, so that they
appeared to be infected by the same plague of impiety as the others. He
therefore rebukes the whole nation, both to convict the reprobate and,
at the same time, to chastise the elect and bring them back into the
right path; but especially, as I have said, he attacks unbelievers, who
professedly, as it were, rejected all hope of grace.

<span id="xv.i-p95"></span>*And my salvation shall not tarry.* This
makes still more plain what he meant by the word “righteousness,” that
is, the assistance which the Lord promised to his people. Consequently,
he means the same thing by the word “salvation” and the word
“righteousness;” for the most remarkable instance of the “righteousness”
of God is, when he preserves, guards, and delivers his people. It is not
superfluous to say that it is not “retarded” or “delayed;” for he
describes the greatness of his mercy by saying, that the Lord opens up a
course for his justice, notwithstanding the reluctance and opposition of
the people.

<span id="xv.i-p96"></span>*And I will place.* The copulative <span
id="xv.i-p96.1"></span>ו *(vau)* is here used in order to express the
cause, *“For* I will place.” This is an additional confirmation of the
preceding statement, that, since the Lord has once determined to save
Jerusalem, she cannot be deprived of that benefit.

<span id="xv.i-p97"></span>*And my glory in Jerusalem.* He connects his
“glory” with the “salvation” of believers, as Paul also uses the word
“glory” to denote “mercy.” (<span id="xv.i-p97.1"></span>[Eph.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006.md), [Eph.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p97.1"></span>..md)
The glory of God is most illustriously displayed, when he rescues his
people from destruction and restores them to liberty; for he wished that
an indissoluble bond should connect the salvation of the Church with his
righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc15014.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xv.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p55"></span> “I (am) he.” (Eng. Ver.) This is the literal
rendering. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc15014.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p56"></span> “‘When thou shalt be old, and thy strength
shall fail, (for thou hast no merits or works of righteousness,) I am
the same as to my mercy and kindness, to keep, and carry, and bear, and
deliver;’ for the Prophet had said of the idol that it is carried about,
and cannot rid itself of its own burden, and therefore God says here, ‘I
am He who carry others and bear my own burden.’” — *Jarchi.*

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc15014.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xv.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p70"></span> “Bring (it) again to mind.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc15014.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xv.i-p71.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p72"></span> “The verb <span
id="xv.i-p72.1"></span>התאששו *(hithshteshu)* is a <span
id="xv.i-p72.2"></span>ἅπαξ λεγόμενον, and admits of several different
explanations. Joseph Kimchi derived it from <span
id="xv.i-p72.3"></span>אש *(esh,) fire,* and explained it to mean, ‘Be
inflamed or reddened,’ that is, ‘blush.’ So the Vulgate, <span
id="xv.i-p72.4"></span>confundamini (be confounded.) The Targum and
Jarchi understand it to mean, ‘Fortify or strengthen yourselves,’ and
connect it with <span id="xv.i-p72.5"></span>אששים, *(ashishim,)*
foundations. (<span id="xv.i-p72.6"></span>[Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007)<span id="xv.i-p72.6"></span>..md)
Bochart derives it from <span id="xv.i-p72.7"></span>איש, *(ish,) a
man,* and identifies it with the <span
id="xv.i-p72.8"></span>ἀνδρίζεσθε, of <span id="xv.i-p72.9"></span>[1Co
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013.md)<span id="xv.i-p72.9"></span>.” —
*Alexander.*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc15014.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xv.i-p81.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p82"></span> “By a bird of prey is here meant the Eagle;
for the Greek word <span id="xv.i-p82.1"></span>ἀετός is derived from
<span id="xv.i-p82.2"></span>עיט *(ait.)* There can be no doubt that he
means Cyrus, who, in a former passage, (<span
id="xv.i-p82.3"></span>[Isa 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025.md)<span
id="xv.i-p82.3"></span>,) is said to have been called by Jehovah ‘from
the East,’ that is, from Persia, which lay to the east of Judea. In
other passages also, (as in <span id="xv.i-p82.4"></span>[Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md)<span id="xv.i-p82.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p82.5"></span>[Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p82.5"></span>,.md)
kings and princes are compared to eagles, because, in the opinion of the
ancients, the eagle is the king of birds. Thus also Cyrus is represented
under the image of a ‘bird of prey,’ chiefly on account of the
astonishing swiftness with which he rode in his expeditions from Persia
into very distant countries, and on account of the violence with which
he flew upon his enemies and seized them as his prey. There may also be
an allusion to the circumstance, that Cyrus ordered a golden eagle, with
outstretched wings, laid on a long spear, to be carried before him as
his military standard; for so Xenophon describes it. <span
id="xv.i-p82.6"></span>Ην δὲ αὐτῷ σημεῖον ἀετὸς χρυσοῦς ἐπὶ δόρατος
μακροῦ ἀνατεταμένος, καὶ νῦν δὲ τοῦτο ἔπι σημεῖον τῳ Περσῶν βασιλεῖ
διαμένει ‘And his standard was a golden eagle stretched on a long spear,
and even now this continues to be the standard of the king of Persia.’
(Xen. Cyrop. 7.)” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc15014.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p88"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p88.1"></span>En son
conseil.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](cc15015.md)
