[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15014)  [Next](cc15016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 47.

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
47:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Come down, and sit in the dust, O
virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: *there is* no throne, O
daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and
delicate.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Descende, et sede in pulvere, virgo
filia Babel. Sede super terram; non est solium filiae Chaldae-orum;
quoniam non fiet amplius ut to vocent teneram et delicatam.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Take the millstones, and grind meal:
uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the
rivers.

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tolle molas, et mole farinam, dissolve
cincinnos tuos, denuda pedes, discooperi crura, ut transeas flumina.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea,
thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet
*thee as* a man.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Retegetur turpitudo tua, et videbitur
probrum tuum; ultionem sumam, et non occurram homini *(vel, homo.)*

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** *As for* our redeemer, the LORD of
hosts *is* his name, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Redemptor noster, Iehova exercituum
nomen ejus, sanctus Israelis.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** Sit thou silent, and get thee into
darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called,
The lady of kingdoms.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Sede quieta, ingredere in tenebras,
filia Chaldmorum; quoniam non fiet amplius ut to vocent dominam
regnorum.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** I was wroth with my people; I have
polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst
shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy
yoke.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Iratus fui in populum meum, profanavi
haerditatem meam, et tradidi cos in manum tuam; non praestitisti Illis
misericordias; super senem aggravasti jugum tuum valde.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And thou saidst, I shall be a lady
for ever: *so* that thou didst not lay these *things* to thy heart,
neither didst remember the latter end of it.

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et dixisti, Ero in aeternum domina.
Hactenus non applicuisti huc animum, neque recordata es finis ejus.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** Therefore hear now this, *thou that
art* given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine
heart, I *am*, and none else beside me; I shall not sit *as* a widow,
neither shall I know the loss of children:

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Nunc vero audi hoc, delicata, sedens
confidenter, quae dicit in corde suo, Ego sum, et nihil amplius; non
sedebo vidua, nec sciam orbitatem.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** But these two *things* shall come to
thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they
shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy
sorceries, *and* for the great abundance of thine enchantments.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Atqui venient tibi ista duo repente,
die uno, orbitas et viduitas; ad perfectionem suam venient super to, ob
multitudinem *(vel ia multitudine)* divinationum tuarum, et copiam
augurum tuorum.

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** For thou hast trusted in thy
wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I *am,* and
none else beside me.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Nam confisa fuisti in malitia tua;
dixisti, Nemo me videt. Sapientia tua et scientia tua ipsa seduxit re.
Et dixisti in corde tuo, Ego, et non amplius.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Therefore shall evil come upon thee;
thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon
thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come
upon thee suddenly, *which* thou shalt not know.

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Itaque venient super to malum, cujus
diluculum ignoras; cadet super to contritio, quam non poteris avertere.
Veniet repentevastatio super to, quam nescis.

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** Stand now with thine enchantments,
and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from
thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest
prevail.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Sta nunc inter divinationes tuas, et
in multitudine augurum tuorum, in quibus fatigasti to a pueritia tua; si
forte possis proficere, si forte robores to.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** Thou art wearied in the multitude of
thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from *these things* that shall
come upon thee.

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Fatigata es in multitudine
conciliorum tuorum, stent nunc et servent colligatores coelorum,
speculatores astrorum, qui lunationes docent, ab ils qum ventura sunt
super to.

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Behold, they shall be as stubble;
the fire shall bum them; they shall not deliver themselves from the
power of the flame: *there shall* not *be* a coal to warm at, *nor* fire
to sit before it.

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ecce erant quasi stipula; ignis
comburet cos; non liberabunt animam suam e manu flammae; non pruna ad
calefaciendum, lumen ad quod sedeatur.

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span>**15.** Thus shall they be unto thee with
whom thou hast laboured, *even* thy merchants, from thy youth: they
shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Sic tibi erunt cum quibus to
fatigasti; negotiatores tui a pueritia tua. Quisque in plagam suam
errabit; nemo erit qui to servet.

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p33"></span><span id="xvi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p34"></span>**1.** *Come down, and sit in the dust.*
Isaiah now explains more fully what he had briefly noticed concerning
the counsel of God, and the execution of it. He openly describes the
destruction of Babylon; because no hope whatever of the return of the
people could be entertained, so long as the Babylonian monarchy
flourished. Accordingly, he has connected these two things, namely, the
overthrow of that monarchy, and the deliverance of the people which
followed it; for the elevated rank of that city was like a deep grave in
which the Jews were buried, and, when it had been opened, the Lord
brought back his people to their former life.

<span id="xvi.i-p35"></span>The use of the imperative mood, “Come down,”
is more forcible than if he had expressed the same thing in plain words
and simple narrative; for he addresses her authoritatively, and as if he
were speaking from the judgment-seat; because he proclaims the commands
of God, and therefore, with the boldness which his authority entitles
him to use, he publishes what shall happen, as we know that God granted
this authority to the prophets. “Behold, I have this day set thee over
nations and kingdoms, to root out and pull down, to destroy and
overthrow, to build and to plant.” (<span id="xvi.i-p35.1"></span>[Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="xvi.i-p35.1"></span>..md)
There is no power that is not added to the authority of the word. In a
word, he intended to place the event immediately before the eye of the
Jews; for that change could scarcely be imagined, if God did not thunder
from heaven.

<span id="xvi.i-p36"></span>*Virgin daughter of Babylon.* It was a
figure of speech frequently employed by Hebrew writers, to call any
nation by the title of “Daughter.” He calls her “Virgin,” not because
she was modest or chaste, but because she had been brought up softly and
delicately like “virgins,” and had never been forced by enemies, as we
formerly said when speaking of Sidon.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) And at the present day the same thing
might be said of Venice and some other towns, which have a great
abundance of wealth and luxuries, and, in the estimation of men, are
accounted very happy; for they have as good reason as the Babylonians
had to dread such a revolution of affairs, even when they appear to be
far removed from danger.

<span id="xvi.i-p38"></span>*For it shall no longer be.* That is, “Thou
shalt no longer be caressed by men who thought that thou wast happy.”

<span id="xvi.i-p39"></span><span id="xvi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p40"></span>**2.** *Take millstones.* The whole of this
description tends to shew that there shall be a great change among the
Babylonians, so that this city, which was formerly held in the highest
honor, shall be sunk in the lowest disgrace, and subjected to outrages
of every kind, and thus shall exhibit a striking display of the wrath of
God. These are marks of the most degrading slavery, as the meanest
slaves were formerly shut up in a mill. The condition of the captives
who were reduced to it must therefore have been very miserable; for, in
other cases, captives sometimes received from their conquerors mild and
gentle treatment. But here he describes a very wretched condition, that
believers may not doubt that they shall be permitted freely to depart,
when the Babylonians, who had held them prisoners, shall themselves be
imprisoned. Now, though we do not read that the nobles of the kingdom
were subjected to such contemptuous treatment, it was enough for the
fulfillment of this prophecy, that Cyrus, by assigning to them the
operations of slaves, degraded them, and compelled them to abstain from
honorable employments.

<span id="xvi.i-p41"></span>*Unbind thy curled locks.* On account of
their excessive indulgence in magnificence of dress, he again alludes to
the attire of young women, by mentioning “curled locks.” We know that
girls are more eager than they ought to be about cuffing their hair, and
other parts of dress. Here, on the contrary, the Prophet describes a
totally different condition and attire; that is, that ignominy, and
blackness, and filth shall cover from head to foot those who formerly
dazzled all eyes by gaudy finery.

<span id="xvi.i-p42"></span>*Uncover the limbs.* “Virgins” hardly ever
are accustomed to walk in public, and, at least, seldom travel on the
public roads; but the Prophet says that the Babylonian virgins will be
laid under the necessity of crossing the rivers, and with their limbs
uncovered.

<span id="xvi.i-p43"></span><span id="xvi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p44"></span>**3.** *Thy baseness shall be discovered.*
This is the conclusion of the former statement. So long as Babylon was
in a flourishing condition, she preserved her reputation, and was highly
honored; for wealth and power, like veils, often conceal a great number
of sores, which, when the veils have been removed, become visible, and
are beheld with the greatest disgrace. And, as Demosthenes says, when,
speaking of Philip’s condition, — <span id="xvi.i-p44.1"></span>ὥσπερ
γὰρ τοῖς σώμασιν ἡμῶν ἕως μὲν ἂν ἐρρωμένος ᾖ τις οὐδὲν ἐπαισθάνεται τῶν
καθ ἕκαστα σαθρῶν ἐπ᾿ ἂν δὲ ἀρρώστημα συμβὣ πάντα κινεῖται κἂν ῥη̑γμα κἂν
στρέμμα κἂν αλλό τι τῶν ὑπαρχόντων σαθρῶν ᾖ οὕτω καὶ τῶν πόλεων καὶ τῶν
τυράννων. “For as, in our bodies, so long as any person is in full
vigor, no malady is perceived in any of the members, but if he fall into
debility, produced either by a wound or by a strain, or by any other of
the diseases to which the body is subject, the whole is affected; so is
it with cities and governments.” (Dem., Olynth. 2.) When commotions
arise, and when their wealth and troops are taken from them, disgraceful
transactions which lay concealed are exposed to view; for cruelty, and
fraud, and extortions, and perjury, and unjust oppressions, and other
crimes, which were honored during prosperity, being to fall into
disgrace.

<span id="xvi.i-p45"></span>*I will take vengeance, and will not meet
(thee) a man.* Some think that <span id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>כ *(caph)*
ought here to be supplied, “*As* a man;” as if he had said, “Do not
think that ye have to deal with man, whose attack ye may be able to
resist.” And, indeed, in other passages, when he speaks of the hand of
man, it denotes some abatement; but here he means that no remedy is
left, because God will reduce them to nothing. Others translate it, “I
will not meet a man;” that is, “I will not allow a man to meet me;
whoever shall meet me, or intercede in their behalf, I will not spare
them, or remit or abate their punishment.” This meaning is highly
appropriate, but the construction is somewhat forced; for <span
id="xvi.i-p45.2"></span>אפגע *(ephgang)* must thus be understood to have
a passive sense, which could scarcely be admitted. Besides, the Prophet
does not absolutely say that no petition shall be presented to God, but
that he cannot be appeased. The former exposition, therefore, flows more
smoothly, so far as relates to the context; but let every one choose
that which he prefers; for, whatever exposition you adopt, the words
amount to this, “that the Lord will destroy the Babylonians, and that
there will be no room for mercy.” Only, I say, that I prefer the former,
because it is more agreeable to the original text.

<span id="xvi.i-p46"></span><span id="xvi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p47"></span>**4.** *Our Redeemer.* The Prophet shews for
what purpose the Lord will inflict punishment on the Babylonians; that
is, for the salvation of his people, as he had formerly declared. (<span
id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>[Isa 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p47.1"></span>.) But this statement is much more forcible,
because he speaks in what may be called an abrupt manner, and like a
person awakened out of sleep, when he sees Babylon ruined, which
formerly was wont to subdue other nations and trample them under her
feet; and he shews that this happens for no other reason than that the
Lord shews himself to be the “Redeemer” and defender of his people.

<span id="xvi.i-p48"></span>*The Holy One of Israel.* As if he had said,
that not in vain hath he chosen this people, and separated it from other
nations. In this transaction he intended to give a display of his power,
and. on that account added to the title descriptive of his power,
*Jehovah of Hosts,* the designation “Holy.”

<span id="xvi.i-p49"></span><span id="xvi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p50"></span>**5.** *Sit silent.* He continues the same
subject, and shews that the end of the Babylonian monarchy is at hand.
As this appeared to be incredible, he therefore repeats the same thing
by a variety of expressions, and repeats what might have been said in a
few words; and thus he brings forward those lively descriptions, in
order to place the event, as it were, before their eyes. When he bids
her “sit” and be “silent,” it is an indication of shame or disgrace. Yet
this silence may be contrasted with her former condition, while she
reigned; for at that time not only did she speak loudly and
authoritatively, but she cried with a loud voice, and by her commands
terrified the whole of the East. But now, in consequence of the change
of her condition, he bids her “sit silent;” because not only will she
not venture to utter terrific words, but she will not even venture to
make a gentle sound.  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) But, since
he adds, *enter into darkness,* I willingly adopt the former view, that
it denotes shame; for they whose condition has been changed for the
worse shut their mouth through shame, and scarcely venture to whisper.

<span id="xvi.i-p52"></span>*For it shall no longer be.* We know that
the Babylonian monarchy was very widely extended, and exercised dominion
over large and numerous countries; for it was the chief of many
kingdoms. On this account the captive people needed to be fortified by
these promises, and to be forewarned of her fall, that they might
entertain assured hope of deliverance

<span id="xvi.i-p53"></span><span id="xvi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p54"></span>**6.** *I was angry with my people.* This is
an anticipation, by which he forewarns the Jews, as he has often done
formerly, that the distressing condition of captivity was a scourge
which God had inflicted; because, if it had proceeded from any other,
there was no remedy in the hand of God. In order, therefore, that they
might be convinced that he who had struck them would heal their wounds,
he bids them attribute it to their sins that they were so terribly
oppressed. Yet he exhorts them to cherish favorable expectation, because
God intends to set a limit to the chastisement; and he even mentions
this as the reason why the Babylonians shall be destroyed, that God, who
is the just avenger of savageness and cruelty, will much more avenge the
injuries done to his people.

<span id="xvi.i-p55"></span>*Thou didst not shew compassion to them.* In
the former clause he calls the Jews to repentance, because by their own
crimes they drew down upon themselves so many calamities. Next, he
accuses the Babylonians of having seized this occasion for exercising
cruelty, just as if one were to become the executioner of a child whom a
father had put into his hands to be chastised. Hence it follows that the
Babylonians have no right to be proud, as if by their own power they had
subdued the Jews and carried them into captivity; but, on the contrary,
because they have wickedly abused the victory and cruelly treated the
captives, he will justly punish them.

<span id="xvi.i-p56"></span>*I profaned my heritage.* When he says that
he “was angry,” and that this was the reason why he “profaned his
heritage,” let us not imagine that he had changed his purpose, and was
offended so far as to cast away the care of his people and the
remembrance of his covenant. This is evident both from the event itself
and from his deigning still to call them “his people,” though the
greater part of them were estranged from him, and though he had the best
reasons for “profaning” them. But he has respect to his covenant when he
speaks in this manner; for he looks at their source and foundation, that
they who were the descendants of Abraham may be accounted the people of
God, though very few of them actually belonged to him, and almost all
boasted of an empty title.

<span id="xvi.i-p57"></span>Thus the word *amger,* in Scripture, must
not be supposed to refer to any emotion in God, who desires the
salvation of his people, but to ourselves, who provoke him by our
transgressions; for he has just cause to be angry, though he does not
cease to love us. Accordingly, while he “profanes” his Church, that is,
abandons her, and gives her up as a prey to her enemies, still the elect
do not perish, and his eternal covenant is not broken. And yet, in the
midst of anger, the Lord remembers his mercy, and mitigates the strokes
by which he punishes his people, and at length even inflicts punishment
on those by whom his people have been cruelly treated. Consequently, if
for a time the Lord “profanes” his Church, if she is cruelly oppressed
by tyrants, let us not lose courage, but betake ourselves to this
promise, “He who avenged this barbarous cruelty of the Babylonians will
not less avenge the savageness of those tyrants.”

<span id="xvi.i-p58"></span>It ought also to be carefully observed that
no one should abuse victory so as to be cruel to captives, which we know
is often done; for men, when they see that they are stronger, lay aside
all humanity, and are changed into wild beasts, and spare neither age
nor sex, and altogether forget their condition. After having abused
their power, they shall not at length pass unpunished; for

<span id="xvi.i-p59"></span>“judgment without mercy shall be experienced
by those who shewed no mercy.”*  
*(<span id="xvi.i-p59.2"></span>[Jas
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p59.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.i-p60"></span>But it is asked, “How could the Babylonians
go beyond the limit which God had assigned to them, as if their lawless
passions were laid under no restraint?” And what will become of that
promise,

<span id="xvi.i-p61"></span>“Not a hair shall fall from your head
without the appointment of your Father?”  
(<span id="xvi.i-p61.2"></span>[Lu
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p61.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.i-p62"></span>The answer is easy. Though it was not in
their power actually to go beyond the limit, yet he looked at their
cruelty, because they endearvored utterly to ruin unhappy persons who
had surrendered at discretion. Thus Zechariah complains of the unbridled
rage of the Gentiles, because, when “he was angry with his people for a
little,” they rushed forward with violent fury to destroy them. (<span
id="xvi.i-p62.1"></span>[Zec 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p62.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p63"></span>*On the old man.* He states an aggravation
of their guilt, that they did not spare even “the old men,” for whom age
naturally procures reverence; and hence he draws an inference, how
savage was their cruelty towards armed foes.

<span id="xvi.i-p64"></span><span id="xvi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p65"></span>**7.** *And thou saidst, I shall for ever*
 <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) *be a mistress.* Here he
censures the haughtiness of the Babylonians, in promising to themselves
perpetual dominion, and in thinking that they could not fall from their
elevation through any adverse event. Thus the children of this world are
intoxicated by prosperity, and despise all men as compared with
themselves; but Isaiah mocks at this confidence, and shews that God
regards it with the greatest abhorrence. *To say,* means here to
conclude in one’s own mind, as will be more clearly evident from what
the Prophet says shortly afterwards; for proud men do not publicly speak
in this manner, but entertain this conviction, though they pretend the
contrary. It is intolerable madness when men, forgetting their frailty,
look upon themselves as not sharing in the common lot; for in this way
they forget that they are men. Believers, too, have their conviction of
being safe, because, under the protecting hand of God, they are prepared
boldly to encounter every danger. And yet they do not cease to consider
that they are liable to many distresses, because nothing in this world
is lasting. Irreligious men, therefore, mock God whenever, through a
foolish imagination, they promise to themselves lasting peace amidst the
constant changes of the world.

<span id="xvi.i-p67"></span>*Hitherto thou hast not applied thy mind to
it.*  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) For the purpose of
heightening the description of their madness, he adds that even a long
course of time did not render them more moderate. To become elated
immediately after having obtained a victory, is not so wonderful; but to
become more fierce from day to day, and to throw out taunts against
their captives, was altogether savage and intolerable. This arose, as we
have said, from pride; because they did not consider that a revolution
of affairs would afterwards take place, or that a condition so
magnificent could be changed. Consequently, this is the second reason
why the Lord overtumed the monarchy of the Babylonians.

<span id="xvi.i-p69"></span>*And didst not remember her end.*  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) Some think that there is a change of
the person here, but I consider that to be too forced; and indeed I have
no doubt that he speaks of the “end” of Jerusalem, which is the opinion
most commonly received. The Lord often speaks of the Church, by way of
eminence, <span id="xvi.i-p70.1"></span>κατ᾿ ἐξοχὴν without mentioning
the name, as we do when our feelings are powerfully affected towards any
person. Now, wicked men do not know the “end” of the Church, and the
reason why the Lord chastises her. They mock at the calamities of good
men, because they would wish them to be utterly destroyed and ruined,
and do not consider that God takes care of them.

<span id="xvi.i-p71"></span>If it be objected that the Babylonians could
not know this, that is nothing to the purpose; for they could not be
ignorant that he was the God whom the Israelites worshipped.
Consequently, when they treated the Jews with haughtiness and cruelty,
they insulted God himself, as if he and the covenant which he had made
with his people had been intentionally trampled under their feet.

<span id="xvi.i-p72"></span><span id="xvi.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p73"></span>**8.** *And now hear this, thou delicate
woman.* The Prophet again threatens the destruction of Babylon, and
employs appropriate words for strengthening the hearts of believers,
that the prosperity of the Babylonians may not stupify and lead them to
despondency; and yet he does not address Babylon in order to produce an
impression upon her, but to comfort believers. He adds, that she was
intoxicated with pleasures; for prosperity, being the gift of God, ought
not in itself to be condemned, but it is well known how prone the
children of the world are, to pass from luxury to insolence.

<span id="xvi.i-p74"></span>*Who saith in her heart.* He now explains
what is meant by the word to say, of which we spoke in the exposition of
the preceding verse, namely, that one convinces himself and believes
that it will be thus and thus, as proud and insolent men commonly do,
although they often conceal it through pretended modesty, and do not
wish it to be publicly known.

<span id="xvi.i-p75"></span>*I am, and there is none besides me.* This
arrogance, by which she prefers herself to the whole world, is
intolerable. First, she thinks that *she is;* secondly, she imagines
that the rest of the world does not deserve to be compared to her;
thirdly, she promises to herself everlasting repose, for she says, *I
shall not sit as a widow.* As to the first, there is none of whom it can
be said with truth that *he is,* but God alone, who has a right to say,
“I am what I am,” (<span id="xvi.i-p75.1"></span>[Ex
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p75.1"></span>;.md)
for by this mark he is distinguished from the creatures. Thus, he who
thinks that he subsists by his own power robs God of the honor due to
him, and so Babylon, by exalting herself, made war with God. Secondly,
she treated the whole world with contempt, when she preferred herself to
it. In this manner proud men begin with God, by representing him to be
their enemy, and they end by making all men, without exception, their
enemies, through their haughtiness. The third clause, which may be
regarded as the copestone of her pride, is, that she considers her
condition to be eternal, and does not take into account the liability of
the affairs of men to undergo change; for the higher men have been
exalted, they sometimes on that account sink the lower.

<span id="xvi.i-p76"></span><span id="xvi.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p77"></span>**9.** *But those two things shall suddenly
come to thee.* Because Babylon supposed that she was beyond the reach of
all danger, the Prophet threatens against her very sore distress. When
she said that she would neither be “a widow” nor “childless,” he
declares on the other hand, that both calamities shall come upon her, so
that her miserable destitution shall expose her to the utmost contempt.

<span id="xvi.i-p78"></span>*In their perfection.* That is,
“completely,” so that in all points, without any exception, she shall be
childless. There is also an implied contrast between moderate
punishment, some alleviation of which may be expected, and the dreadful
vengeance of God, which has no other end than ruin; for, the greater the
confidence with which wicked men are elated, the more severely are they
punished.

<span id="xvi.i-p79"></span>*For the multitude of thy divinations.* Some
render this term *diviners;* but I think that it denotes the act or the
vice rather than the persons. Some explain <span
id="xvi.i-p79.1"></span>ב *(beth)* to mean “on account of,” and
understand it to express a cause; and in this sense it frequently occurs
in Scripture. Yet it might be suitably interpreted, that the Babylonians
shall derive no aid or relief from the deceitful skill in divinations of
which they boasted so much; and so it might be translated
*notwithstanding;*  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md) as if he had
said, “The abundance of divinations or auguries shall not prevent these
things from happening to Babylon.”  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) He ridicules the confidence which they
placed in their useless auguries, by which they thought that they
foresaw future events; but, as we shall shortly afterwards dwell more
largely on this point, I readily admit that it is here reckoned to be
one of the causes of the vengeance inflicted on them, that, in
consequence of trusting to such delusions, they dreaded nothing.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md)

<span id="xvi.i-p83"></span><span id="xvi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p84"></span>**10.** *For thou trustedst.* He explains
what he said in the preceding verse, though it may be extended further,
so as to be a censure of the fraud and oppression and violence and
unjust practices by which the Babylonians raised themselves to so great
power. Almost all large kingdoms are, what a distinguished robber
pronounced them to be, great robberies; for there is no other way in
which they enlarge their dominions than by extorting them from others by
violence and oppression, and by driving out the lawful owners from their
dwellings, that they alone may reign at large.

<span id="xvi.i-p85"></span>*In thy malice.* He gives the name of
“malice” to that which he will afterwards adorn with more plausible
names, namely, *wisdom* and *knowledge.* In this manner do tyrants
usually disguise their tricks, when they lay aside all regard to justice
and equity, and cunningly deceive the people; but the Lord detests and
exposes them; so that it becomes manifest that it served no purpose to
cover their wickedness by useless veils. Thus Job, after having said
that “wise men are taken in their own wisdom,” explains this by calling
it “craftiness.” (<span id="xvi.i-p85.1"></span>[Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span id="xvi.i-p85.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.i-p86"></span>*Thou saidst, No one seeth me.* When he adds
that Babylon thought that her iniquities were not seen, this refers to
free indulgence in sinning; for while men are kept in the discharge of
duty by fear or shame, he who neither dreads God as a witness, nor
thinks that men will know what he does, breaks out into every kind of
licentiousness. It is true, indeed, that even the worst of men are often
tormented by the stings of conscience; but, by shutting their eyes, they
plunge themselves in: stupidity as in a lurking-place, and, in short,
harden all their senses. Above all, we see that they have the hardihood
to mock God, as if by their craftiness they could dazzle his eyes; for
whenever they wish to defraud simpletons, they think it enough that they
are not detected, as if they could impose on God. But to no purpose do
they flatter themselves in their cunning, for the Lord will speedily
take off the mask from them. All men ought therefore to abhor this
wisdom, by which men deceive themselves, and accomplish their own ruin.

<span id="xvi.i-p87"></span>*I, and there is none beside me.* He again
repeats those blasphemies, that all may plainly understand how greatly
God abhors them, and how near to destruction are all who raise
themselves higher than they ought.

<span id="xvi.i-p88"></span><span id="xvi.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p89"></span>**11.** *Therefore shall evil come upon
thee.* Continuing the subject which he had formerly introduced, he
ridicules the foolish confidence of the Babylonians, who thought that by
the position of the stars they foresaw all events. He therefore says
that they shall soon be overtaken by that which Scripture threatens
generally against all despisers of God, (<span
id="xvi.i-p89.1"></span>[1Th 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p89.1"></span>,) that, “when they shall say, Peace and safety,
sudden destruction shall overwhelm them,” and that at the dawning of the
day they shall not know what shall be accomplished in the evening; and
it, is very clear from the book of Daniel that this happened. (<span
id="xvi.i-p89.2"></span>[Da 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p89.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p90"></span><span id="xvi.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p91"></span>**12.** *Stand now amidst thy divinations.*
The Prophet speaks as we are accustomed to speak to desperate men, on
whom no warnings produce any good effect; “Do as thou art wont to do; in
the end thou shalt be instructed by the event; thou shalt know what good
the augurs and soothsayers do thee.” By the word “stand” he alludes to
the custom of the augurs, who remain unmoved in one place till some sign
is seen.  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) In like manner, the
astrologers mark out their divisions in the heavens, even to the
minutest points. If it shall be thought preferable to translate <span
id="xvi.i-p92.2"></span>חברים *(chabarim) diviners* instead of
*divinations,* I shall not greatly object; for the meaning of the word
is ambiguous.

<span id="xvi.i-p93"></span>*If perhaps thou shalt prevail.* As if he
had said, “Thou shalt not be able, by the aid of thy augurs, to mitigate
the calamity which is about to overtake thee.” He taunts their perverse
confidence on this ground, that when they shall have made every attempt,
no advantage will follow.

<span id="xvi.i-p94"></span><span id="xvi.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p95"></span>**13.** *Thou hast wearied thyself.* He now
declares still more plainly what he had formerly expressed in somewhat
obscure language; that all the schemes which Babylon had previously
adopted would lead to her ruin; for she nourished within herself a vain
confidence arising from a belief of her power and wisdom, as if nothing
could do her injury.

<span id="xvi.i-p96"></span>*In the multitude of thy counsels.* He calls
them not only “counsels,” but “a multitude of counsels,” in order to
declare that there is no good reason for being puffed up or exalting
themselves, whatever may be the ingenuity or skill of their efforts to
deceive; because their crafty counsels, the more numerous and the more
plausible they are, will give them the greater annoyance. This is a
general statement against those who, trusting to their own ability,
contrive and form counsels of every sort, and, relying on their
prudence, collect all the stratagems and annoyances that can be invented
for oppressing others; for God scatters all their contrivances, and
overtums their fraudulent designs, as he threatened that all unlawful
means would be unsuccessful. “They dare,” says he, “to take counsel, but
not from me; they weave a web, but not from my Spirit.” (<span
id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>[Isa 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p96.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.i-p97"></span>Thus do the consultations of many persons
altogether fail of success, because they do not ask counsel of God, from
whom (<span id="xvi.i-p97.1"></span>[Jas
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span id="xvi.i-p97.1"></span>.md) all
wisdom should be sought; for, the more they toil, the greater annoyance
do they suffer, and they can obtain no advantage. Well does David  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) say, (<span
id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>[Ps 127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p98.1"></span>,) that “in vain do they toil who rise early in
the morning, and go late to rest, and eat the bread of sorrow;” for he
speaks of unbelievers, who do not cast their cares on the Lord, but,
trusting to their industry, make many daring efforts. The Lord ridicules
this confidence, and causes them to be at length disappointed, and to
feel how worthless are all their wicked labors and efforts, and how in
this way they are punished for their rashness; while at the same time
“the beloved of God sleep pleasantly,” as is said in that passage. Not
that they are freed from all annoyances, but that they do not weary
themselves with useless labor, and they commit to God the result of all
their affairs.

<span id="xvi.i-p99"></span>*Let them stand now.* Here we perceive what
counsellors are chiefly meant by the Prophet, that is, those diviners
who boasted to the people of the empty name of science; as if they
understood, all future events by looking at the stars. But we have
formerly spoken of that judicial astrology, and of its uselessness. If
it be objected, that it was not in the power of those men to mitigate
the dangers which were hanging over them, I reply, the Babylonians would
have done it at their suggestion, if they had foreseen the calamity;
and, since they did not foresee it, the conclusion is, that their art
had no foundation whatever. It is idle to pretend, as some do, that the
Prophet reproves unskilfulness in the art, and not the art itself; for
he addresses the Babylonians, who were the authors of this science.

<span id="xvi.i-p100"></span>*The binders of the heavens.* He says
wittily that they “bind the heavens;” because they utter their decisions
as boldly as if, by binding and tying the stars, they held mankind in
chains. Yet, if any one choose to render the term “inchanters,” the
meaning will not be inapplicable, and both are denoted by the verb <span
id="xvi.i-p100.1"></span>חבר *(chabar).* Although to observe the
position of the stars is not in itself sinful, the Prophet says that it
is carried farther than is proper by those who draw from it conclusions
as to doubtful events, and appears indirectly to contrast those
observers with the prophets, in order to make them more detested,
because they extinguish all divine predictions; for, when men attach to
the stars a fatal necessity, all the judgments of God must fall to the
ground.

<span id="xvi.i-p101"></span><span id="xvi.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p102"></span>**14.** *Behold, they shall be as stubble.*
With still greater eagerness he attacks those astrologers who
strengthened the pride of Babylon by their empty boasting; for impostors
of this sort are wont to take away all fear of God out of the hearts of
men, by ascribing everything to the stars, so that nothing is left to
the providence of God. Hence arises contempt of God and of all his
threatenings; for punishments are not ascribed to the judgment of God,
but to some fate and relation of things which they foolishly imagine.
For this reason he kindles into such indignation against the
Babylonians, and says that they shall be buming “stubble,” which is
quickly consumed; for he does not compare them to wood, which is of some
use for giving heat, but to “stubble,” in order to shew that nothing is
so light or useless.

<span id="xvi.i-p103"></span><span id="xvi.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p104"></span>**15.** *So shal they be to thee.* After
having threatened destruction to those astronomers, he again retums to
the Babylonians, and threatens that they must not look for assistance
from that quarter from which they expected it, and that they ought not
to rely on those vain counsels, with which they had long and eagerly
vexed themselves in vain.

<span id="xvi.i-p105"></span>He calls them *dealers,* or, as we commonly
say, *traffickers;* a metaphor taken from merchants, who are skilled in
innumerable arts of deceiving, and in impostures of every kind; for the
princes do not consult in a manner suitable to their rank, but traffic
in disgraceful transactions.  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md)
Though we may extend this to all the allies by whom the Babylonians were
aided, yet the Prophet has his eye chiefly on the diviners. When he
adds, *from thy youth,* he aggravates the guilt of Babylon, in having
been infected with this foolish belief from an ancient date, and in
having held this error as if it had been born with her.

<span id="xvi.i-p107"></span>*Every one to his own quarter.*  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) It is supposed that the Prophet here
speaks of the flight of the astrologers, that every one shall provide
for his own safety; and I fully agree with this, but think that, there
is also an allusion to the “quarters” of the heavens, which astrologers
divide and measure, so as to deduce their prognostications from them. He
therefore ridicules their vain boasting. “They shall withdraw into their
quarters, but they shall go astray, and there shall be no means of
protection. If any one choose to apply it to the revolt of those whose
assistance Babylon thought that at any time she could easily obtain, I
have no objection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc15015.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p37"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, p. 155.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc15015.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p51"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p51.1"></span>Tant s’en
faut qu’elle ose tonner si haut que de coustume, que mesmes elle n’osera
desserrer les dents.” “So far as she is from venturing to sound as
loudly as she was wont to do, that she will not even venture to open her
teeth.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc15015.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p66"></span> “He chastises the pride and exeessive
confidence of Babylon, by which she promised to herself an eternal
reign. Thus Rome is ealled *eternal* in the constitutions of the
emperors, and in inscriptions and coins, and also ‘The mistress of the
whole world, the queen and mistress of the world.’” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc15015.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p68"></span> “It will not be inelegant to view <span
id="xvi.i-p68.1"></span>עד *(gnad)* as meaning *until,* or *so that;*
and it is so rendered by Jarchi, who explains this verse thus, — “Thou
thoughtest with thyself that thou wouldest perpetually be mistress, and
that punishment would not be inflicted on thee; and this thought led
thee astray *until* thou didst not recall to mind those afflictions
which shall befall thee.’” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc15015.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p70"></span> “The apparent solecism of remembering the
future may be solved by observing that the thing forgotten was the
knowledge of the future once possessed, just as in common parlance we
use the word *hope* in reference to the past, because we hope to find it
so, or hope that something now questionable will prove hereafter to be
thus and thus.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc15015.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p80"></span> “Ewald agrees with the English Version and
the Vulgate in explaining it to mean <span
id="xvi.i-p80.1"></span>*propter,* ‘on account of,’ and supposing it to
be a new specific charge against the Babylonians, by assigning a new
cause for their destruction, namely, their cultivation of the occult
arts. Gesenius and the other recent writers follow Calvin and Vitringa
in making it mean *notwithstanding,* as in <span
id="xvi.i-p80.2"></span>[Isa 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025.md)<span
id="xvi.i-p80.2"></span>, and <span id="xvi.i-p80.3"></span>[Nu
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.i-p80.3"></span>.
There is then no new charge or reason assigned, but a simple declaration
of the insufficiency of superstitious arts to save them. But a better
course than either is to give the particle in its proper sense of *in*
or *in the, midst of,* which suggests both the other ideas, but
expresses more, namely, that they should perish in the very act of using
these unlawful and unprofitable means of preservation.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc15015.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p80.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p81"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p81.1"></span>Nonobstant
la multitude des derins et augures.” “Notwithstanding the multitude of
divinations and auguries.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc15015.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p82"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p82.1"></span>Ils ont
defie tous dangers.” “They defied all dangers.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc15015.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p92"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p92.1"></span>Jusqu’ a ce
que quelque oiseau soit apparu.” “Till some bird is seen.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc15015.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p97.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p98"></span> In the Latin original the word is
“Solomon,” and not “David;” but this oversight has been corrected in the
French Version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc15015.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p106"></span> “It becomes a question whether these are
called traders in the literal and ordinary sense, or at least in that of
national allies and negotiators; or whether the epithet is given in
contempt to the astrologers and wise men of the foregoing context, as
trafficking or dealing in imposture. J. D. Michaelis supposes them to be
described as travelling dealers, that is, pedlars and hawkers, who
removed from place to place, lest their frauds should be discovered. He
even compares them with the gipsy fortune-tellers of our own day, but
admits that the astrologers of Babylonia held a very different position
in society.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc15015.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="xvi.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p108"></span> “That is, wherever each person can depart,
they disperse and wander, so that every person pursues his own road, for
rescuing himself from danger, by fleeing to the farthest boundaries of
the kingdom of Babylon. — *Rosenmuller.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](cc15016.md)
