[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15008)  [Next](cc15010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 41.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
41:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** Keep silence before me, O islands; and
let the people renew *their* strength: let them come near; then let them
speak: let us come near together to judgment.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Tacete mihi insulae; et colligant populi
vires; accedant, tunc loquentur; pariter ad judicium accedamus.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** Who raised up the righteous *man* from
the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made
*him* rule over kings? he gave *them* as the dust to his sword, *and* as
driven stubble to his bow.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quis excitavit ab oriente justitiam,
vocavit eum ad pedem suum, dedit coram co gentes, et reges subjugavit;
dedit quasi pulverem gladio ejus, et quasi stipulam propulsam arcui
ejus?

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** He pursued them, *and* passed safely;
*even* by the way *that* he had not gone with his feet.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Persequutus est cos; evasit in pace,
semita qua non ingressus est pes ejus.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4.** Who hath wrought and done *it*, calling
the generations from the beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the
last; I *am* he.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quis designavit, et fecit, vocans
nationes ab initio? Ego Iehova prius, et cum novissimis ego idem.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5.** The isles saw *it,* and feared; the
ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Viderunt insulae et timuerunt; extremi
fines terrae expaverunt, accesserunt, et venerunt.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**6.** They helped every one his neighbour;
and *every one* said to his brother, Be of good courage.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quisque proximo suo opem tulit, et
fratri suo dixit, Sis strenuus.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**7.** So the carpenter encouraged the
goldsmith, *and* he that smootheth *with* the hammer him that smote the
anvil, saying, It *is* ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with
nails, *that* it should not be moved.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7.** Confortavit faber conflatorem, malleo
percutiens tundentem vicissim, et dixit, Bonum hoc ad plumbaturam;
firmavitque clavis, ut non moveretur.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**8.** But thou, Israel, *art* my servant,
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8.** At tu Israel servus meus, Iacob quem
elegi, semen Abrahae amici mei.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span><span id="x.i-p18.1"></span>9. *Thou* whom I
have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief
men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou *art* my servant; I have chosen
thee, and not cast thee away.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9.** Quoniam apprehendi to ab extremitatibus
terrae, ab eminentiis ejus vocavi to, ac dixi tibi, Servus meus es tu,
elegi to, et non repudiavi to.

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**10.** Fear thou not; for I *am* with thee:
be not dismayed; for I *am* thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will
help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ne timeas, quoniam ego tecum sum; non
terrearis, quoniam ego Deus tuus sum, qui to corroboro, adhuc *(vel,
utique)* opem tibi feram, adhuc to sustentabo dextera justitiae meae.

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**11.** Behold, all they that were incensed
against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing;
and they that strive with thee shall perish.

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ecce pudefient et erubescent omnes qui
to provocant; erunt quasi in nihilum, et peribunt qui tecum litigant.

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>**12.** Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not
find them, *even* them that contended with thee: they that war against
thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quaeres cos, nee invenies; qui
contendunt tecum erunt quasi nihilum, et qui tecum belligerantur, quasi
consumptio.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**13.** For I the LORD thy God will hold thy
right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**13.** Quoniam ego Iehova Deus tuus,
apprehendens dextram tuam, ac dicens tibi, Ne timeas, ego tibi
opitulabor.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**14.** Fear not, thou worm Jacob, *and* ye
men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ne timeas, vermis Iacob, mortui
Israel; ego auxiliabor tibi, dicit Iehova, et redemptor *(vel, vindex)*
tuus, Sanctus Israelis.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**15.** Behold, I will make thee a new sharp
threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and
beat *them* small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ecce posui to in traham; ut tribula
nova habens dentes, triturabis montes et comminues, et colles in
pulverem rediges.

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>**16.** Thou shalt fan them, and the wind
shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou
shalt rejoice in the LORD, *and* shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>**16.** Ventilabis eos, et ventus toilet, et
turbo sparget eos. Tu vero exultabis in Iehova, in Sancto Israel
gloriaberis.

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>**17.** *When* the poor and needy seek water,
and *there is* none, *and* their tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>**17.** Egeni et pauperes quaerent aquas, quae
non apparent; lingua eorum siti exarebit. Ego Iehova exaudiam cos; ego
Deus Israelis non descram eos.

<span id="x.i-p36"></span>**18.** I will open rivers in high places, and
fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool
of water, and the dry land springs of water.

<span id="x.i-p37"></span>**18.** Aperiam in editis cacuminibus flumina,
et fontes in media planitie; desertum ponam in stagna aquarum, et terram
vastam in scaturigines aquarum.

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**19.** I will plant in the wilderness the
cedar, the shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in
the desert the fir tree, *and* the pine, and the box tree together:

<span id="x.i-p39"></span>**19.** Dabo in deserto cedrum, spinum,
myrtum, et pinum; ponam in solitudine abietem, ulmum, et popu-lure
sired.

<span id="x.i-p40"></span>**20.** That they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

<span id="x.i-p41"></span>**20.** Itaque videant, et cognoseant,
cogitent, et intelligant simul, quod manus Iehovae fecerit hoc, et
Sanctus Israelis creaverit istud.

<span id="x.i-p42"></span>**21.** Produce your cause, saith the LORD;
bring forth your strong *reasons,* saith the King of Jacob.

<span id="x.i-p43"></span>**21.** Adeste cansae vestrae, dicit Iehova;
afferte firmamenta vestra, dicit rex Iacob.

<span id="x.i-p44"></span>**22.** Let them bring *them* forth, and shew
us what shall happen: let them shew the former things, what they *be,*
that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare
us things for to come.

<span id="x.i-p45"></span>**22.** Adducant, et annuntient nobis quae
ventura sunt; priora quae fuerunt nuntient, et apponemus cor nostrum; et
sciemus novissima eorum; et quae ventura sunt praedicate nobis.

<span id="x.i-p46"></span>**23.** Shew the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye *are* gods: yea, do good, or do
evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold *it* together.

<span id="x.i-p47"></span>**23.** Nunciate quae futura sunt in posterum,
ut sciamus vos deos esse; quin benefacite, ant malefacite, ut enarremus,
et videanus *(vel, mire-mur*) pariter.

<span id="x.i-p48"></span>**24.** Behold, ye *are* of nothing, and your
work of nought: an abomination *is he that* chooseth you.

<span id="x.i-p49"></span>**24.** Ecce vos estis ex nihilo, et factura
vestra ex nihilo; abominationem elegit in vobis (homo.)

<span id="x.i-p50"></span>**25.** I have raised up *one* from the north,
and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my
name: and he shall come upon princes as *upon* morter, and as the potter
treadeth clay.

<span id="x.i-p51"></span>**25.** Excitavi ab aquilone, et venit; ab
oriente solis vocabit in nomine meo; et veniet ad principes, quasi ad
lutum, et tanquam figulus calcabit lutum.

<span id="x.i-p52"></span>**26.** Who hath declared from the beginning,
that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, *He is* righteous?
yea, *there is* none that sheweth, yea, *there is* none that dcclareth,
yea, *there is* none that heareth your words.

<span id="x.i-p53"></span>**26.** Quis nuntiavit ab initio, ut
cognoscamus? Jam ante, et dicemus, justus. Utique non est annuntians;
utique non audire faciens; utique non audiens verba vestra.

<span id="x.i-p54"></span>**27.** The first *shall say* to Zion, Behold,
behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good
tidings.

<span id="x.i-p55"></span>**27.** Primus Sioni, Ecce, ecce ipsi; et
Ierosolymae nuntium dabo.

<span id="x.i-p56"></span>**28.** For I beheld, and *there was* no man;
even among them, and *there was* no counsellor, that, when I asked of
them, could answer a word.

<span id="x.i-p57"></span>**28.** Aspexi, nec nullus erat; de istis
inquisivi, et nullus erat consiliarius; interrogavi cos, nec
responderunt verbum.

<span id="x.i-p58"></span>**29.** Behold, they *are* all vanity; their
works *are* nothing; their molten images *are* wind and confusion.

<span id="x.i-p59"></span>**29.** Ecce onmes vanitas, et defectus opera;
eorum; ventus et chaos simulachra eorum.

<span id="x.i-p60"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p61"></span><span id="x.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p62"></span>**1.** *Be silent to me,*  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) *O islands.* Though the Prophet’s
discourse appears to be different from the former, yet he pursues the
same subject; for, in order to put the Jews to shame, he says that he
would have been successful, if he had been called to plead with
unbelievers and blind persons. Thus he reproves not only the
sluggishness, but the stupidity of that nation, “to whom God had been so
nigh” and so intimately known by his Law. (<span
id="x.i-p63.2"></span>[De 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md)<span
id="x.i-p63.2"></span>.) Yet we need not wonder that the people,
overtaken by many terrors, trembled so that they scarcely received solid
consolation; for we have abundant experience how much we are alarmed by
adversity, because amidst; this depravity and corruption of our nature,
every man labors under two diseases. In prosperity, he exalts himself
extravagantly, and shakes off the restraint; of humility and moderation;
but, in adversity, he either rages, or lies in a lifeless condition, and
scarcely has the smallest perception of the goodness of God. We need not
wonder, therefore, that the Prophet dwells so largely on this subject,
and that he pursues it in many ways.

<span id="x.i-p64"></span>He gives the name of *islands* to the
countries beyond the sea; for the Jews, having no intercourse with them,
gave to all that lay beyond the sea the name of “islands;” and therefore
he addresses not only the nations which were at hand, but likewise those
which were more distant, and requires them “to keep silence before him.”
But of what nature is this silence? Isaiah describes a kind of judicial
pleading which the Lord is not unwilling to enter into with all nations.
He demands only that he shall be heard in his own cause, and that there
shall be no confusion or disorder in the proceedings, which would be
altogether at variance with a court of justice. On this account he
commands the Gentiles to keep silence, that, when this has been done, he
may openly plead his cause; for the order of a court of justice demands
that every person shall speak in his turn; for, if all should cry aloud
together, there must be strange confusion.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md)

<span id="x.i-p66"></span>This reminds us, that the reason why we do not
think with so much reverence as we ought concerning the power and
goodness and wisdom and other attributes of God, is, that we do not
listen to him when he speaks. Men roar and murmur against God; some,
swelling with their pride, openly despise his word; while others,
through some kind of slothfulness, disregard him, and, in consequence of
being buried in earthly delights, take no concern about aspiring to the
heavenly kingdom. Even now we perceive with what insolence and rebellion
many persons speak against God. How comes it that Papists are so
obstinate and headstrong in their errors, but because they refuse to
listen to God? for if they would listen to him in silence, the truth
would speedily convince them. In a word, the Lord shews by these words
that he will be victorious, if men listen to him attentively. He does
not wish that they shall listen to him in a careless manner, as unjust
and corrupt judges, having already determined what sentence they shall
pronounce, are wont to do; but that they shall examine and weigh his
arguments, in which they will find nothing but what is perfectly just.

<span id="x.i-p67"></span>It may be asked, “Does the Prophet now exhort
the Gentiles to hear?” I reply, these things relate chiefly to the Jews;
for it would be long before this prophecy would reach the Gentiles. But
this discourse would be fitted more powerfully to remove the obstinacy
of the Jews, when he shows that the Gentiles, though they were estranged
from him, would speedily acknowledge his power, provided only that they
chose to listen to him in silence. There is greater weight and force in
these words addressed directly to the “islands” themselves than if he
had spoken of them in the third person.

<span id="x.i-p68"></span>*And let the people collect their strength.*
The Lord defies all the Gentiles to the contest, and in a contemptuous
manner, as is commonly done by those who are more powerful, or who,
relying on the goodness of their cause, have no doubt about the result.
“Let them collect their strength and league against me; they will gain
nothing, but I shall at length be victorious.” As we commonly say, *“I
disdain them, (Je les despite.)* Even though they bend all their
strength both of mind and of body, still they shall be conquered; all I
ask is, that they give me a hearing.” By these words he declares that
truth possesses such power that it easily puts down all falsehoods,
provided that men give attention to it; and, therefore, although all men
rise up to overwhelm the truth, still it will prevail. Consequently, if
we are led astray from God, we must not throw the blame on others, but
ought rather to accuse ourselves of not having been sufficiently
attentive and diligent when he spoke to us; for falsehoods would not
have power over us, nor would we be carried away by any cunning attempt
of Satan to deceive us, or by the force of any attack, if we were well
disposed to listen to God.

<span id="x.i-p69"></span>As to his assuming the character of a guilty
person, in order that he may appear and plead his cause before a court
of justice, it may be asked, “Who among men will be competent. to judge
in so hard and difficult a cause?” I reply, there is nothing said here
about choosing judges; the Lord means only, that he would be successful,
if impartial judges were allowed to try this cause. He cannot submit
either to men or to angels, so as to render an account to them; but, for
the purpose of taking away every excuse, he declares that victory is in
his power, even though he were constrained to plead his cause; and,
consequently, that it is highly unreasonable to dispute among ourselves,
and not to yield to him absolute obedience; that we are ungrateful and
rebellious, in not listening to him, and in not considering how just are
his demands. And, indeed, though nothing can be more unreasonable than
for mortals to judge of God, yet it is still more shocking and
monstrous, when, by our blind murmuring, we condemn him before he has
been heard in his own defense.

<span id="x.i-p70"></span><span id="x.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p71"></span>**2.** *Who shall raise up righteousness from
the east?* This shews plainly what is the design of the Prophet; for he
intends to assure the Jews that they will be in no danger of going
astray, if they choose to follow the path which he points out to them.
And this is the reason why he mentions Abraham; for he might have
enumerated other works of God, but selected an example appropriate to
his subject; for, having been descended from Abraham, whom God had
brought out of Chaldea amidst so many dangers, they ought also to have
hoped that he would equally assist them; since his power was not
diminished, and he is not wearied by acts of kindness.  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) Because it was difficult for captives
and exiles, while they were at a great distance from their native
country, to hope for a return:, he exhorts them by a similar example to
cherish favorable hopes. Having been scattered throughout Chaldea and
the neighboring countries, they thought that the road which led homeward
was shut up against them on account of numerous obstructions. But from
the same place Abraham their father had traveled into Judea. (<span
id="x.i-p72.2"></span>[Gen. 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031.md),
[Gen. 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.i-p72.2"></span>.) Could not he who conducted one poor, solitary
man, with his father, his nephew, and his wife, safe and sound amidst so
ninny dangers, be the leader of his people in the journey? Since,
therefore, God had called Abraham out of his native country, and
delivered him from all distresses, this fact drawn from the family
history ought to have made a deeper impression on his children, that the
departure of their father Abraham might be a pledge or mirror of their
future deliverance from Babylon.

<span id="x.i-p73"></span>When he calls Abraham *righteousness,* he does
so, not for the purpose of extolling the man, but of shewing that God
had assigned to him a character which belonged to the whole condition of
the Church; for he was not called as a private individual, but the
demonstration of God’s eternal justice which was given in his calling is
common to all believers; as if he had said, that in his person the
Church had once been delivered, in order that he might confidently
believe that his salvation and the justice of God would be alike
eternal. And indeed in a single individual we behold the calling of
believers, and a sort of model of the Church, and the beginning and end
of our salvation. In short, Abraham may be regarded as a mirror of the
justice of God, so far as it shines in the affairs of this world. This
word is used for the sake of amplification, (<span
id="x.i-p73.1"></span>πρὸς αὔξησιν); for to “raise up *righteousness*
from the east,” where everything had been corrupted and polluted by the
most abominable superstitions, was an astonishing work of God. If,
therefore, such a display of God’s goodness and power had once been
given, why ought; they not to expect the same or a similar display in
future?

<span id="x.i-p74"></span>*Called him to his foot.*  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) Some interpret this as meaning that
Abraham, wherever he went, called on the name of the Lord; for as soon
as he came into any country, he erected an altar to God, that he might
offer sacrifice upon it. (<span id="x.i-p75.2"></span>[Ge
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007.md)<span id="x.i-p75.2"></span>, and
13:18.) This is indeed true, but I interpret it differently, that the
Lord was the leader in the journey to Abraham, who followed him step by
step; for when he was commanded to depart, no particular country was
pointed out to which he should go; and thus when he set out he knew not
either how far, or in what direction he should travel, but God kept him
in suspense till he entered into the land of Canaan. (<span
id="x.i-p75.3"></span>[Ge 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.i-p75.3"></span>; <span id="x.i-p75.4"></span>[Ac
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#003)<span id="x.i-p75.4"></span>..md) When
Abraham had been called, he immediately appeared, and though he was
uncertain as to his journey, he listened to the mouth of God, and was
satisfied with having God for his leader. On this account the expression
is appropriate, that he followed him “to his foot,” because he
surrendered himself to God to be a footman, like obedient and submissive
servants who follow the footsteps of their master, though they are
uncertain whither he is leading them.

<span id="x.i-p76"></span>*Gave nations before him.* This means that
although the good man might be afflicted and tormented every moment by
many anxieties, yet God removed every obstruction that could annoy him.
Moses does not enumerate all the difficulties which Abraham encountered
at his departure, but any person may conclude that this journey could
not be free from very great annoyances; for it was impossible for him,
when he set out, not to draw upon himself the hatred of the nation, and
to be universally condemned as a madman for leaving his native land, and
relations, and friends, and wandering to an unknown country. After
having come into the land of Canaan, he had to do with wicked and cruel
men, with whom he could not be agreed, because he was entirely opposed
to their superstitions. What Moses relates Shews plainly enough that
Abraham was never at rest, and yet that wicked men durst not attempt to
do anything against him; so that when he wished to purchase a sepulcher
from the children of Herb, they offered it to him freely and for
nothing, and acknowledged him to be a man of God and a prince. (<span
id="x.i-p76.1"></span>[Ge 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#006.md)<span
id="x.i-p76.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p77"></span>*And subdued kings.* The Prophet illustrates
the grace of God, by shewing that he did not spare even *kings,* so as
to make it evident that he was a faithful protector of his servant or
vassal Abraham. The history of the four kings whom he vanquished and
routed is well known, (<span id="x.i-p77.1"></span>[Gen.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p77.1"></span>,.md) and
might be extended to Pharaoh, (<span id="x.i-p77.2"></span>[Ge
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017)<span id="x.i-p77.2"></span>,.md)
and Abimelech, (<span id="x.i-p77.3"></span>[Ge
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)<span id="x.i-p77.3"></span>,.md) who
are also mentioned in <span id="x.i-p77.4"></span>[Ps
105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014.md)<span id="x.i-p77.4"></span>,
where this subject is handled; for they were chastised because they
dared to “touch the Lord’s Anointed.” (<span id="x.i-p77.5"></span>[Ps
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p77.5"></span>..md)
But strictly it denotes that victory which he obtained over four kings,
(<span id="x.i-p77.6"></span>[Gen.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p77.6"></span>,.md) who
had carried off his nephew Lot, with all that belonged to him; for it is
very evident from the context that the Prophet does not speak of kings
or nations that had been soothed, but of armed enemies that had been
violently made to pass under the yoke.

<span id="x.i-p78"></span>*As dust to his sword.* Lastly, he magnifies
the ease with which that victory was gained, and thus expresses the
highest contempt by comparing those kings to *dust* and *stubble;* for
he subdued them without exposing himself to danger. At the same time he
reminds us that this ought not to be ascribed to the power of man, but
to the assistance of God; because it is not by human power that victory
can be so easily gained.

<span id="x.i-p79"></span><span id="x.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p80"></span>**3.** *He pursued* them. The Prophet again
commends, by the greatness of the victory, the extraordinary kindness of
God. It is of the highest importance that he obtained it in a country
which was unknown to him; for it is difficult and hazardous to pursue
enemies in unknown countries; and how great is the value of a knowledge
of places is plainly shewn by history, and daily experienced by those
who carry on war. That was no obstacle to Abraham; and hence it is still
more evident, that he was led and assisted by the hand of God to conduct
his followers courageously.

<span id="x.i-p81"></span><span id="x.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p82"></span>**4.** *Who hath appointed?* Although Isaiah
has exhibited in this passage nothing more than the example of Abraham,
yet he undoubtedly intended to remind the people of all the benefits
which the fathers had received in ancient times; as if he had said,
“Call to remembrance what is your origin, whence I raised up your father
Abraham, by what path I led him; and yet this was not the termination of
my favors, for since that time I have never ceased to enrich you with
every kind of blessings.” When he asks therefore who he is, he does not
speak merely of a single performance, but adds other benefits, which
followed at various times, and which the people ought also to remember.

<span id="x.i-p83"></span>*Calling the nations from the beginning.* This
must relate to the constant succession of ages. In the Hebrew language
<span id="x.i-p83.1"></span>דור *(dor)* means not only “an age,” or the
duration of human life, but the men who lived at that time. Thus one
generation is distinguished from another, as fathers from their
children, and grandchildren from their grandfathers; for posterity will
call us the former generation, and will call our ancestors a generation
more remote and ancient. Again, because any one age would consume
mankind, if it were not renewed by offspring, the Prophet shows that God
multiplies men by an uninterrupted course, so that they succeed each
other. Hence it follows, that he presides over all ages, that we may not
think that this world is governed by chance, while the providence of God
is clearly seen in the succession of ages. But because, in consequence
of various changes, the world appears to revolve by blind impulse, the
Prophet declares by these words that those manifold events were known
“from the beginning”’ of the world, which amounts to this, that amidst
that variety which time brings, God reigns, and accomplishes by a
uniform course what he decreed from the beginning.

<span id="x.i-p84"></span>*I Jehovah.* At length he asserts more plainly
that God is the author of these blessings, that Abraham conquered
enemies, (<span id="x.i-p84.1"></span>[Ge
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016)<span id="x.i-p84.1"></span>,.md)
that he lived among wicked men without suffering harm, that he put kings
to flight, (<span id="x.i-p84.2"></span>[Ps
105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p84.2"></span>,.md)
that the Lord avenged him, when Abimelech (<span
id="x.i-p84.3"></span>[Ge 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018.md)<span
id="x.i-p84.3"></span>) and also Pharaoh (<span
id="x.i-p84.4"></span>[Ge 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017.md)<span
id="x.i-p84.4"></span>) had violently seized his wife. Besides, he shows
that it ought to be ascribed to him, that other blessings of various
kinds had been bestowed on every generation; for his power had been
manifested not only to the race of Abraham, but to the whole world.

<span id="x.i-p85"></span>*Am the first, and likewise with the last.*
This relates not only to the eternity of essence, but to the government
which he exercises on earth; as if he had said, that God does not grow
old by any length of time, and never will surrender his authority; for
he does not sit unemployed in heaven, but from his throne, on the
contrary, he regulates the affairs of this world. But although the world
put in his place an innumerable crowd of gods, yet he declares that he
sustains no loss, because he will always continue to be like himself.

<span id="x.i-p86"></span><span id="x.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p87"></span>**5.** *The isles saw, and feared.* He now
shows the excessive ingratitude of the world, which, after having
perceived the works of God, still continued in the same blindness to
which it had been formerly abandoned. A little before, he had said that
he would easily gain a victory, if they would only listen to him; and
now he adds, that the Gentiles knew his power, and yet were rebellious
and obstinate. The consequence is, that they are altogether inexcusable;
because the majesty of God was abundantly revealed, if they had not
chosen to shut their eyes of their own accord.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) In order, therefore, to take away the
excuse of ignorance even from the most distant nations, he says that
they trembled at the sight of his works, and yet returned immediately to
their natural dispositions, so as to be entangled by many errors and
superstitions. There is an elegant allusion in the two verbs <span
id="x.i-p88.2"></span>ראו וייראו, *(rau veyirau)* which cannot be
expressed in the Latin language; but the general meaning is, that they
not only were eyewitnesses, but also were so deeply convinced, that fear
was awakened in them by what they knew.

<span id="x.i-p89"></span>*The farthest boundaries of the earth
trembled.* It might be objected, that the blessings which God bestowed
on Abraham could not be celebrated throughout the whole world, so as to
be known to foreign nations. But, as we have said, although Abraham
alone was mentioned by him, yet he intended also to bring to remembrance
other instances of his kindness which their fathers experienced, that
these might lead them to entertain better hope; for not only did he
bring Abraham out of Chaldea, but he rescued all his posterity from the
bondage of Egypt, (<span id="x.i-p89.1"></span>[Ex
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016)<span id="x.i-p89.1"></span>,.md)
and put them in possession of the land of Canaan. He says therefore,
that the Gentiles had experience of his power when he delivered and
preserved his people, that they might know that he is the only true God;
for amidst so many miracles his power was clearly and manifestly
displayed. In short, he declares that the Gentiles were terrified by the
wonderful power of God, when he delivered his people; for wicked men,
when they hear something of that power, are every day terrified and
filled with amazement, because they perceive that God is their enemy.

<span id="x.i-p90"></span>*Drew near and came.* This expression, *drew
near,* is interpreted by some to mean, that unbelievers observed more
closely the works of God; for, when we wish to perceive anything more
accurately, we approach nearer. Others refer it to the king of Sodom,”
who went out to meet Abraham.” (<span id="x.i-p90.1"></span>[Ge
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)<span id="x.i-p90.1"></span>..md)
But those interpretations are unsuitable, and indeed have nothing to do
with the subject.

<span id="x.i-p91"></span><span id="x.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p92"></span>**6.** *Every one brought assistance to his
neighbor.* What now follows agrees well with what goes before, if you
connect this verse with the last clause of the former verse, “They drew
near, they were assembled, every one assisted his neighbor;” so that the
meaning is, “Although the islands saw and knew my works, so that they
trembled at them, yet they assembled in crowds to make a league among
themselves.” Why? That they might encourage each other to frame new
gods, and might confirm each other more and more in their blindness. He
therefore aggravates the guilt of the Gentiles by saying, that “every
one assisted his neighbor;” and indeed whoever shall make careful
inquiry will find that this is the source of all superstitions, that men
by mutual consent darken the light brought to them from heaven. But
although the Lord here expostulates with idolaters, yet he does it for
the sake of the Jews, that they may not fall into the impiety of the
Gentiles, or permit themselves to be turned aside from God and from
sincere faith.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) On this account
he brings forward the ingratitude of the Gentiles, that the Jews may not
imitate it, but may remain steadfast in the true worship of God.

<span id="x.i-p94"></span>*And said to his neighbor, Be courageous.*
Here we see, as in a mirror, how great is the wickedness of men, who
profit nothing by considering the works of God, and are even rendered
more rebellious, and harden themselves more and more; for they choose of
their own accord to be blind, and to shut their eyes against the
clearest light, rather than to behold God who manifests himself before
their eyes. To blindness is added rage, in consequence of which they
risc up against God, and. do not hesitate to wage war with him for
defending their superstitions; so that this vice is not idol worship but
idol madness. Isaiah describes this madness by saying, “Be bold, act
courageously;” for he means that men have entered into a base
conspiracy, by which they naturally encourage and inflame each other to
the worship of idols, and to drive away the fear of God which his power
might have led them to entertain.

<span id="x.i-p95"></span><span id="x.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p96"></span>**7.** *The workmen encouraged the founder.*
This verse is explained in various ways, and indeed is somewhat obscure;
and even the Jewish writers are not agreed as to the meaning of the
words. I see no reason why <span id="x.i-p96.1"></span>חרש *(cherish)*
should be here understood to mean simply a carpenter, for it means any
kind of workman.  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) The word <span
id="x.i-p97.10"></span>מהליק, *(mahalik,)* which means *one that
strikes,* is generally rendered in the accusative case; I prefer to
render it, in the nominative case. <span id="x.i-p97.11"></span>פעם
*(pagnam)*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) is generally
translated anvil, and by others a *smaller hammer;* but; as it sometimes
signifies *by turns,* that interpretation appears to agree best with the
context; for the Prophet means that workmen, by beating “in their turn,”
mutually excite each other, because by being earnestly employed in the
same work, they grow warm, and each of them urges and arouses the other,
to perform in the shortest time what they have undertaken. In short, he
describes the rebellion and madness of idolaters, by which they excite
each other to oppose God.

<span id="x.i-p99"></span>From this passage and from all histories it is
manifest that this vice was not peculiar to a single age, and at the
present day we know it by experience more than is desirable. We see how
men, by mumm persuasion, urge one another to defend superstition and the
worship of idols; and the more brightly the truth of God is manifested,
the more obstinately do they follow an opposite course, as if they
avowedly intended to carry on war with God. Since religion was restored
to greater purity, idols have been multiplied and set up in hostility to
it in many places; pilgrimages, masses, unlawful vows, and, in some
cases, anniversaries, have been more numerously attended than before.
During that ancient ignorance there was some kind of moderation; but now
idolaters, as if they had been seized by madness, run about, and are
driven by blind impulse. There is nothing which they do not attempt in
order to prop up a riffling superstition and tottering idols. In a word,
they join hands, and render mutual aid, in order to resist God. And if
any person wish to throw back the blame on his brother, he will gain
nothing; for it adheres to every one in such a manner that it cannot in
any way be removed. All are devoted to falsehood, and almost avowedly
devise methods of imposture, and, trusting to their great numbers, each
of them places himself and others above God. They excite each other to
the worship of idols, and burn with such madness of desire that nearly
the whole world is kindled by it.

<span id="x.i-p100"></span><span id="x.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p101"></span>**8.** *But thou, Israel, art my servant.* He
now shews how unreasonable it is to confound the people of Israel with
the heathen nations, though all have lifted up a standard and agree in
error, and though the whole world be abandoned to impostures; for, since
by a calling of free grace God had chosen and set them apart, they ought
not to have given themselves up to the same rage. This is a remarkable
passage, and teaches us that we ought to be satisfied with our calling,
so as to be restrained from the pollution of this world. Though
corruptions abound, and though we indulge freely in every kind of
iniquity, yet we ought to be restrained by this consideration, that we
are God’s elect, and therefore we are not at liberty to go beyond bounds
like Gentiles, and ungodly men. “Such were some of you,” says Paul,

<span id="x.i-p102"></span>“but now you have been washed, now you have
been sanctified by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God.”  
(<span id="x.i-p102.2"></span>[1Co
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p102.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p103"></span>Indeed, nothing is more unreasonable than
that we should wander like blind men in darkness, when the sun of
righteousness hath shined upon us. We ought therefore to consider our
calling, that we may follow it with all zeal and industry, and, “walking
as becomes the children of light,” (<span id="x.i-p103.1"></span>[Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p103.1"></span>,.md) may
shun that manner of life to which we were formerly habituated. For this
reason he calls Israel his *servant;* not that the Israelites deserved
anything on account of their obedience, but because he had set them
apart for himself; and accordingly, for the same reason he adds —

<span id="x.i-p104"></span>*Jacob, whom I have chosen.* This is a
remarkable commendation of undeserved favor; as if he had said, “You are
indeed my servants, not through your own merit, but through my bounty;
for by my election I have prepared and formed you to be my peculiar
people.” In short, he reminds them that it was not by their own industry
that they obtained the honor of being called God’s *servants,* and that
they did not differ from others so as to excel them in any respect, but
that it was because it so pleased God, who has a right to select this or
that person according to his pleasure. Yet at the same time he explains
what is the design of our election, namely, that we may serve God. “He
hath chosen us,” as Paul says, “that we may be holy and unreprovable
before him.” (<span id="x.i-p104.1"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="x.i-p104.1"></span>..md) The
object to be gained by election is, that they who were the slaves of
Satan may submit and devote themselves unreservedly to God.

<span id="x.i-p105"></span>*The seed of Abraham.* This is added in the
third place, in order to inform us that election depends on the promise
of God; not that the promise goes before the election, which is from
eternity, but because the Lord has bestowed his kindness from a regard
to the promise; for he said to Abraham,

<span id="x.i-p106"></span>“I am thy God and the God of thy seed.”
(<span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p107"></span>This favor has therefore been continued to
posterity, and on account of the promise the Lord took peculiar care of
that people, as Paul also declares that “to them belonged the testament,
the promise, and the giving of the Law.” (<span
id="x.i-p107.1"></span>[Ro 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004.md)<span
id="x.i-p107.1"></span>.) Hence also they were called “that holy
nation,” (<span id="x.i-p107.2"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="x.i-p107.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="x.i-p108"></span>“God’s sacred inheritance, and a priestly
kingdom.”  
(<span id="x.i-p108.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="x.i-p108.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p109"></span>*My friend.* It was an extraordinary honor
which the Lord bestowed on Abraham, when he called him his *friend.* To
be called “the servant of God” is high and honorable; for if it be
reckoned a distinguished favor to be admitted into the family of a king
or a prince, how much more highly should we esteem it, when God accounts
us as his servants and members of his family? But, not satisfied with
that, he bestows on him even a higher honor, and adorns him with the
name of “friend.” What is here said about Abraham relates to all
believers; and Christ declared more plainly, “Now I call you not
servants, but ye are my friends; for servants know not their Lord’s
will, but to you have been revealed secret and divine mysteries, and
hence you may know my friendly and kind disposition towards you.” (<span
id="x.i-p109.1"></span>[Joh 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015.md)<span
id="x.i-p109.1"></span>.) Having therefore obtained from God so great an
honor, we ought to remember our duty, that the more abundantly he has
testified his kindness towards us, we may the more earnestly and with
deeper reverence worship him continually. But we ought always to
remember that Abraham was God’s friend on no other ground than that of
adoption; as Moses also says that the Jews enjoyed their high rank
merely through the good pleasure of God, “because God loved their
fathers.” (<span id="x.i-p109.2"></span>[Deut.
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037.md), [Deut.
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)<span id="x.i-p109.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p110"></span><span id="x.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p111"></span>**9.** *For I have taken thee from the end of
the earth.* Isaiah continues the same subject; for we know by experience
how necessary it is that consolations be repeated when adversity presses
upon us; so that it is not wonderful that the Prophet dwells so largely
on this subject. But from one person, Abraham, he passes to the whole
nation, mentioning the benefits which all of them have received from
God. The relative <span id="x.i-p111.1"></span>אשר *(asher)*  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) appears to me to be here put for an
illative particle; for he assigns the reason why the people ought to be
courageous amidst adversity. It is because they have formerly
experienced his kindness, and consequently ought to cherish equally
favorable expectations for the future. “The ends of the earth” may be
understood in two ways; either that the people were brought from a
distant country, of which Abraham was a native, or that God, who
embraces within his dominion the utmost boundaries of the world, deigned
to stretch forth his hand to none but a single people.

<span id="x.i-p113"></span>*From its eminences have I called thee.*
<span id="x.i-p113.1"></span>אצילים *(atzilim)* has been generally
translated “eminences.” Others prefer to take it in the masculine
gender, as meaning “princes” or “nobles,” in a sense not very different
from the other; for the Prophet extols the grace of God, because,
passing by very illustrious nations, he has adopted to himself a mean
and obscure people. Others refer it to the kingdom of Egypt, from which
the Jews were brought out; for we know how great was the renown of that
people, and how far superior to other nations they reckoned themselves
to be in learning, antiquity, nobility, and many other accomplishments.

<span id="x.i-p114"></span>But I interpret it differently; for I refer
it to the election of the people, who were chosen out of the midst of
other nations far superior to them; and therefore I consider <span
id="x.i-p114.1"></span>מ *(mem)* to mean “from,” or “more than,” so that
there is a comparison between the Jews and other nations. In like manner
also, Moses shews that they were not elected,

<span id="x.i-p115"></span>“because they were more or better than other
nations, (for they were far fewer,) but because the Lord loved them, and
determined to keep the covenant which he had sworn to their fathers.”
(<span id="x.i-p115.1"></span>[Deut.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p115.1"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p116"></span>Again, he says,

<span id="x.i-p117"></span>“Not for thy righteousness, or the
uprightness of thy heart, dost thou come to possess the land.” (<span
id="x.i-p117.1"></span>[De 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#005.md)<span
id="x.i-p117.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p118"></span>Thus, while they were far less than other
nations, still they were elected; and this shews the greatness of the
love of God, and that there was no reason why, after having received
blessings so numerous and so great, they should afterwards distrust so
kind a Father. Besides, he adds, that a proof of this favor was given to
the people in the Law; as if he had said that it was not hidden, but, on
the contrary, was engraven on public tables, when God made a covenant
with them by giving them the Law; for God did not wish that they whom he
had taken to be his own people should wander hither and thither, but
bound them to himself by a promise of salvation.

<span id="x.i-p119"></span>*And have not cast thee off.* This last
expression might be thought superfluous, and even unseasonable, if
Jewish writers had not frequently employed this form of speech, which is
very emphatic; for it denotes the firmness of election, as if he had
said, “After having once adopted thee, I did not desert or forsake thee,
though I had various occasions for casting thee off.” So great had been
the ingratitude of the Jews, that he might justly have rejected them if
he had not resolved to continue to be like himself.

<span id="x.i-p120"></span>What is said about them relates also to us;
for the saying of Paul holds good, that “the gifts of God are without
repentance.” (<span id="x.i-p120.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="x.i-p120.1"></span>..md)
Though he cut off the greatest part of men on account of their unbelief,
yet he reserves some seed of adoption, that the calling may continue in
some furrows; for the wickedness of men cannot change the election of
God. Let us therefore remember that we have been elected by God on this
condition, that we shall continue in his family, though we might justly
have been abandoned.

<span id="x.i-p121"></span><span id="x.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p122"></span>**10.** *Fear not.* The former doctrine
having had for its aim that the people should rely on God, the Prophet
concludes from the numerous blessings by which the Lord manifested his
love, that the people ought not to be afraid. And we ought carefully to
observe the reason which he assigns —

<span id="x.i-p123"></span>*For I am with thee.* This is a solid
foundation of confidence, and if it be fixed in our minds, we shall be
able to stand firm and unshaken against temptations of every kind. In
like manner, when we think that God is absent, or doubt whether or not
he will be willing to assist us, we are agitated by fear, and tossed
about amidst many storms of distrust. But if we stand firm on this
foundation, we shall not be overwhelmed by any assaults or tempests. And
yet the Prophet does not mean that believers stand so boldly as to be
altogether free and void of all fear; but though they are distressed in
mind, and in various ways are tempted to distrust, they resist with such
steadfastness as to secure the victory. By nature we are timid and full
of distrust, but we must correct that vice by this reflection, “God is
present with us, and takes care of our salvation.”

<span id="x.i-p124"></span>*Yet I will assist thee.* <span
id="x.i-p124.1"></span>אף עזרתיך *(aph gnazarticha)* is rendered by some
in the past tense, “Yet I have assisted thee;” but I render it in the
future tense, “I will assist thee.” I translate <span
id="x.i-p124.2"></span>אף *(aph) yet,* as it is usually translated in
many other passages. Yet it is not inappropriate to translate it *even,*
and accordingly my readers are at liberty to make their choice. If the
past tense of the verb be preferred, it will mean *“moreover”* or
*“also.”*

<span id="x.i-p125"></span>*With the right hand of my righteousness.*
Under the word “righteousness,” Scripture includes not only equity, but
that fidelity which the Lord manifests in preserving his people; for he
gives a display of his righteousness when he faithfully defends his
people against the contrivances and various attacks of wicked men. He
therefore gives the appellation of “the *right hand* of righteousness”
to that by which he shews that he is faithful and just. Hence we ought
to draw a remarkable consolation; for if God has determined to protect
and defend his servants, we ought not to have any terror; because “God
cannot deny himself” (<span id="x.i-p125.1"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="x.i-p125.1"></span>.md) or
lay aside his righteousness.

<span id="x.i-p126"></span><span id="x.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p127"></span>**11.** *Lo, all shall be ashamed and blush.*
Here the Prophet expressly promises assistance to the Jews against their
enemies; for if he had merely promised safety, without making any
mention of enemies, various thoughts and anxieties might have arisen in
their minds. God indeed promises that we shall be saved, but yet our
adversaries prevail, and treat us with the utmost scorn and cruelty;
where then is that salvation which was so freely and abundantly
promised? To the general promise, therefore, there is likewise added
this circumstance: “Though the enemies flourish, yet they shall at
length be driven back, covered with shame and disgrace.” Salvation is
therefore promised on this condition, that we must, in the meantime,
encounter enemies and maintain various contests with them, that we may
not promise to ourselves external peace, for we must incessantly carry
on war.

<span id="x.i-p128"></span><span id="x.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p129"></span>**12.** *Thou shalt seek them.* That is, *if
thou seek them;* for enemies are not sought, when they have been put to
flight; and therefore I think that this future ought to be rendered as a
subjunctive*, “If thou seek them, thou shalt not find them;* for they
shall be destroyed and reduced to nothing.” Here it ought to be observed
that he describes two kinds of enemies, one, of those who attack us by
open violence, the other, of those who attack us by words, that is, who
tear us by slanders, curses, and reproaches, and who, as if they were
defending a righteous cause, carry on various controversies with us, and
summon us to courts of justice, and often accuse us of those crimes of
which they have been guilty. But these are the stratagems of Satan, and
we need not wonder that they who are his servants imitate their lord and
master. The Prophet therefore mentions armed enemies who violently fight
against the Church, and next brings forward wranglers, who annoy the
Church by deceit and slander, and by false pretense of justice. We need
not wonder, therefore, that such accusations are directed against us,
and we ought not to think it strange, if many unprincipled men in the
present day sell themselves to Antichrist to slander us; for the same
thing happened formerly to prophets and other servants of God.

<span id="x.i-p130"></span><span id="x.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p131"></span>**13.** *For I am Jehovah thy God.* The
Prophet had already shewn where the hope of salvation ought to be
placed, so as to hold out against every attack; that is, when we are
convinced that God is our God, and is on our side. He now lays down the
same doctrine, but in different words; and yet the repetition is not
superfluous, for we know how easily this doctrine slips out of our
minds, even though it be frequently repeated; and it was impossible to
bestow excessive commendation on this promise, which it is so difficult
to root in our hearts. Let us therefore know that we shall have a
prosperous issue of all our contests, for the Lord is present with us;
and whenever we are attacked by any severe contest, let us learn to look
to Him; for if we hesitate and look hither and thither, we shall never
enjoy peace of mind. When he calls himself *our God,* he not only
mentions his power, but gives proof of his goodness, which he intends to
exercise towards us; for it would not be enough to be convinced of the
power of God, if we were not equally certain of his love; and even when
we are terrified by the mention of his power alone, his goodness is well
fitted to give us peace.

<span id="x.i-p132"></span>*Taking hold of thy right hand, and saying to
thee.* He now speaks about “taking hold of the hand,” and about his
voice; for it is of great importance to us to believe the signs which
God has given us of his love, and to connect with them the doctrine
which assures us of his eternal favor. The word *saying* is therefore
highly emphatic; for we must remain in suspense till the Lord speak,
whose voice alone can remove fear and bring peace. If, then, we desire
to have composure of mind, and to conquer the vexations which come upon
us from various quarters, we must pay close attention to his voice, so
as never to withdraw our mind from it; for they who refuse to hear this
voice of God, or do not hear it attentively, must be miserably tormented
by continual doubt and uncertainty.

<span id="x.i-p133"></span><span id="x.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p134"></span>**14.** *Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye dead
Israel.* He appears to speak of the Jews very disrespectfully when he
calls them “a worm,” and afterwards “dead;” but this comparison agrees
better with the distresses of the people, and is more adapted to console
them than if he had called them an elect nation, a royal priesthood, a
holy tree from a holy root, and adorned them with other titles of that
kind. It would even have been absurd to call them by those high-sounding
names while they were oppressed by the deepest wretchedness.
Accordingly, by the word *worm* he may be viewed as bewailing the
disgraceful condition of the people, and encouraging them to cherish
better hope; for he shews that he keeps his eye upon them, though they
are mean and despised. It is as if he had said, “Although thou art
nobody, yet I will assist thee, and, by restoring thee to thy former
freedom, will cause thee to come out of thy filth and pollution.”

<span id="x.i-p135"></span>Some translate <span
id="x.i-p135.1"></span>מתים *(methim) men,* which does not at all agree
with the context. We are therefore constrained by obvious argument to
translate it *dead,* for it is an exposition of the former word by
repetition, which is very customary among Jewish writers. On this
account I agree with Jerome, who translates it in that manner, and
attaches no importance to the circumstance that the first syllable of
<span id="x.i-p135.2"></span>מתים *(methim)* is here written with Scheva
(:) instead of Tzere (..); for points so closely allied might easily
have been interchanged.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) The
subject ought also to be considered; for nothing could be more foolish
than to put “men” instead of “worms,” unless perhaps it be thought
preferable to render it “mortals.”

<span id="x.i-p137"></span>But, undoubtedly, God intended that this
voice should be heard by persons most deeply afflicted, so as to reach
even to the grave; for he promises, on the contrary, that he will be a
*Redeemer* of “dead men.” Besides, while the Prophet had in view his own
age, he extended this doctrine to all the ages of the world. Whenever,
therefore, we shall see the Church oppressed by the cruelty of wicked
men, it will be our duty to bring these things to remembrance, that we
may believe that the children of God, who are trodden under foot by the
pride of the world, and are not only reckoned contemptible, but
oppressed by every kind of cruelty and reproaches so that they are
scarcely allowed to breathe, are held by God in the highest honor and
esteem, so that they will soon lift up their head; and let every one of
us apply this to himself, so that we may not be terrified by reproaches,
nor by our wretchedness, nor by anguish, nor by death itself. Though we
resemble dead. men, and though all hope of salvation has been taken from
us, yet the Lord will be present with us, and will at length raise up
his Church even from the grave.

<span id="x.i-p138"></span>*The Holy One of Israel.* By adding these
words, the Prophet again reminds believers, as he did a little before,
of that covenant by which Israel had been separated to be God’s sacred
heritage; and thus he imparts courage, that they may not faint or give
way on account of their wretched condition, when they look upon
themselves as “worms” and “dead men.”

<span id="x.i-p139"></span><span id="x.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p140"></span>**15.** *Lo, I have made thee.* The Prophet
still speaks of the restoration of the Church, and promises that she
will be so victorious over her enemies as to crush and reduce them to
powder; and he declares this by a highly appropriate metaphor. The Jews,
whom he addresses, were nearly crushed, but he declares that, on the
contrary, they shall crush their enemies, so that, after having been
delivered, they shall render to them what had been done to themselves.
It was necessary that this should be added, for, if they had not
regained new strength, they would always have been exposed to the
unlawful passions of their enemies; and therefore they needed that God.
should give them strength to repel the attacks which were made upon
them. Yet Isaiah at the same time declares that they shall be
executioners of the vengeance of God.

<span id="x.i-p141"></span>But it may be thought that in this way he
inflames the Jews to be desirous of taking revenge. Now, this is quite
contrary to the nature of the Spirit of God; and, while we are too much
inclined to this disease, the Lord is so far from treating with
forbearance these purposes of revenge, that in many passages he commands
us to repress them; for he exhorts us rather to pray for our enemies,
and not to take delight in their distresses and afflictions. (<span
id="x.i-p141.1"></span>[Mt 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md)<span
id="x.i-p141.1"></span>.) I reply, the Prophet here shews what will
happen, but neither commands nor exhorts us to desire the destruction of
our enemies. If it be again objected that we ought not only to expect
but even to desire what the Lord promises, when it tends to his glory
and our salvation; I acknowledge that this consolation tends greatly to
alleviate our sorrows, when he promises that he will one day inflict
punishment on enemies who have cruelly distressed us, and will render to
them the measure which they have meted out. (<span
id="x.i-p141.2"></span>[Mt 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002.md)<span
id="x.i-p141.2"></span>.) Yet this is not inconsistent: with the command
of God, that we should be kind-hearted, and should pity them on account
of the evils which they bring upon themselves, and bewail their wretched
condition, instead of being led by cruel dispositions to rejoice in
their destruction. (<span id="x.i-p141.3"></span>[Mt
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="x.i-p141.3"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p142"></span>If we embrace this promise with that faith
which we ought to cherish, we shall bring into subjection all the
violence of the flesh, and consequently shall first be disposed to
endure, and afterwards with moderate zeal shall desire the judgment of
God. Accordingly, it ought to be our first aim to repress and lay aside
every violent emotion of the flesh, and thus to await with an honest and
sincere heart the fit season of the divine judgment; and that not so
much from a regard to our private advantage as that due praise may be
given to the justice of God. To the same purpose David wrote —

<span id="x.i-p143"></span>“The righteous shall rejoice when they shall
see the vengeance; they shall wash their feet in the blood of wicked
men.”  
(<span id="x.i-p143.2"></span>[Ps
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span id="x.i-p143.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p144"></span>Not that they delight in their distresses,
but because, as he afterwards adds, the righteous man receives his
reward, and the righteous judgments of God are made known in the earth
when the wicked are punished for their transgressions.

<span id="x.i-p145"></span>The Jews, being by nature cruel and eager of
bloodshed, seize on these promises after the manner of wild and savage
beasts, which eagerly devour the prey that is offered to them, and, as
soon as they smell it, are mad with rage. But the Lord does not wish his
people to forget that kindness which he recommends above all things; for
we cannot be his, if we are not guided by the same spirit, that is, by
the spirit of mildness and gentleness. In a word, by this metaphor of “a
harrow having teeth,” he means nothing else than the wretched
destruction of the wicked, whom the Lord will put to flight by the hand
of the godly; and that for the purpose of comforting the godly, and not
of inflaming them with eagerness for shedding blood.

<span id="x.i-p146"></span><span id="x.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p147"></span>**16.** *Thou shalt winnow them.* The meaning
is the same as in the former verse, but by a different metaphor; for he
compares the Church to a sieve, and wicked men to the chaff which is
driven away by the sieve and scattered in every direction. As if he had
said, “Though for a time the Gentiles bruise and winnow you, yet a
severer judgment awaits them; for by their destruction they shall be
bruised and driven away like chaff.” But we ought to observe the
difference, because here believers are bruised for their good, for they
suffer themselves to be subdued and placed under the authority of God;
while others, who obstinately resist and do not suffer themselves to be
brought into subjection, are scattered by the wind like chaff or
stubble, as the Prophet tells us. Thus God had struck them with his
flails, had bruised and trodden them, had winnowed and tossed them
about, in order that, when the wheat had been well cleansed, he might
gather them to himself; but the heathen nations he assigns as chaff to
the dunghill.

<span id="x.i-p148"></span>To this is added, that the victorious Church
bruises some unbelievers, so that, being purified from their pollution,
they obtain a place in God’s barn; and thus was this prediction
fulfilled, whenever by the agency of believers some of the Gentiles were
subdued, so as to yield obedience to the authority of Christ; for they
were never invested with any earthly power, so as to rule over all his
enemies, but on the contrary they found it necessary to “possess their
souls in patience.” (<span id="x.i-p148.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span id="x.i-p148.1"></span>..md)
But the Lord raised them up like palm-trees bent down by so many
burdens, so that they not only were safe and sound, but also, with
unshaken firmness of mind, trod their enemies under their feet.

<span id="x.i-p149"></span>It ought also to be observed, that Scripture
is frequently accustomed to apply to the Church what strictly belongs to
God alone. Since, therefore, God afflicted the ungodly Gentiles for the
sake of his Church, he is said to have given them to be trodden under
the feet of believers, who reaped the advantage. Whenever we read those
prophecies, our minds ought to be raised to the kingdom of Christ, that,
free from every wicked disposition, we may observe becoming moderation,
and may not desire that this bruising should take place before the
proper time; for it ought to be abundantly sufficient for us, if our
Head shall at length prostrate his enemies under his feet, that we may
share in the triumph of his victory.

<span id="x.i-p150"></span>*But thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah.* When he
adds that the Jews will have cause to rejoice in the Lord, though by
this confidence he intends to alleviate their grief, yet at the same
time he admonishes the godly to be modest, that they may not exult with
fierceness of mind, if at any time it happen that they are raised up by
the hand of God, and exalted in such a manner as to reduce their enemies
under their power; for there is nothing to which men are more prone than
to become proud and insolent when everything happens to their wish. They
forget that they are men, and blot out the remembrance of God, whom they
ought to have acknowledged as the author of all blessings. In order,
therefore, to restrain that immoderate exultation in which the flesh
always indulges, and by which we often suffer ourselves to be carried
away, the Prophet adds, “in the Lord,” because on him all our glory and
all our joy ought to rest. In a word, the Prophet exhorts to gratitude,
that, the more highly God exalts us, the more carefully ought we to
repress all the vanity of ambition, and rejoice and glory in him alone.

<span id="x.i-p151"></span><span id="x.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p152"></span>**17.** *The needy and poor shall seek
water.* Here he follows out the subject which he had begun to handle at
the beginning of the fortieth chapter; for he describes the wretched and
afflicted condition in which the Jews should be in Babylon, till at
length God should have compassion on them and render assistance. He
therefore prepares them for enduring extreme poverty, by saying that
they will be *thirsty;* for this figure of speech, by which a part is
taken for the whole, is better adapted to express the severity of the
affliction. We know that nothing gives men greater distress than the
want of water when they are “thirsty.”

<span id="x.i-p153"></span>*I Jehovah will listen to them.* God declares
that he will relieve them, when they are brought to this necessitous
condition; and hence we ought to learn to whom this promise belongs,
namely, to those who, having been reduced to extremity, are as it were,
parched with thirst and almost fainting. Hence also we see that the
Church does not always possess an abundance of all blessings, but
sometimes feels the pressure of great poverty, that she may be driven by
these spurs to call upon God; for we commonly fall into slothfulness,
when everything moves on according to our wish. It is therefore
advantageous to us to thirst and hunger, that we may learn to flee to
the Lord with our whole heart. In a word, we need to be deeply affected
with a conviction of our poverty, that we may feel the Lord’s
assistance. The Prophet unquestionably intended, by this circumstance,
partly to illustrate the greatness of the favor, and partly to advise
the people not to lose heart on account of their poverty.

<span id="x.i-p154"></span>*The needy and poor.* We ought to observe the
names by which the Prophet here denominates the people of God. When he
calls them “afflicted and poor,” he does not speak of strangers, but of
those whom the Lord had adopted and chosen to be his heritage, and whom
he forewarns that they must patiently endure some severe hardships.
Hence we ought not to wonder if the Lord sometimes permit us almost to
languish through hunger and thirst, since he dealt not less severely
with our fathers.

<span id="x.i-p155"></span>When he says that waters *are nowhere to be
seen,* let us learn that the Lord, in order to try our patience and
faith, withdraws from us every assistance, that we may lean on him
alone. Thus, when we look around on every side, and see no relief, let
us know that still the Lord will assist. By the expression, *I will
listen,* he means that God does not assist every kind of persons, but
those who pray to him; for if we are so slothful as to disregard his
aid, it is right that we should be altogether deprived of it, and, on
account of our unworthiness, should fed no alleviation.

<span id="x.i-p156"></span><span id="x.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p157"></span>**18.** and **19.** *I will open rivers.* He
illustrates the former doctrine in a different manner, namely, that God
has no need of outward and natural means for aiding his Church, but has
at his command secret, and wonderful methods, by which he can relieve
their necessities, contrary to all hope and outward appearance. When no
means of relief are seen, we quickly fall into despair, and scarcely
venture to entertain any hope, but so far as outward aids are presented
to our eyes. Deprived of these, we cannot rest on the Lord. But the
Prophet states that at that time especially they ought to trust, because
at that time the Lord has more abundant opportunities of displaying his
power, when men perceive no ways or methods, and everything appears to
be utterly desperate. Contrary, then, to the hope and belief of all men,
the Lord will assist his people, that we may not suffer ourselves to be
driven hither and thither by doubt and hesitation.

<span id="x.i-p158"></span>*On lofty mountain tops.* In order to confirm
his statement more fully, he promises that he will perform miracles
contrary to the nature and order of things, that we may not imagine that
we should think and judge of these things according to human capacity,
or limit the power and promises of God to these inferior means.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) The Lord has sufficient power in
himself, and needs not to borrow from any other, and is not confined to
the order of nature, which he can easily change, whenever he thinks fit;
for when he says that he will make waters to flow on *the tops of
mountains, and fountains in valleys, and pools in deserts,* we know that
all this is contrary to the order of nature. The reason why he promised
these things is abundantly evident. It was that the Jews might not think
that they were prevented from returning to Judea by that vast desert in
which travelers are scorched by the heat of the sun, and deprived of all
the necessaries of life. The Lord therefore promises that he will supply
them with water, and with everything else that is necessary for the
journey. Now, these things were fulfilled when the Lord brought his
people out of Babylon, but much more abundantly when he converted the
whole world to himself by Christ the Redeemer, from whom flow in great
abundance throughout the whole world waters to quench the thirst of poor
sinners.  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) At that time such a
change took place as could never have entered into the imaginations of
men.

<span id="x.i-p161"></span><span id="x.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p162"></span>**20.** *Therefore let them see and know.*
While God leads us by all his works to adore him, yet when the
restoration of his Church is the matter in question, his wonderful power
is manifested, so as to constrain all to admire him. As we have seen
elsewhere, and as he will afterwards repeat frequently, when he brought
back his people from banishment, he gave a proof fitted for being
remembered in all ages, as he declares in this passage that he will do.
But because we are either sluggish or careless in considering his works,
and because they quickly pass away from our view in consequence of our
giving so little attention to them, he repeats the same statement in
many forms. We give our attention to vain and useless matters, instead
of admiring these works of God; and if at any time they excite our
admiration, yet we quickly forget them, because we are speedily led
aside to different and very unimportant matters. The Prophet therefore
arouses us, in order to shake off our slothfulness, and to quicken and
direct all our senses to understand the power of God. On this account he
places in the first rank *looking,* which produces certain *knowledge,*
and next adds *thought,* which more fully and abundantly confirms the
knowledge.

<span id="x.i-p163"></span>It is uncertain whether the Prophet speaks of
the Jews, who were the citizens of the Church, or of foreigners; but in
my opinion we may view it as having a general meaning, that in the
restoration of the Church the hand of God will be visible even to very
remote Gentiles, so that all shall be constrained to admire the work of
God. Yet it is certain that the Persians and Medes, after having
conquered the Jews, were singularly astonished when they heard those
passages from the prophets:, and especially when they beheld the
accomplishment of them before their eyes; for they knew that such things
could not be performed by men, though they were not converted to God.

<span id="x.i-p164"></span><span id="x.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p165"></span>**21.** *Plead your cause.* There was also a
necessity that this should be added to the former doctrine; for when we
associate with wicked men, they pour ridicule on our hope and charge us
with folly, as if we were too simple-minded and credulous. Our faith is
attacked and frequently shaken by jeers such as the following, “These
people hang on the clouds, and believe things that are impossible and
contrary to all reason.” Since, therefore, the Jews, in their captivity,
would hear such mockeries, it was of importance that they should be
fortified by these warnings of the Prophet; and in order to give greater
weight to this address, he comes forth of his own accord, for the sake
of inspiring confidence, and challenges the Gentiles themselves,
charging them to bring forward everything that could support their
cause, as is usually done in courts of justice.

<span id="x.i-p166"></span>*Saith the king of Jacob.* When he calls
himself “the king of Jacob,” he defies all idols, and shews that he
undertakes the cause of his people, so as to be at length acknowledged
to have vindicated his glory by delivering those who were unjustly
oppressed. And yet the godly needed to possess a strong faith; for what
was the aspect of the kingdom, when they were captives and so severely
oppressed? This was also the reason why he formerly (verse 14) called
them “the worm Jacob” and “dead men.” But they comforted their hearts by
that promise by which he formerly said that their root was concealed
under ground, when he compared the people to a tree that had been cut
down.

<span id="x.i-p167"></span>“A branch shall spring from the stock of
Jesse, and a sprout from his roots shall yield fruit.” (<span
id="x.i-p167.1"></span>[Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md)<span
id="x.i-p167.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p168"></span>They beheld by the eyes of faith that kingly
power which lay concealed; for it could not be seen by the bodily eyes
or comprehended by the human understanding.

<span id="x.i-p169"></span><span id="x.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p170"></span>**22.** *Let them bring them forth.* Not only
does he attack idolaters, but he bids them bring forward the gods
themselves along with them; as if he had said, “Whatever may be their
ingenuity, they will not be advocates able to defend so bad a cause.”
Here we see God sustaining the character of an advocate, and speaking in
the name of the whole nation; for he does not wish to be separated from
his Church, which he therefore confirms and fortifies against the
mockeries of wicked men, and other contrivances by which they attack our
faith. We ought therefore to be of good cheer, when God undertakes our
cause, and comes forth publicly against idolaters, and, armed with his
invincible truth, rises up against the idols and puts to silence their
vanity.

<span id="x.i-p171"></span>In this manner he shews, that by his word he
has most abundantly armed his elect for certain victory, so that they
ought not to hesitate to attack and join battle with all unbelievers;
and indeed whoever has profited, as he ought, by heavenly doctrine, will
easily repel all the tricks of Satan by steadfast and victorious faith.
It is true, indeed, that our faith begins with obedience; but
submissiveness, by which we place our senses in obedience to God, goes
before understanding, in such a manner that it illuminates our minds by
certain knowledge. And by this mark the true religion is distinguished
from superstitions, for it is regulated by a rule which is not doubtful
and cannot deceive. Idolaters are indeed exceedingly proud of their
errors, but all their obstinacy proceeds from stupidity, madness, or
fanatical violence; for if they would soberly and calmly attend to sound
doctrine, that pride by which they obscure the light of truth would
speedily give way.

<span id="x.i-p172"></span>It is far otherwise with the godly, whose
faith is indeed founded on humility, but is not rashly led away by
foolish and inconsiderate zeal, for it has for its guide and teacher the
Spirit of God, that it may not go astray from the sure light of the
word. Accordingly, when there is no rule to distinguish, as the Prophet
declares, it is absolute superstition. Now, since nothing ought to be
rejected at random, believers say, “Bring them forth, and we will give
our heart to them;” not that they whom God has taught ought still to be
ready to turn to either side, but because superstitious persons can
bring forward no argument but what is ridiculous. Again, therefore, he
points out the distinction between stupid obstinacy and true faith,
which has its foundation in the word of God, so that it can never fail.

<span id="x.i-p173"></span>*And let them tell us what is to come.* We
must now inquire by what arguments the Prophet maintains the majesty of
God; for God claims for himself Almighty power and foreknowledge of all
things, in such a manner that they cannot be ascribed to another without
the most shocking blasphemy. Hence it is concluded that these things are
peculiar to the Godhead, so that whoever it be that knows all things and
can do all things, is justly believed to be God. In this manner,
therefore, the Prophet now argues, “If the idols which you worship be
gods, they must know all things, and be able to do all things; but they
can do nothing either in prosperity or in adversity, and they know
nothing that is past or that is future; and therefore they are not
gods.”

<span id="x.i-p174"></span>Here arises a difficult question. In the
writings of heathen authors we find many predictions which they received
from the oracles of their gods, which might lead us to believe that
Apollo, Jupiter, and others, foreknew future events, and consequently
were gods. I reply, first, if we consider what was the nature of those
oracles which are reported to have been uttered by idols, we shall find
that they were all obscure and doubtful, like that which was given to
Pyrrhus,  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) —

<span id="x.i-p176"></span>*“*<span id="x.i-p176.1"></span>*Aio to*
A*Eacida Romanos vincere posse,”*

<span id="x.i-p177"></span>or that to Croesus, —

<span id="x.i-p178"></span>“<span id="x.i-p178.1"></span>Croesus Halym
penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim.”  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="x.i-p180"></span>By embarrassing ambiguities of this sort did
Satan torture the minds of men; so as to send away in uncertainty those
who were the victims of that imposture.

<span id="x.i-p181"></span>But we must also believe what Paul teaches,
that Satan has received power of giving effect to error, that he may
deceive all the ungodly men who willingly give themselves up to his
delusions. (<span id="x.i-p181.1"></span>[2Th
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p181.1"></span>..md)
Thus, when they consulted Satan, “the father of falsehood,” (<span
id="x.i-p181.2"></span>[Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md)<span
id="x.i-p181.2"></span>,) it was not wonderful that they should be
deceived under the pretense of truth; but it was a most righteous reward
of their ingratitude. We see that Satan was freely permitted to
increase, by means of the false prophets, the blindness of Ahab, who
took pleasure in such delusions. (<span id="x.i-p181.3"></span>[1Ki
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022)<span id="x.i-p181.3"></span>..md)
Equally just was it that heathen nations, having alienated themselves
from the true God, should be caught by idle snares, and even drawn to
destruction. And here it is superfluous to pursue the argument on which
Augustine bestows so much toil and pains, how far the devils approach to
the heavenly angels in foreknowledge; for the cause must be sought in
something else than in their nature. Thus, in ancient times, by giving
to wicked teachers the opportunity of practising deception, God revenged
the crimes of his people, not that they excelled in the gift of
understanding, but so far as they were adapted to this purpose, they
freely exercised the permission which was granted to them.

<span id="x.i-p182"></span>So far as relates to God himself, though his
foreknowledge is concealed, and is even a deep abyss, yet he plainly
enough revealed it to the elect people, so as to distinguish himself
from the multitude of false gods. Not that he foretold everything by his
prophets; for the curiosity of men is insatiable, and it is not
advantageous to them to know everything; but because he concealed
nothing that is profitable to be known, and by many remarkable
predictions shewed, as far as was necessary, that he takes a peculiar
care of the Church; as Amos says,

<span id="x.i-p183"></span>“Shall there be any secret that God doth not
reveal to his servants the prophets?”  
(<span id="x.i-p183.2"></span>[Am
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007)<span id="x.i-p183.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p184"></span>This privilege was wickedly and shamefully
abused by the Jews, who universally made traffic of their trivial
predictions among the Gentiles. But the truth always shone so brightly
in the heavenly oracles, that all who guarded against snares clearly
perceived by means of it that the God of Israel, and he alone, is God.
So far were the idols from demonstrating their foreknowledge, that
believers, who had been taught in the school of God, could no more be
deceived by them, than a person who had the proper use of his eyes could
be made to mistake black for white at noon-day. Much less could they
ascribe power to the idols, since it was evident from the predictions
which were daily uttered, that God alone directs both prosperity and
adversity. The Assyrian conqueror rendered thanks to his idols; but God
had previously forewarned the Jews what would happen, and had even
shewed plainly that he armed that wicked man for the purpose of
executing his vengeance.

<span id="x.i-p185"></span><span id="x.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p186"></span>**23.** *Do good, or do evil.* It must not be
supposed that *to do evil* denotes, in this passage, to commit
injustice, which is contrary to the nature of God; but it means to
inflict punishment, and to send adversity, which ought to be ascribed to
the providence of God, and not to idols or fortune. In this sense it is
very frequently found in Scripture.

<span id="x.i-p187"></span>“Is there evil in a city which the Lord hath
not done?”  
(<span id="x.i-p187.2"></span>[Am
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006)<span id="x.i-p187.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p188"></span>In like manner Jeremiah accuses the people of
not acknowledging God to be “the author of good and of evil.” (<span
id="x.i-p188.1"></span>[La 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038.md)<span
id="x.i-p188.1"></span>) By “evils” of that kind, therefore, such as
wars, pestilence, famine, poverty, disease, and others of the same kind,
the Lord punishes the sins of the people, and wishes to be acknowledged
as the author of them all. Now, Isaiah does not bring forward all the
examples and arguments by which God could be distinguished from idols,
for that would have required a very long discourse; but he is at present
satisfied with those which would give a short and yet clear
demonstration; for he has not yet concluded his argument.

<span id="x.i-p189"></span><span id="x.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p190"></span>**24.** *Lo, ye are of nothing.* He now mocks
at idols, in order to confirm the godly in the belief and worship of one
God, when by the comparison they see that those who worship idols are
miserably deceived and blind.

<span id="x.i-p191"></span>*And your work is of nothing. Work* must here
be taken in a passive sense, as if he had said that it is a vain
imagination, a contrivance of no value. But it may be thought that
Isaiah speaks inaccurately, when he says that idols are of nothing, for
they are composed of gold, or silver, or brass, or stone, or other
materials. The solution is easy, for Isaiah did not look at the
material, but at the quality, that is, the notion of divinity which men
erroneously attribute to them. Superstitious people do not adore wood,
or brass, or metal, viewed in themselves, but the majesty which they
foolishly attach to the idol;  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md)
and this undoubtedly is nothing else than a vain imagination, Hence also
Paul, in like manner, declares that “an idol is nothing;” for what
reality can be ascribed, or what name can be given, to a mere image
(<span id="x.i-p192.2"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="x.i-p192.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p193"></span>*He hath chosen abomination in you.* Some
translate *abomination* in the nominative case, and suppose the meaning
to be, that the men who choose the idols are abominable; but I think
that the meaning is different. The verb *hath chosen,* appears to me to
be used indefinitely, as the grammarians call it, and in that manner it
is often used in other passages of Scripture; for when the Prophets
speak of the generality of men:, and relate any common or ordinary
occurrence, they do not employ a substantive. I consider the meaning
therefore to be, that men cannot frame idols without at the same time
framing abomination. This is a remarkable passage for abhorring idols
and the presumption of men who make them, which they cannot do without
offering the highest insult to God. Some men think that it is amusement,
but the Prophet declares it to be “abomination,” which God cannot
endure, and will not permit to be unpunished. The word choose points
out, as with the finger, the origin of idol-worship; for pure religion
would never have been contaminated by so many corruptions, if they had
not dared to make gods for themselves according to their own caprice;
and therefore it ought to be remarked, that all kinds of worship that
are the result of “choice” are at variance with true godliness.

<span id="x.i-p194"></span><span id="x.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p195"></span>**25.** *I have raised him from the north.*
He again returns to that argument; which he had briefly handled,
respecting the foreknowledge and power of God, and shews that to him
alone in whom these are found, the name of God belongs; and therefore
that they are empty idols, which neither know nor can do anything. When
he says that he “raised him from the north,” some explain this as
relating to Cyrus, and others as relating to Christ. But I think that
here the Prophet denotes two things; for when he says “from the north,”
he means the Babylonians, and when he says “from the east,” he means the
Medes and Persians; as if he had said, “Two changes shall happen that
are worthy of remembrance; for I will raise up the Babylonians, whose
empire I will exalt on high, and next shall come the Persians, who shall
become their masters.”

<span id="x.i-p196"></span>Though these events happened afterwards, and
after a long interval, he shews that they were already well known to
him, and appointed by his decree, so that the accomplishment of them is
a clear proof of his divinity. Yet, in the former clause, he threatens
punishment for the purpose of terrifying the Jews; in the latter he
commends his mercy; because he testifies that both the captivity and the
deliverance of the people will be his work, so that it is evident that
both foreknowledge and power belong to him. Heathens make a division of
various offices among their gods: Apollo foretells what is to come,
Jupiter executes it, and another god does something else. But it belongs
to God, not only to foretell or declare what shall happen, but to
arrange everything according to his pleasure; for every divine attribute
belongs to God alone, and cannot be ascribed to another; and this is the
reason why he claims for himself foreknowledge and execution as
inseparable.

<span id="x.i-p197"></span>When he says that he calls him “from the
north,” as I suggested a little before, he predicts the future captivity
of which at that time there was no expectation, because the Jews were
friends and allies of the Chaldeans, and at the same time he prophesies
concerning the restoration of the people who were permitted by Cyrus to
return into their native land. Who would have thought, when matters were
in that state, that such things could be believed? Especially since it
was after a long interval that they followed; for they happened two
hundred years after having been predicted by the Prophet. The Lord
testifies that he is the author of these events, that all may know that
the Babylonians did not attack them by chance, but that the Lord raised
them up as scourges for chastising the Jews, and that the Persians and
Medes did not subdue the Babylonians by their own power, but because
they were led and prompted by the hand of God. In these words,
therefore, he describes the greatness and power of God, and so much the
more plainly by declaring that kings and princes, with respect to him,
are clay. Hence we see more clearly that the Prophet had regard not only
to his own age, but to posterity; for these things could not be known to
the men who lived at that time, but posterity, who had actual experience
of their accomplishment, understood them better; so that none could
doubt that it is God alone “to whom all things are naked and open,”
(<span id="x.i-p197.1"></span>[Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="x.i-p197.1"></span>,.md)
and who directs everything according to his pleasure.

<span id="x.i-p198"></span>This is a remarkable passage for establishing
the full and perfect certainty of the oracles of God; for the Jews did
not forge these predictions while they were captive in Babylon, but long
after the predictions had been delivered to their fathers, they at
length recognised the righteous judgment of God, by whom they had been
warned in due time, and then embraced his mercy, having learned that
they would be at length delivered by the Lord, who wished to preserve
his Church, and whom they had found to be faithful to his promises.
Hence, therefore, we may conclude with certainty, that Isaiah did not
speak at his own suggestion, but that his tongue was moved and guided by
the Spirit of God.

<span id="x.i-p199"></span>*And he has come.*  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) When he says that “he has come,” the
meaning is, that all that has been foretold by the command of God will
infallibly be accomplished. He speaks of a future event, and thus
illustrates the foreknowledge of God; and when he says that God is the
author of these events, this relates to his power and might.

<span id="x.i-p201"></span>*He shall call on my name.* To call “on the
name of God” means nothing else than to undertake anything in obedience
to his authority. It is true, indeed, that nothing was farther kern the
intention of Cyrus than to be employed in the service of the God of
Israel, or to follow him as a leader; but the event shewed that God, in
a secret manner, led the way, so as to conduct him by successive and
incredible victories to Babylon.

<span id="x.i-p202"></span>*And as a potter he shall tread the clay.*
This comparison is added, because the power of the Babylonians was so
vast that it was universally believed that it could not be assailed, and
they looked upon themselves as invincible. Since therefore the
Babylonians, trusting to their resources, despised all their
adversaries, and were elated with pride, the Prophet says, that not only
they, but many others shall be subdued and “trodden down like the clay.”
In short, he means that the wealth of the Babylonians shall not prevent
this change from being made, or the Medes and Persians from becoming
masters of the empire; and, indeed, the propriety of this metaphor was
clearly proved by the event, when Cyrus, after having conquered so many
nations, and gained so many brilliant victories, within a short period
subdued the whole of the East.

<span id="x.i-p203"></span><span id="x.i-p203.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p204"></span>**26.** *Who hath declared from the
beginning?* Again the Lord attacks idols, after having maintained his
divinity; for he asks if idolaters can produce anything of a similar
nature to support their worship; that is, if they can bring forward any
such instance of foreknowledge or power. And because beyond all
controversy he could claim this prerogative for himself alone, he
tauntingly says, “We will acknowledge that he by whom such things shall
be done is the true God.”

<span id="x.i-p205"></span>*We will say he is righteous.* This is the
literal rendering, but the word “righteous” has an extensive meaning,
and sometimes denotes “true and approved;” hence the saying, “Wisdom is
justified,” that is, approved, “by her children.” (<span
id="x.i-p205.1"></span>[Mt 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019.md)<span
id="x.i-p205.1"></span>.) These are then clear proofs of the divine
majesty, which demonstrate the vanity of idols, because by the disposal
of God alone all things are governed, and by the slightest expression of
his will the mightiest monarchies are overthrown. The Lord speaks in the
plural number, in order to shew that he does not defend his own cause,
but the cause of the whole nation. He is, indeed, satisfied with his own
eternity; but as we are weak, it is therefore necessary that it should
be proved to us that he is God, that our minds may not go astray, or
wander in uncertainty, but may rest entirely upon him; and therefore to
the word is added experimental knowledge, that it may more fully support
our faith, if it should still be liable to waver.

<span id="x.i-p206"></span>*There is none that heareth your words.* He
says that the idols are dumb, and leave their worshippers in suspense,
while he kindles the torch of his word, to enlighten his elect people,
and lead them forward to righteous judgment.

<span id="x.i-p207"></span><span id="x.i-p207.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p208"></span>**27.** *The first to Zion.*  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) In this verse God states more clearly
that he predicts future events to the Jews, in order to encourage them
to believe; because if prophecies had not their end and use, it would
not in itself be of very great advantage to know future events. God
therefore testifies that prophecies are intended by him to promote the
faith and edification of the Church. It was necessary that this should
be added to the former statements, that the people might know that those
examples were exhibited, not only in order to magnify the power of God,
but that all believers might reap advantage from it; for all the
instances of the power and foreknowledge of God ought to be viewed by us
in such a light as will enable us to know that he takes care of us,
(<span id="x.i-p209.1"></span>[1Pe
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span id="x.i-p209.1"></span>,.md) and
that he does everything for promoting our salvation. *Zion* is therefore
commanded to acknowledge him as the true and only God, not merely
because he has punished their crimes, but because they are restored from
captivity, and thus learn that God is reconciled to them.

<span id="x.i-p210"></span>*Behold! Behold!* Here we must regard Mount
Zion as desolate and uninhabited, and Jerusalem as reduced to a
wilderness. Hence also Jeremiah represents Jerusalem as speaking in the
manner that is usual with afflicted and distressed women. (<span
id="x.i-p210.1"></span>[La 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#020.md)<span
id="x.i-p210.1"></span>.) Thus the Lord now exhibits her as a widow and
forsaken. Isaiah will afterwards arouse her to rejoice as a woman who
had formerly been barren, and to whom the Lord had given new fertility
for bearing offspring. (<span id="x.i-p210.2"></span>[Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p210.2"></span>..md) At
the same time he now declares that he will comfort Jerusalem, at a time
when nothing was to be seen but what was melancholy and revolting in her
hideous ruins. Now, the present message is, either that she shall give
birth to children, though she was long a widow and desolate, or that
they who had been scattered in distant captivity will return to her in
vast numbers. With that desolation, therefore, we must contrast the
restoration which was effected through Cyrus, when it is said, “Behold,
they come;” and by the word “first,” is denoted not only the eternal
essence of God, but likewise the antiquity of the prediction.

<span id="x.i-p211"></span>*And I will send a messenger to Jerusalem.*
He now describes the manner in which God informs believers about future
events, that is by the agency and ministry of the prophets. <span
id="x.i-p211.1"></span> מבשר*(mebashsher)* is translated by Jerome
“Evangelist,” or “a bringer of good tidings;” but it literally means a
“messenger.” This makes little difference, however, as to the meaning;
for it denotes the prophets who should bring the glad and cheering
message of this deliverance, as God had formerly promised by Moses, that
he would raise up, in uninterrupted succession, faithful ministers who
should surpass all the magicians, and soothsayers, and diviners. (<span
id="x.i-p211.2"></span>[De 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md)<span
id="x.i-p211.2"></span>.) For this reason also he formerly bestowed on
the Church a remarkable appellation, calling her “a bearer of tidings,”
(<span id="x.i-p211.3"></span>[Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)<span id="x.i-p211.3"></span>,.md)
because in the Church the word of God ought to sound aloud.

<span id="x.i-p212"></span>This tends greatly to the commendation of
preaching; for the Lord does not descend from heaven to instruct us, but
employs the ministry of his servants, and declares that he speaks to us
by their mouth; and this distinguished blessing of God ought to be
embraced with our whole heart. He had promised in the Law, as I
mentioned a little before,

<span id="x.i-p213"></span>“I will raise up to you a prophet from the
midst of you.” (<span id="x.i-p213.1"></span>[De
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span id="x.i-p213.1"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p214"></span>He now confirms that promise, by saying that
there shall never be wanting “messengers” to soothe the people amidst
their griefs, and to comfort them amidst their severest afflictions.
Hence also we ought to conclude, that there is no condition of the
Church in which prophecies cease; that is, in which the word of God
brings no alleviation of our distresses.

<span id="x.i-p215"></span><span id="x.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p216"></span>**28.** *I looked, and there was none.* After
having spoken of himself, the Lord returns to idols; for these are
continued contrasts by which a comparison is drawn between God and
idols. As if he had said, “I do these things, but idols cannot do them;
they have no counsel, or wisdom, or understanding; they cannot give an
answer to those that ask them, and cannot yield any alleviation to the
wretched.” In this comparison we ought to observe that he plainly shews
himself to be God, first, by the prophets and by their doctrine, and,
secondly, by his works in a similar manner; and that nothing of this
kind is found in idols; from which it follows, that they are not gods,
and that we ought to rely on him alone. Besides, the eyes of men are
darkened by slothfulness; because they neither inquire, nor consider,
nor observe. Thus they are stupified by idols, for they are willingly
deceived; because they would immediately perceive the emptiness of
idols, if they carefully applied their minds to examine them. This shews
that idolaters cannot be excused on the plea of ignorance, for they
choose to be blind and to wander in darkness, rather than to see the
light and embrace the truth.

<span id="x.i-p217"></span><span id="x.i-p217.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p218"></span>**29.** *Behold, they are all vanity.* After
having spoken of idols, he makes the same statement as to their
worshippers; as it is also said,

<span id="x.i-p219"></span>“They who make them, and all that trust in
them, are like them.” (<span id="x.i-p219.1"></span>[Ps
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p219.1"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p220"></span>Thus he shews that all superstitious persons
are full of “vanity,” and have no judgment or reason. They cannot,
indeed, believe this; for, inflated with pride, they look upon
themselves as men of the highest ability, and despise us as stupid and
ignorant of the affairs of men, when compared with themselves. With what
pride do the Papists and their learned doctors scorn us! With what
haughtiness did the Romans in ancient times despise the Jews! But we
need not spend time on such pride, for in this passage God condemns them
all for “vanity.”

<span id="x.i-p221"></span>*Their works are a failure.* He gives the
name of “works” both to the images which superstitious men make for
themselves, and to all false worship, which has no end or measure, and
in which every person desires to be a master and teacher of religion. He
pronounces all of them to be a “failure,” that is, of no value. He
declares this still more plainly, when he says, that they are *wind and
chaos,* that is, confusion; for I explain <span
id="x.i-p221.1"></span>תהו (tohu) in the same sense that it has in the
first chapter of Genesis, where Moses says that

<span id="x.i-p222"></span>“the earth was at first shapeless and
confused.”  
(<span id="x.i-p222.2"></span>[Ge
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="x.i-p222.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p223"></span>This passage against idolaters ought to be
carefully studied; for they think that images were appointed to preserve
religion, and that minds are kindled by the sight of them, as by the
visible presence of God. They think that they are the books of the
ignorant and unlearned, who cannot be instructed by the reading of the
Scriptures. But the Spirit of God here declares that it is a confused
and shapeless thing, that is, because it disturbs and retains in
superstition the minds of men; and indeed all true knowledge that exists
among men is choked and quenched by this worship of idols. In short, he
teaches that all images, and the homage that is paid to them, and they
who have made and follow them, are mere vanity, and that we may safely
condemn them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc15009.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="x.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p63"></span> “<span id="x.i-p63.1"></span>Devant moy“
“Before me.”

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc15009.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="x.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p65"></span> “He alludes to the method observed in courts
of judicature, where silence is always commanded to prevent
interruption; he calls upon the idolatrous nations to appear at the bar
with him, and see if they could give so convincing proofs of the
divinity of their gods as he could of his own.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc15009.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="x.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p72"></span> “<span id="x.i-p72.1"></span>Puisque sa force
n’estoit point diminuee, ni sa beneficence refroidie.” “Since his
strength was not diminished, nor his benevolence cooled.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc15009.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="x.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p75"></span> “<span id="x.i-p75.1"></span>L’ a-il pas
appele pour venir apres soy.” “Called him to come after himself.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc15009.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="x.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p88"></span> “<span id="x.i-p88.1"></span>Afin de ne la
point voir.” “That they might not see it.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc15009.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="x.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p93"></span> “<span id="x.i-p93.1"></span>De la droite
fiance en luy.” “From proper confidence in him.”

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc15009.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="x.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p97"></span> <span id="x.i-p97.1"></span>חרש *(charash)*
denotes any kind of *workman,* who devotes himself to his work, whatever
may be the material on which he is employed. It is employed particularly
to denote a ‘worker in iron,’ (<span id="x.i-p97.2"></span>[Isa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012)<span id="x.i-p97.2"></span>,.md) ‘a
carpenter,’ (<span id="x.i-p97.3"></span>[Isa
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013)<span id="x.i-p97.3"></span>,.md) ‘a
worker in stone,’ (<span id="x.i-p97.4"></span>[Ex
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p97.4"></span>,.md)
and a ‘worker in brass,’ (<span id="x.i-p97.5"></span>[1Ki
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p97.5"></span>..md)
<span id="x.i-p97.6"></span>צרף *(tzoreph)* is more definite. It is the
participle of the verb <span id="x.i-p97.7"></span>צרף*, (tzaraph,)*
which signifies ‘the melting and casting of metals;’ and hence <span
id="x.i-p97.8"></span>צרף *(tzoreph)* is one who melts metals in the
fire, purifies them from dross, separates one metal from another, and
prepares them by the hammer. (<span id="x.i-p97.9"></span>[Isa.
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#007.md), [Isa.
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006)<span id="x.i-p97.9"></span>..md)” —
*Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc15009.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="x.i-p97.12"></span>

<span id="x.i-p98"></span> “‘Him that striketh by turns with him.’ <span
id="x.i-p98.1"></span>פעם (*pagnam*) is not here a noun substantive,
signifying *an anviI,* as it has been generally understood, but an
adverb, denoting that reciprocal action of two smiths on the same anvil,
of which Virgil speaks. Aen. 8:452.” — *Stocks.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc15009.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="x.i-p111.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p112"></span> That is, instead of the usual and natural
rendering, “whom I have taken,” Calvin renders the clause, “*because* I
have taken thee.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc15009.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="x.i-p135.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p136"></span> “As the parallelism, seems to require an
analogous expression of contempt in the next clause, some either read
<span id="x.i-p136.1"></span>מתי *(methe) (dead men)* with Aquila (<span
id="x.i-p136.2"></span>τεθνεῶτες), Theodotion (<span
id="x.i-p136.3"></span>νεκροί), and Jerome (<span
id="x.i-p136.4"></span>qui mortui estis in Israel), or regard <span
id="x.i-p136.5"></span>מתי (*methe*) as a modification of that word,
denoting *mortals.* Vitringa and Hitzig gain the same end by explaining
it as an ellipsis for <span id="x.i-p136.6"></span>מתי מספר, *(methe
mispar,) men of number,* that is, few men, used in <span
id="x.i-p136.7"></span>[Ps 105:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012.md)<span
id="x.i-p136.7"></span>.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc15009.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="x.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p159"></span> “<span id="x.i-p159.1"></span>Aux causes
secondes.” “To second causes.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc15009.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="x.i-p159.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p160"></span> “<span id="x.i-p160.1"></span>Des poures
pecheurs.”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc15009.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="x.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p175"></span> “<span id="x.i-p175.1"></span>Comme celuy
qui fut donne a Pyrrhus.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc15009.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="x.i-p178.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p179"></span> The former of these hexameters is perhaps
the finest recorded specimen of that intentional ambiguity which the
Pythian and kindred oracles so successfully cultivated. It may either
mean, “I say that thou, the son of Aeacus, canst conquer the Romans,”
or, “I say that the Romans can conquer thee, the son of Aeacus.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc15009.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="x.i-p191.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p192"></span> “<span id="x.i-p192.1"></span>A l’idole
corruptible.” “To the corruptible idol.”

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc15009.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="x.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p200"></span> “And he shall come.” — Eng. Vet.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc15009.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="x.i-p208.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p209"></span> “I, saith Jehovah, am the first that has
foretold by my prophets to the Jews those things which none of the false
gods, and none of their prophets could foretell, the destruction of
Babylon and the return of the banished Jews into their native country.”
— *Rosenmuller.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](cc15010.md)
