[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15012)  [Next](cc15014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 45.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
45:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus saith the LORD to his anointed,
to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him;
and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two-leaved
gates; and the gates shall not be shut;

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sic dicit Iehova Meschiae suo Cyro,
eujus apprehendi dexteram ad subigendas coram eo gentes; itaque lumbos
regum dissolvam, ad aperienda coram eo ostia; ideo portae non
claudentur.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** I will go before thee, and make the
crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and
cut in sunder the bars of iron:

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ego to praecedam, et tortuosa dirigam,
ostia aenea confringam, et vectes ferreos comminuam.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I will give thee the treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that
I, the LORD, which call *thee* by thy name, *am* the God of Israel.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dabo tibi thesauros tenebrarum, et
arcana latebrarum; ut scias quod ego sire Iehova, vocans to nomine tuo,
nempe, Deus Israel.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** For Jacob my servant’s sake, and
Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed
thee, though thou hast not known me.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Propter servum meum Iacob, et Israel
electum meum, vocabo, inquam, to nomine tuo; cognominabo to, quamvis non
noveris me.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** I *am* the LORD, and *there is* none
else; *there is* no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not
known me:

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ego Iehova, et nullus praeter me; non
est praeter me Deus; accinxi to, utcunque non noveris me.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** That they may know from the rising of
the sun, and from the west, that *there is* none besides me. I *am* the
LORD, and *there is* none else.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Propterea scient ab ortu solis, et ab
occasu, quod non sit printer me. Ego Iehova, et nemo praeter me.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these
*things.*

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Formans lucem, et creans tenebras,
faciens pacem, et creans malum; Ego Iehova faciens omnia haec.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** Drop down, ye heavens, from above,
and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let
them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I
the LORD have created it.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Rorate coeli superne; et nubes
stillent justitiam; aperiatur terra; et proveniant salus et justitia;
proferat eas simul; Ego Iehova creavi eum.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker! *Let* the potsherd *strive* with the potsherds of the earth.
Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy
work, He hath no hands?

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Hei litiganti cum fictore suo! Testa
ad testas terrae. An dicet lutum fictori suo, Cur fecisti me? et operi
tuo Non sunt manus.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** Woe unto him that saith unto *his*
father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought
forth?

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Hei qui dicit patti, Cur genuisti?
et mulieri, Cur parturis?

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of
Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and
concerning the work of my hands command ye me.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Sic dicit Iehova, Sanctus Israel, et
fictor ejus; de futuris interrogate me; super filiis meis, et super
opere manuum mearum praecipite mihi.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**12.** I have made the earth, and created
man upon it: I, *even* my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all
their host have I commanded.

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ego feci terram, et hominem super
eam creavi; ego cujus manus extenderunt coelos, et toti militiae eorum
praecepi.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>**13.** I have raised him up in
righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city,
and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the
LORD of hosts.

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ego exeitavi ilium in justitia, et
omnes vias ejus dirigam. Ipse extruet urbem meam, et captivitatem meam
dimittet, non pretio nec munere, dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>**14.** Thus saith the LORD, The labour of
Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature,
shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come
after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down
unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, *saying,* Surely God
*is* in thee; and *there is* none else; *there is* no God.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sic dicit Iehova, Labor Aegypti,
merces AEthiopiae, et proceri Sabaei ad to transibunt, et tui erunt;
ibunt post to, in compedibus transibunt, et adorabunt, (atque) to
obsecrabunt. Utique *(vel, tantum)* in to est Deus, et nullus ultra
prater Deum.

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>**15.** Verily thou *art* a God that hidest
thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Vere tu Deus abscondens to, Deus
Israel servator.

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span>**16.** They shall be ashamed, and also
confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together *that are*
makers of idols.

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Pudore afficientur, atque etiam
erubescent omnes ipsi; simul cum pudore abibunt omnes fabricatores
sculptilium.

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span>**17.** *But* Israel shall be saved in the
LORD with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor
confounded world without end.

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Israel servatus est in Iehova salute
aeterna; non afficiemini pudore, neque erubescetis usque in secula.

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span>**18.** For thus saith the LORD that created
the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath
established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited:
I *am* the LORD, and *there is* none else.

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Quia sic dicit Iehova creans coelos,
ipse Deus fictor terrae, qui fecit eam, paravit earn; non inanem
creavit, ad inhabitandum formavit earn; ego Iehova, et nullus praeter
me.

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span>**19.** I have not spoken in secret, in a
dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me
in vain: I the LORD speak righteousness, I declare things that are
right.

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Non in abscondito loquutus sum, in
loco terrae tenebrarum; non frustra dixi semini Iacob, Quaerite me; ego
Iehova loquens justitiam, annuncians recta.

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span>**20.** Assemble yourselves and come; draw
near together, ye *that are* escaped of the nations: they have no
knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a
god *that* cannot save.

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Congregamini, venite, accedite
simul, abjecti *(vel, remoti)* Gentium. Nihil intelligunt qui efferunt
lignum sculptilis sui, et orant Deum qui non servat.

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span>**21.** Tell ye, and bring *them* near; yea,
let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient
time? *who* hath told it from that time? *have* not I the LORD? and
*there is* no God else beside me; a just God, and a Saviour; *there is*
none beside me.

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Annunciate, et adducite, etiam
consultent simul. Quis audire fecit hoc ab initio, et jam olim
nunciavit? Annon ego Iehova? et non est ultra Deus praeter me, Deus
justus, et servator, non est praeter me.

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span>**22.** Look unto me, and be ye saved, all
the ends of the earth: for I *am* God, and *there is* none else.

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Respicite ad me, et salvi critis,
omnes fines terrae; quia ego Deus, et non est amplius.

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span>**23.** I have sworn by myself, the word is
gone out of my mouth *in* righteousness, and shall not return, That unto
me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Per me juravi; egressum est ex ore
meo in justitia verbum, quod non revertetur, quod mihi flectetur omne
genu, jurabit omnis lingua.

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span>**24.** Surely, shall *one* say, In the LORD
have I righteousness and strength: *even* to him shall *men* come; and
all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Utique in Iehova milli, dicet,
justitiae et robur; ad eum usque veniet; pudefient autem omnes qui
provocant eum.

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span>**25.** In the LORD shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory.

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span>**25.** In Iehova justificabuntur, et
gloriabuntur, totum semen Israel.

<span id="xiv.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p53"></span><span id="xiv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p54"></span>**1.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* He pursues the
subject which he had begun to handle. He shews that not in vain did he
promise deliverance to his people, since the manner of it was altogether
decreed and appointed by him;  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md)
for when the question relates to our salvation, we always inquire into
the way and manner. Although God frequently chooses to hold us in
suspense, and thus conceals from us the method which he has ready at
hand, yet, in this instance he indulges the weakness of his people, and
explains the method in which he will deliver them.

<span id="xiv.i-p56"></span>*To Cyrus his anointed.* He names the person
by whose hand he will bring them back; for, since their faith would be
sharply tried by other temptations, he wished in this respect to provide
against doubt, that the difficulty of the event might not shake them.
And in order to impart greater efficacy to this discourse, he turns to
Cyrus himself: “I have chosen thee to be a king to me; I will take hold
of thy hand, and will subject the nations to thy authority, so that they
shall open up a passage for thee, and voluntarily surrender.” These
words have greater effect than if the Lord spoke to his people.

<span id="xiv.i-p57"></span>Yet it might be thought strange that he
calls Cyrus *his Anointed;* for this is the designation which was given
to the kings of Israel and Judah, because they represented the person of
Christ, who alone, strictly speaking, is “the Lord’s Anointed.” “The
Lord went forth with his Anointed,” says Habakkuk, “for the salvation of
his people.” (<span id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>[Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>..md)
In the person of David a kingdom had been set up, which professed to be
an image and figure of Christ; and hence also the prophets in many
passages call him “David,” and “the Son of David.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p57.2"></span>[Ezek. 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#025)<span id="xiv.i-p57.2"></span>..md) It
was indeed a special anointing, intended to distinguish that priestly
kingdom from all heathen kingdoms. Since therefore this title belonged
to none but the kings of Judea, it might be thought strange that it is
here bestowed on a heathen king and a worshipper of idols; for although
he was instructed by Daniel, yet we do not read that he changed his
religion. True, he regarded with reverence the God of Israel, and
considered him to be the Highest; but he was not prompted by a sincere
affection of the heart to worship him, and did not advance so far as to
forsake superstitions and idolatries.

<span id="xiv.i-p58"></span>Thus God deigns to call him his “Anointed,”
not by a perpetual title, but because he discharged for a time the
office of Redeemer; for he both avenged the Church of God and delivered
it from the Assyrians, who were its enemies. This office belongs
peculiarly to Christ; and this ordinary appellation of kings ought to be
limited to this circumstance, that he restored the people of God to the
enjoyment of liberty. This should lead us to observe how highly God
values the salvation of the Church, because, for the sake of this single
benefit, Cyrus, a heathen man, is called “the Messiah,”  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) or “the Anointed.

<span id="xiv.i-p60"></span>*Whose right hand I have taken hold of.* By
this mode of expression, he means that Cyrus shall prosper in all his
undertakings, for he shall carry on war under God’s direction; and
therefore Isaiah declares that, for the sake of the Church, in order
that he may deliver her, God will grant to him prosperity in all things;
while he again commends the providence of God, that the Jews may fully
believe, amidst changes and troubles, that God on high governs all
things in such a manner as to promote the benefit of his elect. Now,
since it was not easy for Cyrus to penetrate as far as Babylon, because
the whole of Asia had leagued together in order to frustrate his
designs, the Prophet testifies that God will dissolve all the strength
which men can bring against him.

<span id="xiv.i-p61"></span>*I will loose the loins of kings.* Because
the whole strength lies in the reins, the Hebrew writers use the phrase
“opening,” or “loosing the loins,” to denote “being deprived of
strength.” We might also view it somewhat differently, that is, that the
Lord will “make bare,” or “loose their loins,” according to the
customary manner of Scripture, by which kings are said to be ungirded of
the belt, namely, of the badge of royalty, when they are deprived of
authority. Job (<span id="xiv.i-p61.1"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)<span id="xiv.i-p61.1"></span>.md)
employs this mode of expression, and Isaiah will afterwards employ it:
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) “I will gird thee.” (Ver. 5..md)
On this account I more readily adopt this sense, that the force of the
contrast may be more evident. This shews clearly that kings have just as
much strength and power as the Lord bestows on them for the preservation
of each nation; for when he determines to convey their authority to
others, they cannot defend their condition by any weapons or swords.

<span id="xiv.i-p63"></span>*To open the gates before him.* By this
expression he means that no fortresses can resist God, which indeed is
acknowledged by all, but yet they do not cease to place foolish
confidences in bulwarks and fortresses; for, where cities are well
surrounded by walls, and the gates are shut, men think that there they
are safe. On the other hand the Prophet shews that all defences are
useless, and that it serves no purpose to block up every entrance, when
the Lord wishes to open up a way for the enemies. Although it is certain
that the gates were shut and securely barred, yet, because Cyrus pushed
his way as swiftly as if all the cities had been thrown open, the
Prophet justly affirms that nothing shall be closed against him.

<span id="xiv.i-p64"></span><span id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p65"></span>**2.** and **3.** *I will go before thee.*
These two verses contain nothing new; but, in general, he shews that
Cyrus will gain an easy and rapid victory, because he will have the Lord
for the leader of his expedition. Accordingly he promises that all
*crooked* paths shall be *made straight,* because God will remove every
obstruction. Now, since money is the sinews of war, and Cyrus came from
the scorched and poor mountains of Persia, Jehovah says that *treasures*
which were formerly hidden and concealed shall come into the hands of
Cyrus, so that, laden with rich booty, he shall have enough for
defraying any expenditure; for by *the treasures of darkness* he means
those which lay concealed, and as it were buried in safe and deep places
of defense. It is abundantly clear from history, that all these things
happened; for by taking Croesus, king of Lydia, who was at that time the
richest of all men, he obtained large sums of money. Nor would any one
have expected that he would gain victories so easily; and the reason of
so great success is now added, because the Lord called and directed him,
that he might give in him an illustrious demonstration of his power; for
he adds —

<span id="xiv.i-p66"></span>*That thou mayest know that I am Jehovah.*
True, Cyrus, as we formerly said, though he acknowledged that the God of
Israel is the true God, and was filled with admiration, yet was not
converted to him, and never embraced his pure worship according to the
standard of the Law. This was therefore special knowledge, that is, so
far as he assisted the Church, for whose deliverance he was appointed;
and therefore it was necessary that he should be under the influence of
this knowledge, in order that he might execute this work of God. Thus he
does not speak of that knowledge by which we are enlightened, or about
the Spirit of regeneration, but about special knowledge, such as men
destitute of religion  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) may
possess.

<span id="xiv.i-p68"></span>*Calling thee by thy name.* From some
commentators this mode of expression has received a trivial
interpretation, that “before Cyrus was born, God called and described
him by his name.” But we have seen in a former passage, (<span
id="xiv.i-p68.1"></span>[Isa 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p68.1"></span>,) that the Prophet, while he used the same form
of expression, meant something different; for God is said to “call by
name” those whom he has chosen, and whom he appoints to perform some
particular work, that they may be separated from the multitude. This
word denotes closer and more familiar intercourse. Thus a shepherd is
said to “call his sheep by name,” (<span id="xiv.i-p68.2"></span>[Joh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p68.2"></span>,.md)
because he knows them individually. This applies indeed, in the highest
degree, to believers, whom God reckons as belonging to his flock, and to
the number of the citizens of his Church. God did not bestow this favor
on Cyrus; but because, by appointing him to be the leader of so
excellent a deliverance, he engraved on him distinguished marks of his
power; with good reason is the commendation of an excellent calling
applied to him.

<span id="xiv.i-p69"></span>*The God of Israel.* This ought to be
carefully observed; for superstitious men ascribe to their idols the
victories which they have obtained, and, as Habakkuk (<span
id="xiv.i-p69.1"></span>[Hab 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p69.1"></span>) says, “They sacrifice every one to his god;”
and therefore they wander in their thoughts, and conceive in their
hearts any deity that they fancy, while they ought to acknowledge that
Jehovah is the only and true God. What is said of Cyrus ought to be much
more applied to us, that we may not fashion any knowledge of God
according to our fancy, but may distinguish him from idols, so as to
embrace him alone, and to know him in Christ alone, apart from whom
nothing but an idol, or even a devil can be worshipped. In that;
respect, therefore, let us surpass Cyrus, to whom the knowledge of God
was revealed, so that we may lay aside superstitions and all false
worship, and may thus adore him in a holy and upright manner.

<span id="xiv.i-p70"></span><span id="xiv.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p71"></span>**4.** *For the sake of my servant Jacob.*
He shews for what purpose he would grant such happy and illustrious
success to this prince. It is, in order that he may preserve his people;
as if the Lord had said, “Thou shalt indeed obtain a signal victory, bur
I will have regard to my own people rather than to thee; for it is for
their sake that I subject kings and nations to thy power.” By these
predictions, indeed, the Lord intended to encourage the hearts of
believers, that they might not despair amidst those distresses; but
undoubtedly he intended likewise to excite Cyrus to acknowledge that he
owed to that nation all that he should accomplish, that he might he more
disposed to treat them with all kindness.

<span id="xiv.i-p72"></span>*And Israel mine elect.* In this second
clause there is a repetition which serves still farther to explain that
reason; and at the same time he shews on what ground he reckons the
Israelites to be “his servants.” It is because he condescended to choose
them by free grace; for it is not in the power of men to make themselves
“servants of God,” or to obtain so great honor by their own exertions.
This clause is therefore added,  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md)
as before, for the sake of explanation. But still it denotes also the
end of election; for, since we are naturally the slaves of Satan, we are
called in order that, being restored to liberty, we may serve God. Yet
he shews that no man is worthy of that honor, as we have said, but he
whom God hath chosen; for who will boast that he is worthy of so high an
honor, or what can we render or offer to God? Thus “we are not
sufficient of ourselves, but the Lord hath made us sufficient,” as Paul
says. (<span id="xiv.i-p73.2"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p73.2"></span>..md)
The beginning of our salvation, therefore, is God’s election by free
grace; and the end of it is the obedience which we ought to render to
him.

<span id="xiv.i-p74"></span>But although this is limited to the history
of Cyrus, still we may draw from it a general doctrine. When various
changes happen in the world, God secures at the same time the salvation
of his people, and in the midst of storms wonderfully preserves his
Church. We are indeed blind and stupid as to the works of God, yet we
ought firmly to believe that, even when everything appears to be driven
about at random, and to be tossed up and down, God never forgets his
Church, whose salvation, on the contrary, he promotes by hidden methods,
so that it is at length seen that he is her guardian and defender.

<span id="xiv.i-p75"></span>Josephus relates a memorable narrative about
Alexander, who, while he was besieging Tyre, sent ambassadors to
Jerusalem, to demand the tribute which the Jews were paying to Darius.
Jaddus, the high-priest, who had sworn that he would pay that tribute,
would not become subject to Alexander, and refused to pay him the
tribute. Alexander was highly offended, and, swelling with pride and
fierceness, determined to destroy Jerusalem, and, after having conquered
Darius, marched to Jerusalem, for the purpose of consigning it to utter
destruction. Jaddus went out to meet him, accompanied by other priests
and Levites, wearing the priestly dress; and Alexander, as soon as he
saw him, leapt from his horse, and threw himself down as a suppliant at
his feet. Every person was astonished at a thing so strange and so
inconsistent with his natural disposition, and thought that he had lost
his senses. Parmenio, who alone of all who were present asked the
reason, received a reply, that he did not adore this man, but God, whose
servant he was; and that, before he left Dion, a city of Macedonia, a
man of that appearance and dress, who appeared to have the form of God,
presented himself to him in a dream, encouraged him to take Asia, and
promised to be the leader of the army, so that he ought to entertain no
doubt of victory, and therefore that he could not but be powerfully
affected by seeing him. In this manner, therefore, was Jerusalem rescued
from the jaws of that savage highwayman who aimed at nothing else than
fire and bloodshed, and even obtained from him greater liberty than
before, and likewise gifts and privileges.  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p77"></span>I have quoted this example in order to shew
that the Church of God is preserved in the midst of dangers by strange
and unusual methods. Those were troublous times, and scarcely a corner
of the earth was at rest; but above all other countries Judea might be
said to be devoted to destruction. Yet behold the Church rescued in a
wonderful and unusual manner, while other nations are destroyed, and
nearly the whole world has changed its face!

<span id="xiv.i-p78"></span>*And yet thou hast not known me.* These
words are added for the purpose of giving greater force to the
statement, not only that Cyrus may learn that this is not granted on
account of any of his own merits, but that he may not despise the God of
Israel, though he does not know him. The Lord frequently, indeed,
reminds us on this subject, that he anticipates all the industry that
exists in men, in order that he may beat down all the pride of the
flesh. But there is another reason, as regards Cyrus; for if he had
thought that the Lord granted those things for his own sake, he would
have disregarded the Jews and treated them as despicable slaves. For
this reason the Lord testifies that it does not happen on account of
Cyrus’s own merit, but only for the sake of the people, whom he
determines to rescue out of the hands of enemies. Besides, nothing was
more probable than that this man, in his blindness, would appropriate to
his idols that which belonged to the true God; because, being entirely
under the influence of wicked superstitions, he would not willingly have
given place to a strange and unknown God, if he had not been instructed
by this prediction.

<span id="xiv.i-p79"></span><span id="xiv.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p80"></span>**5.** *I am Jehovah.* He confirms the
preceding statement, and the repetition is not superfluous; for it was
proper that it should be often repeated to Cyrus, that there is one God,
by whose hands all rulers and nations are governed, that he might be
drawn aside from all delusions and be converted to the God of Israel.
Besides, it is clearly stated that we ought not to try to find divinity
in any other; as if he had said, “Beware of ascribing this victory to
idols, or forming any confused idea of a god such as men imagine; know
that the God of Israel is the only author of this victory.” Although
Cyrus did not profit by this admonition to such an extent as to leave
his idols and devote himself to the true God, yet it made so deep an
impression on his heart that he acknowledged Jehovah to be God and to
possess the highest authority. At the same time, it was proper that they
who were members of the Church should embrace this doctrine, that they
might boldly despise all pretended gods.

<span id="xiv.i-p81"></span>*I have girded thee.* That girding
corresponds to the nakedness which he formerly mentioned, (verse 1,)
when he said that he “opened” or “ungirded the loins of kings;” for he
is said to “gird” those whom he supplies with strength and courage and
renders victorious. Hence it ought to be inferred, that men have no
courage but when the Lord imparts to them his power and strength, that
neither weapons nor any military force can do anything unless he assist,
and, in a word, that he presides over all wars, and gives victory to
whomsoever he pleases, that none may think that it happens by chance. He
again repeats, *Though thou hast not known me,* in order to make it
still more certain that these things are granted to Cyrus for the sake
of the Church, in order that he may give evidence that he remembers it
with gratitude, and may shew kindness to the people of God in return for
such a distinguished favor.

<span id="xiv.i-p82"></span><span id="xiv.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p83"></span>**6.** *Therefore they shall know.* He means
that this favor shall be so remarkable as to be acknowledged and admired
by all nations. This was not indeed immediately fulfilled; for, although
the fame of that victory was spread far and wide, yet few understood
that the God of Israel was the author of it; but it was immediately made
known to the neighbors, and was communicated by one nation to another,
till the report of it was spread throughout the whole world. He does not
predict what shall happen immediately, but what shall happen afterwards,
though these things were long concealed. God therefore did not permit
the remembrance of this transaction to fade away, but determined that it
should be handed down in permanent records, that it might be celebrated
in all ages, and by the most distant nations, to the very end of the
world. We must therefore remember what I formerly remarked, that the
Prophet interweaves earlier and later events, because the return of the
people was the prelude to a future redemption, and that he thus speaks
of a perfect restoration of the Church. Besides, when it happens that
the illustrious works of God are buried by the ingratitude and malice of
men, still it does not cease to be true, that they shall be visible to
the whole world; for they shine openly and brightly, though the blind do
not see them.

<span id="xiv.i-p84"></span><span id="xiv.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p85"></span>**7.** *Forming light.* As if he had said,
that they who formerly were wont to ascribe everything either to fortune
or to idols shall acknowledge the true God, so as to ascribe power and
the government and glory of all things, to him alone. He does not speak
of perfect knowledge, though this intelligence is requisite for the
attainment of it. But since the Prophet says that it shall be manifest
even to heathens, that everything is directed and governed by the will
of God, they who bear the Christian name ought to be ashamed, when they
strip him of his power, and bestow it on various governors, whom they
have formed according to their fancy, as we see done in Popery; for God
is not acknowledged when a bare and empty name is given to him, but when
we ascribe to him full authority.

<span id="xiv.i-p86"></span>*Making peace, and creating evil.* By the
words “light” and “darkness” he describes metaphorically not only peace
and war; but adverse and prosperous events of any kind; and he extends
the word peace, according to the custom of Hebrew writers, to all
success and prosperity. This is made abundantly clear by the contrast;
for he contrasts “peace” not only with war, but with adverse events of
every sort. Fanatics torture this word *evil,* as if God were the author
of evil, that is, of sin; but it is very obvious how ridiculously they
abuse this passage of the Prophet. This is sufficiently explained by the
contrast, the parts of which must agree with each other; for he
contrasts “peace” with “evil,” that is, with afflictions, wars, and
other adverse occurrences. If he contrasted “righteousness” with “evil,”
there would be some plausibility in their reasonings, but this is a
manifest contrast of things that are opposite to each other.
Consequently, we ought not to reject the ordinary distinction, that God
is the author of the “evil” of punishment, but not of the “evil” of
guilt.

<span id="xiv.i-p87"></span>But the Sophists are wrong in their
exposition; for, while they acknowledge that famine, barrenness, war,
pestilence, and other scourges, come from God, they deny that God is the
author of calamities, when they befall us through the agency of men.
This is false and altogether contrary to the present doctrine; for the
Lord raises up wicked men to chastise us by their hand, as is evident
from various passages of Scripture. (<span id="xiv.i-p87.1"></span>[1
Kings 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)<span id="xiv.i-p87.1"></span>..md)
The Lord does not indeed inspire them with malice, but he uses it for
the purpose of chastising us, and exercises the office of a judge, in
the same manner as he made use of the malice of Pharaoh and others, in
order to punish his people. (<span id="xiv.i-p87.2"></span>[Ex
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.i-p87.2"></span> and
<span id="xiv.i-p87.3"></span>[Ex
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)<span id="xiv.i-p87.3"></span>..md)
We ought therefore to hold this doctrine, that God alone is the author
of all events; that is, that adverse and prosperous events are sent by
him, even though he makes use of the agency of men, that none may
attribute it to fortune, or to any other cause.

<span id="xiv.i-p88"></span><span id="xiv.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p89"></span>**8** *Drop down dew from above.* Some think
that a form of prayer is here added, which it was the duty of believers
to use while they were waiting for the redemption which is here
described; and they connect this verse with the preceding in the
following manner, “The Lord will not so speedily deliver you, but still
it is your duty to be diligently employed in prayer.” But I interpret it
differently in this manner. The Prophet always speaks in the name of
God, who, in the exercise of his authority, calls on heaven and earth to
lend their services to the restoration of the Church.

<span id="xiv.i-p90"></span>This verse is fitted very powerfully to
confirm the godly in the hope of future redemption; for the people,
wherever they looked, saw nothing but despair. If they tumed their eyes
towards heaven, there they beheld the wrath of God; if towards the
earth, there also were beheld afflictions and chastisements; and
therefore nothing fitted to lead them to entertain favorable hope was
visible. On this account the Prophet confirms them, and enjoins heaven
and earth, which held out nothing but threatentings and terrors, to
bring forth salvation and “righteousness.” This is more emphatic than if
he promised that it shall be, when all the elements, which are ready to
yield obedience to God, receive orders as to what he wishes them to do.
And thus the stream of the discourse will flow on continuously, which
otherwise will be abruptly broken off, if we understand this passage to
be a prayer.  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p92"></span>*And let the clouds drop righteousness.*
This form of expression is frequently employed in Scripture; such as,

<span id="xiv.i-p93"></span>“And the mountains shall bring peace to the
people, and the hills righteousness.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p93.2"></span>[Ps
72:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p93.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p94"></span>And again, “Piety and truth met together,
righteousness and peace kissed each other; truth shall spring from the
earth, and righteousness looked down from heaven;” where David describes
the kingdom of Christ and its prosperity, and shews that in it
“righteousness, peace, mercy, and truth, shall be joined together.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p94.1"></span>[Ps.
85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span id="xiv.i-p94.1"></span>..md)
This passage treats of the same subject. There is an allusion to the
ordinary food of men, who subsist on bread and other productions of the
soil; for their life needs such aids. Now, in order that the earth may
bring forth fruits, it must obtain its vigor from heaven and draw water
from the clouds, that it may be rendered fertile, and then bring forth
herbs and fruits both for men and for animals.

<span id="xiv.i-p95"></span>By the word *righteousness* he means nothing
else than the fidelity with which the Lord defends and preserves his
people. The Lord thus “drops down from heaven righteousness,” that is,
well established order, of which salvation is the fruit; for he speaks
of the deliverance of the people from Babylon, in which the Lord shews
that he will be their protector. Yet while we understand the natural
meaning of the Prophet, we must come down to the kingdom of Christ, to
which these words undoubtedly bear a spiritual import; for God does not
limit these promises to a few years, but continues his favors down to
the coming of Christ, in whom all these things were abundantly
fulfilled. There can be no doubt, therefore, that he likewise celebrates
that eternal righteousness and salvation which is brought to us by
Christ; but we ought first to observe that simple interpretation about
the return from the captivity in Babylon.

<span id="xiv.i-p96"></span><span id="xiv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p97"></span>**9.** and **10.** *Wo to him that striveth
with his Maker!* This passage is explained in various ways. Some think
that it refers to King Belshazzar, who, as is evident from Daniel,
haughtily defied God, when he profaned the vessels of the Temple. (<span
id="xiv.i-p97.1"></span>[Da 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p97.1"></span>.) But that is too forced an exposition. The
second might appear to be more probable, that the Lord grants far more
to his children than a man would grant to his sons, or an artisan to his
work; for they suppose that a comparison of this kind is made. “If the
son rise up against the father, and debate with him, he will not be
listened to. The father will choose to retain his power, and deservedly
will restrain his son; and in like manner, if the clay rise up against
the workman. But the Lord permits questions to be put to him, and kindly
offers to satisfy the people; nay, even bids them put questions to him.”
And thus they join together the 10th and 11th verses, and think that
God’s forbearance is manifested by treating us with greater kindness,
and condescending to greater familiarity, than men usually exhibit
towards their sons.

<span id="xiv.i-p98"></span>The latter exposition is indeed more
plausible, but both are at variance with the Prophet’s meaning; and
therefore a more simple view appears to me to be, to understand that the
Prophet restrains the complaints of men, who in adversity murmur and
strive with God. This was a seasonable warning, that the Jews, by
patiently and calmly bearing the cross, might receive the consolation
which was offered to them; for whenever God holds us in suspense, the
flesh prompts us to grumble, “Why does he not do more quickly what he
intends to do? Of what benefit is it to him to torture us by his delay?”
The Prophet, therefore, in order to chastise this insolence, says, “Does
the potsherd dispute with the potter? Do sons debate with their fathers?
Has not God a right to treat us as he thinks fit? What remains but that
we shall bear patiently the punishments which he inflicts on us? We must
therefore allow God to do what belongs to him, and must not take
anything from his power and authority.” I consider <span
id="xiv.i-p98.1"></span>הוי, *(hoi,) Wo!* to be an interjection
expressive of reproof and chastisement.

<span id="xiv.i-p99"></span>*Potsherd to potsherds.* That is, as we say
in common language, *(Que chacun se prenne a son pareil,)* “Let each
quarrel with his like,” “Let potsherds strive with potsherds of the
earth.”  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) When he sends men to
those who are like themselves, he reproves their rashness and
presumption, in not considering that it is impossible to maintain a
dispute with God without leading to destruction; as if he had said,
“With whom do they think that they have to deal? Let them know that they
are not able to contend with God,  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) and that at length they must yield.
And if, unmindful of their frailty, they attack heaven after the manner
of the giants, they shall at length feel that they did wrong in warring
 <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) with their Maker, who can
without any difficulty break in pieces, and even crush into powder, the
vessels which he has made.

<span id="xiv.i-p103"></span>Some interpret <span
id="xiv.i-p103.1"></span>חשים (*charasim*) to mean “workmen” or
“potters,” and suppose the meaning to be, “Shall the potsherd rise up
against the potter?” But those interpreters change the point and read
<span id="xiv.i-p103.2"></span>ש (*schin*) instead of <span
id="xiv.i-p103.3"></span>ש (*sin*). I acknowledge that such diversity
and change may easily occur, but I prefer to follow the ordinary
reading, and to adopt this simple meaning, *“Shall* *the clay say to its
maker?* A potter is allowed to make any vessel of what form he pleases,
a father is allowed to command his sons; will you not admit that God
possesses a higher right?” Thus he reproves those who in adversity
remonstrate with God, and cannot patiently endure afflictions.

<span id="xiv.i-p104"></span>We ought therefore to listen to the warning
given by Peter, when he bids us learn to submit to God, and to “humble
ourselves under his mighty hand,” (<span id="xiv.i-p104.1"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="xiv.i-p104.1"></span>,.md)
so as to yield to his authority, and not to strive with him, if he
sometimes tries us by various afflictions; because we ought to
acknowledge his just right to govern us according to his pleasure. If we
must come to debate, he will have such strong and decisive arguments as
shall constrain us, being convicted, to be dumb. And when he restrains
the insolence of men, it is not because he is destitute of argument, but
because it is right and proper that we should yield and surrender
ourselves to be wholly governed according to his pleasure; but at the
same time he justly claims this right, that his own creatures should not
call him to render an account. What can be more detestable than not to
approve of his judgments, if they do not please men?

<span id="xiv.i-p105"></span>Paul makes use of the same metaphor, but on
a higher subject; for he argues about God’s eternal predestination, and
rebukes the foolish thoughts of men, who debate with God why he chooses
some, and reprobates and condemns others. He shews that we ought, at
least, to allow to God as much power as we allow to a potter or workman;
and therefore he exclaims,

<span id="xiv.i-p106"></span>“O man, who art thou, that repliest against
God? Shall the clay say to the potter, Why hast thou made me thus?”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p106.2"></span>[Ro
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span id="xiv.i-p106.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p107"></span>“Who is so daring as to venture to oppose
God, and to enter into debate with him?” Thus he perfectly agrees with
the Prophet, though he makes use of this metaphor on a different and
more intricate subject; for both affirm that God has full power over
men, so as to permit themselves to be ruled and governed by him, and to
endure patiently all adverse events. There is only this difference, that
Isaiah reasons about the course of the present life, but Paul ascends to
the heavenly and eternal life.

<span id="xiv.i-p108"></span>*His work hath no hands.* The Prophet
speaks in ordinary language, as we say that one “puts the last hand,”
when a thing is completed, and that “hands are wanting,” when a work is
disorderly, confused, or imperfect. Thus, whenever men murmur against
God for not complying with their wishes, they accuse him either of
slothfulness or of ignorance.

<span id="xiv.i-p109"></span><span id="xiv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p110"></span>**11.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* I have
already said, that I do not agree with those who connect this verse with
the preceding, as if God, abandoning his just right, gave permission to
the Jews to put questions more than is allowed among men. There is
another meaning not much different, that the Israelites are miserable,
because they know not, and do not even wish to know the will of the
Lord; that they do not seek and even do not accept of consolation; and,
in short, that the deep sorrow with which they are oppressed arises from
the fault of the people, that is, because they do not ask at the mouth
of the Lord. If we adopt this exposition, we must arrive at the
conclusion that this passage treats of a different kind of inquiry; for
as it is unlawful to thrust ourselves into the secret decrees of God, so
he graciously condescends to make known to his people, as far as is
necessary, what he intends to do; and, when he opens his sacred mouth,
he justly commands us to open our ears to him, and to hear attentively
whatever he declares. Now, we also know by experience that which Isaiah
brings as a reproach against the ancient people.

<span id="xiv.i-p111"></span>But it is more reasonable to view this
statement as depending on the preceding, so as to be an application of
the metaphor in this sense: “A son will not be allowed to enter into a
dispute with his father, and the clay will not be permitted to strive
with its potter; how much more intolerable is this liberty which men
take, when they prescribe to God in what manner he ought to treat his
sons?” For otherwise this sentence would be broken and imperfect, but
those two clauses agree beautifully with each other. “The potter will
make clay of any shape according to his pleasure, the son of a mortal
man will not venture to expostulate with his father; and will you refuse
to me, who am the supreme Father and Maker of all things, to have equal
power over my sons and my creatures?” If the former meaning be
preferred, the Prophet reproaches men with their slothfulness, in not
deigning to put questions to God, and to learn from his mouth those
things which related to their consolation; for they might have learned
from the prophecies that God took care of them, and might have known the
conclusion of their distresses. And indeed there is no better remedy in
adversity than to ask at the mouth of God, so as not to fix our eyes on
the present condition of things, but to embrace with the heart that
future salvation which the Lord promises.

<span id="xiv.i-p112"></span>“The Lord is faithful, who will not suffer
us to be tried beyond what we are able to bear; but with the temptation
will also grant deliverance, and will increase his grace in us.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p112.2"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p112.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p113"></span>*Command ye* *me*. This must not be
understood as denoting authority; for it does not belong to us to
“command” God, or to press upon him unseasonably; and it will not be
possible for any person to profit by the word of God, who does not bring
an humble heart.  <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) But God
presents himself to us, that we may ask from him what is of importance
to us to know; as if he had said, “Order me; I am ready to reveal those
things which are of the highest importance for you to know, that you may
derive consolation from them.” But as that would be an unnatural mode of
expression, I consider that the complaint which I have stated is more
simple, that God is robbed of a father’s right, if he do not retain the
absolute and uncontrolled government of his Church. Thus, in the clause,
*Ask me of things to come,* the word ask is taken in a bad sense, when
men, forgetting modesty, do not hesitate to summon God to their bar, and
to demand a reason for anything that he has done. This is still more
evident from the word *command;* as if he had said, “It will belong to
you, forsooth, to prescribe what shape I ought to give to my work!”

<span id="xiv.i-p115"></span>In a word, the Prophet’s design is to
exhort men to moderation and patience; for, as soon as they begin to
dispute with him, they endeavor to drag him from his heavenly throne.
Now, he does not address the Jews alone, for he needed to restrain the
blasphemies which even at that time were current among infidels. It is
as if God, wishing to maintain his right, thus refuted the slanders of
the whole world: “How far shall your insolence carry its excesses, that
you will not allow me to be master in my own workshop, or to govern my
family as I think fit?”

<span id="xiv.i-p116"></span><span id="xiv.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p117"></span>**12.** *I made the earth.* He appears
merely to maintain the power of God, as be had formerly done; so that
there is an indirect contrast between God and idols, which superstitious
persons worship. Foolish men ask counsel of idols, as if the world were
governed at their pleasure. On the contrary, God calls us back to
himself, when he says that he

<span id="xiv.i-p118"></span>“made the earth, and placed man upon it,
and that his hands stretched out the heavens.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p118.1"></span>[Gen. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="xiv.i-p118.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p119"></span>But it will be more appropriate, in my
opinion, to apply the whole of this discourse to the nature of the
present subject. “Can anything be more foolish than that men shall
uphold their own rank, and shall haughtily interrogate, and treat as a
criminal, God, whose majesty is above the heavens?” Thus he indirectly
censures the madness of men, who do not scruple to exalt themselves
above the very heavens. Yet at the same time he reminds them that, if it
must come to a strict examination, God will not want arguments to defend
his cause; for, if he governs the whole world, he undoubtedly takes a
peculiar care about his own people, and does not care for strangers, so
as to allow the members of his family to be scattered and wander. Thus,
then, I understand this verse. “Shall I, whose vast and inconceivable
wisdom and power shine brightly in heaven and earth, not only be bound
by human laws, but be degraded below the ordinary lot of men? And if
there be any doubts of my justice, shall not I, who rule and govern all
things by my hand, be careful of those whom I have adopted into my
family? Shall I not watch over their salvation?”

<span id="xiv.i-p120"></span>Thus it is an argument from the less to the
greater, and this meaning is agreeable to Scripture. We know that we
have been adopted by God, in such a manner that, having been received
under his protection, we are guarded by his hand; and none can hurt us,
but by his permission. If “a sparrow,” as Christ tells us, “does not
fall to the ground without his permission,” (<span
id="xiv.i-p120.1"></span>[Mt
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="xiv.i-p120.1"></span>,.md)
shall we whom he values more than the sparrows be exposed by him at
hazard to the rage and cruelty of enemies? And, therefore, since God
upholds all the creatures by his providence, he cannot disregard the
Church, which he prefers to the whole world. We must, therefore, betake
ourselves to this providence, even in the most desperate affairs, and
must not give way to any temptations by which Satan attacks us in
various ways.

<span id="xiv.i-p121"></span><span id="xiv.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p122"></span>**13.** *I have raised him up.* He now
continues the subject on which he had entered in the beginning of the
chapter; for, having undertaken to soothe their affliction, which was
exceedingly sharp and severe, Isaiah holds out the hope of deliverance,
and stretches out his hand to them, that they may look for an absolutely
certain redemption. Though you think that you are ruined, yet the Lord
will protect you against destruction. Why the reproof which we have seen
was intermingled with it, may be easily gathered from the event itself;
for, if Isaiah had not abruptly made this digression, the Jews, in their
vehement impatience, would have been hurried into despair.

<span id="xiv.i-p123"></span>*In righteousness.* This means “justly and
truly,” and must be understood relatively; for it assigns the reason why
God determined to raise up Cyrus, that is, because he is a faithful
guardian of his Church, and does not disappoint his worshippers. Some
explain it, “in justice,” that is, in order that he may punish the
Babylonians; and others, “that he may reign justly;” but the Prophet
meant nothing of this sort. But in the Scriptures, “righteousness” often
signifies fidelity, (<span id="xiv.i-p123.2"></span>[Ps.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008.md), [Ps.
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031)<span id="xiv.i-p123.2"></span>.md),
because the Lord manifests his “righteousness” by fulfilling his
promises and defending his servants. The “righteousness” of God shines
brightly in giving a display of exalted and perfect rectitude by saving
his people; for, although there is no work of God on which a mark of
righteousness is not engraven, yet a much more clear and striking proof
is seen in the salvation of the Church. The meaning therefore is, that
he “raised up” Cyrus, in order to manifest his “righteousness” in him,
whom he has appointed to lead and conduct in bringing back his people.

<span id="xiv.i-p124"></span>*He shall build my city.* Jerusalem is
meant, which he calls “his city,” because he wished that there the
remembrance of his name should be preserved, and because he had
consecrated it in a peculiar manner to himself. In like manner God
himself had declared,

<span id="xiv.i-p125"></span>“Wherever I shall cause my name to be
recorded, I will come to thee, and will bless thee.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p125.1"></span>[Exodus.
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span id="xiv.i-p125.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p126"></span>Now, there was no other city which he had
appointed for sacrifices and vows, and for calling on his name; and,
therefore, also it is called (<span id="xiv.i-p126.1"></span>[Ps.
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p126.1"></span>.md)
“The city of God, the holy tabernacle of the Most High, for God is in
the midst of her;” and in another place it is said, “This is my rest for
ever and ever.” (<span id="xiv.i-p126.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p126.2"></span>.) Now, Cyrus did not build this city with his
own hand, but by royal edicts forbade any one to hinder the rebuilding
of it, and likewise supplied the people with provisions and money.
(<span id="xiv.i-p126.3"></span>[2Ch
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#023.md)<span id="xiv.i-p126.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p126.4"></span>[Ezr.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002.md), [Ezr.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p126.4"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p127"></span>*And shall release my captivity, not for a
price,* that is, “for nothing.” This was uncommon; for, if captives are
released by a conqueror, either a price is demanded, or harsh conditions
are imposed on them; but Cyrus did nothing of that kind. Hence it
follows that this deliverance took place by the will of God, and not by
the will of man. The word “captivity” is here used as a *collective*
noun, denoting “captives.”

<span id="xiv.i-p128"></span><span id="xiv.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p129"></span>**14.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* He still
speaks of the restoration which was afterwards effected under the
conduct of Cyrus; but we must keep in remembrance what we formerly
remarked, that those promises must be extended farther; for it includes
the whole time which followed, down to the coming of Christ. Whoever
shall duly consider and weigh this Prophet’s ordinary style will find in
his words nothing extravagant, and will not look upon his language as
exaggerated.

<span id="xiv.i-p130"></span>*The labor of Egypt, the merchandise of
Ethiopia.* The Prophet alludes to the expenses which Cyrus contributed
for building and adorning the temple. (<span
id="xiv.i-p130.1"></span>[Ezr 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p130.1"></span>) At that time was fulfilled what he says, that
“the labor of Egypt” and “the merchandise of Ethiopia” came to the Jews;
for “Egypt and Ethiopia” were tributaries and subjects of the king of
Persia. From those tributes the temple of Jerusalem was rebuilt. But as
that restoration was only the prelude to that which was accomplished by
Christ, so likewise the homage which foreign nations rendered to the
people of God was only the beginning of that homage which various
nations rendered to the Church of God, after Christ had been revealed to
the world.

<span id="xiv.i-p131"></span>Now, under the name of “Egypt, Ethiopia,
and the Sabeans,” who flourished at that time, he includes also the rest
of the nations. It is as if he had said, “You are now oppressed by the
tyranny of foreign nations, but the time shall one day come when they
shall be subject to you.” This was not immediately fulfilled, but only
at the time when Christ, by his coming, subdued their flinty and
hitherto untameable hearts, so that they mildly submitted to the yoke
that was laid upon them. But the Lord redeemed his people from Babylon,
in order that he might preserve some Church till the coming of Christ,
to whose authority all nations should be subject; and therefore we need
not wonder, if the Prophet, when speaking of the return of the people,
directs his discourse at the same time to God’s end and design, and
makes it to be one redemption.

<span id="xiv.i-p132"></span>*In chains they shall pass over.* When he
says that the Israelites shall be victorious over all the nations, this
depends on the mutual relation between the Head and the members. Because
the Only-begotten Son of God unites to himself those who believe in him,
so that they are one with him, it frequently happens that what belongs
to him is attributed to

<span id="xiv.i-p133"></span>“the Church, which is his body and
fullness.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p133.2"></span>[Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span id="xiv.i-p133.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p134"></span>In this sense also government is ascribed
to the Church, not so as to obscure by haughty rule the glory of her
Head, or even to claim the authority which belongs to him, or, in a
word, so as to have anything separate from her Head; but because the
preaching of the gospel, which is committed to her, is the spiritual
scepter of Christ, by which he displays his power. In this respect no
man can bow down submissively before Christ, without also obeying the
Church, so far as the obedience of faith is joined to the ministry of
doctrine, yet so that Christ their Head alone reigns, and alone
exercises his authority.

<span id="xiv.i-p135"></span>*Surely*  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) *God is in thee.* He relates what will
be said by those who shall make respectful entrearies to the Church.
They will acknowledge that “God is in her.” Some translate <span
id="xiv.i-p136.2"></span>אך (*ach) only,* which I do not object to, and
even acknowledge to be well adapted to express the Prophet’s meaning;
yet it will not be inappropriate to explain it affirmatively, *Surely
God is in thee*

<span id="xiv.i-p137"></span>*And there is none besides God.*  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) He explains the manner in which
foreign nations shall be subject to the Jews; that is, by acknowledging
that there is no other God than He whom the Jews worshipped. If it be
objected, that this has nothing to do with the Jews, who are now
alienated from the Church, I reply, The gospel nevertheless proceeded
from them, and was diffused throughout the whole world; and thus we
acknowledge Jerusalem to be the fountain from which pure doctrine
flowed. (<span id="xiv.i-p138.2"></span>[Ps
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md)<span id="xiv.i-p138.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p138.3"></span>[Lu
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="xiv.i-p138.3"></span>..md)
In ancient times there undoubtedly were none but the Jews who understood
who is God, and what is the proper manner of worshipping him; the rest
were devoted to trifles and delusions, and worshipped their own
inventions. Hence also Christ, addressing the Samaritan woman, says, “We
know what we worship.” (<span id="xiv.i-p138.4"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="xiv.i-p138.4"></span>..md)
Justly, therefore, is it here said, “God is in thee,” because other
nations were ignorant of God. Yet as there is an implied contrast, I
cheerfully admit the adverb *only,* so as to be a testimony of the
repentance of the Gentiles, when they are satisfied with the one God and
forsake their idols.

<span id="xiv.i-p139"></span>The meaning may be thus summed up, “They
who formerly were haughty, and with lofty brow despised the Church,
shall submit to her, when it shall be known that she is the sanctuary of
the true God,” for, as we have said, when God extols his Church, he does
not relinquish his own authority. And this is a Sign of true conversion,
that we do not worship a God whom we have imagined, but him who is
acknowledged in the Church. We ought also to observe this encomium
pronounced on the Church, “God is in thee;” for, as we formerly quoted,
“God is in the midst of her,” because he hath chosen her to be his
habitation. (<span id="xiv.i-p139.1"></span>[Ps
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p139.1"></span>..md)
If we are the people of God, and are subject to his doctrine which
bringeth salvation, it follows that he will assist, us; because he does
not wish to forsake his people; for this promise is perpetual, and ought
not to be viewed as referring solely to that time.

<span id="xiv.i-p140"></span><span id="xiv.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p141"></span>**15.** *Truly thou art a God that hidest
thyself.* Isaiah now exclaims, that there is need of long exercise of
patience, that we may enjoy the promises of God; for the people might
have been prompted to despair, when the wicked had everything to their
wish, and when everything adverse befell themselves. I am aware that
some expound it differently. The Jewish writers commonly interpret it to
mean, that the Lord will hide himself from the Gentiles, but will reveal
himself to his people. Christian interpreters bring forward a different
sense, but too far-fetched. There is ingenuity, indeed, in what they
say, that Christ is a hidden God, because his divinity lies concealed
under the infirmity of the flesh. But it does not agree with the
Prophet’s meaning; for he calls himself “a hidden God,” because he
appears to withdraw,  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) and, in
some measure, to conceal himself, when he permits his people to be
afflicted and oppressed by various calamities; and, therefore, our
hearts ought to be encouraged by hope. Now, as Paul says, (<span
id="xiv.i-p142.4"></span>[Ro 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p142.4"></span>,) “hope is not directed to those things which
are seen;” and in this sense Isaiah calls him “a hidden God,” because
those things which he promised are not immediately visible to our eyes.

<span id="xiv.i-p143"></span>Thus he intended that we should withdraw
our minds from present objects, and raise them above the heavens, which
we must do,  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) if we wish to
receive and accept of his aid. There is “need of patience,” (<span
id="xiv.i-p144.2"></span>[Heb
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)<span id="xiv.i-p144.2"></span>,.md)
therefore, that we may continue to direct our desires towards him, when
he delays the execution of his promises. He had said, a little before,
that unbelievers, though at that time they were blind and stupid, would
feel the presence of God; but, because the time of manifestation was not
yet at hand, this exclamation is appropriately introduced, that God,
before he displays his glory, conceals his power in order to try our
faith.

<span id="xiv.i-p145"></span>*God the Savior of Israel.* That the
Prophet does not speak of the essence of God, but of his assistance, may
be easily inferred from the epithet which is now added, when he calls
God “the Savior.” He explains that God “hides himself” in the method
which he takes for saving his Church, because he conceals his hand for a
time in such a manner as if he had intended totally to abandon them. He
wishes that our salvation should remain, as it were, hidden in darkness,
that, if we desire to enjoy it, we may know that we must go out of this
world,  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) for it will not all at
once present itself to us, or become visible to our eyes. We ought,
therefore, to look for it with unshaken steadfastness; for it is highly
advantageous that in this manner God should try and prove our faith,
that, when we shall be oppressed by various afflictions on every hand,
we may nevertheless rely on God and on his promises.

<span id="xiv.i-p147"></span><span id="xiv.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p148"></span>**16.** and **17.** *They shall all be put
to shame.* Here the Prophet compares the Jews with the Gentiles, in
order to meet a grievous and dangerous temptation, by which they might
be assailed, when they saw the Gentiles enjoying prosperity;  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) for, amidst so great troubles, they
might have suspected that God was favorable to the Gentiles, or that he
had cast away the care of his people, or that everything was governed by
the blind impulse of fortune. The Prophet, therefore, assures them that,
although for a time the Gentiles flourish and appear to be exalted to
heaven,  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) yet the result must be,
that they shall perish and Israel shall be saved. In a word, he exhorts
them not to judge of the power of God from the present condition of
things, not to have their minds fixed on temporary happiness, but to
raise them to eternal salvation, and, when struck by the hand of God,
patiently to bear their condition, and, on the other hand, not to envy
the prosperity of the wicked, which shall be followed by a moumful
reverse, as it is excellently described by the Psalmist. (<span
id="xiv.i-p150.2"></span>[Ps. 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p150.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p151"></span>This statement is added to the preceding;
for whoever shall know that God, when he is a “Savior*,*” is “hidden,”
will not wonder that wicked men enjoy prosperity, and that good men are
poor, and despised, and tried by various afflictions. Thus the Lord
makes trial of our faith and patience, and yet no part of our eternal
salvation is lost; but they who now appear to be a thousand times safe
and happy shall at length perish, and all the wealth which they possess
shall plunge them in deeper ruin; because they abuse God’s benefits,
and, like robbers, seize on what belongs to other men, even though they
appear to possess all of them by a just title. Whenever, therefore, this
thought arises in our minds, “Wicked men are at ease, and therefore God
favors them, and the promises on which we rely are unworthy of credit;”
let us betake ourselves to this declaration of the Prophet as the surest
anchor, and let us fortify ourselves by it, “The Lord will not
disappoint our expectation, but we shall at length be delivered, even
though we be now exposed to the reproaches, slanders, mockings, and
cruelty of the wicked.”

<span id="xiv.i-p152"></span><span id="xiv.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p153"></span>**18.** *For thus saith Jehovah.* This
verse tends to confirm the preceding; for the Prophet means that the
Jews are fully convinced that the Lord will at length deliver them,
though they are oppressed by wretched bondage.

<span id="xiv.i-p154"></span>*God the maker of the earth.* Some think
that by “the earth” is here meant Judea, but I consider it to be an
argument from the less to the greater, as we said formerly on the
twelfth verse, that, since the providence of God extends universally to
the creatures, much more does it relate to those whom he has adopted to
be his sons; for of them he has a special care. In short, the Prophet’s
argument is this. “Since God created the earth, that men might have an
abode and habitation in it, much more did he create it, that there might
be a residence for his Church; for he takes a deeper concern about his
Church than about all the rest.” If, therefore, he founded the earth, if
he gave to it a shape and a fixed use, that men might be nourished by
the fruits which it should produce, he has undoubtedly assigned to his
children the first place and the highest rank of honor. This is not
always visible to our eyes, and therefore our hearts ought to be
encouraged and upheld by hope, that we may stand unmoved against all
temptations.

<span id="xiv.i-p155"></span>In a word, as long as the earth shall
endure, so long shall the Church of God exist; so long as the sun and
moon shall last, it shall not fail. Afterwards the Prophet will use a
still stronger argument. “If the covenant which God made with Noah, as
to the settled order of this world, is stable, much more the covenant
which he hath made concerning the Church must be stable. (<span
id="xiv.i-p155.1"></span>[Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009.md)<span id="xiv.i-p155.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p155.2"></span>[Ge
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p155.2"></span>..md)
The world is fading and corruptible; but the Church, that is, the
kingdom of Christ, shall be eternal; and therefore it is reasonable to
believe that the promises which relate to the Church shall undoubtedly
be more stable and permanent than all the rest.

<span id="xiv.i-p156"></span>*He did not create it empty.* As it is the
principal ornament of the earth that it is the abode of inhabitants, he
adds, that it was not created in order that, by being empty, it might be
waste and desolate. If it be objected, on the other hand, that the earth
was “empty and void” when it was created, as appears from that passage
in which Moses employs the same word that is here used by the Prophet,
<span id="xiv.i-p156.1"></span>תהו, (*tohu,)* which means “shapeless and
empty,” the answer is easy. The Prophet does not speak of the
commencement of the creation, but of God’s purpose by which the earth
was set apart for the use and habitation of men; and therefore, there is
nothing here that is contrary to what is said by Moses, for Isaiah
contemplates the end and use.

<span id="xiv.i-p157"></span>*He formed it to be inhabited.* This
statement indeed extends to all mankind, because the earth was appointed
to all, that they might dwell in it; for how comes it that God nourishes
us and supplies us with everything that is necessary, and even supports
wicked men, but because he intended that his decree should stand, by
which he gave the earth to be inhabited by men? In any other point of
view, it is strange that he bears with so many sins and crimes, and does
not entirely destroy mankind; but he has regard to his own purpose, and
not to our merit. Hence kingdoms and commonwealths are sustained, and
hence ranks of society and forms of government are preserved even amidst
barbarians and infidels; for, although God often reduces some countries
to desolation on account of the sins of men, and sprinkles them, as it
were, with “saltness,” (<span id="xiv.i-p157.1"></span>[Ps
107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034.md)<span id="xiv.i-p157.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) .md) that they may become barren,
and may never again be able to support their inhabitants, yet he always
adds this alleviation, “that the earth may be inhabited;” for this is
his inviolable decree. Yet we must bear in remembrance what I have
already said, that, so long as the earth shall be inhabited, it is
impossible that God shall not support his worshippers who call upon him.
Besides, from this passage all good men ought to derive the highest
consolation, that, although they are despised by the world and are few
and feeble, and although, on the other hand, wicked men surpass them in
numbers, and power, and influence, while they are despised so as to be
reckoned of less value than “the offscourings of the world,” (<span
id="xiv.i-p158.4"></span>[1Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p158.4"></span>,.md)
yet they are precious in the sight of God, because he reckons them in
the number of his children, and will never suffer them to perish.

<span id="xiv.i-p159"></span>*I am Jehovah.* When he repeats that he is
God, this is not intended merely to assert his essence, but to
distinguish him from all idols, and to keep the Jews in the pure faith;
for even superstitious men acknowledge that there is one God, but
conceive of him according to their fancy; and therefore we must
acknowledge God, who revealed himself to the fathers, and who spoke by
Moses. Thus, he does not speak merely of God’s eternal essence, as some
think, but of all the offices which belong to him alone, that no part of
them may be ascribed to creatures.

<span id="xiv.i-p160"></span><span id="xiv.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p161"></span>**19.** *Not* *in secret have I spoken.* He
now recalls the people to the doctrine of the Law, because God cannot be
comprehended by human faculties; but as he is concealed from carnal
reason, so he abundantly reveals himself, and affords the remedy, by his
word, which supplies what was wanting, that we may not desire anything
more. If this had not been granted, we should have had no hope, and
should have lost all courage. Now, he solemnly declares that he does not
invite us *in vain,* though he delay his assistance; for what he has
promised is most certain, and, as he plainly shewed to whom we ought to
betake ourselves, and on whom we ought to rely, so he will give
practical demonstration that the hope of those who relied on his word
was not *vain,* or without foundation.

<span id="xiv.i-p162"></span>This enables us to see clearly how wicked
are the speeches of those who say that no certainty can be obtained from
the word, and who pretend that it is a nose of wax, in order to deter
others from reading it; for thus do wicked men blaspheme, because the
mere doctrine of the word exposes and refutes their errors. But we reply
with David,

<span id="xiv.i-p163"></span>“Thy word, O Lord, is a lamp to our feet,
and a light to our paths.”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p163.2"></span>[Ps
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p163.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.i-p164"></span>We reply with Isaiah and the rest of the
prophets, that the Lord has taught nothing that is obscure, or
ambiguous, or false. We reply also with Peter, that

<span id="xiv.i-p165"></span>“the prophetic word is more sure, and you
do well if you take heed to it, as to a lamp buming in a dark place,
till the day dawn, and the morning-star arise in our hearts.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p165.1"></span>[2Pe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span id="xiv.i-p165.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p166"></span>If these things were said concerning the
Law and the prophets, what shall we say of the Gospel, by which the
clearest light has been revealed to us? Shall we not say with Paul,

<span id="xiv.i-p167"></span>“If the Gospel is dark, it is dark to those
who are lost, whom Satan, the prince of this world, hath blinded?”  
(<span id="xiv.i-p167.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="xiv.i-p167.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p168"></span>Let blind and weak-sighted men therefore
accuse themselves, when they cannot endure this brightness of the word;
but, whatever may be the darkness by which they shall endeavor to clothe
it, let us adhere firmly and steadfastly to this heavenly light.

<span id="xiv.i-p169"></span>Besides, the Prophet appears to allude to
the predictions which were uttered out of the groves and tripods of the
idols.  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) They are uncertain and
deceitful, but nothing of this kind can be found in God’s answers; for
he speaks openly, and utters nothing that is deceitful or ambiguous. But
experience tells us that Scripture is somewhat dark and hard to be
understood. This is indeed true, but ought to be ascribed to the dulness
and slowness of our apprehension, and not to the Scripture; for blind or
weak-sighted men have no right to accuse the sun, because they cannot
look at him.

<span id="xiv.i-p171"></span>*I have not said in vain to the seed of
Jacob, Seek me.* This continues to be a fixed principle, that they who
shew themselves to be submissive and obedient, do not spend their labor
in vain; because God faithfully performs the office of a teacher towards
poor and little ones. Now, though all do not rise in the highest degree,
yet the labor of those who shall sincerely seek God will never be
unprofitable. By this expression, *Seek me,* Isaiah points out the
principal end and use of the Law, to invite men to God; and, indeed,
their true happiness lies in being united to God,  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) and the sacred bond of union is faith
and sincere piety.

<span id="xiv.i-p173"></span>In this second clause he not only asserts
that he has spoken clearly and without ambiguity, but declares the
certainty and steadfastness of his word; as if he had said, that he does
not promise largely with an intention to deceive, or amuse hungry men by
words, but actually performs what he has promised. This demonstrates the
ingratitude of those who, when they are called, do not answer; since God
has no other design than to make us partakers of all blessings, of which
we are otherwise empty and destitute.

<span id="xiv.i-p174"></span>*I Jehovah speaking righteousness.* This is
added for the sake of explanation; as if he had said that the word by
which he draws his elect to himself, is not soiled by any stain of
fraud, but contains the most perfect holiness. “The words of the Lord,”
as David says, “are clean, like silver purified in an earthen fumace,
seven times refined.” (<span id="xiv.i-p174.1"></span>[Ps
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span id="xiv.i-p174.1"></span>..md)
Thus, in the word of God we have bright righteousness, which instantly
shines into our hearts, when the darkness has been removed.

<span id="xiv.i-p175"></span><span id="xiv.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p176"></span>**20.** *Assemble yourselves,* He
challenges all superstitious persons, and, as it were, appoints a day
that they may submit to a righteous judgment, as we have formerly seen
in expounding other passages, in order to shew that they can plead
nothing which shall not be speedily overtumed. Now, indeed, they delight
in their superstitions; but all their smoke shall be dispelled, when
they come to plead their cause, and without any difficulty they shall be
convicted. Let them then “assemble” in crowds, let them conspire and
make every effort by fraud, and threatenings, and terrors; the truth
shall at length be victorious. This confirmation was highly necessary
for the Jews, because in every nation and in every place they beheld the
spread of wicked errors which buried the worship of the true God. We
also ought to betake ourselves to this refuge, when we see how few and
how feeble we are. The Mahometans possess a large portion of the world,
the Papists, with elevated crest, triumph far and wide, while we are but
a handful of people,  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) and are
scarcely reckoned in the number of men. But truth shall at last prevail,
and shall cast down all that loftiness which now dazzles the eyes of
men.

<span id="xiv.i-p178"></span>*Ye rejected of the nations*  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) <span id="xiv.i-p179.8"></span>פליטי
*(pelite)* is translated by some “rejected,” by others “exiles,” or
“those who have escaped;” and the address is supposed to be made to the
Jews who had retumed from the captivity. But that is too forced a sense.
The more generally received interpretation is, “Rejected of the
nations,” because <span id="xiv.i-p179.9"></span>פלט *(palat)* means “to
reject.” Not that he describes the meaner sort, or the refuse of men;
but, on the contrary, he directs his discourse to those who were the
highest in rank, and wealth, and power, and learning among the Gentiles.
He calls them “rejected,” because they are of no value in the sight of
God, though they are highly esteemed by men; for

<span id="xiv.i-p180"></span>“that which ranks high among men is
detestable in the sight of God.” (<span id="xiv.i-p180.1"></span>[Lu
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015)<span id="xiv.i-p180.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p181"></span>Yet if it be thought preferable to
translate it “distant,” I have no objection; as if he had said, “Let
them assemble from the farthest parts of the earth.”

<span id="xiv.i-p182"></span>*That carry the wood of their graven
image.* He shews how great is the madness which seizes idolaters, who
worship images, which they bear on their shoulders and carry round on
waggons. Or we may take <span id="xiv.i-p182.1"></span>נשיים *(nesum)*
as denoting “to place on a lofty and elevated spot,” as it was a crafty
device of Satan to erect statues on pillars and lofty places, in order
to excite the admiration of men, and to lead men to pay honor and
reverence by merely looking at them. But we may interpret it simply as
denoting all worship that is rendered to images, so as to convict them
of vanity and madness. Superstitious persons know that idols need the
aid and assistance of men, instead of men needing the aid and assistance
of idols, which cannot even be made to stand upright without the agency
of men.  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) And this is the meaning
of what next follows, to *pray to a god that cannot save;* for what can
be more foolish than to address vows and prayers to wood and stone? and
yet infidels run about to dead statues, for the purpose of seeking
salvation from them.

<span id="xiv.i-p184"></span><span id="xiv.i-p184.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p185"></span>**21.** *Tell ye.* He again challenges all
those who might have annoyed the Jews and shaken their faith by their
taunts; for he always keeps this object in view, to fortify the faith of
the people against all the assaults of the Gentiles. Amidst temptations
so numerous and so severe, there was danger lest the Jews should sink
under their terrible afflictions, if there had not been powerful
arguments on the other side to induce them still to worship and trust
the true God; and therefore he permits heathens to produce and bring
forward everything that they can find in support of their cause.

<span id="xiv.i-p186"></span>*Let them also take counsel together.*
These words are added, in order to inspire greater confidence; for the
Prophet means, as we have already said, that they will gain nothing,
though they “take counsel” among themselves and enter into a conspiracy.
Yet, perhaps, he intended also to make it evident that there is nothing
but groundless pretense and falsehood in all that infidels contrive for
excusing their errors. Whatever then may be the gaudy ostentation with
which they plume themselves on their inventions, the Prophet shews that
the word of God will be abundantly strong to support the faith of
believers. He challenges them to a strict examination, in order to
compare with the Law and the prophets all that infidels boast of as
having been foretold by their idols. I cheerfully admit what is
generally believed, that the Prophet speaks of the redemption of the
people; but as the overthrow of the Babylonian monarchy was likewise
connected with it, I think that it is also included.

<span id="xiv.i-p187"></span>*Who hath proclaimed this from the
beginning?* Because there is a repetition of the same statement, <span
id="xiv.i-p187.1"></span>מקדם *(mikkedem*) and <span
id="xiv.i-p187.2"></span>מאז (*meaz*) mean the same thing; as if he had
said, “from the beginning,” or, “from of old;” for this prophecy was
published long before the event happened. Hence believers might with
certainty conclude that God had spoken.

<span id="xiv.i-p188"></span>*And a savior.* To foreknowledge he adds
power, as in a former passage. Yet he likewise describes for what
purposes he exerts his power, that is, for “saving” his people.

<span id="xiv.i-p189"></span><span id="xiv.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p190"></span>**22.** *Look unto me.* Hitherto he
addressed the Jews alone, as if to them alone salvation belonged, but
now he extends his discourse farther. He invites the whole world to the
hope of salvation, and at the same time brings a charge of ingratitude
against all the nations, who, being devoted to their errors, purposely
avoided, as it were, the light of life; for what could be more base than
to reject deliberately their own salvation? He therefore commands all
“to look to him,” and to the precept adds a promise, which gives it
greater weight, and confirms it more than if he had made use of a bare
command.

<span id="xiv.i-p191"></span>*And ye shall be saved.* Thus we have a
striking proof of the calling of the Gentiles; because the Lord, after
having broken down “the partition-wall” (<span
id="xiv.i-p191.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xiv.i-p191.1"></span>.md)
which separated the Jews from the Gentiles, invites all without
exception to come to him. Besides, we are here reminded also what is the
true method of obtaining salvation; that is, when we “look to God,” and
tum to him with our whole heart. Now, we must “look to him” with the eye
of faith, so as to embrace the salvation which is exhibited to all
through Christ; for “God so loved the world that he gave his
only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him may not perish.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p191.2"></span>[Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p191.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p192"></span>*For I am God.* When he exhorts *all the
ends of the earth,* he at the same time shews that all men have hitherto
wandered, and have not “looked to” the true God; for where infidelity
exists, there cannot be a distinct looking towards God, so as to
distinguish him from empty masks. In a word, he declares that the ruin
of all has been occasioned by their being driven about by their wicked
inventions, and thus revolting from the true God, from the knowledge of
whom certain and eternal salvation flows. The Lord therefore stretches
out his hand, in order to rescue all and point out the method of
obtaining salvation.

<span id="xiv.i-p193"></span>This makes it evident that it was not at
random that the doctrine of the Gospel was preached to all nations, but
by the decree of God, by whom it had been long ago ordained. Yet, as I
remarked a little before, he accuses the Gentiles of stupidity, in
allowing their senses to be tumed and whirled about in all directions,
wherever their fancy led them. Though by nature they could not approach
to God, and though they even sucked in with their milk the superstitions
by which they were blinded, yet God might have justly reproached them
with wicked contempt of his grace; for ignorance always implies
hypocrisy, when men choose rather to be deceived by empty flatteries
than to go straight to God.

<span id="xiv.i-p194"></span><span id="xiv.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p195"></span>**23.** *I have sworn by myself.* He adds a
clearer confirmation of the preceding statement; for, in consequence of
this calling being unusual and marvellous, he adds an oath, as is
usually done in what is new and hard to be believed. The Jews might have
objected, that they alone were called by the name of the elect people;
but, when he confirms it by an oath, this removes all debate. The
Prophet still, indeed, aims at the same object, namely, that the glory
of God shall be so visible in the restoration of the Church as to arouse
the whole world to the admiration of it from the rising to the setting
of the sun, or, to express it more briefly, that this demonstration of
the power of God shall be so splendid and illustrious as to strike all
nations with fear. Yet from these words we may justly infer what I have
remarked, that the Gentiles shall be admitted to an equality with the
Jews, so that God shall be the common Father of all, and shall be
worshipped in every country.

<span id="xiv.i-p196"></span>Now, God “swears by himself,” because he
cannot have another equally competent witness of the truth; for he alone
is the truth. “Men,” as the Apostle says, “swear by a greater than
themselves; but God, because he had no greater, hath sworn by himself.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p196.1"></span>[Heb
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p196.1"></span>..md)
We ought to observe the reason why he “swears.” It is because he
intended to aid the weakness of his people, that they might not be
tossed about in uncertainty. This certainly is wonderful condescension,
that, in order to remedy the fault of our distrust, he does not scruple
to bring forward his own name as holding the place of a pledge; and the
more base and disgraceful must be our unbelief, if even an oath does not
satisfy us. Besides, since God claims for himself all confirmation of
the truth, we ought to be exceedingly careful, when we appeal to him by
an oath, not to mingle any other names either of saints or of any
creature, but, by using his name with all becoming reverence, to
preserve the honor due to him entire and unabated.

<span id="xiv.i-p197"></span>*The word hath gone out of my mouth in
righteousness.* He means that all that he has commanded to be published
by his Prophet is firm and lasting, as if he had said that this
commandment did not proceed “out of his mouth” rashly or unadvisedly.
And in this sense the word *righteousness* is often used in Scripture,
that is, for a word that is not deceitful, which shall clearly appear to
be perfectly true; and thus he says that the decree cannot be revoked.

<span id="xiv.i-p198"></span>*And shall not return.* This is another
mode of expression conveying the same idea. It means that the word of
God shall continue to make progress, till the actual result shall make
manifest that it has proceeded from a just and true and almighty God. A
person is said to *return,* when some obstacle hinders him from
proceeding farther; but, because nothing can prevent God from executing
what he has decreed, the Prophet justly infers that nothing can
interrupt or retard the course of this word. The particle <span
id="xiv.i-p198.1"></span>כי, *(ki,) that,* must be viewed as introducing
an explanatory clause; as much as to say, “This is the *word,”*

<span id="xiv.i-p199"></span>*That to me every knee shall bow.* By this
mode of expression he means that all the Gentiles shall be suppliants to
God, because the astonishing deliverance of the Church shall strike
terror upon all. Yet hence also it follows, that his worship shall be
spread among all nations; for we cannot truly “bend the knee” before God
till he hath been made known to us. To an unknown God, indeed, men may
render some kind of worship; but it is false and unprofitable. But here
he speaks of a true profession, which proceeds from a knowledge of God
deeply seated in our hearts; for, where there is no faith, there can be
no worship of God, and faith is not directed to a thing unknown or
uncertain. Accordingly, he has made use of the sign to express the thing
itself, as is frequently done.

<span id="xiv.i-p200"></span>Hence it ought to be observed, that God
demands also external worship; for the Prophet does not separate an
external profession of religion from the inward feelings of the heart.
In vain, therefore, do fanatics boast that in some manner they worship
God and do homage to him, while they bow down before idols. In vain, I
say, do they pretend that their heart is upright towards God; for the
worship of the heart cannot be separated from an external profession. In
like manner the soul cannot be dedicated and consecrated to God, while
the body is consecrated to the devil; for both ought to be consecrated
to God, and thus the worship of the heart ought also to be accompanied
by an external profession.

<span id="xiv.i-p201"></span>“With the heart we believe to
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p201.1"></span>[Ro
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="xiv.i-p201.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p202"></span>Hence also the Lord, approving of the piety
and uprightness of his people, says, “that they have not bowed a knee
before Baal.” (<span id="xiv.i-p202.1"></span>[1Ki
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md)<span id="xiv.i-p202.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p202.2"></span>[Ro
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)<span id="xiv.i-p202.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p203"></span>Paul applies this passage of Isaiah to the
last judgment, when he says (<span id="xiv.i-p203.1"></span>[Rom.
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)<span id="xiv.i-p203.1"></span>.md)
that “we must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ;” although
the subject here treated of is, the redemption of the people, the
publication of the gospel, and the establishment of the kingdom of
Christ. But he takes for granted (what all ought to know) that those
statements which relate to the kingdom of Christ must not be limited to
any part of it, but extend to the whole of its course, till it arrive at
full perfection. The knee is bent to Christ, when his doctrine is
obeyed, and when the preaching of the gospel is accepted. But many still
oppose and boldly despise him; Satan contrives many schemes and
incessantly carries on war with him; and therefore we are at a great
distance from the full accomplishment of this prophecy. Then shall every
knee be truly bent to Christ, when he shall triumph over vanquished and
utterly ruined adversaries, and shall render visible to all men his
majesty, which Satan and wicked men now oppose. Thus Paul teaches that,
when Christ shall ascend his judgment-seat to judge the world, then
shall be fully accomplished that which began to be done at the
commencement of the gospel, and which we still see done from day to day.

<span id="xiv.i-p204"></span>*Every tongue shall swear.* By a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole, the word *swear* is put
for worship, reverence, or subjection. “Swearing” is one department of
the honor which is due to God; for by it we confess and acknowledge that
he is the Author and Father and lawful defender of the truth, and that
“all things are naked and open to him.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p204.1"></span>[Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p204.1"></span>..md)
Whenever therefore this honor is bestowed on idols, the majesty of God
is dishonored by abominable sacrilege; and consequently they who worship
him purely swear exclusively by his name. But on this subject we have
spoken  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) in the exposition of
another passage. (<span id="xiv.i-p205.2"></span>[Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)<span id="xiv.i-p205.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p206"></span><span id="xiv.i-p206.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p207"></span>**24.** *Surely in Jehovah.* He shews what
is the nature of true faith and of the true worship of God; that is,
when we not only acknowledge, or perceive by the understanding, that
there is a God, but likewise feel what he wishes to be towards us.
Whoever shall be satisfied with a bare knowledge departs very widely
from faith, which must invite us to God in such a manner that we shall
feel him to be in us. In like manner Paul wishes that

<span id="xiv.i-p208"></span>“Christ should dwell in the hearts of
believers through faith.” (<span id="xiv.i-p208.1"></span>[Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="xiv.i-p208.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p209"></span>He who imagines that God sits unemployed in
heaven either will not humble himself sincerely before him, or will not
make an open and sincere profession.

<span id="xiv.i-p210"></span>*Righteousness and strength.* As these are
the two principal parts of our salvation, when believers acknowledge
that they receive both of them from God, they ascribe to him the
undivided praise of a happy life, and testify that by nature they do not
possess that which they acknowledge that they owe to his grace. Thus
they own that in themselves they have nothing either of “righteousness”
or of “strength,” but seek them in God alone, that he may not be
defrauded of his right.

<span id="xiv.i-p211"></span>*To him shall he come.* Here commentators
differ; but, for my own part, I take a simple view of this passage as
relating to believers who submit themselves to God, so as to enable us
to perceive the nature of the contrast between them and rebels, who do
not cease obstinately to resist God. I explain it thus: “They who shall
confess that their righteousness is placed in God will approach to him.”
He means that we obtain access to God through faith, so that they who
perceive that their righteousness is placed in him, feel that he is
present; and indeed no man, if he be not reconciled to God, will ever
approach to him willingly, but, on the contrary, all who dread his
majesty will fly to the greatest possible distance from him. Thus the
Prophet applauds the very delightful result of grace, because it will
unite to God those men who were formerly driven away from him by their
wickedness; and to this corresponds what is said by the Psalmist,

<span id="xiv.i-p212"></span>“Thou art the God that heareth prayer; to
thee shall all flesh come.” (<span id="xiv.i-p212.1"></span>[Ps
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p212.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p213"></span>*But all who defy him shall be ashamed.*
After having testified that God wishes to gather strangers from their
dispersion, that he may bring them into a state of intimate friendship
with himself, he threatens vengeance against despisers, who, being
without God, and despising God, give the reins to their wicked passions,
and wallow in the enjoyments of the world. As it is only by faith that
we obey God, so it is by unbelief alone that Isaiah declares his anger
to be provoked; while he distinguishes all unbelievers by this mark,
that they are disobedient to God, and even challenge him to a contest.
Although they now use the language of triumph, the Prophet declares that
they shall be clothed with shame and disgrace.

<span id="xiv.i-p214"></span><span id="xiv.i-p214.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p215"></span>**25.** *In Jehovah shall be justified.* He
now makes a brief reply to an objection which might be urged, that it
appeared absurd to say, that the Lord called the Gentiles, who had
always been alienated from him. “Is it in vain that the Lord hath chosen
the seed of Abraham? Is his promise void, which he so frequently
repeated?” (<span id="xiv.i-p215.1"></span>[Gen.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md), [Gen.
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p215.1"></span>..md)
In order to remove this doubt, he declares that the Lord will
nevertheless stand by his promises; that, though he choose the Gentiles,
yet the covenant which he made with the fathers shall not fall to the
ground, because the elect people shall enjoy the privileges of their
rank. Nor does he in this passage, as in many others, speak of the
rejection of that nation; but the Prophet simply shews that the grace of
God, which shall be diffused throughout the whole world, shall flow from
that fountain.

<span id="xiv.i-p216"></span>As to the greater number having been
rejected by God, still this did not set aside God’s covenant; because
the remnant of adoption were always the true and lawful Israel; and
although they were few in number, yet they were the first-born in the
Church. Besides, all those among the Gentiles who had been ingrafted
into that body began also, as we have formerly seen, to be accounted
children of Abraham.

<span id="xiv.i-p217"></span>“One shall say, I belong to Jacob; another
shall subscribe with his band, I am a descendant of Israel.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p217.1"></span>[Isa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p217.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p218"></span>And on this ground we are now reckoned the
genuine Israel of God, though we are not the descendants of Israel. The
Prophet therefore added this, both that the Jews might not think that
the Lord’s covenant had failed, and that they might not boast of their
birth and despise the Gentiles.

<span id="xiv.i-p219"></span>*All the seed of Israel.* He extends this
seed farther, that they may not suppose that it ought to be limited to
the family of Abraham; for the Lord gathers his people without
distinction from among Jews and Gentiles, and here he speaks universally
of the whole human race.

<span id="xiv.i-p220"></span>*Shall be justified and shall glory.* It
ought to be observed that the Prophet says that we “are justified and
glory in the Lord,” for in none else ought we to seek “righteousness” or
“glory.” He has joined to it “glory,” which depends on “righteousness,”
and is added to it. Hence also Paul says,

<span id="xiv.i-p221"></span>“Where is thy glorying? It is excluded. By
what law? Of works? No, but by the law of faith.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p221.1"></span>[Ro 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p221.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.i-p222"></span>And, again,

<span id="xiv.i-p223"></span>“If Abraham was justified by works, he hath
glory,  
but not before God.” (<span id="xiv.i-p223.2"></span>[Ro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p223.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p224"></span>It follows, therefore, that they alone
deservedly glory who seek their righteousness in God, and acknowledge
that in themselves they have no ground for glorying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc15013.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p55"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p55.1"></span>Estoit
decrete et ordonne desia en son conseil.” “Was already decreed and
appointed in his counsel.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc15013.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p59"></span> For an explanation of the meaning and use
of the term “Messiah,” see Harmony of the Evangelists, vol. 1, p. 92, n.
2, and p. 142, n. 2. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc15013.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p62"></span> Our author has already explained this
allusion. See Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, p. 135. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc15013.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p67"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p67.1"></span>Les profanes
et incredules.” “Heathens and infidels.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc15013.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p73"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p73.1"></span>Ce mot d’
*eleu* est donc adjuste.” “This word *elect* is thus added.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc15013.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p76"></span> Joseph. Ant., Book 11, chap. 8.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc15013.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p91"></span> “This is what is usually called ‘a
prophetic imperative,’ which supplies the place of the future tense; for
the prophets command those things to be done which they promise, and
which they know will certainly happen. Thus Elisha said to Naaman, ‘Wash
thee seven times in Jordan, and be thou clean;’ that is, ‘And thou shalt
be clean.’ (<span id="xiv.i-p91.1"></span>[2Ki
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)<span id="xiv.i-p91.1"></span>..md)
See also <span id="xiv.i-p91.2"></span>[Isa.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001.md), [Isa.
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019.md)<span id="xiv.i-p91.2"></span>“ —
*Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc15013.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p100"></span> “It seems to be a just observation of
Hitzig, that *earth* is not mentioned as the dwelling of the potsherd,
but as its material, which is indeed the predominant usage of <span
id="xiv.i-p100.1"></span>אדמה, *(adamah,)* as distinguished from <span
id="xiv.i-p100.2"></span>ארץ, *(eretz.)”* — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc15013.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p100.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p101"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p101.1"></span>Que Dieu
sera plus fort qu’ eux.” “That God will be stronger than they.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc15013.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p101.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p102"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p102.1"></span>Qu’ ils
ont eu tort de guerroyer.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc15013.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p114"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p114.1"></span>Un esprit
humble et modeste.” “An humble and modest mind.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc15013.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p136"></span> “<span
id="xiv.i-p136.1"></span>Seulement.” “Only.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc15013.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p138"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p138.1"></span>N’y en a
point d’autre que Dieu.” “There is no other than God.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc15013.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p142"></span> By a reference to the human form <span
id="xiv.i-p142.1"></span>ἀνθρωπομορφῶς God is said, in the ordinary
language of Scripture, to *hide himself* when he refuses assistance,
does not answer prayers, and withdraws himself, that is, withdraws his
power from the wishes of men. There is, as Hensler has justly observed,
a beautiful contrast between <span
id="xiv.i-p142.2"></span>מסתתר,*(mistatter,) hiding,* and <span
id="xiv.i-p142.3"></span>מושיע, *(moshiang,) saving.”* — *Doederlein.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc15013.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p144"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p144.1"></span>Ce qu’
aussi nous devons faire.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc15013.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p146"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p146.1"></span>Hors de ce
monde.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc15013.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p149"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p149.1"></span>En voyant
les Gentils avoir toutes choses a souhait.” “When they saw the Gentiles
have everything to their wish.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc15013.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p149.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p150"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p150.1"></span>Et
semblent estre elevees jusqu’ au ciel.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc15013.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p157.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p158"></span> It may be necessary to remind the reader,
that, in the passage alluded to, the word commonly rendered “barrenness”
literally means “saltness.” On this point our author’s version and
commentary, and the editor’s instructive note, may be consulted with
advantage. *See* Com. on the Psalms, vol. 4, p. 260. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc15013.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p170"></span> “Vitringa, Lowth, Ewald, and Umbreit
suppose an allusion to the mysterious and doubtful responses of the
heathen oracles. The objections of Gesenius are of no more weight than
in verses 1, 2, 3, the analogy of which places makes it not improbable
that such an allusion to the oracles is couched under the general terms
of the verse before us.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc15013.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p172"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p172.1"></span>C’est leur
vraye felicite d’estre conjoints a leur Sauveur.” “It is their true
happiness to be united to their Savior.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc15013.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p177"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p177.1"></span>Qui ne
sommes qu’une poignee de gens.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc15013.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p179"></span> “Ye (that are) escaped of the nations.” —
Eng. Ver.  
This interpretation, though set aside by our author, is approved by able
commentators. “*Escaped* *of the nations* has been variously explained
to mean the Jews who had escaped from the oppression of the Gentiles,
and the Gentiles who had escaped from the dominion of idolatry. But
these last would scarcely have been summoned to a contest. On the whole,
it seems most natural to understand the nations who survived the
judgments sent by God upon them. The Hebrew phrase is in itself
ambiguous, the noun added to <span id="xiv.i-p179.2"></span>פליטי
*(pelite)* sometimes denoting the whole body, out of which a remnant has
escaped, sometimes the power from which they are delivered. Compare
<span id="xiv.i-p179.3"></span>[Jud
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004.md)<span id="xiv.i-p179.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p179.4"></span>[Ezr.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#009.md), [Ezr.
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#016.md)<span id="xiv.i-p179.4"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p179.5"></span>[Ob
11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.i-p179.5"></span>,
with <span id="xiv.i-p179.6"></span>[Jer
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028.md)<span id="xiv.i-p179.6"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p179.7"></span>[Ezr
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008.md)<span id="xiv.i-p179.7"></span>.
The predominant usage and the context here decide in favor of the first
interpretation.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc15013.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p182.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p183"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p183.1"></span>Lesquelles
ne pourroyent demeurer debout si les hommes n’y mettoyent la main.”
“Which could not stand upright, if men did not put their hand to them.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc15013.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p204.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p205"></span> See Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, p. 70.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](cc15014.md)
