[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15001)  [Next](cc15003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 34

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
34:1-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Come near, ye nations, to hear; and
hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the
world, and all things that come forth of it.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Accedite gentes ad audiendum, et
populi attendite. Audiat terra, et plenitudo ejus; orbis, et cuncta
germina ejus.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** For the indignation of the LORD *is*
upon all nations, and *his* fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly
destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quia indignatio est Iehovae super
omnes gentes, et furor super omnem exercitum earum; vastavit eas,
tradidit eas in mactationem.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Their slain also shall be cast out,
and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains
shall be melted with their blood.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Interfecti earum abjicientur, et e
cadaveribus eorum ascendet foetor earum, ac liquefient montes prae
sanguine eorum.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And all the host of heaven shall be
dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all
their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and
as a falling *fig* from the fig tree.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et tabescent omnes exercitus coelorum,
et complicabuntur ut liber. Coeli et onmes exercitus eorum defluent,
sicut defiuit folium e vite, et sicut defiuit ex ficu.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** For my sword shall be bathed in
heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of
my curse, to judgment.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quoniam inebriatus est in coelis
gladius meus. Ecce, super AEdom descendet, super populum, inquam,
anathematis met in judicium.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>**6.** The sword of the LORD is filled with
blood, it is made fat with fatness, *and* with the blood of lambs and
goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a
sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Gladius Iehoae impletus eat sanguine,
impinguatus est ab adipe; sanguine, inquam, agnorum et hircorum, adipe
renum arietum. Quoniam victima Iehova in Bozra, et mactatio magna in
terra AEdom.

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the unicorns shall come down with
them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their l.and shall be soaked
with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et descendent unicornes cum eis, et
juvenci cum tauris; et inebriabitur terra eorum sanguine, et pulvis
adipe impinguabitur.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**8.** For *it is* the day of the LORD’S
vengeance, *and* the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quoniam dies ultionis Iehovae, annus
retributionum in causam Sion.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the streams thereof shall be
turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land
thereof shall become burning pitch.

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et convertentur flumina ejus in
picem, et pulvis ejus in sulphur; eritque terra ejus in picem ardentern.

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**10.** It shall not be quenched night nor
day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to
generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and
ever.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Noctu et die non extinguetur,
perpetuo ascendet fumus ejus; a generatione in generationem
devastabitur, perpetuis aeternitatibus nemo transibit per cam.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**11.** But the cormorant and the bittern
shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he
shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Itaque accipient eam in possessionem
pelicanus et ulula; noctua et corvus habitabunt in ea; extendetque super
earn funiculum inanitatis et lapides perpendiculares vantratis.

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>**12.** They shall call the nobles thereof
to the kingdom, but none *shall be* there, and all her princes shall be
nothing.

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Nobiles ejus sine regno vacabunt, et
cuncti principes ejus erunt nihilum.

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And thorns shall come up in her
palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be
an habitation of dragons, *and* a court for owls.

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Proferet in palatiis ejus spinas, et
urticam, et carduum in arcibus ejus; eritque habitaculum draconum, et
mansio pullis struthionis.

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>**14.** The wild beasts of the desert shall
also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to
his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself
a place of rest.

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et occurrent bestiae sylvestres
satyris, et stryx ad socium suum vociferabur;etiam Lamina ibi per
noctabit, invenietque sibi mansionem quietam.

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span>**15.** There shall the great owl make her
nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the
vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate.

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ulula faciet ibi nidum, et
incubabit, et excludet, et congregabit in umbra ejus; quinetiam vultures
ibi congregabuntur, unaquaeque cum socia sua.

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Seek ye out of the book of the LORD,
and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my
mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them.

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Sciscitamini ex libro Iehovae, et
legite. Nunquid unum ex illis substractum; nullum sociae suae deerit;
quoniam os ejus praecepit, et spiritus ejus congregavit eas.

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And he hath cast the lot for them,
and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it
for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein.

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et ipse projecit eis sortem,
etmarius ejus divisit illis in perpetuum, quasi per funiculum. Ideo
haereditabunt eam, in generationem et genereationem illic habitabunt.

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span><span id="iii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span>**1.** *Draw near, ye nations.* Hitherto the
Prophet, intentding to comfort the children of God, preached, as it
were, in the midst of them; but now, directing his discourse to the
Gentiles, he pursues the same subject, but in a different manner. Having
formerly shewn (<span id="iii.i-p38.1"></span>[Isa.
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#006.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020)<span id="iii.i-p38.1"></span>.md)
that the Lord takes such care of his people as to find out the means of
preserving them, he now likewise adds, what we have often seen in
earlier parts of this book, that, after having permitted wicked men to
harass them for a time, he will at length be their avenger, He therefore
pursues the same subject, but with a different kind of consolation; for
he describes what terrible vengeance the Lord will take on wicked men
who had injured his people.

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>*Hearken, ye peoples.* In order to arouse
them the more, he opens the address by this exclamation, as if he were
about to discharge the office of a herald, and summon the nations to
appear before the judgmentseat of God. It was necessary thus to shake
off the listlessness of wicked men, who amidst ease and prosperity
despise all threatenings, and do not think that God will take vengeance
on their crimes. Yet amidst this vehemence he has his eye principally on
the Church; for otherwise he would have spoken to the deaf, and without
any advantage.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>*Let the earth hear.* He addresses the
Edomites who would haughtily despise these judgments, and therefore he
calls heaven and earth to bear witness against them; for he dedares that
the judgment will be so visible and striking, that not only all the
nations but even the dumb creatures shall behold it. It is customary
with the prophets thus to address the dumb creatures, when men, though
endued with reason and understanding, are stupid, as we have formerly
seen. (<span id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>[Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.i-p40.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.i-p40.2"></span>[De
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p40.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span><span id="iii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>**2.** *For the indignation of Jehovah is on
all the nations.* He undoubtedly means “the nations” which were hostile
to the Jews, and at the same time were contiguous to them; for, being
surrounded on all sides by various nations, they had almost as many
enemies as neighbors. Though this hatred arose from other causes, such
as envy, yet the diversity of religion very greatly inflamed their rage,
for they were exceedingly offended at having their superstitions
condemned. So much stronger was the reason why God proraised that he
would be a judge and avenger.

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>*On all their army.* This is added because
the Jews were few in number when compared with the rest of the nations.
Although, therefore, “the nations” were proud of their vast numbers, and
despised the Jews because they were few, yet he declares that God will
easily diminish and crush them, in order to preserve, his little flock,
of which he is the guardian.

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span>*He hath destroyed them.* Though he speaks
of future events, yet he chose to employ the past tense, in order to
place the event immediately before the eyes of those who were lying low
and overwhelmed with adversity. These predictions were made, as I
briefly noticed a little before, not on account of the Edomites, who
paid no regard to this doctrine, but for the sake of the godly, whom he
wished to comfort, because they were wretchedly harassed by their
enemies.

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span><span id="iii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span>**3.** *Their slain shall be cast out.* By
this circumstance he shews that it will be a great calamity, for if a
few persons are “slain,” they are committed to the earth; but when so
great a multitude is slain at one time, that there are not left as many
as are necessary for burying them, there is no thought of interment, and
therefore the air is polluted by *the stench of their carcases.* Hence
it is evident, that God is sufficiently powerful to lay low innumerable
armies. Perhaps, also, the Prophet intended to heighten the picture of
the judgment of God, because to the slaughter of the nations there will
be added shame and disgrace, so that they shall be deprived of the honor
and duty of burial

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span>*And the mountains shall melt on account of
their blood.* Another figure of speech is employed to shew more fully
the extent of the slaughter, for the “blood” will flow from “the
mountains,” as if the very mountains were melted, just as when the
waters run down violently after heavy showers, and sweep away the soil
along with them. Thus, also, he shows that there will be no means of
escape, because the sword will rage as cruelly on the very mountains as
on the field of battle.

<span id="iii.i-p48"></span><span id="iii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p49"></span>**4.** *And all the armies of heaven shall
fade away.* Isaiah employs an exaggerated style, as other prophets are
accustomed to do, in order to represent vividly the dreadful nature of
the judgment of God, and to make an impression on men’s hearts that were
dull and sluggish; for otherwise his discourse would have been deficient
in energy, and would have had little influence on careless men. He
therefore adds that “the stars” themselves, amidst such slaughter, shall
gather blackness as if they were ready to faint, and he does so in order
to show more fully that it will be a mournful calamity. In like manner,
as in a dark and troubled sky, the clouds appear to be folded together,
the sun and stars to grow pale and, as it were, to faint, and all those
heavenly bodies to totter and give tokens of ruin; he declares that thus
will it happen at that time, and that everything shall be full of the
saddest lamentation.

<span id="iii.i-p50"></span>These statements must be understood to
relate to men’s apprehension, for heaven is not moved out of its place;
but when the Lord gives manifestations of his anger, we are terrified as
if the Lord folded up or threw down the heavens; not that anything of
this kind takes place in heaven, but he speaks to careless men, who
needed to be addressed in this manner, that they might not imagine the
subject to be trivial or a fit subject of scorn. “You will be seized
with such terror that you shall think that the sky is falling down on
your heads.” It is the just punishment of indifference, that wicked men,
who are not moved by any fear of God, dread their own shadow, and
tremble “at the rustling of a falling leaf,” (<span
id="iii.i-p50.1"></span>[Le 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036.md)<span
id="iii.i-p50.1"></span>,) as much as if the sun were falling from
heaven. Yet it also denotes a dreadful revolution of affairs, by which
everything shall be subverted and disturbed.

<span id="iii.i-p51"></span><span id="iii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p52"></span>**5.** *For my sword is made drunken in the
heavens.* He says that the “sword” of the Lord is bloody, as extensive
slaughter makes the “swords” wet with gore; and, in order to give
greater weight to his style, he represents the Lord as speaking. But why
does he say that it is *in heaven?* for God does not call men to heaven
to inflict punishment on them, but executes his judgments openly in the
world, and by the hand of men.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)
Here the Prophet looks at the secret decree of God, by which he appoints
and determines everything before it is executed; and he does not mean
the act itself, but extols the efficacy of the prediction, because the
certainty of the effect is manifest from the unchangeable purpose of
God; that unbelievers may know that the Lord in heaven takes account of
the crimes of wicked men, although for a time they may pursue their
career of iniquity without being punished, and that, although they enjoy
profound peace, still the sword by which they shall be slain is even now
bloody in the sight of God, when he determines to inflict punishment on
them. In like manner Sodom (<span id="iii.i-p53.2"></span>[Ge
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#028)<span id="iii.i-p53.2"></span>.md)
was already burning in the sight of God, while it freely indulged in
wine and feasting, and in satisfying its lust; and the same thing must
be said of other wicked men, who, while they are wallowing in pleasures,
are held as appointed by God to be slain. We ought not, therefore, to
fix our attention on the present state when we see wicked men enjoy
prosperity and do everything according to their wish. Though no one
annoys them, still they are not far from destruction when God is angry
with them and is their enemy.

<span id="iii.i-p54"></span>*So it shall come down on Edom.* He
expressly mentions the Edomites, who were hostile to the people of God,
though related to them by blood, and distinguished by the same mark of
religion; for they were, as we have formerly mentioned,  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) descended from Esau, (<span
id="iii.i-p55.4"></span>[Ge 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.i-p55.4"></span>,) and were the posterity of Abraham. At the
present day, in like manner, we have no enemies more deadly than the
Papists, who have publicly received the same baptism with ourselves, and
even profess Christ, and yet cruelly persecute and would wish utterly to
destroy us, *because* we condemn their superstitions and idolatry. Such
were the Edomites, and therefore the Prophet has chiefly selected them
out of the whole number of the enemies.

<span id="iii.i-p56"></span>*On the people of my curse.* By giving them
this appellation he confirms the sentence which he had pronounced, for
in vain would they endeavor to escape that destruction to which they
were already destined and devoted. By this term he declares that they
are already destroyed by a decree of heaven, as if they had been already
separated and cut off from the number of living men. That it may not be
thought that God has done it unjustly, he adds, *to judgment;* for there
is nothing to which men are more prone than to accuse God of cruelty,
and the greater part of men are unwilling to acknowledge that he is a
righteous judge, especially when he chastises with severity. Isaiah,
therefore, shews that it is a just judgment, for God does nothing
through cruelty or through excessive severity.

<span id="iii.i-p57"></span><span id="iii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p58"></span>**6.** *The sword of Jehovah is filled with
blood.* He follows out the same statement, but by a different
description, which places the matter in a much stronger light, in order
to shake off the drowsiness of wicked men, who are wont to laugh and
scoff at all doctrine, as we have formerly remarked. It is therefore
necessary that the judgments of God should be set forth as in a lively
picture:, that it may not only make a deep impression on their dull
minds, but may encourage believers by holy confidence, when they learn
that the pride and rebellion of their enemies cannot at all hinder them
from being dragged like cattle to the slaughter, whenever it shall be
the will of God.

<span id="iii.i-p59"></span>He compares it to *sacrifices,* for animals
are slain in sacririce for the worship and honor of God, and in like
manner the destruction of this people will also tend to the glory of
God. And here he confirms what was formerly said about *judgment,* for
when God executes his judgments, he shews forth his glow; so that the
destruction of wicked men is justly compared to “sacrifices,” which
belonged to his worship. “Sacrifices,” indeed, were undoubtedly not very
pleasant and agreeable to behold, for the revolting act of taking away
life, the reeking blood, and the stencil of the smoke, might have a
repulsive effect; and yet in these things the honor of God shone
brightly. Thus, also, this slaughter was hideous to behold, and little
fitted to obtain regard; but believers, in order that they may hallow
the name of God in this respect, are commanded to lift up their eyes to
heaven; because, in executing such punishment, God erects altars to
himself for slaying sacrifices. Because they unjustly oppressed the
Church of God, and, forgetful of all humane feelings, treated the
children of God with cruelty, Isaiah declares that in their blood is
offered a sacrifice of sweet savor, and highly acceptable to God,
because he executes his judgment.

<span id="iii.i-p60"></span>*With the blood of lambs and of goats.*
Under this appellation he describes metaphorically the people that were
to be slain, and, alluding to the various kinds of victims, includes not
only all men of ordinary rank, but all the nobles, in order to intimate
that the Lord will punish his enemies in such a manner that no man of
any class whatever shall be exempted he mentions *Bozrah,* the chief
city and metropolls, as it were, of the nation, where the greatest
slaughter shall take place; and next, he adds, the country of *Edom,*
through the whole of which this calamity shall take its course.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

<span id="iii.i-p62"></span><span id="iii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p63"></span>**7.** *And the unicorns shall come down
with them.* This verse is closely connected with the former, for he adds
nothing new, but proceeds with the same figure, amplifying what he had
said about “rams” and “goats,” to which he adds not only *bullocks* but
wild and savage beasts. It amounts to this, that the vengeance of heaven
will be so unrelenting as to spare neither age nor rank, and to mark;
for slaughter even cruel giants, notwithstanding their silly fierceness,
just as if one were preparing a sacrifice which consisted
indiscriminately of every kind of animals. It ought not to be thought
strange that lambs are mingled with cruel beasts, for the term “lambs”
is not employed in commendation of their mildness or harmlessness, but
is applied comparatively to those who are feeble and who belong to the
ordinary rank, which lays them under the necessity of having some
appearance of modesty.

<span id="iii.i-p64"></span>Although God may appear to be harsh in thus
directing his hostility against all classes, yet, by the use of the word
“sacrifice,” he claims for himself the praise of justice; and indeed no
man, when he comes to the trial, will be found to be without blame, so
that on good grounds all, without exception, are irrecoverably ruined.
Such is the destruction which awaits all the reprobate, who of their own
accord refuse to devote themselves to the service of God; irreligious
hands shall offer them in sacrifice.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)

<span id="iii.i-p66"></span><span id="iii.i-p66.1"></span>אברים
*(abbirim)* is translated *strong* by some commentators; I have
preferred to follow those who explain it to mean *bulls,* which it means
also in <span id="iii.i-p66.2"></span>[Ps
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.i-p66.2"></span>,
though in this passage the Prophet employs the word *bulls* to denote
metaphorically those who are very strong and powerful.

<span id="iii.i-p67"></span><span id="iii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p68"></span>**8** *For it is the day of vengeance of
Jehovah.* This verse must be viewed as closely connected with the
preceding verses, for it points out the object which the Lord has in
view in punishing the Edomites with such severity; and that object is,
that he wishes to avenge his people and defend their cause. If,
therefore, he had not also assigned this reason, the former statements
might have appeared to be obscure or inappropriate; for it would, have
been an uncertain kind of knowledge if we did not consider that God, in
punishing wicked men, testifies his unceasing affection and care to
preserve his own people.

<span id="iii.i-p69"></span>What was formerly said about the Edomites
must undoubtedly be extended to the enemies of the Church, for all of
them were included by the Prophet under a particular class; and,
therefore, in adversity our hearts ought to be supported by this
consolation:, that the attacks which we now suffer shall come into
judgment before God, who justly claims for himself this office. The
Prophet does not only mean that it is in his power to punish wicked men
whenever he thinks proper, but, that he reigns in heaven, in order to
punish every kind of injustice at the proper time.

<span id="iii.i-p70"></span>But we must attend to the words *day* and
*year,* by which he reminds us that God does not sleep in heaven, though
for a little time he does not come forth, but delays his vengeance till
a fit season, that believers may in the meantime “possess their souls in
patience,” (<span id="iii.i-p70.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p70.1"></span>,.md)
and may leave him to govern according to his inscrutable wisdom.

<span id="iii.i-p71"></span><span id="iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p72"></span>**9.** *And its streams shall be turned into
pitch.* What the Prophet now adds contains nothing new, but describes
more fully this desolation. We have formerly explained the reason wily
the prophets employ these lively pictures in representing the judgments
of God. It is for the purpose of leading men to view them as actually
present, and of compelling them to acknowledge those things which their
eyes and minds do not discern, or which, as soon as they are beheld and
known, are immediately forgotten. But it ought also to be observed that
the Prophets spoke of things which were dark and secret, and which were
generally thought to be incredible; for many persons imagined that the
Prophets uttered them at random. It was, therefore, necessary to add
many confirmations, such as those which he employs in this and in other
passages; and thus he denotes a horrible change, which shall destroy the
whole face of Judea.

<span id="iii.i-p73"></span>Moreover, he alludes to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, (<span id="iii.i-p73.1"></span>[Ge
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="iii.i-p73.1"></span>,.md)
as the prophets very frequently do. In that destruction, as Jude informs
us, we have a perpetual representation of the wrath of God against the
reprobate, (<span id="iii.i-p73.2"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="iii.i-p73.2"></span>;.md)
and it is not without good reason that the prophets call it to our
remembrance, that all may learn to dread the judgments of God. To the
same purpose is what he adds, —

<span id="iii.i-p74"></span><span id="iii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p75"></span>**10.** *By night and by day it shall not be
quenched.* The Prophet’s language is undoubtedly hyperbolical; but the
Lord is compelled to act towards us in this manner, for otherwise plain
words would produce no impression on us. When he declares that the wrath
of God against the Edomites will resemble a fire that burns continually,
he cuts off from them all hope of pardon, because, having never ceased
to provoke God, they find that he is implacable; and Malachi also
pronounces this expression of reprobation, that the curse of God will
for ever rest on that nation. (<span id="iii.i-p75.1"></span>[Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004)<span id="iii.i-p75.1"></span>..md)
The contrast must be supplied, because some mitigation is always held
out to the people of God for their comfort. But this does not need a
lengthened interpretation. It is enough that we understand the meaning
and design of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.i-p76"></span><span id="iii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p77"></span>**11.** *Therefore the pelican and the owl
shall possess it.* As to these animals there are various opinions, and
Hebrew commentators are not agreed about them; but the design of the
Prophet is evident, which is, to describe a desert place and an
extensive wilderness. He undoubtedly mentions dreadful beasts and
hideous monsters, which do not dwell with men, and are not generally
known by them, in order to shew more fully how shocking will be this
desolation. The former clause therefore is plain enough, but the latter
is attended by some difficulty.

<span id="iii.i-p78"></span>*He shall stretch over it the cord of
emptiness.* Some view the phrase “an empty cord” as bearing an opposite
sense, and apply it to the Jews; but I take a more simple view, and
think that, like all the preceding statements, it must relate to the
Edomites. Anti to make it more clear that this is Isaiah’s natural
meaning, we read the same word in the Prophet Malachi, who lived a long
time afterwards. That passage may be regarded as an approbation of this
prophecy.

<span id="iii.i-p79"></span>“If Edom shall say, We have been diminished,
we shall therefore return and rebuild the desolate places; thus saith
the Lord of Hosts, They shall indeed build, but I shall pull down, and
they shall call them the borders of wickedness, and the people against
whom the Lord is angry for ever. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall
say, Let the Lord be magnified on the borders of Israel.” —  
(<span id="iii.i-p79.2"></span>[Mal.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#005)<span id="iii.i-p79.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.i-p80"></span>What Isaiah had foretold more obscurely,
Malachi explains with greater clearness. The latter declares that “the
Edomires shall build in vain,” and the former that “they shall stretch
an empty cord.” As if he had said, “In vain shall the masterbuilders
bestow their exertions on rebuilding the cities;” for builders make use
of cords and plummets in all their measurements. He therefore shews that
the efforts of those who shall intend to restore the land of Edom will
be fruitless; for his meaning is, that they shall be destroyed in such a
manner that they cannot at all recover from that destruction, though God
usually alleviates other calamities by some consolation.

<span id="iii.i-p81"></span>And hence we ought to draw a very profitable
doctrine, that when cities are in some measure restored after having
been thrown down, this arises from the distinguished kindness of God;
for the efforts of builders or workmen will *be* unavailing, if he do
not put his hand both to laying the foundation and to carrying forward
the work. Fruitless and unprofitable also will their work be, if he do
not conduct it to the conclusion, and afterwards take it under his
guardianship. In vain shall men bestow great expense, and make every
possible exertion, if he do not watch over and bless the work. It is
only by the blessing of God, therefore, that we obtain any success; and
hence also it is said that “his hands have built Jerusalem.” (<span
id="iii.i-p81.1"></span>[Ps 147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.i-p81.1"></span>; <span id="iii.i-p81.2"></span>[Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)<span id="iii.i-p81.2"></span>..md)
What Isaiah threatens in this passage against the Edomites, the Holy
Spirit elsewhere declares as to the house of Ahab, meaning that it shall
be razed to the very foundation. (<span id="iii.i-p81.3"></span>[2Ki
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013)<span id="iii.i-p81.3"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.i-p82"></span><span id="iii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p83"></span>**12.** *They shall call her nobles without
a kingdom.* This passage has received various interpretations, which I
do not quote, because it would be tedious to refute them. One of the
most probable is, “They shall call his nobles to reign, but in vain.” As
if he had said, “In their wretched condition none will be found willing
to rule over them, and to undertake the charge of the commonwealth.” A
statement of the same kind is found elsewhere, and we have formerly
(<span id="iii.i-p83.1"></span>[Isa.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007)<span id="iii.i-p83.1"></span>.md) seen
one that is almost alike; but the words do not correspond. When the
Prophet speaks thus, “They shall call her nobles, and they shall not be
there,” he employs, I doubt not, witty raillery to censure the pride of
that nation which had been cherished by longcontinued peace and
abundance. When the Edomites, therefore, out of their mountains breathed
lofty pride, the Prophet declares that they shall be disgracefully cast
down, so that they shall have no nobility and no government; just as,
when a kingdom has been overturned, government is taken away, so that
the general mass of the people resembles a maimed or disfigured body,
and there is no distinction of ranks. To those stately nobles who
vaunted themselves so much, he says in mockery, that they shall be
princes without subjects.

<span id="iii.i-p84"></span>*And all her princes shall be nothing.* The
meaning of the former clause is still more evident from this second
clause, in which he adds for the sake of explanation, that her princes
“shall be reduced to nothing.’ It amounts to this, that the land of Edom
shall resemble a mutilated body, so that nothing shall be seen in it but
shocking confusion. This is the utmost curse of God; because, if men
have no political government, they will hardly differ at all from
beasts. Indeed, their condition will be far worse, for beasts can
dispense with a governor, because they do not make war against their own
kind; but nothing call be more cruel than man, if he be not held by some
restraint, for every one will be driven by the furious eagerness of his
own passions to every kind of vicious indulgence.

<span id="iii.i-p85"></span><span id="iii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p86"></span>**13.** *In her palaces she shall bring
forth thorns.* He pursues the same subject; for he describes a frightful
desolation, by which splendid houses and palaces are levelled to the
ground, or reduced to a state so wild that they are of no use to men,
but produce only *briers, thorns,* and *nettles;* which is more
disgraceful than if they had been turned into fields and meadows. In
this manner does the Lord punish the insolence of those who built lofty
and magnificent houses and costly palaces, that the remembrance of them
might be handed down to the latest posterity. Having banished men, he
turns those dwellings into nests of birds and dens of wild beasts, that,
instead of being, as they expected, the trophies of their name and
renown, they may stand as monuments of foolish ambition. Thus the place
of men is nearly supplied by beasts, which represent the dispositions of
those who reared those goodly edifices. This overthrow of order is
likewise a sad token of the wrath of God, when the earth, which was
created for the use of man, beholds its natural lords banished, and is
compelled to admit other inhabitants; for then, undoubtedly, it is
cleansed from the defilements with which it was polluted.

<span id="iii.i-p87"></span><span id="iii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p88"></span>**14.** *And the wild beasts shall meet with
the satyrs.*  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) These animals are
thought by some commentators to mean fauns, by others screechowls or
goblins, and by others satyrs; and it is not fully agreed what is the
exact meaning of the Hebrew words; but it would serve no good purpose to
give ourselves much uneasiness about them, for it is quite enough if we
understand the meaning and design of the Prophet. He draws a picture of
frightful desolation, as if he had said that Idumea shall be destroyed
so as to be without inhabitants, and instead of men it shall be
inhabited by frightful beasts. This reward is most justly reaped by the
ambition of those who built costly palaces to be, as we have already
said, monuments of their name and reputation. Yet this is also a
punishment threatened against the cruelty of a wicked nation, which was
eagerly bent on the oppression of neighbours and brethren.

<span id="iii.i-p90"></span>Though we cannot absolutely determine
whether the Prophet means witches, or goblins, or satyrs and fauns, yet
it is universally agreed that these words denote animals which have the
shape of men. We see also what various delusions are practiced by Satan,
what phantoms and hideous monsters are seen, and what sounds and noises
are heard. But of these we have already spoken under the thirteenth
chapter.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)

<span id="iii.i-p92"></span>The sin which God punished so severely in a
single nation, is common to almost every nation; for hardly ever are
those splendid buildings reared without committing much violence and
injustice against the poor, and giving great and numerous annoyances to
others; so that the lime, and stones, and timber, are filled with blood
in the sight of God. Therefore, as Habakkuk says,

<span id="iii.i-p93"></span>“the stone shall cry out of the wall, and
the beam out of the timber shall bear witness to it.” (<span
id="iii.i-p93.1"></span>[Hab 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.i-p93.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.i-p94"></span>Let us not wonder, therefore, at those
dreadful changes, when ambition lays hold on plunder and wicked
extortions, but let us contemplate the righteous judgments of God.

<span id="iii.i-p95"></span><span id="iii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p96"></span>**16.** *Inquire at the book of Jehovah.* By
“the book of the Lord” some understand this prophecy, as if he had
enjoined them to read attentively this prediction; for not even in the
minutest point will it fail at the appointed time, as he will afterwards
add. Others explain it more ingeniously as denoting the eternal decree
of God; “inquire if such be not the purpose of God;” but this exposition
is not sufficiently natural. I willingly interpret it as denoting the
Law itself, which by way of eminence is called “the book of the Lord;”
for from the Law, as from its source, the Prophets drew their doctrine,
as we have frequently remarked.

<span id="iii.i-p97"></span>Lest the strangeness of the event should
prevent the prediction from being believed, Isaiah says that the Jews
had been warned of it long before; and thus he indirectly censures the
unbelief of those who stared at the announcement, as. if it had been
something uncommon. He appropriately brings them back to the Law, in
which God frequently declares that he will take care of his people, and
that he will punish the wicked and reprobate. Moses having long ago
spoken in this manner, the Prophet says that there is no reason why it
should be difficult to believe what he foretells, since he brings
forward nothing new, but only confirms now what Moses declared and
testified. Such appears to me to be the natural meaning of the Prophet,
and by these words he intended to fortify the Jews, patiently to look
for what the Lord promised, and fully to believe that all that had. been
foretold about the Edomites and the other adversaries of the Church
would at length be actually fulfilled, since Moses was a credible
witness, that God would always be the avenger of his people. Besides, it
was proper that they should be reminded of this, in order that, when
these things should befall the Edomites, they might not think that they
had happened by chance, but might know that they were brought about by
the judgment of God. Such is the rebellion of men, that they do not
believe God when he forewarns them, and what afterwards takes place by
the judgment of God is ascribed by them to fortune. Isaiah therefore
meets this, and bids them inquire at Moses, whose authority they all
revered.

<span id="iii.i-p98"></span>*Not one of those;* that is, of the animals;
for the Hebrew writers employ these terms, <span
id="iii.i-p98.1"></span>איש *(ish)* and <span
id="iii.i-p98.2"></span>אשה, *(ishshah,)* not only for men and women,
but for males and females of any species.

<span id="iii.i-p99"></span>*For his mouth hath commanded.* He confirms
what he formerly said; for although the works of God are sufficiently
plain, yet by *his mouth,* that is, by the word, he makes them plainer
to us, that we may see them more clearly. And this is the true
contemplation of the works of God, when we keep our eye fixed on the
mirror of the word; for otherwise our boldness is carried to excess, and
we tke greater liberty than is proper, if heavenly doctrine do not guide
us like a lamp. This ought therefore to restrain the boldness and
rashness of men, who, despising the doctrine of the word, wish to
dispute and form opinions about the judgments of God and all his worlds.
If they “inquired at the book,” and asked at the mouth of the Lord, we
should see greater piety and religion among them.

<span id="iii.i-p100"></span>Yet by “the mouth of the Lord” the Prophet
intended to confirm the vengeance which he had foretold, because nothing
that has come out of God’s holy mouth can fail of its effect. Isaiah
affirms that what God has once decreed, and published in his own name,
cannot be reversed. By this shield he thus wards off all the doubts
which quickly arise, whenever the promises of God go beyond our senses.
Sometimes, indeed, he threatens conditionally, as he threatened the
Ninevites, (<span id="iii.i-p100.1"></span>[Jon
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002)<span id="iii.i-p100.1"></span>,.md)
Pharaoh, (<span id="iii.i-p100.2"></span>[Ge
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017)<span id="iii.i-p100.2"></span>,.md)
and Abimelech, (<span id="iii.i-p100.3"></span>[Ge
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)<span id="iii.i-p100.3"></span>,.md)
whom he spared, because they repented; but when he has once determined
to revenge and punish, he gives actual proof that he is not less true
and powerful than when he promised salvation to his people. The
agreement of the words *Mouth* and *Spirit* makes it still more evident.

<span id="iii.i-p101"></span>*And his Spirit hath gathered them.*
Although “the breath of the mouth” often means the same thing as
“speech,” and although it is customary with the Hebrew writers to repeat
the same thing twice, yet here he alludes elegantly to the breath, from
which the words proceed, and by which they are formed; as if he had said
that this prediction is abundantly powerful, because the same God who by
his voice commanded the brute animals to possess the land of Edom, will
bring them by merely breathing. He speaks of a secret influence; and we
ought not to wonder that the slightest expression of the will of God
causes all the animals to assemble, as happened at the flood, (<span
id="iii.i-p101.1"></span>[Ge 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.i-p101.1"></span>,) and likewise at the very creation of the
world, when, as Moses relates, all the animals were gathered together,
by the command of God, to the first man, that they might be subject to
his authority. (<span id="iii.i-p101.2"></span>[Ge
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p101.2"></span>..md)
And undoubtedly they would have continued to be subject and obedient to
him, had not his own rebellion deprived him of that power and authority;
but when he revolted from God, the animals at the same time began to
refuse subjection and to attack him.

<span id="iii.i-p102"></span><span id="iii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p103"></span>**17.** *And he hath cast the lot for
them.* He says that to those wild beasts and monsters there hath been
granted a secure and permanent habitation, from which they cannot be
easily banished or driven out; because God hath allotted it to them
as.their portion by inheritance. This means that the whole of Idumea is
at the disposal of the Lord, to drive out the inhabitants, and to grant
possession of it to whomsoever he pleases, either wild beasts, or birds,
or monsters.

<span id="iii.i-p104"></span>Hence infer that it is vain for men ever to
promise themselves a permanent abode, unless so far as every person has
obtained his place “by lot,” and on the express condition that he shall
instantly leave it, whenever God calls. We lead a dependent life
wherever he supports us; and either on our native soil, or at a distance
from our fatherland, we are strangers. If he shall be pleased to give us
a peaceable habitation for a long time in one place, it will only be by
his special favor that we shall dwell there; and as soon as he thinks
proper, he will constrain us to change our abode. Besides, if we
acknowledge that a residence in this or that country has been appointed
to us by God, we may dwell in it with safety and composure; for if he
keeps wild beasts in possession of the place which he has allotted to
them, how much more will he preserve men, for whose sake he created
heaven, earth, the seas, and all that they contain?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc15002.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p53"></span> Nothing is more customary among Eastern
poets than to employ a ‘sword drunken with blood’ to denote extensive
slaughter. (Schurrer on <span id="iii.i-p53.1"></span>[Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)<span id="iii.i-p53.1"></span>..md)
Or, perhaps, in this verse the sword in heaven ought rather to be
understood to be drunk with the divine anger, before it is let down on
the earth to be glutted with the blood of enemies; in which case the
following verse would fifty describe that sword as glutted with blood in
the land of the Edomites.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc15002.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p55"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 1 p. 393.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc15002.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p61"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p61.1"></span>Au travers
de la quelle ceste desconfiture passera sans espargner endroit
quelconque.” “Across which this overthrow shall pass without sparing any
place whatever.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc15002.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p65"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p65.1"></span>Ils seront
sacrifiez par les mains d’aussi mecans qn’eux.” “They shall be
sacrificed by the hands of persons as wicked as themselves.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc15002.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p89"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p89.1"></span>Les bestes
sauvages (assavoir Ziim avec Iim,) s’y rencontreront.” “The wild beasts
(that is, the Ziim with the Iim) shall meet there.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc15002.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p91"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol 1, p. 429.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](cc15003.md)
