[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc15015)  [Next](cc15017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 48

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
48:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which
are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters
of Judah, which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the
God of Israel, *but* not in truth, nor in righteousness.

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite hoc, domus Iacob, qui vocamini
nomine Israelis, qui de aquis Iuda exierunt, qui jurant in nomine
Iehovae, et Dei Israel recordantur, non in veritate, neque injustitia.

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** For they call themselves of the holy
city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts *is*
his name.

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quoniam ab urbe sancta denominantur,
et innituntur Deo Israel, eujus nomen Iehova exercituum.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** I have declared the former things
from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed
them; I did *them* suddenly, and they came to pass.

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Priora jam olim annuntiavi, ex ore
meo egressa sunt; publicavi ea, repente feci, et venerunt.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Because I knew that thou *art*
obstinate, and thy neck *is* an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quia cognovi qubd durus sis, et
nervus ferreus cervix tua, et frons tuae aenea.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** I have even from the beginning
declared *it* to thee; before it came to pass I shewed *it* thee: lest
thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and
my molten image, hath commanded them.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Annuntiavi tibi jam olim; antequam
venirent indicavi tibi, ne forte diceres, Idolum meum fecit haec,
sculptile meum et conflatile meum praecepit ea.

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Thou hast heard, see all this; and
will not ye declare *it*? I have shewed thee new things from this time,
even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Audisti, vide omnia; et vos nonne
annuntiabitis? Feci to jam nunc audire nova et abscondita, quae
nesciebas.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**7.** They are created now, and not from
the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest
thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Nunc primum creata sunt, non jam
olim, neque successu temporis; non audieras ea; ne dicas, Ecce noveram.

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou
knewest not; yea, from that time *that* thine ear was not opened: for I
knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a
transgressor from the womb.

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Certe non audieras; cert, non
noveras; certe non fuit pridem aperta auris tun; quia sciebam quod
transgrediendo transgressurus esses. Ideo rebellem ab utero vocavi to.

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>**9.** For my name’s sake will I defer mine
anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not
off.

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Propter nomen meum differam furorera
meum, et in laudera meam moderabor mihi erga to, ut to non succidam.

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Behold, I have refined thee, but
not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ecce examinavi to, et non instar
argenti; elegi to in fornace afflictionis.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span>**11.** For mine own sake, *even* for mine
own sake, will I do *it:* for how should *my name* be polluted? and I
will not give my glory unto another.

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Propter me, propter me faciam; nam
quomodo profanabitur nomen meum? Et gloriam meam alteri non dabo.

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Hearken unto me, O Jacob and
Israel, my called; I *am* he: I *am* the first, I also *am* the last.

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Audi me, Iacob, et Israel, vocate
mi. Ego ipse, ego primus; adhuc ego novissimis.

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Mine hand also hath laid the
foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens:
*when* I call unto them, they stand up together.

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Utique manus mea fundavit terram,
et dextera mea palmo mensa est *(vel, sustinuit)* coelos. Vocate me eos,
adstant *(vel, adstabunt)* pariter.

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span>**14.** All ye, assemble yourselves, and
hear; which among them hath declared these *things?* The LORD hath loved
him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm *shall be on* the
Chaldeans.

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Congregamini vos omnes, et audite.
Quis in eis annuntians ista? Iehova dilexit eum, et voluntatem ejus
exequetur in Babylone, et brachium *(vel, opus)* ejus in Chaldaeis.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span>**15.** I, *even* I, have spoken; yea, I
have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way
prosperous.

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ego, ego locutus sum, utique vocavi
eum, adduxi eum; ideo prospere habebit in via sua.

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Come ye near unto me, hear ye this;
I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it
was, there *am* I: and now the Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Accedite ad me, audite hoc. Non ab
initio in abscondito locutus sum. Ex quo res facta est, ibi fui. Et nunc
Dominus Iehova misit me, et Spiritus ejus.

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer,
the Holy One of Israel; I *am* the LORD thy God which teacheth thee to
profit, which leadeth thee by the way *that* thou shouldest go.

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Sic dixit Iehova redemptor tuus,
Sanctus Israelis. Ego Iehova Deus tuus, docens to utiliter; dirigens to
per viam qua incedis.

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>**18.** O that thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness
as the waves of the sea:

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span>**18.** O si attendisses ad mandata mea!
Tunc fuisset uti fluvius pax tua, et justitia tua ut fluctus maris.

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Thy seed also had been as the sand,
and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should
not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Fuisset ut arena semen tuum, et
filii uteri ut lapilli ejus. Non succideretur, neque aboleretur nomen
ejus a conspectu meo.

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye
from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter
it *even* to the end of the earth; say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his
servant Jacob.

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Exite e Babel, fugite a Chaldaeis.
Voce exultationis annuntiate hoc, divulgate, efferte usque ad extremum
terrae. Dicite, Redemit Iehova servum suum Iacob.

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And they thirsted not *when* he led
them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock
for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Itaque non sitierunt eum per
solitudines duxit eos; aquam fecit illis fluere e petra, scidit petram,
et fluxerunt aquae.

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span>**22.** *There is* no peace, saith the
LORD, unto the wicked.

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Non est pax, dixit Iehova impiis.

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span><span id="xvii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span>**1.** *Hear this, O house of Jacob.* He
now addresses his discourse to the Jews; whom also he had chiefly in his
eye, in the whole of the preceding chapter; for he was not sent to the
Babylonians, but addresses them in such a manner as to wish that the
Jews, to whom he had been especially appointed, should hear him.
Accordingly, he foretold the destruction of the Babylonians, that the
Jews might calmly wait for deliverance, and at the same time might not
be terrified by the greatness and power of their enemies,  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) and that, relying on these promises,
they might stand unmoved against all temptations. But because the Jews
were obstinate, and did not believe those promises, and because Isaiah
foresaw how great would be their hard-heartedness and obstinacy during
their captivity, for that reason he reproves them with greater severity.
Ezekiel shews still more clearly how inveterate was their unbelief, when
they murmured against God, and cast away all confidence, and cared no
more about the promises of God than about empty fables. It was not
without reason, therefore, that Isaiah made use of such vehement
language, in order to shew that they offered the highest insult to God
by refusing to rely on his grace.

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span>*Who are called by the name of Israel.* He
addresses “Israel,” but that which was actually spurious, and which at
that time had nothing more than the name of “Israel;” for he does not
employ this honorable name for the sake of mentioning them in a
respectful manner, but rather in order to put to shame their false
boasting, because they had no riglit to glory in this empty title, from
the truth of which they were widely estranged. Why did God honor Jacob
with this name, but because he proved himself to be courageous and
invincible in adversity? This appeared from that wrestling in which he
contended with God; for when the Lord tries by various afflictions, he
enters, as it were, into debate with us. (<span
id="xvii.i-p50.1"></span>[Ge
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#025)<span id="xvii.i-p50.1"></span>.)
How, then, did this name apply to his posterity, if they were cast down
and threw away all hope in adversity?

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span>*Who have come out from the.waters of
Judah.* He next reproaches them with being descended from the holy
fathers, and yet being utterly unlike them. By “the waters of Judah,” he
means metaphorically the source and fountain from which the Jews
proceeded; for I do not approve of the childish attempt of the Jewish
writers to explain the metaphor, which is borrowed in a highly natural
manner from waters which flow from a distant place.

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span>*Who swear by the name of Jehovah.* Having
censured them for being the degenerate and wicked children of holy
fathers, he adds that they falsely pretend to the worship of God, and to
a semblance of piety from which they are widely distant. Now, as
“swearing” is a kind of worship of God, he here puts one department for
the whole class, by a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the
whole. As idolaters offer an insult to God, when they swear by their
idols, in like manner do the sincere worshippers of God render honor to
God, by employing his name in oaths; for they acknowledge that they have
one God, in whose name they glory. But here he attacks hypocrites who,
with open mouth, loudly boasted of the name of God, and frequently
mentioned his name, and yet in their hearts were greatly opposed to him.
On this account he *says, not in truth nor in righteousness,* he employs
the word “righteousness,” to denote integrity and sincerity of heart,
without which nothing can be acceptable to God; or rather
“righteousness” and “truth” are synonymous terms; as if he had said,
that it was mere pretense and hypocrisy to profess that they were the
people of the true God, because their treachery openly proclaimed their
falsehood.

<span id="xvii.i-p53"></span><span id="xvii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p54"></span>**2.** *For from the holy city they are
called.* He continues the same subject, and by different words exposes
their false boasting; for they falsely boasted that they were the
citizens of “the holy city,” which they defiled by their vices and
crimes. Jerusalem ought to have been “holy,” for God had consecrated her
to himself; but she had prostrated herself to iniquities, so great and
so numerous, that she scarcely retained any holiness. We see in <span
id="xvii.i-p54.1"></span>[Ps. 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002),
[Ps. 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004)<span
id="xvii.i-p54.1"></span>, what the true citizens of Jerusalem ought to
be; but because the Jews were not ashamed of mocking God, they reckoned
it enough to be protected by the shadow of the Temple.

<span id="xvii.i-p55"></span>*And rely on the God of Israel.* When he
says that they “rely on Jehovah,” he does not speak of sincere belief,
but of empty confidence; for, as good men rely on God, and trust him
with their whole heart, so hypocrites falsely make pretensions to his
name, and are intoxicated by unfounded belief, and fearlessly despise
everything, and even boast confidently of these words, “God will assist
us, he will not cast off his people;” as if God wished to encourage
their wickedness. In a word, by trampling him under their feet, they
loudly declare that they rely on themselves for safety; but, lest they
should think that they will not be punished for this mockery, the
Prophet assures them that God loses nothing of his authority, when he is
thus misrepresented by hypocrites; for, when he calls him *Jehovah of
hosts,* he adds this by way of threatening, that they might know that
God, under whose name they falsely sheltered themselves, was strong
enough to punish them, and at length would not permit them to make him
the subject of mockery.

<span id="xvii.i-p56"></span><span id="xvii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p57"></span>**3.** *Long ago have I declared the former
things.* He accuses the Jews of ingratitude, because they distrust God,
who has given every possible proof of his goodness, in order to
establish them in sincere confidence; and therefore he takes away from
them every excuse, by saying, that “he declared the former things.” He
appears to speak not of their deliverance from Babylon, but of other
benefits which the Lord had bestowed on that nation; as if he had said
that God began, long before this, to foretell to his people what would
happen, and never promised anything which he did not perform, and yet
that his people, after having received so many proofs, did not place
confidence in his certain and infallible truth.

<span id="xvii.i-p58"></span>It may also be said, that the Prophet did
not merely address those who lived at that time, but those who should
afterwards live during the captivity, in order that, when this certainty
arrived, they might consider that it had been already foretold. God
intended that this prediction should be widely known, in order that,
during their captivity, they might know that these things did not happen
by chance, and that they might obtain some consolation. Isaiah therefore
rebukes them, because, after having learned the truth of this matter
from the event itself, still they cannot acknowledge the work of God, or
place confidence in him.

<span id="xvii.i-p59"></span>And justly does he severely reprove and
accuse them of obstinacy; for they resisted God, who stretched out his
hand to them, and rejected his grace; they did not believe that they
would have liberty to return to Judea, and, when the way was opened up,
there were very few who had courage to return. Some thought that it
would be better to remain in Babylon than to undergo the annoyances and
dangers of the joumey. Others suspected that Cyrus had made a crafty
proclamation of liberty to return, in order that, having ascertained
their dispositions, he might oppress them or treat them with severity;
and they did not take into account that God had foretold these things,
and that they must unavoidably happen, and that no power of men could
prevent them. Accordingly, I understand those predictions of which the
Prophet speaks so as to include, indeed, the ancient prophecies by which
God foretold to Abraham (<span id="xvii.i-p59.1"></span>[Ge
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)<span id="xvii.i-p59.1"></span>)
that his seed would be held captive, and would afterwards be restored to
their former freedom, but that afterwards, in their due order, other
predictions are added, which also followed at different times; for this
also was frequently fulfilled, partly at one time, and partly at
another. He shews, therefore, that the Lord predicted nothing which was
not justified by the event.

<span id="xvii.i-p60"></span><span id="xvii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p61"></span>**4.** *For I knew that thou art
obstinate.* Literally it is, “On account of my knowing,” or, “From nay
knowing.” Here the Lord solemnly declares by the Prophet, that it was on
account of the hard-heartedness of the people that he spake of future
events; as if he had said that he acted more liberally towards them than
he ought to have done. Not that this was the only end which he aimed at;
for we know that the chief use of doctrine belongs to believers, who
gently submit themselves and cheerfully obey; but Isaiah, who had to
deal with obstinate men, justly says that, if their depravity had not
been incurable, God made use of an excellent remedy, by uttering many
successive predictions for the purpose of ratifying his Law. Thus as he
had foretold future events to the fathers, so he shews that he follows
the same course, in order to conquer or soften the obstinacy and
hard-heartedness of the people.

<span id="xvii.i-p62"></span>*And thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy
forehead is of brass.* He calls their neck “an iron sinew,” because it
cannot be bent. “Sinews” are indeed hard, but still they are capable of
being bent; here, he says, there is no bending, because they are
untameable. He next mentions “a brazen forehead,” to denote their
impudence. There are two ways by which we may be kept in the path of
duty; first, if we are submissive and obey good instructions or holy
commandments; and secondly, if, after having fallen into any sin, we are
moved by sincere shame to repent of what we have done. When these are
wanting, it is a sign of desperate wickedness. These are two proofs,
therefore, which he has brought forward to shew that the nation was
abandoned to everything that was sinful; they were refractory, and they
were impudent. And yet, when the Lord cannot cure us in any other way,
he treats even our perversity with such forbearance, that he is pleased
to give us warning of future events. Thus he assumes, as it were, every
possible shape, in order to recall us to himself, and bring us back into
the right path.

<span id="xvii.i-p63"></span><span id="xvii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p64"></span>**5.** *I foretold to thee long ago.* He
again repeats the same statement, that the people, when they had been
delivered from Babylon, might acknowledge the kindness of God, and might
not ascribe this deliverance to idols or to fortune. If it be asked “Why
does the Prophet mention idols, seeing that the Jews professed the
worship of one God?” I reply, They had been corrupted by associating
with the Gentiles, and had degenerated into superstitions, to such an
extent, that they had entirely forgotten God. Ezekiel complains of this,
that, in the vision in which he appeared to be carried to Jerusalem, he
beheld the sanctuary of God polluted by various idols. (<span
id="xvii.i-p64.1"></span>[Eze 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003)<span
id="xvii.i-p64.1"></span>.) Not without reason, therefore, does he
recall them to God as the only author of these events, that they may
acknowledge that he has redeemed them.

<span id="xvii.i-p65"></span>*Lest, perhaps, thou shouldest say.* He
means that the Jews will be inexcusable, if they do not acknowledge the
kindness of God, when they shall have been emancipated from slavery; for
what had been long ago foretold would not have happened by chance. God’s
foreknowledge is therefore connected by the Prophet with his power; and
he declares that he not only foresaw, but likewise accomplished these
events. Here then, as in a mirror, we behold the wicked exercise of our
understanding, which always contrives in what way it shall rob God of
the praise which is due to him. Whenever he either assists us, or in any
way is kind to us, he may be said to stretch out his hand and invite us
to himself.

<span id="xvii.i-p66"></span>Yet the world, as if it purposely designed
to make resistance, ascribes to others what has proceeded from God; as
we see that in Popery all God’s benefits are attributed to dead saints,
in such a manner as if God were sleeping a deep sleep. It is therefore
necessary that the lamp of doctrine should shine, in order to regulate
our judgment; for, in considering the works of God, we shall always go
astray, if he do not go before and enlighten us by his word. But even
now we find in many persons what Isaiah deplores in his nation, that,
even after having been warned, they do not cease to make idols for
themselves, which they clothe with the spoils taken from God. Peter and
John loudly declared (<span id="xvii.i-p66.1"></span>[Ac
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="xvii.i-p66.1"></span>)
that it was not by their own merits or excellence that they performed
their miracles; but we see how the Papists load them with miracles
against their will, and in spiteof their resistance. Although God does
not now foretell the events which shall happen, yet the doctrine of the
Law and of the Gospel will tend as powerfully to condemn our ingratitude
as if the prophecies had attested those works of which God there
declares himself to be the author.

<span id="xvii.i-p67"></span><span id="xvii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p68"></span>**6.** *Thou hast heard.* This makes it
still more clear that the Prophet speaks of a future captivity, and of
the redemption by which it should be followed; thus intending to make
provision for the advantage both of the men of his own time and of
posterity, that, if they who then lived received no benefit, at least
posterity might take warning and repent. It frequentlyhappens, that the
doctrine of the prophets produces little effect on those who see and
hear, and sometimes is even treated by them with contempt, while
posterity receive it with better dispositions.

<span id="xvii.i-p69"></span>*See all.* When he bids them *see,* some
think that the Prophet exhibits the event in such a manner as if he had
said, that God had spoken nothing which had not been made evident to be
true. But I give a different interpretation of this word <span
id="xvii.i-p69.1"></span>חזה, *(chazeh,) see,* in this manner: “Seeing
that the Lord hath spoken, it is thy duty to examine the words, and to
give attention.” Hence we ought to observe, that it is owing to our
sluggishness or indolence that we immediately lose those things which
proceed from the mouth of God, and that in vain do many persons hold out
the pretext of ignorance; because the Lord reveals clearly enough all
that is necessary to be known, if they who hear would examine it
carefully, and with due attention.

<span id="xvii.i-p70"></span>*And will ye not declare it?* The Lord next
demands something more from his people than to understand and consider
his word; that is, that they may be a herald and witness of the miracles
which they have known by experience. And, indeed, he instructs his
people on this condition, that they shall afterwards lead others to the
same confession of faith. *Even now have I made thee to hear* As if he
had said, “Observe this day, on which the Lord foretells to thee, by my
mouth, those things which thou didst not know; for these things cannot
be perceived or foreseen by human conjecture.”

<span id="xvii.i-p71"></span><span id="xvii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p72"></span>**7.** *Now for the first time have they
been created.* The Prophet shews that he is not reasoning about things
that are known, or that have been learned by actual experience; and his
object is, not merely to correct that haughtiness which is natural to
all men, (for they claim for themselves what belongeth to God alone,)
but likewise that no part of this event may be ascribed to fortune or to
any other cause. In various ways do men rob God of the glory that is due
to him, and direct all their faculties towards distributing among the
creatures that which belongs to Him alone, so as to leave Him nothing
but a bare and empty name. That the people might not think that they had
been vanquished by the power of the Babylonians, or that it was by human
strength or by chance that they were afterwards restored to liberty, on
this account he so frequently repeats and reiterates, that this is the
work of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p73"></span>*Thou hadst not heard those things.* When
he affirms that “they had not heard them,” some explain this to mean
that the people rejected God’s warnings, and did not listen to good
counsels. But I think that the Prophet’s meaning was different, namely,
that what could not be known by human sagacity, and what had been
unknown to the Jews, has been revealed in such a manner that they cannot
defraud the Holy Spirit of the praise which is due to him; and this is
very evident from the context.

<span id="xvii.i-p74"></span><span id="xvii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p75"></span>**8.** *I knew that by transgressing thou
wouldest transgress.* By these words the Lord means that it is not
without good reason that he so earnestly persuades and entreats the
people to acknowledge that it was by him that they were chastised and
afterwards delivered from so great distresses. The rebelliousness of
that people might have prompted them to complain that it was useless to
repeat this so often, and to press it on their attention. The Prophet
replies, that men need not wonder at it, because he has to deal with
obstinate men; and thus he confirms by different words what he said a
little before about “the iron sinew of their neck.” (Ver. 4.) The
meaning amounts to this, that the forwardness of that nation was well
known to God, and that consequently he left nothing undone which was
fitted to retain those who were attached to his service; and that,
having received abundant evidence from undoubted proofs, they were so
much the more inexcusable.

<span id="xvii.i-p76"></span>*Therefore have I called thee a rebel from
the womb.* After having torn off the mask from this nation, which, as we
formerly saw, falsely boasted of the name of Israel, he gives them a new
name, and calls them “rebels.” By the “womb” I understand to be meant,
not their first origin when they began to be reckoned a nation, but the
time when they were delivered from the bondage of Egypt; for that
deliverance might be regarded as a sort of nativity of the Church.
(<span id="xvii.i-p76.1"></span>[Ex
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051)<span id="xvii.i-p76.1"></span>.)
But the people, though they had experienced the infinite goodness of
God, did not cease to act treacherously towards him, and transgressed
more and more, so that he justly calls them “rebels and transgressors.”

<span id="xvii.i-p77"></span><span id="xvii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p78"></span>**9.** *For my name’s sake.* After having
reproached the people with that malice which was natural to their
fathers from the beginning, and which had passed down to children and
grandchildren, he now reminds them that it is owing to his mercy that
they survive, but that otherwise they would have deserved a thousand
times to perish. This warning served two purposes; first, believers
needed to be supported, that during their captivity they might not lose
courage; and secondly, when they had received permission to return, it
was not of less importance that they should be humbled, that they might
acknowledge that they were indebted for their deliverance to nothing
else than God’s undeserved goodness.

<span id="xvii.i-p79"></span>*So as not to cut thee off.* Hence we see
that the object of the preceding remonstrance was, that the people might
know that it is not owing to their merit that the Lord stretches out his
hand to bring them out of the grave of Babylon; for they deserved to be
utterly ruined. Consequently, that the Lord now spares us also, that he
mitigates or remits punishment, and, in a word, that he pays any
attention to us, all this is entirely the result of his grace; so that
we ought not to ascribe it to any merits or satisfactions of men. And
thus, as we have formerly explained at other passages, the distinction
made by the Sophists falls to the ground, as to the remission of
punishment which they refuse to admit to be undeserved, because
satisfaction is made to the justice of God. But here Isaiah declares
that remission is made by free grace “for God’s name’s sake;” for he
speaks of punishment which he might justly have inflicted on the Jews.
He had the justest cause for destroying this nation, if he had not
determined to defend his glory

<span id="xvii.i-p80"></span><span id="xvii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p81"></span>**10.** *Lo, I have tried thee.* The Lord
shews that he exercises such moderation in chastising his people, that
he makes provision for their salvation. Formerly he had said that he had
spared or would spare them, because he had regard to his glory. He now
declares that he does indeed lay stripes upon them, but of such a nature
as to be serviceable to them; for it is for the purpose of “proving and
trying” that he chastises them, and we “prove” that which we do not wish
to be lost. Since therefore he has this end in view, it follows that he
makes provision for our salvation. Besides, it is by way of anticipation
that he mentions the “trial,” lest any one should object that God’s
forbearance did not, at all appear amidst such severe afflictions. The
Prophet therefore comes forward early to meet this objection, and points
out that, although God does not permit his people altogether to go free,
yet he deals gently with them.

<span id="xvii.i-p82"></span>*And not like silver.* He adds that he does
not “try us like silver,” because we should be altogether consumed; for
“silver” contains something that is pure, but in us nothing will be
found but chaff; and even if God did not make us “silver,” we should be
reduced, like chaff or stubble, to ashes and to nothing. Chastisement
itself would undoubtedly bring out nothing that is pure. Accordingly, in
the very “trial” the Lord considers what we can endure, so as not to
proceed beyond measure; and, at the same time, by the secret influence
of his Spirit, he makes those punishments to be profitable to us which
would otherwise have been destruction.

<span id="xvii.i-p83"></span>*I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction.* To “choose” means here to “distinguish.” We “choose” that
which we desire to preserve and defend, as he formerly said in the same
sense,

<span id="xvii.i-p84"></span>“to choose the good and refuse the bad.”
(<span id="xvii.i-p84.1"></span>[Isa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)<span id="xvii.i-p84.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p85"></span>By this word, therefore, he shews how wide
is the difference between the punishment which is inflicted on good men
and that which wicked men endure, and which ends in their destruction.
We, on the other hand, though the Lord bums and pierces us, are accepted
by him; and he retains his kindness toward us in the midst of
afflictions, and even causes us to come out of them more fully tried,
and to be to him a sacrifice of good savor. In a word, he means that
God, even when he appears to abandon his people to destruction, is still
gracious to them.

<span id="xvii.i-p86"></span><span id="xvii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p87"></span>**11.** *For my own sake.* He repeats the
same statement which he had formerly made, but adds a question, such as
Hebrew writers are wont to employ, when they speak of what is absurd,
“Is it possible that my name should be profaned?”

<span id="xvii.i-p88"></span>*And I will not give my glory to another.*
This second clause is added for the purpose of exposition; and therefore
Isaiah, by multiplying the forms of expression, now adorns that which he
had formerly expressed in a few words, and elevates his style. Nor is it
a mere explanation of the former statement, but rather an adornment in
order to confirm it the more. By these words he means that men do all
that lies in their power to “profane the name of God,” and to convey
“his glory to another,” but that the Lord, by his wonderful providence,
meets this evil, and causes his glory to remain unabated. Although,
therefore, by our fault we abandon the glory of God, yet he will
preserve it, while he shall be our protector. Hence we derive wonderful
consolation, that God connects our salvation with his own glory, as we
have already pointed out on other passages.

<span id="xvii.i-p89"></span>*I will not give.* That is, “I will not
suffer my glory to be taken from me.” This would have happened, if the
God of Israel had been mocked on account of the ruin and destruction of
the people; as wicked men, when the people of God were oppressed, were
wont to taunt them with blasphemies of this sort, “Where is their God?”
(<span id="xvii.i-p89.1"></span>[Ps
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010)<span id="xvii.i-p89.1"></span>.)
Moses also assigned a familar reason why the Lord was unwilling to
destroy the whole nation. “Lest perhaps,” says he, “their enemies should
claim it for themselves, and say, It is our lofty hand, and not the
Lord, that hath done all this.” (<span id="xvii.i-p89.2"></span>[De
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027)<span id="xvii.i-p89.2"></span>.)
And indeed, when the Lord, by exhibiting tokens of his anger, strikes
terror into believers, there remains no refuge but this, that he will
remember his adoption, so as not to expose his sacred name to the curses
of wicked men. Nor did the Prophet, by these words, merely exhort his
people to gratitude, that they might acknowledge that it was exclusively
through the grace of God that they were preserved; but he held out to
believers a ground of supplication, and a shield by which they might
resist despair.  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234)

<span id="xvii.i-p91"></span><span id="xvii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p92"></span>**12.** *Hearken to me, O Jacob.* We have
formerly explained the reason why the Lord declares his eternity. It is,
that we may know that he is always like himself, and that we may not
measure him by our capacity. He bids us “hearken to him;” because we are
led into errors and are carried away by false opinions, in consequence
of refusing to lend our ears to him.

<span id="xvii.i-p93"></span>*And Israel, my called.* When he says that
“Israel has been called by him,” he indirectly contrasts this statement
with the reprobation mentioned by him at the beginning of the chapter;
for he shewed that the Jews falsely assumed this name, and idly gloried
in it, inasmuch as they did not prove themselves to be true Israelites.
Here, on the contrary, he affirms that “Israel is his called.” Just as
if a father, in rebuking his son, should call him a bastard, and yet
should afterwards acknowledge him to be his son, so the Lord shews that
the Jews are so greatly degenerated that he might justly reject them,
but that, although they do not deserve so high an honor as to belong to
his family, still he pays regard to his calling, which no ingratitude or
wickedness of men can set aside.

<span id="xvii.i-p94"></span>*I, even I.* In this passage the particle
<span id="xvii.i-p94.1"></span>אף (*aph*,) *even,* denotes continuance;
for he lays down nothing else than that God is always like himself, and
does not, like men, undergo change or alter his counsel. (<span
id="xvii.i-p94.2"></span>[Rom. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004), [Rom.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="xvii.i-p94.2"></span>.)
On this account he says that he is *the first and the last.*  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) But here it ought also to be observed,
that Isaiah does not speak of God’s eternal essence, but applies this
doctrine to our use, that we may know that he will be to us the same
that he has always been, and next, that we may remember to distinguish
him from idols, lest our understandings, led away by extravagant
inventions, should fall off from the fear of him.

<span id="xvii.i-p96"></span><span id="xvii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p97"></span>**13.** *Surely my hand hath founded the
earth.* Here the Prophet explains more clearly what he meant in the
preceding verse. After having spoken of God’s constant and unvarying
will toward us, he likewise praises God’s power as manifested by the
works which we daily behold. In these works the Lord may be said to
present himself to our view; and, coming forth from his sanctuary, he
approaches to us by means of them.

<span id="xvii.i-p98"></span>*And my right hand hath measured,* or,
*hath upheld the heavens.* Whether we translate <span
id="xvii.i-p98.1"></span>טפחה *(tippechah,)* “Hath measured,” or, “Hath
upheld,” the meaning will be the same; and we need not give ourselves
much trouble about the interpretation of the word. By the word “measure”
is denoted God’s amazing wisdom in having adjusted on all sides, with
such exact proportion, the vast extent of the heavens, so that it is
neither nearer to the earth nor farther from it than is advantageous for
preserving order, and that in this prodigious expanse there is nothing
jarring or unseemly. If we prefer the word “uphold,” this also is an
extraordinary commendation of the wisdom and power of God, in
“upholding” the huge mass of the heavens in continual motion, so that it
neither totters nor leans more to one side than to another.

<span id="xvii.i-p99"></span>*When I call them, they stand up,* or,
*shall stand up together.* This latter clause, in which he says that all
things are ready at, his command, is attended by some greater
difficulty; for it may refer either to the first creation or to the
continual government of the world. If we refer it to the first creation,
the future <span id="xvii.i-p99.1"></span>יעמדו *(yagnamdu,) they shall
stand,* will be put for a preterite. “As soon as the Lord commanded them
to appear, they instantly obeyed;” as the Psalmist says, “He spake, and
they were done.” (<span id="xvii.i-p99.2"></span>[Ps
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span id="xvii.i-p99.2"></span>.)
But if we adopt this meaning, the word *equally,* which he adds, may
appear not to agree well with the history of the creation as related by
Moses; for heaven and earth were not created and beautified at one
moment, but at first everything was shapeless and confused, and
afterwards the Lord reduced them to order. (<span
id="xvii.i-p99.3"></span>[Ge
1:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="xvii.i-p99.3"></span>.)
The answer is easy; for the Prophet means nothing more than that the
Lord, by the mere expression of his will, created all things, and gave
to heaven and earth their form, so that they immediately obeyed his
command.

<span id="xvii.i-p100"></span>Yet I willingly extend it to the continual
government of the world; as if he had said, “Heaven and earth yield to
the authority of the Lord and obey his voice, and those bodies which are
at the greatest distance from each other move of their own accord with
astonishing harmony, as if they were carried about by the same motion of
a wheel. Though heaven is separated from the earth by a wide space, yet
the voice of the Lord is everywhere heard, he needs no messengers to
convey his will, but by the slightest expression he executes everything
at the very moment.” Is there any prince who has his servants everywhere
rendering to him instant obedience? Certainly not. Thus, the power of
God is infinite, is diffused far and wide, and extends to every part of
the world, as Scripture declares, (<span id="xvii.i-p100.1"></span>[Ps
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002)<span id="xvii.i-p100.1"></span>,)
and as we learn by the instructions of faith.

<span id="xvii.i-p101"></span><span id="xvii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p102"></span>**14.** *Assemble, all of you, and hear.*
There can be no doubt that the Prophet addresses the Jews, though here
he utters nothing that ought not to be acknowledged by all. But because
unbelieving and irreligious men have no ears, on this account he does
not invite them to “hear.” We know that the Jews enjoyed this privilege
above other nations, that God revealed himself to them. (<span
id="xvii.i-p102.1"></span>[Ps. 147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)<span id="xvii.i-p102.1"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p102.2"></span>[Ro
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span id="xvii.i-p102.2"></span>.)
“God is known in Judea,” says the Psalmist,: his name is great in
Israel.” (<span id="xvii.i-p102.3"></span>[Ps
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001)<span
id="xvii.i-p102.3"></span>.) So much the less excusable was either their
slothfulness or their obstinacy, in paying scarcely any regard to their
own prosperity. Whence arose their great levity or proneness to revolt,
but from their undervaluing or despising the inestimable treasure of
heavenly doctrine? They therefore deserved to be sharply and severely
rebuked by the Prophet, who now exclaims against them, indirectly
remarking that they wickedly and perversely agree among themselves to
cast into the shade the grace of God.

<span id="xvii.i-p103"></span>*Who among them foretelleth those things?*
Here God appears to permit the Jews to bring forward publicly any
objection which they can make, as those who trust to the goodness of
their cause venture to taunt their adversaries: “Produce thy arguments;
if thou possessest any acuteness, shew it.” Of his own accord,
therefore, he makes an attack upon them, and gives them permission to
shew, if they can find any argument to that effect, that such things
were foretold by the gods of the Gentiles. We may also extend it to the
diviners and augurs, who claimed for themselves the knowledge of future
events, and who could not at all foresee such things. With the same view
he will repeat what follows in the next verse, “It is I, it is I who
have spoken.” The object of the whole is to shew that the Jews waver,
and even fall away, in consequence of not estimating sufficiently how
extraordinary a blessing it is to learn from the sacred mouth of God all
that is necessary for their salvation.

<span id="xvii.i-p104"></span>*Jehovah hath loved him, and he shall
execute his pleasure on Babylon.* He points out a single instance, that
God had now deigned to foretell to them the end of their captivity in
Babylon. Cyrus is not named by him as the dispenser of this favor, but,
as if he were speaking of a man who was known and ascertained, he says,
without mentioning the name, that God has chosen him to take Babylon by
force. The word *loved* is not employed in an absolute sense, but <span
id="xvii.i-p104.1"></span>πρὸς τὶ; with reference to a particular
object; and therefore it is limited to the successful result of the
expedition. In like manner Saul, with reference to a particular object,
was dear to God, so that he reigned for a time, and was even endued with
the gift of prophecy. (<span id="xvii.i-p104.2"></span>[1Sa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)<span
id="xvii.i-p104.2"></span>.) The case is different with believers, whom
God has embraced with an unchangeable love, and whom he never permits to
fall away from him. He intimates that Cyrus will take Babylon by force,
in consequence of having undertaken this work by God’s appointment and
direction, not indeed intentionally on his part, but in such a manner as
God makes even the ignorant and blind to go where he pleases, or compels
them against their will to yield obedience; for the Prophet does not
applaud Cyrus for voluntary obedience, but rather magnifies the
providence of God, by which he leads all men to execute his counsel.

<span id="xvii.i-p105"></span>*And his arm.*  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) Some read the word “arm” in the
nominative, and others in the accusative case; but it makes little
difference as to the meaning. *Arm* may here be taken for “work,” and in
a metaphorical sense; and thus the passage will read more smoothly. “He
will execute his counsel on Babylon, his work on the Babylonians;” for
we know that it is a distinguishing peculiarity in the style of the
prophets to join together “the work of the Lord” and his “counsel.”
Indirectly he reproaches the Jews with their ingratitude in refusing to
believe the promises of God, though he points out the event, as it were,
with the finger, and speaks in a very different manner from that in
which either diviners or false gods are accustomed to speak. In a word,
he wishes to convince the Jews that, the taking of Babylon by storm
shall be “the work of the Lord,” under whose direction Cyrus shall
execute it, in order that the Church may at length be delivered.

<span id="xvii.i-p107"></span><span id="xvii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p108"></span>**15.** *Therefore he shall prosper in his
way.* He again reminds the Jews of the predictions, and claims for God
this honor, that, by foretelling the event in due time, he has removed
all doubt; and next he adds, that all that had been foretold shall be
accomplished. Accordingly, in the repetition of the pronoun, *It is I,
it is I who have spoken,* there is a double emphasis; first, tlmt none
but the God of Israel hath spoken about future and hidden events, and
secondly, that, because he is faithful and never deceives, all the
events which he has foretold shall undoubtedly take place. Accordingly,
in the last clause of the verse I consider the copulative <span
id="xvii.i-p108.1"></span>ו *(vau)* to mean *therefore.* Here Isaiah has
two objects in view; first, that the captive Jews may expect
deliverance, and secondly, that, after having been delivered, they may
acknowledge God to be the author of so valuable a blessing, and may not
imagine that it took place either by the assistance of men or by chance.

<span id="xvii.i-p109"></span>*Surely I have called him, I have
conducted him.* He declares that everything shall go prosperously with
Cyrus, because Jehovah “hath called him;” not that he deserved so high a
favor, or obtained it by his own industry or power, but because the Lord
was pleased to employ the agency of Cyrus in delivering his people. As
to his calling him *beloved* in the preceding verse, and now saying that
he has been “called and conducted,” I explained a little before that
this cannot refer to the love of God, by which he adopts us to be his
children and calls us to himself; for in this sense Cyrus was not
“beloved” or “called.” Though he was endowed with great virtues, yet he
was stained by very great vices, ambition and the lust of power,
avarice, cruelty, and other vices; and his lamentable end shewed what
kind of person he was. The Prophet therefore means that God was
favorable to Cyrus, so as to bestow upon him an external blessing, but
not so as to adopt him, and to impart to him that grace which he bestows
on the elect. We must consider the reason why he calls him by these
names. It is because he makes use of the agency of Cyrus for delivering
the Church, as we have already explained.

<span id="xvii.i-p110"></span><span id="xvii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p111"></span>**16.** *Draw near to me, hear this.* He
again addresses the Jews, and, by bidding them draw near, goes out, as
it were, to meet them, and to receive them kindly. Yet at the same time
he indirectly glances at their revolt, shewing that they would not be
capable of receiving sound doctrine, if they did not withdraw from
error. It was no small crime that they were so far removed from God, to
whom they ought to have been united in a friendly manner. They were at a
great distance from him, not as to space, but as to the agreement of the
heart. The “drawing near,” therefore, means that we should lay aside our
natural dispositions and be ready to hear him. And this must proceed
from his grace; for we can never be prepared to do this, if he do not
lead us to himself.

<span id="xvii.i-p112"></span>*Not from the beginning have I spoken in
secret.* Commentators explain this passage in various ways. Many apply
it to Christ, though the Prophet meant no such thing; but we ought to
guard against violent and forced interpretations. Others explain it as
relating to the Prophet himself, but that is not more suitable; for this
discourse would not be applicable to a man. I think, therefore, that
Isaiah introduces God as speaking, in order to reproach the people with
ingratitude, because “from the beginning,” that is, from the time that
he began to reveal himself to their fathers, he did not speak obscurely
or secretly. Hence it follows, that all the ignorance that was in them
ought to be ascribed to their depravity, because of their own accord
they forsook the light.

<span id="xvii.i-p113"></span>*From the time that it was done, I was
there.* When he says that he was present at the time that the event
occurred, the meaning is, that what he had uttered with his mouth was
carried into execution by his strength and by his power. Justly,
therefore, does he affirm that he gave tokens of his presence, when, by
accomplishing all things, he not only proved the truth of the
predictions by the event itself, but shewed that those things which are
supposed to be accidental are governed by his authority. In a word, he
mentions the ancient promises of God and the fulfillment of them, in
order to shew that God will always be like himself. Those who say that
Isaiah will be present in spirit, when the Lord shall bring back his
people, torture the Prophet’s words, and produce nothing that agrees
with his meaning.

<span id="xvii.i-p114"></span>*And now Jehovah hath sent me.* Isaiah now
begins to speak of himself, and applies this statement to the preceding
doctrine, and testifies that that God, who hath spoken from the
beginning, now speaketh by him, and consequently that we ought to
believe those things which God now speaketh by him, in the same manner
as if he were visibly present. Hence we ought to draw a useful doctrine,
namely, that all the miracles which the Lord has performed ought to be
brought to our remembrance, that we may confirm his truth in our hearts.
It is no slight argument, that the Lord had from the beginning a
distinct people, whom he taught, to whom he made sure promises, and to
whom he performed those promises, and whom he never deceived, even in
the smallest matter; for all things were performed and fulfilled in due
time. Whenever, therefore, any doubt arises, we ought to betake
ourselves to these examples, “God hath always assisted his people; not
now, for the first time, hath he spoken to them, and he did not deceive
his people by words which were dark or ambiguous, but spoke plainly and
clearly.” Thus the Prophet declares that he brings forward nothing of
his own, but that he was sent by God, who has proved himself to be
faithful.

<span id="xvii.i-p115"></span>*And his Spirit.* He mentions “the
Spirit,” not as if he meant something different from God, because he is
of the same essence with him; for in one essence of God we acknowledge
Three Persons; but he names “The Spirit,” because He is the only teacher
and director of all the prophets. Paul says, that “no man can say that
Jesus is Christ, but by the Spirit,” and a little after he says that
“the gifts of God are various, but that it is one and the same Spirit
who worketh all things in all.” (<span id="xvii.i-p115.1"></span>[1 Cor.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span id="xvii.i-p115.1"></span>.)
This passage is also a clear proof of the divinity of the Spirit, since
the prophets are sent by him; for it belongs to God alone to send them,
as it is by the authority of the prince alone that ambassadors are sent;
and since the Spirit does this, — since he directs them, and gives to
them power and efficacy, unquestionably he is God.

<span id="xvii.i-p116"></span>From this passage we learn also, that they
who have not this direction of the Spirit, though they boast of having
been sent by God, ought to be rejected; such as those Popish bands of
wolves which glory in the name of pastors and teachers, and impudently
boast of their mission, though they are altogether opposed to the Spirit
of God, and to his doctrine. In vain do they boast of having been sent
or authorized by God, when they are not adorned with the gifts of the
Spirit, which are necessary for the execution of such an office. To
pretend to having the inspiration of the Spirit, while they are entirely
destitute of faith, and have not even the slightest spark of doctrine,
is excessively disgusting. Let us suppose an assembly of mitred bishops,
the greater part of whom are known to be ignorant, and among three
hundred of whom there shall scarcely be found ten who have a moderate
share of the rudiments of piety; what could be more foolish than for
such an assembly to boast of being governed by “the Spirit?“

<span id="xvii.i-p117"></span><span id="xvii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p118"></span>**17.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* I connect
this verse with the four following verses, because they relate to the
same subject, and because in them the Lord promises deliverance to his
people, but in such a manner as first to shew that it was through their
own fault that they were reduced to slavery; that is, that the people
might not murmur and object that it would have been better to be kept in
their native country, if the Lord wished to assist them, than to be
carried away and brought back; for physicians who cure a disease which
they might have prevented, are held to be less entitled to thanks. The
Prophet therefore meets this, and says that this befell the people
through their own fault, and that they might have escaped this
destruction, if they had attended to the commandments of the Lord. He
shews, therefore, that this was a just reward of the wickedness of the
people; for it was not the Lord who had formerly prevented the people
from enjoying prosperity, but they had rejected his grace. And yet he
declares that the Lord will go beyond this wickedness by his goodness,
because he will not suffer his people to perish, though he afflict them
for a time.

<span id="xvii.i-p119"></span>*Teaching thee profitably.* He means that
God’s *“teaching”* is such that it might keep the people safe and sound,
if they would only rest upon it. Now, the Lord “teaches,” not for his
own sake, but in order to promote our salvation; for what profit could
we yield to him? It is therefore by “teaching” that he makes provision
for the advantage of each of us, that, having been instructed by it, we
may enjoy prosperity. But since, through our ingratitude, we reject the
benefit that is freely offered to us, what remains but that we shall
miserably perish? Justly, therefore, does Isaiah reproach the Jews that,
if they had not defrauded themselves of the benefit of teaching, nothing
that was profitable for their salvation would have been hidden from
them. And if these things were said of the Law, that the Lord, by means
of it, “taught his people profitably,” what shall we say of the Gospel,
in which everything that is profitable for us is very fully explained?
 <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)

<span id="xvii.i-p121"></span>Hence, also, it is manifest, how shocking
is the blasphemy of the Papists who say that the reading of the Holy
Scripture is dangerous and hurtful, in order to terrify unlearned
persons  <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) from reading it. Shall
they then accuse God of falsehood, who declares, by the mouth of the
Prophet, that it is “profitable?” Do they wish us to believe them rather
than God? Though they impudently vomit out their blasphemies, we
certainly ought not to be dissuaded from the study of it; for we shall
learn by actual experience with what truthfulness Isaiah spoke, if we
treat the Holy Scriptures with piety and reverence.

<span id="xvii.i-p123"></span>*Leading thee.* These words shew more
clearly the profitableness which was mentioned a little before. He means
that the way of salvation is pointed out to us, if we hearken to God
when he speaks; for he is ready to become our guide during the whole
course of our life, if we will only obey him. In this manner Moses
testifies that he “set before the people life and death.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p123.1"></span>[De
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span
id="xvii.i-p123.1"></span>.) Again, it is said, (<span
id="xvii.i-p123.2"></span>[Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)<span
id="xvii.i-p123.2"></span>,) “This is the way, walk ye in it;” for the
rule of a holy life is contained in the Law, which cannot deceive. “I
command thee,” says Moses, “that thou love the Lord thy God, and walk in
his ways, and keep his commandments and statutes and judgments, that
thou mayest live and be multiplied, and that the Lord may bless thee in
the land which thou goest to possess.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p123.3"></span>[De
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016)<span
id="xvii.i-p123.3"></span>.) In a word, they who submissively yield
obedience are not destitute either of counsel or of the light of
understanding.

<span id="xvii.i-p124"></span><span id="xvii.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p125"></span>**18.** *O* *if thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments!* As the people might complain of being carried into
captivity, the Prophet, intending to meet those murmurs, points out the
cause, which was, that they did not submit to the doctrine of salvation,
and did not allow themselves to derive any advantage from it. He
undoubtedly alludes to the song of Moses, in which very nearly the same
form of expression occurs, “O that they were wise, and that they
understood!” (<span id="xvii.i-p125.1"></span>[De
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029)<span
id="xvii.i-p125.1"></span>.) <span id="xvii.i-p125.2"></span>לוא *(lu)*
denotes a wish, O if! or, *Would that!*

<span id="xvii.i-p126"></span>Not only does the Lord expostulate with
the Jews for having disregarded the advantage, or “profitableness,”
(verse 17,) which was offered to them, but like a father, he deplores
the wretchedness of his children; for he takes no pleasure in our
distresses, and is not severe, unless when we constrain him by our
wickedness. This is therefore a figurative appropriation of human
affections, by which God compassionates the ruin of those who chose
rather to perish of their own accord than to be saved; for he was ready
to bestow blessings of every kind, if we did not drive him away by our
obstinacy. Yet it would be foolish to attempt to penetrate into his
secret counsel, and to inquire why he did not add the efficacy of the
Spirit to the external word; for nothing is said here about his power,
but there is only a reproof of the hard-heartedness of men, that they
may be rendered inexcusable. Certainly, whenever God invites us to
himself, there is clearly laid before us, in his word, complete
happiness, which we wickedly reject.

<span id="xvii.i-p127"></span>*Then would thy peace have been as a
river.* The word *peace,* as we have formerly explained,  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) denotes all prosperous events. It is
as if he had said, “The richest plenty of spiritual blessings would have
flowed to thee abundantly, and thou wouldst have had no occasion to
dread any change; because the blessing of God upon believers is never
dried up.

<span id="xvii.i-p129"></span>*And thy righteousness as the waves of the
sea.* We might explain *righteousness,* which he connects with *peace,*
to mean what is expressed by the familiar phrase *(*<span
id="xvii.i-p129.1"></span>*ton bon droict)* “thy right.” But I choose
rather to understand by the word “Righteousness” a well regulated
commonwealth, in which everything is administered in a regular and
orderly manner; as if he had said, “Thou wouldest have had everything
well conducted at home, and wouldest have had plenty and abundance of
all things.” And properly does he connect this condition with “peace;”
for when government is overtumed, everything goes wrong and is out of
order, and it is utterly impossible that we shall enjoy “peace,” if
there be not “righteousness,” that is, a just and equitable
administration of affairs. If, therefore, we are desirous of “peace,”
let us likewise wish to have that blessed condition on which the Lord
bestows his blessing. Here some commentators speculate about spiritual
“righteousness,” and the forgiveness of sins; but they wander far from
the Prophet’s meaning, which is plain and obvious.

<span id="xvii.i-p130"></span><span id="xvii.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p131"></span>**19.** *Thy* *seed would have been as the
sand.* This also relates to a happy life, when progeny is multiplied, by
whose aid the labors of the old are alleviated, and which “resists the
adversaries in the gate.” The Psalmist compares such children to “arrows
shot by a strong hand,” and pronounces him to be “blessed who hath his
quiver full of them;” that is, who has a large number of such children.
(<span id="xvii.i-p131.1"></span>[Ps.
127:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005)<span id="xvii.i-p131.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p132"></span>When he mentions *sand,* he appears to
allude to the promise which was made to Abraham,

<span id="xvii.i-p133"></span>“I will multiply thy seed as the stars of
heaven, and as the sand which is on the sea-shore.” (<span
id="xvii.i-p133.1"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="xvii.i-p133.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p134"></span>And he repeats the same sentiment in
various words; according to the usage of the Hebrew writings,
substituting *children* for “seed,” and *small stones* for “sand.” In a
word, he shews that the people prevented God from causing them to enjoy
the fruit of that promise.

<span id="xvii.i-p135"></span>*His name would not have been cut off.*
Coming down to the interruption of this favor, he next reproaches them
in more direct terms with having sought for dispersion, after having
been miraculously collected by the hand of God; for by the word *name*
he means the lawful condition of the people, which would always have
flourished, if the blessing had not been tumed aside front its course.
What he says about the people having been “cut off,” must be understood
to refer to the land of Canaan, from which the people of God had been
cast out, and thus appeared to have been thrust out of their Father’s
house; for the Temple, of which they were deprived, was a symbol of
God’s presence, and the land itself was a pledge or earnest of a blessed
inheritance. Being driven into captivity, therefore, the people appeared
to have been cut off and banished from the presence of God, and had no
token of the divine assistance, if the Lord had not soothed their
affliction by those promises. Now, we ought carefully to observe this
distress, that, when they had been banished into a distant country, they
had no temple, or sacrifices, or religious assemblies; for they who in
the present day have no form of a Church,  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) no use of sacraments, and no
administration of the word, ought to look upon themselves as being in
some measure cast out from the presence of God, and should learn to
desire, and continually to ask by earnest prayer, the restoration of the
Church.

<span id="xvii.i-p137"></span><span id="xvii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p138"></span>**20.** *Go out of Babylon.* This is the
second clause of this remonstrance, in which the Lord solemnly declares
that he will be the Redeemer of his people, though they have been
unworthy and ungrateful. After having declared that he performed the
office of a good teacher, but that the people refused to hearken to him,
so that by their own fault they drew down on themselves the punishment
of captivity, he now declares his unwearied forbearance, by adding that
he will still assist them, in order to bring them out of slavery. He
therefore commands them to go out of the land of Babylon, in which they
were captives. Hence we see that God, in his unspeakable goodness,
though he has just cause to remonstrate with us, yet relieves our
afflictions, and assists those who had been unworthy, and even who had
insolently rejected his grace.

<span id="xvii.i-p139"></span>*With the voice ofrejoicing.* This relates
to the confirmation of the deliverance, for he intended to give
assurance to a promise which was altogether incredible. In order,
therefore, to remove all doubt, he employed lofty language in extolling
this blessing.

<span id="xvii.i-p140"></span>*Tell it.* He describes the strength of
that confidence by which he wished to encourage the Jews; for we are
wont to utter loudly and boldly those things of which we are certain,
and, if we have any doubt, we scarcely venture to speak, and are dumb.
Isaiah speaks of a future event as if it had actually arrived, that the
people might cherish in their hearts greater and stronger confidence He
makes use of the imperative mood, which is much more forcible, and
produces a more powerful impression on our minds, than if he had
expressed his meaning in plain terms.

<span id="xvii.i-p141"></span><span id="xvii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p142"></span>**21.** *Therefore they thirsted not.*
Because the Jews did not see the way opened up for their return, and
because great and dangerous wildernesses intervened, the Prophet asserts
the power of God, and brings forward examples of it, that they may not
be terrified by any difficulty. He therefore bids them consider whether
or not God had sufficient power to rescue their fathers from the slavery
of Egypt, and to lead them through desolate wildernesses, in which he
supplied them with food and water and everything that was necessary for
them. (<span id="xvii.i-p142.1"></span>[Exod.
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001), [Num.
20:0](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="xvii.i-p142.1"></span>.)
Here the Jews, according to their custom, contrive absurd fables, and
invent miracles which were never performed; and they do this, not
through ignorance, but through presumption, by which anything that is
plausible, though there be no ground whatever for it, easily gains their
support.

<span id="xvii.i-p143"></span>The design of the Prophet was to recall to
their remembrance the former departure from Egypt, and the miracles
which the Lord performed at that time, which we have already remarked to
be customary with the Prophets, when they wish to extol in lofty terms
the works of God. Thus David, when he was celebrating the victories
which he had obtained, says that

<span id="xvii.i-p144"></span>“the mountains trembled and flowed down,
that the air was cleft asunder, and that the Lord was seen from
heaven,”  
(<span id="xvii.i-p144.2"></span>[Ps
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)<span id="xvii.i-p144.2"></span>,)

<span id="xvii.i-p145"></span>though nothing of this kind ever happened
to him; but he imitates the description of the deliverance from Egypt,
in order to shew that God, who was the author of it, had also been his
supporter and leader in conquering his enemies, and that the power of
God ought not to be less acknowledged in his victory than in those signs
and wonders.

<span id="xvii.i-p146"></span>In like manner the Prophet wishes that the
people should now contemplate those miracles, in order to correct their
unbelief, and that they may not be tempted by any distrust. The holy
servants of God were always accustomed to cast their eyes on that
deliverance, in order that, by the remembrance of so great a benefit,
they might strengthen the hearts of all in hope and confidence; as we
have formerly said that it was the duty of believers in every age to
expect the fruit of this redemption, that the Lord, by uninterrupted
progress, might be the guardian of a redeemed people. Thus Isaiah means
that the Lord will easily surmount every obstacle, will open up a way
which is shut, and will supply them abundantly with water, so that they
shall not die of thirst, in the same manner as he formerly brought water
out of rock by an extraordinary miracle, when the people thought that
their condition was hopeless; and consequently, that there is no reason
why they should despair of their return, if they wish to contemplate,
and cordially to believe, that power of God which they have already
experienced.

<span id="xvii.i-p147"></span><span id="xvii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p148"></span>**22.** *There is no peace, saith Jehovah
to the wicked.* These words, “saith the Lord,” are included by some
commentators in a parenthesis; but we view them as having this
connection with what goes before, that the Lord denies to wicked men
that “peace” of which they are unworthy.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) And this is expressly added, that
hypocrites might not, according to their custom, cherish false
confidence in these promises; for he declares that the promises do not
belong to them, in order to shut them out altogether from the hope of
salvation. But Isaiah appears also to have had his eye on something
else; for, since the greater part of the people, under the influence of
impiety, rejected this blessing, many weak and feeble persons might
hesitate and might be terrified by the opinion of the multitude;  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) as in our own day we see feeble
consciences disturbed, when they see the greater part of men despise the
doctrine of salvation. Beholding many persons placed in danger, he tums
away their minds from such a temptation, that they may not be troubled
by the multitude of wicked and unbelieving men, who reject the grace of
God and this prosperous condition, but that, without paying any regard
to those men, they may embrace and enjoy this benefit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc15016.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p49.1"></span>De leurs
ennemis.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc15016.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xvii.i-p89.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p90"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p90.1"></span>Mais
pareillement a mis une priere en la bouche, et un bouclier au bras des
fideles pour resister a la tentation.” “But at the same time put a
prayer into the mouth, and a shield on the arms, of believers, for
resisting temptation.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc15016.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xvii.i-p94.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p95"></span> That is, his nature is eternal, he depends
on none, he is the beginning and end of all things, as in <span
id="xvii.i-p95.1"></span>[Isa. 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004),
[Isa. 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span
id="xvii.i-p95.1"></span>.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc15016.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xvii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p106"></span> “‘And his arm shall be seen (or shall be
visible) in the land of the Babylonians.’ Here he speaks of Cyrus.” —
*Jarchi.  
*“Others, without supplying <span id="xvii.i-p106.2"></span>ב, *(beth,)*
suppose that this phrase contains an aposiopesis, and read the words
thus: ‘And his arm the Babylonians,’ that is, ‘And his arm (shall strike
or shall make war upon) the Babylonians.’ Koeher, thinking that in the
words <span id="xvii.i-p106.3"></span>וזרועו כשדים *(uzerogno kassedim)*
there is no ellipsis, explains them to mean, ‘And the Babylonians his
arm,’ that is, they shall be his supporters. ‘For,’ adds he, ‘their aid
was of no small consequence, if what Xenophon (Cyroped. 4:24; 5:11) has
recorded about Gobryas and Gadates, who were Babylonians, be true. Thus,
allies, friends, and any one that assists another, are accounted to be
his *arm.’”* — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc15016.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xvii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p120"></span> “When God the Redeemer says here that he
‘teacheth his people, <span id="xvii.i-p120.1"></span>להועיל
*(lehognil)* to profit,’ and that he provides for their true interests,
there can be no doubt that he makes this declaration concerning himself,
<span id="xvii.i-p120.2"></span>κατ᾿ ἀντίθεσιν by way of contrast with
Idols, false gods, the worship of which not only did no good, but even
did harm, and brought great hurt and damage to their worshippers.
(Compare <span id="xvii.i-p120.3"></span>[Isa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010)<span id="xvii.i-p120.3"></span>,
and <span id="xvii.i-p120.4"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span
id="xvii.i-p120.4"></span>.) Hence also God says by, <span
id="xvii.i-p120.5"></span>[Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p120.5"></span>,
‘Is there any nation that changeth its gods, though they are not gods?
But my people have changed their glory <span
id="xvii.i-p120.6"></span>בלא יועיל (belo yognil) for that from which
they derive no advantage;’ or rather, from which they suffer the
greatest loss and damage.” — *Vitringa.*

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc15016.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xvii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p122"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p122.1"></span>Afin de
destourner les idiots (qu’ils appellent) de lira dedans.” *“In* order to
dissuade idiots (as they call them) from reading it.”

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc15016.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xvii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p128"></span> See Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 1, p 312;
vol. 2, pp. 214, 227.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc15016.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xvii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p136"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p136.1"></span>Nulle
forme d’Eglise.”

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc15016.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xvii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p149"></span> Our author means that, instead of reading
the words thus, “There is no peace to the wicked, saith Jehovah,” he
prefers to read them, “Jehovah saith to the wicked, There is no peace.”
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc15016.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xvii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p150"></span> “These words relate to those Jews who,
being obstinately devoted to idolatry, and having settled down in
Babylon, chose to remain there rather than to return to their native
country and the religious worship of Jehovah. He declares, therefore,
that such persons shall not have the happiness that is promised to those
who shall return to their native habitations.” — *Rosenmuller.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Isaiah 33-48](cc15017)
