[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15003)  [Next](cc15005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 36

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
36:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001.md)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now it came to pass in the fourteenth
year of king Hezekiah, *that* Sennacherib king of Assyria came up
against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Accidit anno decimo quarto regis
Ezechiae, ut ascenderet Sennacherib rex Assur contra omnes urbes Iuda
munitas, et caperet eas.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh
from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he
stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller’s
field.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tum misit rex Assur Rapsacen e Lachis
Ierosolymam ad regem Ezechiam cum manu valida, qui stetit in aquae ductu
piscinae superioris, in via agri fullonis.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**3.** Then came forth unto him Eliakim,
Hilkiah’s son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and
Joah, Asaph’s son, the recorder.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et egressus est ad eum Eliacim filius
Helchiae praefectus domus, et Sobna cancellarius, et Ioach filius Asaph
secretarius.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now
to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What
confidence *is* this wherein thou trustest?

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixit illis Rapsaces: Dicite agedum
Ezechiae, Sic dicit rex magnus, rex Assur, Quae fiducia haec qua
confisus es?

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**5.** I say, *sayest thou,* (but *they are
but* vain words,) *I have* counsel and strength for war: now, on whom
dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Dixi: (tantum verbum labiorum:)
Consilium et fortitudo ad bellum. Nunc super quo confisus es, quod
rebellasti adversum me?

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>**6.** Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this
broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand,
and pierce it: so *is* Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ecce confiusus es super baculo isto
arundineo confracto, super *A*Egypto; eui si quis innititur, penetrabit
in manum ejus, et perforabit eam. Talis est Pharao rex *A*Egypti erga
omnes qui fiduciam habent in eo.

<span id="v.i-p14"></span>**7.** But if thou say to me, We trust in the
LORD our God: *is it* not he, whose high places and whose altars
Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall
worship before this altar?

<span id="v.i-p15"></span>**7.** Quod si dixeris mihi, In Iehova Deo
nostro confidimus; annon hic est enjus abstulit Ezechias excelsa et
altaria, dixitque ad Iuda et Ierusalem, coram altari hoc adorabitis?

<span id="v.i-p16"></span>**8.** Now therefore give pledges, I pray
thee, to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two
thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>**8.** Nunc age, da obsidem domino meo regi
Assur. Dabo tibi duo millia equorum; an tibi erunt equites quos illis
imponas?

<span id="v.i-p18"></span>**9.** How then wilt thou turn away the face
of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put thy trust
on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?

<span id="v.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et quomodo aspernaris faciem ducis
unius e servis domini mei minoribus, et fiduciam tibi statuis in AEgypto
ob currus et equites?

<span id="v.i-p20"></span>**10.** And am I now come up without the LORD
against this land to destroy it? The LORD said unto me, Go up against
this land, and destroy it.

<span id="v.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et nunc an absque Iehova ascendi ad
terrain hanc, ut perdam eam? Iehova mihi dixit: ascende in terram hanc,
ut perdas eam.

<span id="v.i-p22"></span>**11.** Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah
unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian
language; for we understand *it:* and speak not to us in the Jews’
language, in the ears of the people that *are* on the wall.

<span id="v.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et dixit Eliacim, et Sobna, et Ioach,
ad Rapsacem: loquere quaeso ad servos tuos Syriace, quoniam nos
intelligimus, et non loquaris nobiscum Iudaice, audiente populo qui est
super murum.

<span id="v.i-p24"></span>**12.** But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master
sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? *hath he* not
*sent me* to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own
dung, and drink their own piss with you?

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit Rapsace: Nunquid ad dominum
tuum et ad to misit me dominus meus, ut loquar verba ista? Annon ad
viros sedentes super murum, ut comedant stercora sua et bibunt lotium
suum vobiseum?

<span id="v.i-p26"></span>**13.** Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a
loud voice in the Jews’ language, and said, Hear ye the words of the
great king, the king of Assyria.

<span id="v.i-p27"></span>**13.** Stetit ergo Rapsace, et cla—mavit voce
magna Iudaice, ac dixit: Audite verba regis magni, regis Assur.

<span id="v.i-p28"></span>**14.** Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah
deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you.

<span id="v.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sic dicit rex: Ne vobis imponat
Ezechias, quia non poterit vos liberare.

<span id="v.i-p30"></span>**15.** Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in
the LORD, saying, The LORD will surely deliver us: this city shall not
be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="v.i-p31"></span>**15.** Neque vos confidere faciat Iehovae
Ezechias, dicens, Liberando liberabit nos Iehova; non tradetur haec urbs
in manum regis Assur.

<span id="v.i-p32"></span>**16.** Hearken not to *Hezekiah*: for thus
saith the king of Assyria, Make *an agreement* with me *by* a present,
and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of
his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;

<span id="v.i-p33"></span>**16.** Ne audieritis Ezechiam; quoniam sic
dicit rex Assur: Facite mecum benedictionem, et egredimini; et comedant
singuli e ficu sua, et bibant singuli aquas putei sui.

<span id="v.i-p34"></span>**17.** Until I come and take you away to a
land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and
vineyards.

<span id="v.i-p35"></span>**17.** Donec veniam et assumam vos in terrain
similem terre vestrae, terrain frumenti et vini, terrain panis et
vinearum.

<span id="v.i-p36"></span>**18.** *Beware* lest Hezekiah persuade you,
saying, The LORD will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations
delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="v.i-p37"></span>**18.** Ne forte decipiat vos Ezechias,
dicens, Iehova eripiet nos. An eripuerunt dii Gentium quisque terram
suam e mann regis *Assur?*

<span id="v.i-p38"></span>**19.** Where *are* the gods of Hamath and
Arphad? where *are* the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered
Samaria out of my hand?

<span id="v.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ubi est Deus Amath et Arpad? ubi Dens
Sepharvaiim? An liberaverunt Samariam e manu mea?

<span id="v.i-p40"></span>**20.** Who *are they* among all the gods of
these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the
LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="v.i-p41"></span>**20.** Quis est in omnibus diis istarum
terrarum qui liberaverit terram suam e manu mea; ut eruat Iehova
Ierusalem e mann mea?

<span id="v.i-p42"></span>**21.** But they held their peace, and
answered him not a word: for the king’s commandment was, saying, Answer
him not.

<span id="v.i-p43"></span>**21.** Tacuerunt, nec responderunt ei verbum;
quoniam praeceptum hoc regis erat, qui dixerat: Ne respondeatis illi.

<span id="v.i-p44"></span>**22.** Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah,
that *was* over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son
of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with *their* clothes rent, and told
him the words of Rabshakeh.

<span id="v.i-p45"></span>**22.** Venit antem Eliacim praefectus
palatii, et Sobna cancellarius, et Ioach, filius Asaph, secretarius, ad
Ezechiam scissis vestibus, et nuntiaverunt illi verba Rapsace.

<span id="v.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p47"></span><span id="v.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p48"></span>**1.** *It happened in the fourteenth year.*
In this and the following chapter the Prophet relates a remarkable
history, which may be regarded as the seal of his doctrine, in which he
predicted the calamities that would befall his nation, and at the same
time promised that God would be merciful to them, and would drive back
the Assyrians and defend Jerusalem and the Holy Land. What had already
been accomplished made it evident that he had not spoken in vain; but
God intended that it should also be testified to posterity. Yet to the
men of that age it was not less advantageous that such a record should
be preserved. He had often threatened that the vengeance of God was near
at hand, and that the Assyrians were ready at his bidding to be employed
by him as scourges; and st the same time he promised that he would
assist Jerusalem even when matters were come to the worst. Both were
accomplished, and the greater part of the nation passed by, as with
closed eyes, those evident judgments of God, and not less basely
despised the assistance which was offered to them. So much the more
inexcusable was their gross stupidity.

<span id="v.i-p49"></span>But to the small number of believers it was
advantageous to perceive such illustrious proofs of the hand of God,
that greater credit might afterwards be given to Isaiah. The Prophet
also might pursue his course more ardently and with unshaken firmness,
since God had given so splendid an attestation of his doctrine from
heaven. And because the truth of God scarcely obtains from us the honor
due to it, unless it be supported by strong proofs, God has provided not
less largely for our weakness, that we may perceive as in a mirror that
the power of God accompanied the words of Isaiah, and that what he
taught on earth was confirmed from heaven. More especially has calling
was manifestly sealed, when God delivered Jerusalem from the grievous
siege of Sennacherib, and when no hope of safety remained; so that
believers saw that they had been rescued from the jaws of death by the
hand of God alone. For this reason I have said that it was a seal to
authenticate the prophecies which might otherwise have been called in
question.

<span id="v.i-p50"></span>*In the fourteenth year.* Not without reason
does he specify the time when these things happened; for at that time
Hezekiah had restored the worship of God throughout the whole of his
dominions, (<span id="v.i-p50.1"></span>[2Ki
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)<span id="v.i-p50.1"></span>;.md)
and, not satisfied with this, sent messengers in various directions to
invite the Israelites to come with speed from every place to Jerusalem,
to offer sacrifices, and, after long disunion, again to unite in holy
harmony of faith, and to worship God according to the injunctions of the
Law. While such was the condition of the kingdom that superstitions were
removed and the Temple cleansed, and thus the true worship of God was
restored, Judea is invaded by the king of Assyria, fields are pillaged,
cities are taken, and the whole country is subject to his authority.
Jerusalem alone, with a few inhabitants, is left; and in that city
Hezekiah was shut up as in a prison.

<span id="v.i-p51"></span>We must now consider what thoughts might occur
to the pious king and to other persons; for if we judge of this calamity
according to the perception of the flesh, we shall think that God was
unjust in permitting his servant to be reduced to such extremities,
whose piety seemed to deserve that the Lord would preserve him in safety
and free from all molestation, since his whole desire was to maintain
the true worship of God. This was no small trial of the faith of
Hezekiah, and ought to be continually placed before our eyes, when we
are subjected to the same temptations. The Lord did not punish Hezekiah
for carelessness, pleasures, or luxury, and much less for superstitions,
or unholy contempt of the Law; for as soon as he began to reign, he
labored with the utmost zeal and carefulness and industry to restore the
purity of religion. God therefore intended to try his faith and
patience.

<span id="v.i-p52"></span><span id="v.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p53"></span>**2.** *Then the king of Assyria Rent
Rabshakeh.* The order of the narrative may here have been altered; for
he had formerly said that Sennacherib had taken all the cities of Judea,
and now he says that he sent Rabshakeh  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) from Lachish, implying that he was
besieging it, and consequently he had not yet stormed them all. But it
ought to be observed that historical connection is frequently disturbed,
and that what was first in the order of time, comes last in the
narrative. Besides, the Scriptures frequently make use of a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole, and by which it might be
said that all the cities were taken, because those which had been left
were few, and Hezekiah had no means of intercourse with them. It
appeared, therefore, that the king of Assyria had brought the whole of
Judea under his dominion, because nearly all that remained was Jerusalem
alone, in which Hezekiah was shut up.

<span id="v.i-p55"></span>This history is more fully related in the
Books of Kings, where it is shewn how eager for peace Hezekiah was; for
he labored to obtain it on any terms. He had delivered up “three hundred
talents of silver and thirty talents of gold,” which that tyrant had
demanded; and he found it necessary to seize the vessels of the Temple,
and the golden plates which had been attached to its doors, to make up
that sum, because his treasury was exhausted. (<span
id="v.i-p55.1"></span>[2Ki 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.i-p55.1"></span>.) But as such gulfs are insatiable, when he had
received that money, he next demanded more, and sought to enforce harder
conditions. This was done partly, in order to provoke and torment
Hezekiah, (for, having once abused the ready compliance of the pious
king, he thought that he would obtain anything,) and partly because he
sought an occasion of renewing the war. Yet it ought to be observed that
the people were justly punished for their iniquities, as had been
foretold; for although true religion flourished as to external worship,
yet their life was not changed for the better, and their wickedness was
not removed, nor was the inward pollution cleansed from their hearts.
Accordingly, because the people did not repent, it was necessary that
their obstinate depravity should be severely chastised. But because the
measure of their iniquities was not yet full, God abated the fierceness
of his anger, and suddenly, when matters were desperate, brought such
assistance as could not have been believed.

<span id="v.i-p56"></span><span id="v.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p57"></span>**3.** *And Eliakim went to him. Eliakim* was
formerly mentioned. It was he to whom the Lord promised that he would
give him the chief power in the kingdom after the banishment of Shebna.
(<span id="v.i-p57.1"></span>[Isa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020)<span id="v.i-p57.1"></span>..md) It
now appears as if that promise had failed, when he is sent to an enemy
as a suppliant, and as one who is about to surrender himself and his
companions, and to undergo cruel tyranny. This might also fill the
hearts of believers with anxiety, and lead them to doubt the promises of
God. Besides, the godly king had such a scarcity of good men, that,
along with Eliakim, he was compelled to send Shebna, whom he knew well
to be deceitful and treacherous.

<span id="v.i-p58"></span><span id="v.i-p58.1"></span>ספר *(sopher)*
means *scribe;* and accordingly it often denotes learned men or doctors,
and sometimes those who took charge of writings and those who had the
custody of the royal records. I have translated it *chancellor,* for
unquestionably it does not relate to legal skill; and we may infer that
this Shebna held a high rank, though he had been deprived of his office
as governor. <span id="v.i-p58.2"></span> מזכיר*(mazkir)* denotes a
secretary or recorder.

<span id="v.i-p59"></span><span id="v.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p60"></span>**4.** *Say now to Hezekiah.* He relates that
the three ambassadors, though they were attended by all the magnificence
that yet remained in the kingdom, were not only repulsed, but
disdainfully treated by the tyrant’s delegate, and loaded with
disgraceful reproaches; for, as if Hezekiah had been convicted of wicked
revolt, Rabshakeh asks how he had dared to rebel. The particle <span
id="v.i-p60.1"></span>נא (*na*) is supposed by some to denote entreaty,
and is rendered by them *I pray;* but it would be unsuitable to a proud
and insolent man to entreat in this manner. He speaks in the ordinary
language of those who lay conditions on the vanquished, or on those who
are overwhelmed with fear, whom they wish to compel to make an
unconditional surrender, or, as we commonly say, *(sommer) to summon.*

<span id="v.i-p61"></span>*Thus saith the great king.* In order to give
greater validity to the summons, that general speaks in the name of his
king, whose greatness he extols to the skies, in order to terrify
Hezekiah, when he learns that he has to do with a king of such vast
resources. He does not only mean that the first monarch in the world was
far superior to Hezekiah, who in comparison of him was but a petty
prince; but he calls the king of Assyria *great,* because by his power
he eclipsed all others, so that he stood alone in his lofty rank. By
these thunderbolts of words Hezekiah might have been overthrown and
subdued, especially since he was so far from being able to resist the
power of that tyrant that he was shut up in the city and unable to move
out of it.

<span id="v.i-p62"></span><span id="v.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p63"></span>**5.** *I have said (only a word of the
lips.)* In the sacred history (<span id="v.i-p63.1"></span>[2Ki
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#020)<span id="v.i-p63.1"></span>.md) the
word employed is, *Thou hast said* This may be explained as a
declaration what kind of courage Rabshakeh thinks that Hezekiah
possesses; as if he had said, “Such are thy deliberations.” In this
passage the use of the first person, “I have said,” does not alter the
sense; because Rabshakeh, as if he had examined the counsels of Hezekiah
and fully understood them all, ironically reproaches him; “I see what
thou art thinking, but they are *words of the lips.”* This passage is
explained in various ways. Some interpret it, “Thou sayest, that thou
hast not merely words of the lips,” that is, “Thou boastest that thou
excellest not only in the use of words, but likewise in courage and
wisdom.” Others interpret it, “Thou hast words indeed, but wisdom and
courage are necessary in war.”

<span id="v.i-p64"></span>Some think that by “words” are meant
“prayers.” I do not approve of that exposition; for it is excessively
farfetched and unnatural, and therefore I view it thus: “Hezekiah has
words of lips, that is, he employs a beautiful and elegant style, to
keep the people in the discharge of their duty, or, as we commonly say,
*He has fine speeches;*  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) but it is
not by these that war can be begun or carried on.” He therefore means,
that he perfectly understands what Hezekiah is doing, and what it is on
which he places his chief reliance, namely, on words and eloquence;
 <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) but these are of no use for war,
in which wisdom and courage are needed. It might also be appropriately
viewed as relating to the Egyptians, as if he had said that Hezekiah
acts foolishly in allowing himself to be cheated by empty promises; and
undoubtedly the Egyptians were liberal in promising mountains of gold,
though they gave nothing in reality. But as we shall find that he speaks
of the Egyptians, soon afterwards, in a particular manner, I have no
doubt that here he ridicules Hezekiah, as if he fed the expectation of
the people by empty boasting, while he was not provided with military
preparations.

<span id="v.i-p67"></span><span id="v.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p68"></span>**6.** *Behold, thou hast trusted in, that
broken staff of reed.* This is probably separate from the former verse;
for, having formerly said that the eloquence by which he flatters the
people is all that Hezekiah possesses, and having inferred from this
that his confidence is exceedingly foolish, he now comes to other
particulars. He employs every method for shaking the hearts of the
people, that all, being stunned, may absolutely surrender. Accordingly,
after having represented Hezekiah to be contemptible as to his internal
resources, he next adds, that the external resources are idle and
useless, and says that they are greatly mistaken in expecting any
assistance whatever from the Egyptians.

<span id="v.i-p69"></span>And, first, he compares the Egyptians to “a
staff of reed” on account of their weakness; secondly, for the sake of
amplification he calls them “a broken staff;” thirdly, he says that it
is so far from supporting that it *pierces the hands that lean upon it.*
The meaning may be thus summed up, “the hope which the Jews entertain of
receiving aid from the Egyptians is not only false and unfounded, but
pernicious.” And indeed with truth might Rabshakeh have said this, if it
had been true that Hezekiah relied on the Egyptians; but he slanderously
and falsely accuses the pious king of this vain confidence Yet God
justly rewarded a rebellious and disobedient people by allowing this
filthy dog to reproach them with their wicked revolt. Isaiah had
formerly (<span id="v.i-p69.1"></span>[Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md)<span id="v.i-p69.1"></span>, and
31:1, 6) condemned this crime in severe terms, but their deaf ears
refused to admit the reproof; and therefore the Jews, who had wickedly
despised a Prophet that spoke to them in the name of God, deserved to
have Rabshakeh for their instructor.

<span id="v.i-p70"></span>We are therefore warned by this example, that
there is no reason to wonder if unbelievers, who do not obey the counsel
of God for their salvation, and reject all prophecies, are subjeered to
the jeers of their enemies, as Rabshakeh, the captain of the Assyrian
king, now haughtily taunts the rebellious Jews. Yet it is of importance
to consider how great a difference there is between the warnings of God
and the mockeries of Satan. When God wishes to dissuade us from sinful
confidence in the flesh, he declares in general terms, “Cursed be he
that trusteth in man,” (<span id="v.i-p70.1"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="v.i-p70.1"></span>..md)
that the whole world may be reduced to nothing, and that thus we may be
satisfied with himself alone; and therefore, when he has brought us low,
he instantly imparts courage to us by holding out a remedy. But when
Satan deceitfully blames any vain hope, he drives us to despair, and
urges us to many other hopes equally bad or still worse, and tempts us
to adopt unlawful methods; as Rabshakeh does not smite the hope which
the Jews entertained from the Egyptians, in order that they may rely on
God alone, but substitutes the king of Assyria, as if safety ought not
to be expected from any other quarter, tie names *Pharaoh,* but likewise
includes the whole nation.

<span id="v.i-p71"></span><span id="v.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p72"></span>**7.** *And if thou shalt say to me.*
Rabshakeh employs an argument which consists of three parts. Either
Hezekiah thinks that he has sufficient strength to resist, or he expects
assistance from Egypt, or he trusts in God. If he trusts in himself, he
is mistaken; for what is he when compared to my king? As to Egypt, it
will render him no assistance, but on the contrary will inflict serious
damage. It remains therefore that he expects some assistance from God.
But he has thrown down his altars and curtailed his worship; will he not
rather be punished on that account? In short, this Rabshakeh takes away
from the pious king all assistance, both divine and human.

<span id="v.i-p73"></span>By this slander Satan attempted not only to
wound the heart of the king, that it might sink under the weight, of
affliction, but to make an impression on the light and fickle multitude;
because hitherto in the hearts of many there remained an attachment to
superstition, and there was a strong tendency to fall back into this
imposture, because the religion which was ancient, and to which they
were long accustomed, had been changed, and, in their opinion,  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) Hezekiah was about to be chastised for
his own rashness. In like manner, the Papists in the present day,
whenever any adverse event befalls us, maintain that we are punished by
God, because we have ventured to set aside ancient ceremonies.  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="v.i-p76"></span><span id="v.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p77"></span>**8.** *Now come, give a hostage.*  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) He concludes that there will be nothing
better for Hezekiah than to lay aside the intention of carrying on war,
to surrender himself, and to promise constant obedience to the king of
Assyria. To persuade him the more, Rabshakeh again reproaches him with
his poverty. “If I shall give thee two thousand horses, thou wilt not
find among all thy people men to ride on them. What then is thy
strength; or with what confidence dost thou dare to oppose my king?” He
does not offer him horses for the sake of respect or of kindness, but in
order to terrify and shake still more the heart of Hezekiah. The future
tense ought therefore to be explained by the subjunctive mood,
“*Although I give* thee two thousand horses, yet thou wilt not find an
equal number of riders.” I am aware of what is alleged by other
commentators; but whoever examines the matter fully will quickly
perceive that this is ironical language.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md)

<span id="v.i-p80"></span><span id="v.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p81"></span>**9.** *And how dost thou despise?*  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) He confirms the preceding statement, and
shews that ttezekiah is so far from being able to endure the presence of
his king, that he ought not to be compared to the very smallest of his
captains. In this insolent manner does he taunt him, that the Jews may
not derive courage from the absence of Sennacherib, who was still
detained by the siege of Lachish. Although, therefore, Sennacherib does
not yet appear before them with his whole army, Rabshakeh boasts that
his lieutenants are sufficiently powerful, so that Hezekiah ought not to
hesitate to make submission.

<span id="v.i-p83"></span><span id="v.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p84"></span>**10.** *And now have I come up without
Jehovah?* He now attacks Hezekiah in another manner, by telling him that
it will serve no purpose to assemble his forces and to make other
warlike preparations. For he alleges that Hezekiah has not to do or to
contend with a mortal man, but with God himself, at whose suggestion,
and not at his own, he camo hither to destroy the country; and therefore
that they who oppose him will fight against God, and consequently all
their efforts will be fruitless.

<span id="v.i-p85"></span>Hence we ought to learn that however earnestly
we may be devoted to godliness, and however faithfully we may labor to
advance the kingdom of Christ, still we must not expect to be free from
every annoyance, but ought rather to be prepared for enduring very heavy
afflictions. The Lord does not always recompense our piety by earthly
rewards; and indeed it would be an exceedingly unsuitable recompense
that we should possess abundant wealth and enjoy outward peace, and that
everything should proceed to our wish; for the world reckons even wicked
men to be happy on this ground, that they do not endure bad health or
adversity, and are free from the pressure of poverty, and have nothing
to disturb them. In this respect our condition would not differ at all
from that of the reprobate.

<span id="v.i-p86"></span>This example of Hezekiah, who labored with all
his might to restore religion and the true worship of God, and yet
endured calamities so heavy and violent that he was not far from
despair, ought to be constantly placed before our eyes, in order that,
when we shall think float we have discharged our duty, we may
nevertheless be prepared to endure conflicts and troubles of every kind,
and may not be disturbed if enemies gain an advantage at the first
onset, as if all at once they would swallow us up. Those proud and
haughty minds will quickly fall, when the first ardor has boiled over
and spent its foam, and their eagerness and pride will speedily
disappear Rabshakeh boasted of the greatness and power of his king, in
order to terrify Hezekiah. Such is the manner in which wicked men act
towards us. By threatening words they attack us, and by various terrors
they try our patience, or rather through their agency Satan labors, whom
we plainly see speaking by the mouth of Rabshakeh. Nay, Satan assumes
the character of God himself, and “is transformed into an angel of
light.” (<span id="v.i-p86.1"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="v.i-p86.1"></span>..md)
Thus also the Spirit of God himself declares, that the strength of man
is frail and fading, and that every one who leans on it seeks his own
destruction. (<span id="v.i-p86.2"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="v.i-p86.2"></span>..md)
Rabshakeh says the same thing, and discourses as if he were discharging
the prophetical office by the command of God.

<span id="v.i-p87"></span>We ought therefore to distinguish wisely when
God speaks, and when, on the other hand, his name is falsely assumed by
men; for Satan resorts to various artifices to make himself appear to be
like God. All these reproaches were unjustly, as we have said, brought
by Rabshakeh against Hezekiah, who did not place his hope in his own
strength, and did not vaunt himself through reliance on the Egyptians;
but godly men, even when they do well, must be exposed to evil reports.
By these stratagems Satan attacks our faith, and unjustly slanders us
among men. This temptation is highly dangerous, for we are desirous that
our integrity should be well known; and when we are well disposed, we
take it ill if other men put a different interpretation on our conduct.
Thus Satan endearours by slander to overturn all that has been done out
of a good conscience, or accuses us of something with which we are not
at all chargeable, or loads us with unfounded slanders, or contrives
what never came into our mind; but an upright conscience ought to be
like a brazen wall to us, that, imitating the example of Hezekiah, we
may stand unshaken against such accusations and slanders.

<span id="v.i-p88"></span>So far as relates to the last clause, in which
Rabshakeh reproaches him with having overturned the worship of God,
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) every person must plainly see how
slanderous is that charge; for Hezekiah had taken away false gods and
superstitious  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) worship, which God
abhors. (<span id="v.i-p90.2"></span>[2Ki
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)<span id="v.i-p90.2"></span>..md) But
we need not wonder that wicked men cannot distinguish between the true
God and the false, between superstition, and religion. And the same
thing is practiced amongst us every day; for the Papists, who are
delighted with nothing but their own superstitions, accuse us of having
taken away innumerable inventions of men, and complain that we have
impaired and almost abolished the worship of God. They taunt us also in
the same manner as that Rabshakeh, “Would God assist those who have
taken away his worship, profaned the holy temples, and everything that
was established in that beautiful order?” The reason is, that in Popery
everything had a dazzling appearance, and drew the admiration of men;
while we retain no ceremonies but those which are plain and simple, and
free from all pageantry, and therefore they think that we have taken
away the worship of God, which they estimate by outward appearances. If
any adverse event befalls us, they exclaim that it; is richly deserved,
that all the blame attaches to us, that the whole world is punished for
our ungodliness, and if we ourselves suffer any calamity they taunt us
still more.

<span id="v.i-p91"></span>Yet with resolute faith we must stand out
against such ungodly speeches, by shewing that what they call the
worship of God is not his worship, but that we have taken away, and have
justly taken away, mere trifles, and that all the contrivances of men do
not belong to the worship of God, but. are delusions of Satan, and that
nothing is more destructive. We must therefore stand out with unshaken
faith against reproaches of every kind, by which Satan endeavors to
throw a shade over the practice of godliness. At first sight it appears
to be shameful that he overthrew many altars and left but one, that he
profaned many temples that one might remain. (<span
id="v.i-p91.1"></span>[2Ki 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.i-p91.1"></span>.) But Hezekiah was fully acquitted by this single
defense, that he undertook nothing but by the word of God; and therefore
that he was satisfied with a single altar, because God had forbidden him
to erect more, and that he had thrown down all images, because they had
been unlawfully set up in opposition to the instructions of the Law.
(<span id="v.i-p91.2"></span>[Ex
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)<span id="v.i-p91.2"></span>..md) We
have the same dispute with the Papists in the present day, because they
blame us on no other ground than that we have set aside a huge mass of
ceremonies, and retain only what God has enjoined. In such cases,
however, we must not argue about what pleases men, but what is approved
by God.

<span id="v.i-p92"></span><span id="v.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p93"></span>**11.** *Then said Eliakim.* This circumstance
again shews how deeply Hezekiah was depressed, when by his ambassador he
entreats so humbly the servant of his enemy. It shews also with what
pride Rabshakeh was puffed up, when he rejected so insolently all
entreaties; and the refusal was the more shameful, because what was
requested was not of great value. From these matters we learn that it
was not owing to Hezekiah that he did not pacify the rage of the enemy;
for forgetful almost of his royal rank, Hezekiah endearours with all
possible modesty to soothe him. If at any time we happen to be oppressed
by unjust violence, let us not be ashamed to yield up our rights and to
supplicate with humility. Now, when Hezekiah was so submissive, because
he saw that he was unable to resist the king of Assyria, this tends
powerfully to magnify the glory of God in preserving a nation which was
nearly ruined. For that deliverance would have been less remarkable, if
they had been rescued only from an ordinary danger; but when they were
not far from destruction, so much the more manifest is the hand of God,
who by an extraordinary miracle subdued and ruined an enemy that had
already set his feet on their neck. (<span id="v.i-p93.1"></span>[2Ki
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#031)<span id="v.i-p93.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.i-p94"></span>*Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the
Syrian language.*  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) They request
that he will not speak in this manner in the presence of the people;
because it is difficult to restrain a people naturally giddy and fickle,
for they are easily moved, and tremble at the smallest alarm.  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) They would have wished that Rabshakeh
should not speak to them in the Jewish language, because they were
desirous to enter into any moderate terms of peace. For that good king
tried every method of allaying the rage of that tyrant, but without any
success.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) These ambassadors
therefore gain nothing from Rabshakeh; when he is entreated, he grows
worse, and (as is usually the case with haughty men) becomes moro
insolent.

<span id="v.i-p98"></span><span id="v.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p99"></span>**12.** *And* *Rabshakeh said.* Hence we see
the fierceness and insolence of the enemy, and hence also it is evident
that Hezekiah’s kingdom was on the brink of ruin; for here Rabshakeh
speaks like a conqueror, and does not address Hezekiah as a king, but as
if he had been his slave. When therefore we see Rabshakeh swelled with
so much pride, we ought at the same time to recollect that Hezekiah was
entirely overwhelmed and destitute of all confidence, so that he was
looked upon as ruined. Hence we also infer that Rabshakeh was not sent
for the purpose of offering any conditions of peace, but rather to
obtain an unconditional surrender, and to strike the people with alarm;
for Sennacherib had sent him for this purpose with a powerful army.
Hence also he boasts that he has nothing to do with the king, that he
addresses the people for their advantage, and, in order to terrify them
still more, mentions the distress and calamities into which they will
throw themselves if they choose to obey Hezekiah; that they will perish
through hunger, and will be compelled to eat and drink what is
revolting; and therefore, that their wisest course will be to surrender
in good time, and to provide for their safety.

<span id="v.i-p100"></span><span id="v.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p101"></span>**13.** *Therefore Rabshakeh stood, and cried
with a loud voice in the Jewish language.* The Prophet shews by what
expedients Rabshakeh endeavored to shake the heart of the people, and
first relates that he spoke in the Jewish language, though the
ambassadors entreared him not to do so. It was, indeed, exceedingly
shocking that the holy language, which had been consecrated to the
mysteries of heavenly wisdom, was profaned and prostituted to wicked
blasphemies; and this must undoubtedly have been a sore temptation to
weak minds. But this should lead us to remark, that no enemies are more
destructive than those who speak the same language as ourselves. At the
present day we find this to be true in many who learn our language, that
is, our way of speaking, that they may be able to insinuate themselves
into the ears of weak and ignorant persons, so as to draw them aside
from the true faith. Thirty years ago, the Papists had a language which
was barbarous and totally at variance with the style of the Holy Spirit;
scarcely were they heard to utter a word which breathed of Christian
piety; but now they have succeeded in acquiring such skill as to know
how to cloak their impieties under the ordinary language of Scripture,
as if they were speaking in a Christian manner. Thus we see that it was
Satan who framed that style; for he is their teacher and instructor as
truly as he formerly was the teacher and instructor of Rabshakeh.

<span id="v.i-p102"></span>When the Prophet says that he *stood,* he
expresses the fierceness and insolence of the wicked man; for the very
attitude shews how haughtily he conducted himself. Formerly he *stood,*
but now he placed himself in such an attitude as to be better seen, and
strike greater terror into the Jews.

<span id="v.i-p103"></span>*Hear the words of the great king.* Having
already spoken of the greatness of his king, he repeats his commands. It
is customary with Satan to exaggerate in words the power of the enemies,
and to represent the dangers as greater than they really are, in order
to compel us to lose courage; for when our eyes are dazzled by the vain
splendor of earthly objects, we faint. We ought therefore to contrast
the power of God with all dangers; and if we have that power constantly
placed before our eyes, there is nothing that can do us injury. With
high disdain and great insolence the enemies will boast of their
greatness and strength, and, on the other hand, will meek at our
feebleness and our small numbers; but if the Lord is with us, we have
nothing to fear.

<span id="v.i-p104"></span><span id="v.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p105"></span>**14.** *Thus saith the king.* While he
claims for his master the name of *king,* he speaks of Hezekiah as a
private individual, without adding any title.

<span id="v.i-p106"></span>*Let not Hezekiah impose upon you.* He goes
on to utter impudent calumnies against him, and at the same time vomits
out his venom against God himself; for he calls it “imposture” and
“deception” for Hezekiah to rely on his favor, and to exhort his
subjects to cherish the same confidence. But with similar calumnies are
we now assailed by the Papists, who say that we bewitch the minds of men
and lead them to destruction, and who have no pretext for saying so,
except that we teach them that they ought to hope in the true God. But
we have no reason to wonder that the same things which were spoken
against the good king are likewise brought forward against us, since
they proceed from the same inventor and teacher of slander, Satan.

<span id="v.i-p107"></span>*For he will not be able to deliver you.*
Rabshakeh’s assertion, that they cannot be delivered by the hand of
Hezekiah, is indeed true, unless God assist; and Hezekiah did not lay
claim to this or rob God of the honor due to him, but, on the contrary,
testified that his own safety and that of the people were in the hand of
God. But the enemy found it necessary to employ some pretext, as wicked
men commonly do at the present day, when they slander our doctrine; for
they employ pretexts which give high plausibility to what they say, and
which actually deceive men, when they are not closely examined.

<span id="v.i-p108"></span><span id="v.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p109"></span>**15.** *And let not Hezekiah make you trust
in Jehovah.* He quotes the exhortation by which Hezekiah encouraged the
people, and speaks lightly of it as an idle and unfounded speech. Hence
we see plainly that wicked men, though they assert the power of God,
treat it with contempt; for although he does not openly deny that God
can assist, if he choose, yet, by sapping the foundations of their
faith, he does all that he can to reduce the power of God to nothing.
His intention is, to discourage the hearts of the people in such a
manner that they may be constrained, as if in despair, to submit and
receive laws from a victorious tyrant.

<span id="v.i-p110"></span>But in order to destroy their confidence in
the assistance of God, he employs also another expedient, by flattering
their hearts with the allurements of a more comfortable life; for there
is nothing to which we are more prone than to revolt from God, when we
are drawn away by the appearance of advantage. If the world flatter and
caress, the hope of eternal salvation quickly passes away; for our
senses are always fixed on the present state of things. Fortified by
this resource, Rabshakeh advises, “Do not depend on an uncertain hope,
but rather receive what is certain.” And this discourse is powerfully
fitted to persuade; for nothing is more agreeable to men than to have in
hand what they consider to be desirable; and they are so impatient of
delay that they prefer an immediate advantage to what is very distant.
Rabshakeh, therefore, reasons thus: “Hezekiah promises to you the
assistance of God, but we do not see it; he holds you in suspense about
what is uncertain; but my king proraises to you those things which are
at hand, and will assuredly bestow them.” This might appear to be a
strong argument; but we must observe the sophistry; for by the same
stratagem does Satan frequently attack us, and lead us aside from
confidence in God.

<span id="v.i-p111"></span>The Lord calls us to the hope of eternal
life; that hope is concealed, “for we hope (<span
id="v.i-p111.1"></span>[Ro 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span
id="v.i-p111.1"></span>) for what we do not see;” he promises that he
will be our deliverer, and yet allows us to languish and hint.; so that
it appears that our hope is vain, if we look at the present condition of
things. On this ground Satan attacks us. “Why dost thou hope in vain?
What is the fruit of thy faith? What dost thou expect beyond the world?”
In short, this is our daily lamentation. When Christ calls us to heaven,
Satan endeavors to keep us still on the earth; and therefore we must
adhere firmly to the promises, that, “hoping against hope,” (<span
id="v.i-p111.2"></span>[Ro 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018.md)<span
id="v.i-p111.2"></span>,) we may trust in God, and not suffer ourselves
to be drawn away from him by any allurements.

<span id="v.i-p112"></span><span id="v.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p113"></span>**16.** *Do not listen to Hezekiah.* While he
labors to turn away the hearts of the people from Hezekiah, he at the
same time invites them to pleasures, that they may forget God and not
expect anything from him. It is as if he had said, “Do not believe God,
but rather believe my king.” Thus Satan deals with us; for, darkening
the goodness of God by his clouds, and holding out to us the masks of
false hope, he secretly and indirectly creeps into the place of God, or
employs creatures to entangle us in his nets. He holds out pleasures,
and some kind of more agreeable life, with this boast, “God shews it to
you at a distance, I present it to you.”

<span id="v.i-p114"></span>Though Hezekiah is mentioned, yet the
comparison is actually made between God and the king of Assyria; for
Hezekiah, as he was the servant of God, made no false pretensions, and
did not boast of any vain confidence, but, relying on true and most
certain promises, faithfully exhorted the people to seek God; but
Rabshakeh adorned his king by robbing God, and yet was the servant of
Satan, to withdraw the people from confidence in God to all impiety.

<span id="v.i-p115"></span>*Make with me a blessing.*  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) “To make a blessing” is to conduct
themselves in a friendly manner; as if he had said, “Do not give any
hostile indication, or risk a battle. Surrender, make your submission to
my king.” Sennacherib does not merely demand that he shall be heard, but
likewise that the people shall swear allegiance to hint; and, in order
to allure them to him the more powerfully, he makes use of the word
*blessing* as a cloak to that bondage which was in itself hateful. He
bids them purchase a quiet life, and other conveniencies which they
formerly enjoyed, by that miserable revolt; that is, by forsaking
Hezekiah and going out to him; for to revolt from a pious king, whom God
had appointed, and who was a type of Christ, was more wretched and
miserable than anything else that could befall them, and could not take
place without denying God himself, who had set up in Judea that token of
heavenly favor.

<span id="v.i-p117"></span><span id="v.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p118"></span>**17.** *Till I come and take you away.* He
now adds another condition far harder than the former; for he declares
that peace cannot be made with Sennacherib in any other way than by the
people going into banishment. This was nothing else than to abandon the
worship of God and degenerate into superstition, and voluntarily to quit
the inheritance which God had given them. But because he addresses a
people whose distressed condition and extreme danger had struck them
with terror, he insolently commands them to save their lives.

<span id="v.i-p119"></span>*Into a land of corn and wine.* Here we see
more clearly that Rabshakeh’s speech is nothing else than an image of
the temptations by which Satan daily attacks our faith; for there is
nothing which Satan more constantly attempts  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) than to withdraw us from confidence in
God by the allurements and pleasures of this world; that we ought to
enjoy peace and quietness, and to purchase them at any price; and that
happiness consists in plentiful abundance of good things. But most of
all, he makes a wicked use of adversity to press upon us, and more
eagerly urge us to shake off the yoke of God. Gently indeed, and by
secret and unseen methods, he insinuates himself; but, after having once
inveigled and caught us in his net, so as to lead us to value present
advantages more highly than those which are future, he adds this
condition, that he shall hold us entirely bound and devoted to him;
which we certainly cannot avoid, when he holds us entangled by his
plausible hopes, and by the relish of present objects.

<span id="v.i-p121"></span>*Into a land like your own land.* Because the
word banishment was harsh and disagreeable, and it was not easy to part
with the delightfulness of their native country, in order to shew that
they sustain no loss by leaving it, he says, that the country into which
they are about to be conveyed is equally fertile and productive.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) Thus he draws a veil over their eyes,
that they might not think that they were losing anything. Yet he
cunningly passes by what ought above all other things to be valued by
them, the worship of God, the temple, the kingdom, the order of holy
government, and everything else that belonged to the heavenly
inheritance. Without these what happiness can there be? Let every one
therefore learn diligently to apply his mind to spiritual blessings;
“for to dwell in the house of God,” is justly pronounced to be a far
more valuable blessing than all the luxuries and prosperity of the
world. (<span id="v.i-p122.1"></span>[Ps.
84:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010)<span id="v.i-p122.1"></span>..md)
Thus shall we guard against being led away by the hope of present
objects and deprived of true happiness; for this is a dreadful
punishment by which the Lord takes vengeance on the unbelief of men, and
which all godly persons ought to dread, that they may not faint or give
way under any distresses and calamities.

<span id="v.i-p123"></span><span id="v.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p124"></span>**18.** *Lest perhaps Hezekiah deceive you.*
This is another argument different from the former, by which he
endeavors to withdraw the people from Hezekiah and from confidence in
God. Formerly he boasted that he was God’s servant, and that God had
sent him to destroy Judea, and on that ground he assured himself of
certain victory; but now he openly insults God himself. At the first
onset wicked men do not usually betray their scorn and impiety, but at
length the Lord makes known their dispositions, and constrains them to
discover the venom of their own heart. Now therefore the wicked
Rabshakeh bursts forth with greater violence, and boasts that he will
gain the victory over God himself.

<span id="v.i-p125"></span>*Have any of the gods of the nations rescued
their land?* He speaks in the person of his master, that he had obtained
great victories over many and powerful nations. They had their “gods,”
by whose protection they thought that they were defended; and therefore
Sennacherib thought that he had vanquished the “gods” themselves,
because he had vanquished the nations which relied on their aid. The
consequence is, that he breaks out into such insolence as not to
hesitate to compare himself to the living God, and is impelled by such
rage that he brings his own strength into conflict with the power of
God.

<span id="v.i-p126"></span>Thus, although at first wicked men conceal
their contempt of God, yet they afterwards shew that they claim
everything for themselves, and that they are “without God.”  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) (<span id="v.i-p127.2"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="v.i-p127.2"></span>..md) In
words, indeed, they pretend to ascribe victories to their idols; but
afterwards, as Habakkuk says, they

<span id="v.i-p128"></span>“sacrifice to their net, and offer incense to
their drag.”  
(<span id="v.i-p128.2"></span>[Hab
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="v.i-p128.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.i-p129"></span>We see hypocrites do this also at the present
day; for they run to do honor to their idols after having obtained a
victory, but immediately afterwards boast of their plans, and wisdom,
and courage, and military forces; which plainly shews that they ascribe
to themselves and not to their idols all that has happened.

<span id="v.i-p130"></span>By such insolent boasting, therefore, he
shewed that it was a lie, when he said that he acknowledged God to be
the author of his victories. Besides, it was impossible that these words
should not give dreadful agony to the heart of the good king, when he
was informed that the promises of God were condemned as false, when that
wicked man openly insuited God and linked their cause with idols. And
these things are related, in order that we may behold the patience of
the good king, and may resolve to imitate him when anything of the same
kind shall take place.

<span id="v.i-p131"></span>*Have they delivered?* When he sets himself
in opposition to all the gods, and declares that he is more powerful
than they are, this is so much at variance with common sense, that it is
abhorred even by wicked men themselves; yet if the Lord press hard upon
them, if he put them to the torture, he speedily extorts from them such
language. When they make a premeditated speech, they pretend that they
are worshippers of God, but afterwards God constrains them to bring out
and acknowledge what was lurking within. Let us therefore learn, that
superstition is always accompanied by pride; so that they who do not
know God, do not scruple to rise up against everything that is called
God; and let us not be astonished at the rebellion and insolence of
wicked men, for nothing but the pure knowledge of God can teach us
humility. And yet that wicked man cannot be excused as if he justly
reproached idols with their weakness and uselessness; for we ought to
observe his sentiments and the purpose of his heart, since he does not
ridicule the superstition and vain confidence of the nations, but in the
idols themselves he pours contempt on the power of God. In like manner,
when Dionysius the tyrant ridiculed his gods, he fought with God and
defied him to a contest; for he attacked, in opposition to his
conscience, such a deity as his mind could comprehend. The same
observation might be made on all other infidels who treated with scorn
false religions which they supposed to be from God.

<span id="v.i-p132"></span>Here we ought also to observe another kind of
blasphemy, by which the majesty of God is wickedly dishonored; which is,
that Rabshakeh confounds God with idols, and represents him to be one of
the multitude. For what blasphemy is it to confound the immortal God and
creator of all things with what is most detestable, to confound truth
with falsehood, glory with shame, heaven with earth?

<span id="v.i-p133"></span>“The Lord is great,” says David, “and worthy
of the highest praise; he is to be feared above all gods. For all the
gods of the nations are nothing; but the Lord made the heavens. Majesty
and honor are before him; strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.” —  
(<span id="v.i-p133.2"></span>[Ps
96:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)<span id="v.i-p133.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.i-p134"></span><span id="v.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p135"></span>**19.** *Where are the gods of Hamath and
Arpad?* It is supposed that *Hamath* was Antioch in Syria, that *Arpad*
was that city from which colonies were brought to Damascus, and that
*Sepharvaim* was a city situated in the country of Damascus. If this be
true, Rabshakeh mentions the ancient names of cities, from which many
nations had formerly come, and which afterwards lost not only their
celebrity, but likewise their distinctive names, and aims at producing
in them greater alarm, by reminding them of so great revolutions.
However that may be, he mentions chiefly the neighboring cities, the
destruction of which might affect them more deeply on account of their
being better known to the Jews. And I have no doubt that these places
belonged to Syria and Israel; as if he had said, “Look at these two
kingdoms subdued, which were presided over by their gods as their
guardians. Will your God resist me?”

<span id="v.i-p136"></span><span id="v.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p137"></span>**20.** *That Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem
out of my hand?*  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) The particle
<span id="v.i-p138.2"></span>כי (*ki*) is taken by commentators in both
places interrogatively, “Did the gods of the nations deliver? And will
your God deliver?” But in order to make the meaning flow more smoothly,
I have preferred to render the second clause, “that your God should
deliver;” for the repetition of the same word marks a resemblance. Yet
the words appear also to contain irony; as if he had said in mockery,
“Yes; as the gods of the nations delivered their worshippers, so will
your God assist you.”

<span id="v.i-p139"></span>This insolence of ungodly men arises from
their not understanding that God punishes the sins of men when they
suffer any adversity. And first they go wrong in this respect that they
institute a wicked and absurd comparison, “I have conquered that nation,
and therefore I am better or stronger.” They do not perceive that they
were appointed to be the executioners of God’s anger for the punishment
of iniquities; for, although they say that they have received something
from God, they do it hypocritically, and do not consider his will or his
justice. They afterwards rise higher, for they venture to make a
comparison between them and God himself, “I have conquered those over
whom God presided, and therefore I have conquered God himself.”

<span id="v.i-p140"></span>And here we see painted in a lively manner
what was formerly expressed, —

<span id="v.i-p141"></span>“Ah! Assyria, the rod of my indignation; but
he thought not so.” (<span id="v.i-p141.1"></span>[Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005)<span id="v.i-p141.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.i-p142"></span>In that passage God forewarned believers,
that although Sennacherib, in blind madness, lifted himself up and
attempted to overthrow all divine power, still they should continue to
believe this doctrine, that he could do nothing more than what he was
permitted by heaven to do. It is our duty to acknowledge that God
inflicts punishment by the hand of wicked men, who may be regarded as
the instruments of God’s anger; and therefore we ought to turn away our
eyes from them, that we may look directly at God, by whom we are justly
punished. If wicked men are more powerful, let us not think that the arm
of God is broken, but let us consider that we do not deserve his
assistance; for he arms enemies for our destruction, supplies them with
vigor and with armies, drives them backwards and forwards whenever he
thinks proper, and gives us up into their hands when we have turned away
from him.

<span id="v.i-p143"></span>Accordingly, when the Turk now rises up
haughtily against us, because he has already vanquished so great a
multitude of Christians, we need not be alarmed on that account, as if
the power of God were diminished, and as if he had not strength to
deliver us. But we ought to consider in how many ways the inhabitants of
Greece and of Asia provoked his anger, by the prevalence of every kind
of base and shocking licentiousness in those countries, and by the
dreadful superstitions and wickedness which abounded. On this account
very severe chastisement was needed for restraining the crimes of those
who made a false profession of the name of God. Hence came the
prosperity of the Turk, and hence was it followed by a shockingly
ruinous condition throughout the whole of the east. Yet we see him
insolently raising his crest, laughing at our religion, and applauding
his own in a strange manner; but still more does he applaud himself, and
“sacrifice to his net,” (<span id="v.i-p143.1"></span>[Hab
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="v.i-p143.1"></span>,.md) as
we have already said of other infidels.

<span id="v.i-p144"></span>We ought, therefore, to direct our minds
towards the judgments of God, that we may not think that the Turk
acquired such extensive dominion by his own strength. But the Lord
allowed him greater freedom, for the purpose of punishing the
ungodliness and wickedness of men, and will at length restrain his
insolence at the proper time. Now, although prosperity is a token of the
blessing of God, yet we must not begin with it if we wish to form right
views of God himself, as Mahometans and Papists infer from the victories
which they have gained, that God is in some respects subject to their
control. But when we have known the true God, blessings are added in the
proper order to testify his grace and power.

<span id="v.i-p145"></span>Yet we ought always to beware of making the
smallest claim for ourselves, for as soon as foolish confidence has
gained admission, we shall immediately be seized with such fury as to
believe that even God is not equal to us. At first, even wicked men will
be shocked at anything so grossly irreligious; but when we are maddened
by such diabolical pride as to rob God and adorn ourselves with the
spoils, we easily fall into the practice of open insult. Sennacherib
still retained some form of piety, for we shall afterwards read (<span
id="v.i-p145.1"></span>[Isa 37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038.md)<span
id="v.i-p145.1"></span>) that “he was slain in the temple of his god,
while he was worshipping there;” and he undoubtedly wished that God
would be gracious to him; but, as in this passage he treads under his
feet the Creator of heaven and earth along with the gods of the nations,
so he would not have hesitated, when an opportunity occurred, to act in
the same manner towards his own idol.

<span id="v.i-p146"></span><span id="v.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p147"></span>**21.** *And they were silent.* This is added
in order that we may more fully understand how deep was the affliction
which prevailed throughout the whole of Judea; for the good king, having
hardly any strength or means of defense, is therefore struck dumb even
when an enemy insults him. Ambassadors were sent to soothe the enemy;
when they are unsuccessful they are enjoined to be silent, that they
might not provoke that savage beast, which already was too much excited,
to cruelty. Yet it is uncertain whether these words relate to the
ambassador or to the people, against whom Rabshakeh threw out these
reproaches; and indeed it is probable, that it rather refers to those
who guarded the walls, who, though they were sharply piqued by the
taunts of the enemy, yet were not provoked to quarrels or disturbance,
because they obeyed the kings command. Hence, also, we infer that it
arose from the peculiar kindness of God, that they were so much disposed
to yield obedience when matters were desperate.

<span id="v.i-p148"></span>It will perhaps be objected that they ought
not to have been silent when such blasphemies were uttered against God;
for we ought not to conceal our sentiments when wicked men mock, and
jeer, and reproach God, even though our life should be put in danger. We
ought, at least, to testify that we cannot patiently endure that his
honor and glory should be attacked. But it is not said that they were
silent because they expressed their assent, or cared nothing about the
reproaches which were cast on God, and which, though not a word was
uttered by them, gave deep pain to the ambassadors, and prompted them to
the attitudes and tokens of grief; for afterwards, such is the
bitterness of their sorrow that they tear their garments, and by this
token they shew that they hold such blasphemies in abhorrence and
detestation. But as it would have been of no avail for the ambassadors
to debate with Rabshakeh, they returned peaceably and without any
tumult; and the people, because it was useless to make any disturbance,
reckoned it enough to meet the wicked man’s impertinence by silent
groans. And it is no despicable courage, even when we have it not in our
power to utter a syllable, still not to shrink or flinch, but to remain
quietly in our place.

<span id="v.i-p149"></span>Hence we are also reminded, that we ought not
always to contend with wicked men when they reproach and tear in pieces
the name of God; for amidst bitter strife and confused noise the truth
will not be heard. And yet we must not on that account give way to
cowardice, by thinking that we ought to be excused for being silent,
whenever wicked men rise up against God; for our silence will have no
excuse if we do not in some way testify that it is highly displeasing to
us, and if we do not, as far as lies in our power, declare that nothing
is more distressing to us than that the name of God should be
dishonored. We must, therefore, give expression to our zeal, that wicked
men may not think that we have no regard for the honor of God, and that
we are not moved when they blaspheme it.

<span id="v.i-p150"></span><span id="v.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p151"></span>**22.** *Then came Eliakim.* We now see that
Eliakim and the other ambassadors were not silent as if they either
approved of the impiety of Rabshakeh, or through dread of danger
connived at such blasphemies; for they tear their garments, and in that
manner give visible display how highly they are offended at those wicked
slanders. I except *Shebna,* who was destitute of piety, and was only
driven by shame to assume the dress of mourning along with others as a
matter of form. It was customary among the Jews and other eastern
nations, when they viewed anything with strong abhorrence, to tear their
garments; for those nations, having much greater warmth of temperament
than we have who inhabit cold countries, display greater vehemence in
gesture, deportment, dress, and other outward signs. Here it ought also
to be observed, that they who took no notice of the insults offered to
them as private individuals, whenever they hear reproaches uttered
against God, “tear their garments;” for they who are ready to take
offense at an insult offered to them in their private, capacity, where
patience was needed, and who are unmoved when they learn that the name
of God is dishonored, give evidence that they have no zeal or piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc15004.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="v.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p54"></span> “The Hebrew doctors will have it that this
Rabshakeh was an apostate Jew, and Procopius is of the same opinion,
which is not altogether improbable, both because he could speak readily
in the Hebrew tongue, and when he blasphemed the Divine Majesty, the
king and nobles rent their clothes, which was not usual unless he that
uttered such blasphemous words was an Israelite. Some think his name
imports that he was the principal cupbearer to the king of Assyria, who
assumed to himself the title of the Great King, because of his great
conquests and large dominions.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc15004.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="v.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p65"></span> <span id="v.i-p65.1"></span>Il a de belles
paroles.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc15004.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="v.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p66"></span> “<span id="v.i-p66.1"></span>Assavoir, sur
belles paroles.” “Namely, on fine speeches.”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc15004.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="v.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p74"></span> “<span id="v.i-p74.1"></span>A leur advis.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc15004.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="v.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p75"></span> “<span id="v.i-p75.1"></span>Pource que nous
avons ose abolir les traditions et ceremonies qui estoyent en usage de
long temps.” “Because we ventured to abolish the traditions and
ceremonies which had been long used.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc15004.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="v.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p78"></span> “Now therefore give pledges *or* *hostages.”*
— Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc15004.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="v.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p79"></span> “He seems to challenge him to come out and
fight with his master, and if he would give security to make that use of
them, he would furnish him with two thousand horses, provided he was
able to find so many men to set upon them, which are words of the
highest contempt and undervaluing of his power; or the meaning may he,
he would lay a wager with him he could not find men to sit on so many
horses, for few were good horsemen in Judea, where horses were scarce.”
— *White.  
*“He taunts Hezekiah on account of the want of cavalry. These words do
not refer to the small number of men, but to the very small number of
Jews who were skilled in horsemanship; for after Jotham the kings of
Judea did not maintain any cavalry, and hence we have already seen
(<span id="v.i-p79.2"></span>[Isa.
30:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#000.md), [Isa.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#000)<span id="v.i-p79.2"></span>..md)
that a part of the Jews sought cavalry from the Egyptians.” —
*Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc15004.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="v.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p82"></span> “How then wilt thou turn away?” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc15004.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="v.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p89"></span> Our author refers to the charges contained in
the 7th verse of this chapter. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc15004.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="v.i-p89.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p90"></span> “<span id="v.i-p90.1"></span>Les idols et
l’idolatrie.” “Idols and idolatry.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc15004.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="v.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p95"></span> *“In Aramean.* This request implies an
apprehension of the bad effect of his address upon the multitude.
*Aramean* corresponds very nearly to *Syrian* in latitude of meaning;
but the language meant is not what we call *Syriac,* but an older form,
which was probably current, as the French is now, at the courts and
among the educated classes of an extensive region. Jewish is *Hebrew,*
so called by the Jews, as the language of the whole British empire is
called *English,* or as German is sometimes called *Saxon.”* —
*Alexander.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc15004.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="v.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p96"></span> “I suppose Eliakim perceived the people to be
frightened with big words, and therefore entreated him in the name of
the other commissioners sent to treat with him, to speak no longer in
the *Jews’* language, but in his own; for he was not sent to treat with
the people, but with them who understood the *Syrian* tongue very well.”
— *White.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc15004.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="v.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p97"></span> “<span id="v.i-p97.1"></span>Mais c’estoit
temps perdu.” “But it was time thrown away.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc15004.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="v.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p116"></span> “Make \[an agreement\] with me \[by\] a
present, or seek my favor by a present. — Hebrews Make with me a
blessing. — Eng. Ver. <span id="v.i-p116.1"></span>εἰ βούλεσθε
σὐλογηθὢναι “if you wish to be blessed.” — *Sept.* “Come out to me for
the sake of peace, and bless me, and bring me a peace-offering.” —
*Jarchi.* <span id="v.i-p116.2"></span>ברכה *(berachah,) blessing* is
here figuratively used for *peace;* for since blessings commonly ran in
this form, *Peace to thee, to you,* it appears that *peace* was called
*blessing.* The Chaldee interpreter has therefore rendered it correctly,
— <span id="v.i-p116.3"></span>עבדו עמי שלמא, *(guabdu gnimmi shalma,)
make peace with me.”* — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc15004.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="v.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p120"></span> “<span id="v.i-p120.1"></span>Car tonte son
etude est.” “For his whole study is.’”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc15004.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="v.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p122"></span> “It has been disputed what particular land
is here meant, some saying Mesopotamia, to which others object that it
was not a winegrowing country. But, as Knobel observes, there its no
need of supposing that the Assyrian’s description was exactly true he
may indeed have intended merely to promise them in general country as
abundant as their own.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc15004.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="v.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p127"></span> “<span id="v.i-p127.1"></span>Et n’ont que
faire de luy“ “And have nothing to do with him.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc15004.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="v.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p138"></span> *“And* (when or where was it) *that they
delivered Samaria out of my hand?* <span id="v.i-p138.1"></span>כי
*(ki)* is not an interrogative pronoun, (Who have delivered?) nor an
interrogative particle, (Have they delivered?) but a connective
particle, dependent upon something not expressed.” — *Alexander.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](cc15005.md)
