[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15004)  [Next](cc15006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 37

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
37:1-38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah
heard *it,* that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Factum est autem ut, hoc audito, rex
Ezechias scinderet vestimenta sua, et sacco opertus veniret in domum
Iehovae.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he sent Eliakim, who *was* over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered
with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Simul misit Eliacim praefectum palatii;
et Sobnam cancellarium, et seniores sacerdotes, saccis opertos, ad
Isaiam filium Amoz, prophetam.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And they said unto him, Thus saith
Hezekiah, This day *is* a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of
blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and *there is* not
strength to bring forth.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Qui dixerunt illi: Sic dicit Ezechias:
Dies angustiae et increpationis et blasphemiae dies hic, quia filii
venerunt ad partum, neque est vis pariendi.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** It may be the LORD thy God will hear
the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to
reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the LORD thy
God hath heard: wherefore lift up *thy* prayer for the remnant *that is*
left.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Si forte audiet Iehova Deus tuus verba
Rapsacae, quem misit rex Assur dominns ejus, ad maledicendum Deo
viventi, et arguendum ver. bis, quae audivit Iehova Deus tuus. Tu ergo
levabis orationem pro reitquiis quae adhuc extant.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** So the servants of king Hezekiah came
to Isaiah.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Venerunt servi regis Ezechiae ad
Isaiam.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall
ye say unto your master, Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words
that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have
blasphemed me.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit illis Isaias: Sic dicetis
domino vestro: Sic dicit Iehova, Ne timeas a verbis quae audiisti quae
mihi exprobrarunt servi regis Asstir.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Behold, I will send a blast upon him,
and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I will cause
him to fall by the sword in his own land.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Ecce apponam illi ventum; audiet enim
rumorem, et revertetur in terrain suam; et faciam ut cadat gladio in
terra sua.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** So Rabshakeh returned, and found the
king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was
departed from Lachish.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Reversus autem Rapsaces invenit regem
Assur oppugnantem Lobnam. Audivit enim profectum a Lachis.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he heard say concerning Tirhakah
king of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thee. And when he
heard *it,* he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Audiens autem a Thirhaka rege
Æthiopiae, egressus est, ut pugnet contra to; ex quo audivit, misit
nuntios ad Ezechiam, dicens:

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>**10.** Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king
of Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Sic dicetis Ezechiae regi Iuda: Non
to decipiat Deus tuus, in quo tu confidis, dicens: Non tradetur
Ierusalem in manum regis Assur.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Behold, thou hast heard what the
kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and
shalt thou be delivered?

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ecce tu audiisti quae fecerunt reges
Assur universis terris, quomodo vastaverunt eas; et tu liberaberis?

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>**12.** Have the gods of the nations
delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, *as* Gozan, and Haran,
and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which *were* in Telassar?

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**12.** An liberaverunt dii gentium, quos
perdiderunt patres mei, Gozam, et Harum, Rezeph, et filios Edom, qui
fuerunt in Bithlassar?

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span>**13.** Where *is* the king of Hamath, and
the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and
Ivah?

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ubi rex Amath, rex Arpad, rex
civitatis Sepharvaiim, Hena et Ira?

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Hezekiah received the letter from
the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the
house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Accepit Ezechias literas e manu
nuntiorum, et legit eas, et ascendit in domurn Iehovae, et expandit eas
coram Iehova.

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD,
saying,

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Tum oravit Ezechias ad Deum, dicens:

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>**16.** O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, that
dwellest *between* the cherubims, thou *art* the God, *even* thou alone,
of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Iehova exercituum, Deus Israel, qui
habitas inter cherubin: tu ipse Deus solus super omnia regna terrae; tu
fecisti ccelos et terrain.

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>**17.** Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear;
open thine eyes, O LORD, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib,
which hath sent to reproach the living God.

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Inclina Iehova aurem tuam, et audi;
aperi Iehova oculos tuos et vide; et audi cuneta verba Sennacherib, qui
misit ad exprobrandum Deo vivo.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>**18.** Of a truth, LORD, the kings of
Assyria have laid waste all the nations, and their countries,

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Sane Iehova, perdiderunt reges Assur
cunctas terras terrain, inquam, eorum,

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>**19.** And have cast their gods into the
fire: for they *were* no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and
stone: therefore they have destroyed them.

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Posueruntque deos earum in ignem,
quoniam non sunt dii, sed opus manuno hominis, lignum, et lapis; ideo
perdiderunt cos.

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span>**20.** Now therefore, O LORD our God, save
us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou
*art* the LORD, *even* thou only.

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et nunc Iehova Dens noster, serra nos
e mann ejus; ut cognoscant omnia regna terrae quod tu Iehova es solus.

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span>**21.** Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast
prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Tunc misit Isaias filius Amoz ad
Ezechiam, dicens: Sic dicit Iehova Deus Israel; Quoniam me precatus es
de Sennacherib rege Assur;

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span>**22.** This *is* the word which the LORD
hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath
despised thee, *and* laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>**22.** Hoc est verbum quod loquutus est
Iehova de eo: Sprevit to, subsannavit to, virgo filia Sion; movit post
to caput filia Ierusaleto.

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span>**23.** Whom hast thou reproached and
blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted *thy* voice, and lifted
up thine eyes on high? *even* against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span>**23.** Quem probris affecisti? et quem
contumeliose aggressus es? Super quem exaltasti vocem tuam, et in
sublime extulisti oculos tuos? nempe, super sanctum Israelis.

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span>**24.** By thy servants hast thou reproached
the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots am I come up to
the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut
down the tall cedars thereof, *and* the choice fir-trees thereof: and I
will enter into the height of his border, *and* the forest of his
Carmel.

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span>**24.** In manu servorum tuorum exprobrasti
Domino ac dixisti: Ego in multitudine curruum meorum ascendam in excelsa
montium, ad latera Libani, succidam summa cedrorum ejus, electas ejus
abietes; tum veniam ad summum extremitatis, sed sylvam ejus campestrem,
*(vel, planitiei ejus.)*

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>**25.** I have digged, and drunk water; and
with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged
places.

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span>**25.** Fodiam, et bibam aquas; exsiccabo
planta pedum meorum cunctos lacus obsidionis.

<span id="vi.i-p52"></span>**26.** Hast thou not heard long ago, *how I*
have done it; *and* of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I
brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities
*into* ruinous heaps.

<span id="vi.i-p53"></span>**26.** Annon audiisti quod a longinquo
tempore fecerim eam; a diebus antiquis formaverim ipsam? Nunc vero
adducerem earn, ut sit in desolationem, in acervos ruinarum, quemadmodum
urbes munitas.

<span id="vi.i-p54"></span>**27.** Therefore their inhabitants *were* of
small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were *as* the grass
of the field, and *as* the green herb; *as* the grass on the housetops,
and *as corn* blasted before it be grown up.

<span id="vi.i-p55"></span>**27.** Nam incolae earurn manu fuerunt
mutilati, territi et confusi sunt; facti sunt tanquam gramen agri, olus
viride, herba tectorum, quae ante maturitatem exarescit.

<span id="vi.i-p56"></span>**28.** But I know thy abode, and thy going
out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

<span id="vi.i-p57"></span>**28.** Sessionem tuam, exitum tuum, et
introitum tuam novi, et iracundiam tuam contra me.

<span id="vi.i-p58"></span>**29.** Because thy rage against me, and thy
tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy
nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by
which thou camest.

<span id="vi.i-p59"></span>**29.** Quoniam iratus es contra me; ideo
tumultus tuns ascendit in auras mens. Itaque ponam hamum *(vel,
circulum)* meum in narem tuam, et framum meum in labia tua; et reducam
to per viam ubi venisti.

<span id="vi.i-p60"></span>**30.** And this *shall be* a sign unto thee,
Ye shall eat *this* year such as groweth of itself; and the second year
that which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and
reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.

<span id="vi.i-p61"></span>**30.** Hoc autem erit tibi signum: Comedes
hoc anno quae sponte nascuntur, secundo etiam sponte provenientia, in
tertio vero anno seminabiris et metetis, et plantabitis vineas, et
comedetis fructum earurn.

<span id="vi.i-p62"></span>**31.** And the remnant that is escaped of
the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit
upward:

<span id="vi.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et adjiciet quod servatum erit e domo
Iuda, quodque residuum erit, radicem jacere deorsum, et fructum proferre
seorsum.

<span id="vi.i-p64"></span>**32.** For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of
hosts shall do this.

<span id="vi.i-p65"></span>**32.** Nam e Ierusalem egredientur
reliquiae, et quod serratum erit e monte Zion. Zelus Iehovae exercituum
hoc faciet.

<span id="vi.i-p66"></span>**33.** Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor
shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank
against it.

<span id="vi.i-p67"></span>**33.** Propterea sic dicit Iehova de rage
Assur: non ingredietur urbem hanc, neque projiciet illuc sagittam, et
non occupabit eam clypeo munitus, neque fundet contra earn ballstam.

<span id="vi.i-p68"></span>**34.** By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the LORD.

<span id="vi.i-p69"></span>**34.** Per viam qua venit revertetur, neque
ingredietur urbem hanc dicit Iehova.

<span id="vi.i-p70"></span>**35.** For I will defend this city to save
it for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.

<span id="vi.i-p71"></span>**35.** Et protector ero super hanc urbem, ut
servem eam, propter me et propter David servum meum.

<span id="vi.i-p72"></span>**36.** Then the angel of the LORD went
forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore
and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold,
they *were* all dead corpses.

<span id="vi.i-p73"></span>**36.** Et egressus angelus Iehovae percussit
in castris Assyriorum centum octaginta quinque millia; et cum mane
surrectum esset, ecce omnes cadavera mortuorum.

<span id="vi.i-p74"></span>**37.** So Sennacherib king of Assyria
departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.

<span id="vi.i-p75"></span>**37.** Tum profectus abiit, et reversus est
Sennacherib rex Assur, et habitavit in Nineve.

<span id="vi.i-p76"></span>**38.** And it came to pass, as he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and
Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the
land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="vi.i-p77"></span>**38.** Et accidit quum adoraret in templo
Nisroch deum suum *(vel, dei sui,)* Adrammelech et Sarrezer filii ejus
percusscrunt eum gladio, fugeruntque in terram Armeniae, et regnavit
Essaradon filius ejus pro eo.

<span id="vi.i-p78"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p79"></span><span id="vi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p80"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass.* The Prophet
declares that the only hope of safety that was left to the pious king
was to bring his complaints before God as a righteous judge; as it is
said in the Psalm, that

<span id="vi.i-p81"></span>“in the same manner as servants or handmaids,
when they are injured, look to the protection of their master or
mistress, so the eyes of believers are fixed on the assistance of God.”
—  
(<span id="vi.i-p81.2"></span>[Ps
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p81.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p82"></span>Thus, when Jerusalem appears to be completely
ruined, Hezekiah, being bereft of earthly assistance, betakes himself to
the protection of God, and thus acknowledges that there is no other
remedy for heavy distresses. Hence also the grace of God shone more
brightly, so that it was evidently miraculous, when the pious king was
rescued from the jaws of that lion. We ought, therefore, to observe this
circumstance, that we may better understand the great excellence of the
work of God. Here we are also taught what we ought to do in the most
desperate circumstances, not to be indolent or sluggish in supplicating
the assistance of God, who himself invites us to come to him. We must
not tremble or despair, but, on the contrary, ought to be stimulated by
the necessity which presses upon us to seek his aid; as we see what
Hezekiah did, who immediately betook himself to the temple in the same
manner as to a place of safety, that he and all his people might take
refuge under the shadow of God.

<span id="vi.i-p83"></span>*That King Hezekiah rent his clothes.* He
likewise adds the outward expressions of repentance, the “rending of the
clothes and wearing sackcloth,” sprinkling of ashes, and other things of
the same kind; for these were the ordinary signs of repentance, when,
under the weight of any calamity by which they were afflicted, they
confessed their guilt before God and implored pardon from him. Wonderful
is the modesty of the holy king, who, after having performed so many
illustrious works, and after having been adorned by the excellence of so
many virtues, does not hesitate to prostrate himself humbly before God;
and, on the other hand, wonderful is his courage and the steadfastness
of his faith, in not being hindered by the weight of so heavy a
temptation from freely seeking God by whom he was so severely smitten.
Scarcely do we find one man in a hundred who does not murmur if God
treats him with any degree of severity, who does not bring forward his
good deeds as a ground of complaint, and remonstrate that he has been
unjustly rewarded. Other men, when God does not comply with their
wishes, complain that their worship of God has served no good purpose.

<span id="vi.i-p84"></span>We perceive nothing of this kind in Hezekiah,
who, though he is conscious of possessing uncommon piety, does not
shrink from a confession of guilt, and therefore if we desire to turn
away God’s anger, and to experience his favor in adversity, we must
testify our repentance and sincerely acknowledge our guilt; for
adversity does not fall out to us by chance, but is the method by which
God arouses us to repentance. True, indeed, sackcloth and ashes will be
of little avail, if they be not preceded by the inward feelings of the
heart; for we know that hypocrites are abundantly liberal in the use of
ceremonies; but as we have formerly said, the Holy Spirit justly
commends those exercises, when they are directed to their proper object.
And indeed it was a proof of uncommon piety and modesty, that the pious
king and the whole nation excited themselves in this manner to fear God,
and that he made a voluntary acknowledgment of guilt in a form attended
by wretched filthiness; for we know how unwilling kings are to let
themselves down from their rank.

<span id="vi.i-p85"></span><span id="vi.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p86"></span>**2.** *And he sent Eliakim.* This message
was not intended merely to invite Isaiah to join with him in
lamentation, but to request some consolation from his doctrine. And
indeed to no purpose shall prayers be poured into the air, if they do
not rest on the word of God. Thus we see that unbelievers are
exceedingly noisy in their prayers, and yet they flee from God by
despising or disregarding his promises. It was therefore a proof of
sincere piety in Hezekiah, that, while he was earnestly employed in
prayer, he at the same time added a confirmation of his hope, that he
might not yield to temptation.

<span id="vi.i-p87"></span>*To Isaiah, the son of Amos the Prophet.* He
follows the method appointed by God, when he wishes to hear God speaking
by the mouth of “the Prophet.” (<span id="vi.i-p87.1"></span>[De
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.i-p87.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p87.2"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p87.2"></span>..md)
Though he relies on God alone, he does not reject the testimony of a
mortal man; and therefore not without reason does he expressly add the
designation *Prophet;* for he sends to Isaiah, that he may be confirmed
by some new prediction, and names him, not as a private individual, but
as the servant of God, whose duty it was to soothe the pious king by
some consolation.

<span id="vi.i-p88"></span>There are therefore two remedies that deserve
our attention, by which we are soothed in affliction. First, we ought to
call on God to deliver us; and, secondly, we ought to consult the
prophets, at least, if we can obtain them, that they may bring us some
comfort out of the word of God; for it is their duty to encourage and
comfort the afflicted by promises, and if they fail to do so, still
abundant consolation is communicated to us from the word. And we ought
to consult the prophets, who were appointed, not only for their own age,
but also for posterity and for every age; for although the men are dead,
yet their books survive; their doctrine lives and shall never die. We
shall never, therefore, be destitute of true remedies, if we do not
reject them; but, in a word, we ought always to consult God.

<span id="vi.i-p89"></span>It may be asked, “Was not Hezekiah abundantly
supplied and fortified by the promises of God? Was it not a sign of
distrust to seek new promises from the Prophet?” I reply, it ought not
to be ascribed to unbelief or distrust, that he seeks a new promise;
for, being conscious of his weakness, he does not scruple to ask new
confirmations. The flesh always excites us to distrust, and therefore we
ought not to despise additional aid; on the contrary, we ought always to
seek every kind of assistance, by which we may resist various
temptations; for on all sides Satan attacks and besieges us in such a
manner that, if we are not strongly fortified, we shall scarcely be able
to escape his snares and devices till the end. Although, therefore, we
have been taught by the word of God that he will assist us in adversity,
yet when we are engaged in any arduous contest, it is proper that we
should again and again ask at the mouth of the Lord, and seek new
confirmations for the purpose of strengthening our faith. There are
indeed no prophecies of the same kind that are given to us in the
present day; but we ought to apply to our use the general prophecies,
which were also written for our benefit. (<span
id="vi.i-p89.1"></span>[Ro 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.i-p89.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p90"></span>As to the reason why Hezekiah sent
ambassadors, and did not himself go to Isaiah, it was obviously because
he was praying in the Temple; for the circumstance, that all the elders
and counsellors were clothed with sackcloth, shews clearly that the
mourning was general; and it is probable that prayers were publicly
offered by the command of the king. Yet it ought to be observed, that
the Prophet did not remain at home for his own ease or pleasure, but by
his absence God intended to try the faith of the pious king.

<span id="vi.i-p91"></span><span id="vi.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p92"></span>**4.** *If perhaps Jehovah thy God will
hear.* Hezekiah appears to doubt whether, or not the Lord is willing to
hear him; for the particle <span id="vi.i-p92.1"></span>אולי *(ulai)* is
translated *perhaps,* and this is the meaning which it frequently bears
in Scripture. But it ought to be observed that believers, even though
they know with certainty that the Lord will assist them, yet, in
consequence of being perplexed by the difficulty of the case, often
speak in this manner. Hezekiah had reasons for hesitating, if we look at
the matter itself; but when he turns his eyes to the word, he is made
certain as to the will of God, so that he ceases to tremble. But as it
is impossible that the flesh should not retard believers by making them
walk in a halting and staggering manner,  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) they sometimes accommodate their language
to the present appearances of things.

<span id="vi.i-p94"></span>It may also be observed, in other passages of
Scripture, that the saints, even while speaking of what was certain,
spoke in this manner; for Peter, in exhorting Simon, says,

<span id="vi.i-p95"></span>“*If* *perhaps* this thought of thy heart may
be forgiven thee.”  
(<span id="vi.i-p95.2"></span>[Ac
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p95.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p96"></span>He does not advise Simon to tremble and
hesitate in prayer; for stroh a supplication would have been vain; but
he points out the heinousness of the offense; that he may strike his
mind more forcibly, and may at length constrain him to rouse himself
that he may approach God with true repentance. This word *perhaps,*
therefore, does not imply doubt, but is equivalent to an expression
which we commonly use, *if it be possible,* when we venture to hope and
promise to ourselves something. And Hezekiah did not speak as if God
were deaf to the words of the ungodly, or as if anything escaped his
notice; but because it was a fixed principle in his heart that “God is
near to all that truly call upon him,” (<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>[Ps
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p96.1"></span>,.md)
he determines to strive against despondency, and arms himself by prayer;
and because he does not expect to gain the conquest without difficulty,
he says, *If perhaps.*  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) Besides, he
mentions two kinds of hearing, which in some measure removes the
difficulty.

<span id="vi.i-p98"></span>*If perhaps Jehovah, thy God shall hear the
words which Jehovah thy God hath heard.* At first sight there is some
apparent contradiction in these words; but the manner of speaking is
highly appropriate, because Hezekiah was assuredly and beyond all
controversy convinced that nothing is hidden from God; only he argues
with himself on this point, whether or not, God determines to call in
question the blasphemy of this filthy dog; because frequently he delays
and conceals vengeance for a time, and thus seems to shut his eyes and
overlook it. In short, taking for granted that

<span id="vi.i-p99"></span>“all things are open and manifest to God,”
(<span id="vi.i-p99.1"></span>[Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="vi.i-p99.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="vi.i-p100"></span>he only asks with earnestness whether or not
God actually shews that he is so highly offended by the blasphemies of
Rabshakeh that he determines not to allow them to remain unpunished. In
a word, he wishes God to hear effectually, that is, by restoring those
things which were scattered and confused, and shewing himself to be a
judge; for then do we know that he actually sees and observes all
things. In this manner Hezekiah asks, “Hath not the Lord heard the
blasphemies of Rabshakeh, to take vengeance on them, and to shew that he
hath a regard to the glory of his name?”

<span id="vi.i-p101"></span>*Jehovah thy God.* By calling him “the God
of Isaiah,” Hezekiah does not mean that there is only one man who
worships God, nor does he exclude himself from the number of the godly;
but because prayers flowed from doctrine, the pious king wished to speak
in commendation of the ministry of the Prophet, and to testify that he
was a true servant of God. That relation is somewhat more extensive; for
all believers call on God, and, on the other hand, God reckons them
among his people; but God is reckoned in a peculiar manner to be the God
of Isaiah and Paul, because they have a special calling. In a word,
these words expressly contain praise and commendation of Isaiah’s
calling.

<span id="vi.i-p102"></span>*Thou wilt therefore lift up a prayer.* This
is the second reason why Hezekiah sent messengers to Isaiah; namely,
that he also would pray along with others. Hence we learn that it is the
duty of a prophet, not only to comfort the afflicted by the word of the
Lord, but also to offer his prayers for their salvation. Let not pastors
and ministers of the word, therefore, think that they have fully
discharged their duty, when they have exhorted and taught, if they do
not also add prayer. This indeed is what all ought to do; but Hezekiah
sent to Isaiah in a particular manner, because he ought to lead the way
to others by his example. Besides, “to lift up a prayer” is nothing else
than “to pray,” but the mode of expression deserves attention; for it
shews how our feelings ought to be regulated when we pray. Scripture
everywhere enjoins us to “lift up our hearts to heaven,” (<span
id="vi.i-p102.1"></span>[La 3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041.md)<span
id="vi.i-p102.1"></span>;) for otherwise we would have no fear of God.
Moreover, our stupidity is so great that we are immediately seized by
gross imaginations of God; so that if he did not bid us look to heaven,
we would choose rather to seek him at our feet. “To lift up a prayer,”
therefore, is to pray in such a manner that our hearts may not grovel on
the earth, or think anything earthly or gross about God, but may ascribe
to him what is suitable to his majesty, and that our warm and earnest
affections may take a lofty flight. In this sense it is said in the
Psalm,

<span id="vi.i-p103"></span>“Let my prayer come up before thee as
incense,  
and as the evening sacrifice.” (<span id="vi.i-p103.2"></span>[Ps
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)<span id="vi.i-p103.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p104"></span>*For the remnant that is still left.* When
he desires that prayer should be offered “for the remnant of the people
that was left,” this circumstance was fitted powerfully to move the
Lord; not that he is moved after the manner of men, but he acts towards
us in this manner, and accommodates himself to our weakness. Thus when
our affairs are brought to such an extremity that we are not far from
destruction, we ought to spread our misery before God, that our minds
may receive some consolation; for God declares that he hath regard to
“the poor and afflicted.” (<span id="vi.i-p104.1"></span>[Ps
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024)<span id="vi.i-p104.1"></span>..md)
And the nearer we appear to be to destruction, so much the more warmly
and earnestly ought we to implore that he would render assistance to us,
as we see here that Hezekiah did when matters were desperate.

<span id="vi.i-p105"></span><span id="vi.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p106"></span>**5.** *And the servants of King Hezekiah
came to Isaiah.* As the Prophet formerly related that the pious king had
no other refuge than to consult the mouth of the Lord, so he now shews
that he did not consult in vain; for he received the consolation which
he desired. Instructed by this example, if we seek relief from him by
pouring our cares and anxieties into the bosom of God, our hope shall
never be disappointed; and although there will not always be prophets in
the world, such as Isaiah was, yet he will come forth seasonably to
render assistance in an appropriate manner.

<span id="vi.i-p107"></span><span id="vi.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p108"></span>**6.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* Isaiah begins
by saying that he gives the reply in the name of God, and expressly
declares that the oracle comes from God, both because prophets ought
always to beware of bringing forward anything of their own, and because
in so difficult a matter the authority of God was needful. In this
manner also, the Prophet shewed that he met the prayers of the pious
king. Even false prophets, indeed, boast of the name of God, but
falsely. Isaiah was truly the organ of the Holy Spirit, and therefore he
has a right to mention the holy name of Him that sent him.

<span id="vi.i-p109"></span>*Fear not.* When he bids him “not fear,” he
exhorts Hezekiah to be of a courageous or, at least, a calm disposition.
Whenever we hear this word, let us be reminded that we are enjoined to
cultivate that peace which faith produces in our hearts; for all who
trust in God, and expect from him deliverance from their distresses,
rise superior to all fears by the exercise of patience, so that even in
the midst of affliction they have peace. Besides, in order that the
pious king may continue cheerfully to expect a joyful issue, he plainly
declares that God conducts his own cause which he has undertaken to
defend, because he cannot permit wicked men unpunished to dishonor his
name without making it appear at length that he is a righteous judge.
 <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)

<span id="vi.i-p111"></span>*The servants of the king of Assyria.* By
calling them *servants,* he presents in a stronger light the baseness of
the action; for although the king himself had spoken in this manner,
still it would have been intolerable that the Lord should be despised
and so shamefully attacked by a mortal man. Hence it might easily be
concluded that much less would he endure to be so highly insulted by
“servants,”  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) and therefore the rank
of the person increases the heinoushess of the attack.

<span id="vi.i-p113"></span><span id="vi.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p114"></span>**7.** *Behold, I will bring a wind upon
him.* Others translate it, “I will put my Spirit in him,” as if the
Prophet were speaking of a secret influence of the heart; but that is a
forced interpretation. It is a highly appropriate metaphor that there is
in the hand of God a wind or whirlwind to drive Sennacherib in another
direction. To compare wicked men to “straw or chaff,’ (<span
id="vi.i-p114.1"></span>[Ps 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.i-p114.1"></span>) is a mode of expression frequently employed in
Scripture, because God easily drives them wherever he thinks proper,
when they think that they are standing very firm. The commotion that
arose in the kingdom of Sennacherib is compared by the Prophet to a
“wind” or “storm” which drove him out of Judea, and then he shews that
the Lord will find no more difficulty in repelling that enemy than if he
wished to move straw or chaff; and the very same thing might be said of
all tyrants, however powerful.

<span id="vi.i-p115"></span>*For he shall hear a report.* The words “and
he shall hear” are evidently added for the sake of explanation, and
therefore I have chosen to interpret them as assigning a reason, “For he
shall hear.”  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) This is the wind by
the raising of which Sennacherib was suddenly driven away; for a report
which he heard about the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia constrained him to
return to his own country.

<span id="vi.i-p117"></span>*And I will cause him to fall by the sword
in his own land.* This means as if he had said, “He now annoys and
harasses others, and endeavors to extend widely the limits of his
empire; but I will raise up enemies to him, in the very bosom of his own
land, who shall discomfit him.” Some expound it to mean the land of
Israel, but that is an excessively forced interpretation; for he speaks
of the land of the king of Assyria himself, and there is an implied
contrast, “He who subdued other men’s cities and kingdoms shall not be
able to defend his own country, but shall be destroyed and perish in
it.”

<span id="vi.i-p118"></span><span id="vi.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p119"></span>**8.** *And Rabshakeh having returned.* He
now declares how Rabshakeh, without doing anything, returned to his
king, not to the same place where he had left him; for he understood
that he had raised the siege of Lachish, and had departed into Egypt for
the purpose of attacking Libnah. Some think that this city is Pelusium,
others choose rather to assign it to Judea. It is, indeed, probable
that, in consequence of a report that reached him about the approach of
enemies, he moved his camp towards Egypt, that by meeting them he might
prevent them from advancing. Though God restrained the violence of the
tyrant by a new war, in order to give some relief to the Jews, yet he
did not wish to conquer the tyrant by the hand of man, but only to shew
openly and, as it were, to display on a theater his unconquerable pride;
because, even when he was in great danger, he did not cease to vomit out
the same blasphemies, as we shall soon see.

<span id="vi.i-p120"></span><span id="vi.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p121"></span>**9.** *And hearing concerning Tirhakah king
of Ethiopia.* From what follows we may conjecture the reason why the
king of Assyria suddenly departed from Judea; for the kings of Egypt and
Ethiopia had formed a league with each other against Sennacherib,
because they saw that his power was becoming excessive, and that his
invasion of other countries had no limit, and therefore they readily
concluded that, unless they opposed his violence at an early period,
they also would be in imminent danger from him. These kings did not
intend to provide for the safety of Judea at their own loss, but looked
to themselves; for so great power possessed by one individual is
commonly and deservedly viewed with suspicion by other princes and
nations. They therefore act wisely in joining their forces and meeting
him early; for separately they would easily have been subdued and
destroyed. For this reason these two kings took arms together, in order
to repel the power and violence of that tyrant.

<span id="vi.i-p122"></span>*He sent messengers to Hezekiah.* The king
of Assyria, being involved in so hazardous a war, “sends messengers to
Hezekiah,” to induce him by terrors and threatenings to surrender; for
tyrants are maddened by ambition and by a false opinion of their own
greatness, and therefore imagine that their words, the report of their
name, and even their shadow, will strike terror into all men. Entangled
in a hazardous war, he thinks of subduing Judea, from which he had been
compelled to withdraw, ashamed of not having continued the siege, but
perhaps thinking that he will gain in his absence what he could not
accomplish by his presence. But the Lord miraculously assisted his
people who appeared to be very near destruction. And, first, in order to
restrain the violence of this tyrant, he presented hinderances and
obstructions, from which he could not so speedily extricate himself;
just as if one should “lay a bridle on the mouth or a hook on the nose”
of a wild and savage beast, as the Prophet will afterwards say. (<span
id="vi.i-p122.1"></span>[Isa
37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029)<span id="vi.i-p122.1"></span>..md)
His rage and cruelty, indeed, are not abated, but are restrained so that
they can do no harm.

<span id="vi.i-p123"></span>We see the same thing in the present day.
How many cruel tyrants would wish that the Church of God were destroyed!
What schemes are employed for the accomplishment of it! How diversified
are the plans which they form! What forces do they assemble from every
quarter! But when they think that they will accomplish anything, the
Lord suddenly raises up enemies against them, sometimes even brings them
to fight with each other, and turns against themselves that cruelty
which they wished to exercise against the children of God. Yet they go
on in their cruelty, and cease not to attempt this or that; as this
Sennacherib, though he is surrounded by difficulties, ceases not to
annoy Hezekiah, and addresses him from his royal throne, as if he were a
despicable slave, and commands him as if he were his vassal, and even to
God himself addresses insolent and opprobrious language, and goes beyond
his agent Rabshakeh in arrogance; for, although Rabshakeh’s words had
the same meaning, still this man, in a more impudent manner, and, as we
may say, with more open mouth reviles God.

<span id="vi.i-p124"></span><span id="vi.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p125"></span>**10.** *Let not thy God deceive thee.* How
shocking is this blasphemy, to speak of God the Author of truth, and to
accuse him of falsehood and deceit, as if he actually imposed on his
people! What is left to God when his truth is taken away, for nothing is
more absolutely his own? God extorted this word from the wicked man,
although he formerly pretended to revere some deity; for such impiety,
as we have formerly said, God does not permit to remain any longer
concealed.

<span id="vi.i-p126"></span>*Saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered.*
This quotation of the words uttered by God himself, that “Jerusalem
would be preserved,” has led some to conjecture that Isaiah’s prediction
had been disclosed to the king of Assyria by the traitor Shebna. But
there is no need of such conjectures; for the Assyrian knew well that
Hezekiah placed his hope in God, and was not ignorant of the promises
which were made both to him and to David,

<span id="vi.i-p127"></span>“This is my rest; here will I dwell for ever
and ever.”  
(<span id="vi.i-p127.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p127.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p128"></span>Not that he gave himself any trouble about
heavenly oracles, but because every person knew and talked of them, and
the Jews gloried in them wonderfully, and often boasted of the
assistance and protection of God in opposition to their enemies.

<span id="vi.i-p129"></span>These promises, therefore, the tyrant meets
by this blasphemy, — “Let not thy God deceive thee.” And thus he exalts
himself against God, as if God were not sufficiently powerful to defend
Jerusalem, and as if his own power were greater, not only than all the
power of men, but even than the power of God himself. He endeavors to
prove this by examples, because he has vanquished nations which were
under the protection of other gods, and draws an argument from the power
of his ancestors, — “They conquered the gods of other nations, and I am
far superior to my ancestors; therefore the God of Israel will not
conquer me.”

<span id="vi.i-p130"></span>Thus do wicked men commonly exalt themselves
more and more in prosperity, so that at length they forget that they are
men, and not only claim for themselves, but even think that they
surpass, Divine Majesty. Setting aside all distinction between right and
wrong, satisfied with the mere power of doing injury, they glory in
their own crimes and those of their ancestors, and egregiously flatter
themselves on the ground of their being descended from robbers and
infamous men; for frequently the most powerful of monarchs is the best
entitled to be called the rich son of a great robber. This tyrant does
not consider whether it was in a right or a wrong manner that so many
countries came into the power of his ancestors; for they have no regard
to justice or injustice, when they aim at greatness; it is enough for
them if in any way, either lawful or unlawful, they can bring others
under their yoke. Thus they think that they are at liberty to do
whatever they can. They hold by that proverb, (<span
id="vi.i-p130.1"></span>εἰ ἀδικητέον τυραννίδος περὶ ἀδικητέον) “if
justice ought to be violated, it ought to be violated for the sake of
reigning;” and this vice was not peculiar to a single age, but even now
we feel it to be excessive.

<span id="vi.i-p131"></span><span id="vi.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p132"></span>**11.** *Behold, thou hast heard.* Here we
ought to observe a twofold comparison; for he compares Hezekiah to other
kings of Judah who preceded him, because he was inferior to them, and
yet they were vanquished by the kings of Assyria; and Sennacherib, on
the other hand, having obtained greater power than all the rest, is more
daring and insolent. It followed, that Hezekiah could not resist him.
The other comparison is that of the kings of Assyria, and Sennacherib
himself, with the idols of the nations; for if the idols could not
protect the nations that adored them, consequently neither will the God
of Israel defend the nation by which he is adored.

<span id="vi.i-p133"></span>When we thus read that singular assaults of
temptations were directed against the faith of Hezekiah, let us prepare
ourselves for the contest by being equipped with the same armor. Even
while leisure is granted to us, let us endeavour to fortify ourselves
early, in order that, when we come into such a field of battle, we may
fight courageously. And if Satan taunt us with the destruction of many
nations, we must attend to the difference of our condition; because,
although we are liable to similar calamities, still we have assured hope
of our salvation, of which they are destitute.

<span id="vi.i-p134"></span><span id="vi.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p135"></span>**12.** *Gozan.* This place is mentioned in
<span id="vi.i-p135.1"></span>[2 Kings
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006.md), [2 Kings
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.i-p135.1"></span>.
We may infer that it was a town in Media, though some think that it was
situated elsewhere; but it is enough that, with regard to Jerusalem, it
lay in an easterly direction. *Haran* is often mentioned in Scripture.
Pliny places this town in Arabia; but it is more generally believed to
have been in Mesopotamia, and this is confirmed by the journeyings of
Abraham, who came to it along with his father, after having left his
native country Chaldaea. (<span id="vi.i-p135.2"></span>[Ac
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.i-p135.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p135.3"></span>[Ge
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)<span id="vi.i-p135.3"></span>..md)
It is called Charrae, in the plural number, by heathen historians, who
also mention that Crassus and his son were killed there.

<span id="vi.i-p136"></span><span id="vi.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p137"></span>**14.** *Hezekiah took the letters.* The
Prophet now shews what kind of refuge Hezekiah had amidst so great
calamities. He immediately went into the Temple, to lament before the
Lord the calamity which: he could not remove, and to “cast upon him”
(<span id="vi.i-p137.1"></span>[Ps
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p137.1"></span>.md)
his grief and his anxieties.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) Nor
was this a blind or confused lamentation, but the pious king wished to
move God by his tears and complaints to render assistance. We are taught
by his example that, when we are sore pressed, there is nothing better
than to east our burden into the bosom of God. All other methods of
relief will be of no avail, if this single method be wanting.

<span id="vi.i-p139"></span>*And spread them before Jehovah.* In
“spreading the letters before the Lord,” he does not do this as if the
Lord did not know what was contained in the letters, but God allows us
to act in this manner towards him in accommodation to our weakness
Neither prayers, nor tears, nor complaints make known to God what we
need; for he

<span id="vi.i-p140"></span>“knows our wants and necessities before we
ask anything  
from him.” (<span id="vi.i-p140.2"></span>[Mt
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008)<span id="vi.i-p140.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p141"></span>But here we ought rather to consider what is
necessary for us, that is, that God should manifest that he knows the
blasphemies of adversaries, and that they who have uttered them will not
remain unpunished. The reason and design, therefore, why Hezekiah
“spread before the Lord the letters” of the wicked tyrant was this, that
he might excite his own earnestness, and inflame his own ardor, in
prayer.

<span id="vi.i-p142"></span><span id="vi.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p143"></span>**15.** *Then Hezekiah prayed to God,
saying, O Jehovah of hosts.* Because Sennacherib was the agent employed
by Satan to shake the faith of Hezekiah, he defends himself by this
rampart, that God possesses infinite power; for, by bestowing on God
those lofty praises, he undoubtedly encourages himself to confidence in
supplication. That out’ prayers may not be unsuccessful, we ought always
to hold it as certain that God “is the rewarder of all who seek him.”
(<span id="vi.i-p143.1"></span>[Heb
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p143.1"></span>..md)
It was especially necessary for the pious king, that he might boldly and
undauntedly remove the obstruction by which Satan had attempted to stop
the progress of his confidence, to believe that although wicked men mock
and undervalue the power of God, still it remains undiminished. The
heroic, courage of the pious king appeared by not only contending with a
wicked king in maintaining the power of God, but. by exalting it in his
own heart and appealing to God as the witness of his inward feelings.
Accordingly, before forming any prayer, he overturns the delusions by
which Satan had endeavored to shake his courage.

<span id="vi.i-p144"></span><span id="vi.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p145"></span>**16.** *Thou alone art God over all the
kingdoms of the earth.* Not only does he assert God’s almighty power,
but likewise maintains the authority which he exercises over the whole
world. And these statements are made by the pious king for the purpose
of strengthening himself in the faith which he entertained about the
providence of God, by which he governs the world and every part of it.
All believers ought above all to believe this, that they may not think
that they pray in vain. Nor would the prayer of the king have had so
much efficacy if he had only said, “Incline thine ear, O Lord,” or
something of that sort, as when he believes that the Lord takes care of
his works. He persuades himself that God will undertake that cause. If
it belongs to God to rule and govern the whole world, he will not permit
this tyrant to act in this insolent manner without restraining his
insolence; for Sennacherib claims for himself what belonged to God, and
at length would not pass unpunished.

<span id="vi.i-p146"></span>The statement, that all the kingdoms of the
earth are under the power and authority of God, applies especially to
the present subject. Yet while this title always belongs to God alone,
that he “rules over all kingdoms,” Still the Prophet does not deny that
kings also, and princes, and magistrates hold their dominion, but so as
to be subject to God, and to owe to him all their power and authority.
In like manner, when Paul asserts that government belongs to God alone,
(<span id="vi.i-p146.1"></span>[1Ti
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)<span id="vi.i-p146.1"></span>,.md)
he does not overthrow princes and magistrates, but shews that all, how
great and powerful soever they may be, depend on God alone, that they
may not imagine themselves to be his equals or companions, but may
acknowledge him as their Lord and Prince. Thus will kings, therefore,
retain their authority, if they keep an intermediate position between
God and men, and do not wish to rise higher.

<span id="vi.i-p147"></span>*Thou hast made heaven and earth.* Hezekiah
draws the same inference from creation itself; for it is impossible that
God, who is the Creator of heaven and earth, should forsake his work; on
the contrary, he governs by his providence the human race, which is the
chief part of the world. It would be absurd to confine creation within
such narrow boundaries as if it were a proof of a sudden and transitory
exercise of the power of God; but we must extend it to perpetual
government. Hence it is evident that tyrants who wish to rule at their
pleasure rob God of his honor, and therefore are justly punished for
their insolence.

<span id="vi.i-p148"></span>*O Jehovah of hosts, God of Israel, who
dwellest between the Cherubim.* Here are other titles employed by
Hezekiah for the confirmation of his faith. And, first, by calling him
“Jehovah of hosts,” he again extols his power. But when he adds “God of
Israel,” he brings him near, and on familiar terms; for it was no
ordinary token of love to take that nation under his protection. Such is
also the import of “sitting between the cherubim;” as if he had said,
“Thou hast here placed thy seat, and promised that thou wilt be the
protector of those who call upon thee before the ark of the covenant.
Relying on this promise, I flee to thee as my guardian.”

<span id="vi.i-p149"></span>Hezekiah had in view, I have no doubt, the
form of the ark, which was surrounded by two cherubim. Others interpret
Cherubim to mean angels, as if it were said, that God reigneth in heaven
and sitteth among the angels. But this interpretation is unsuitable; for
he is said to “sit between the cherubim,” on account of the form of the
ark, which was constructed in this manner. (<span
id="vi.i-p149.1"></span>[Ex 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.i-p149.1"></span>.) We know that it was a symbol of the presence
of God, though his power was not confined to it; and Hezekiah, by
mentioning it, intended to express his firm belief that God was present
with him, and had designed to gather a people to himself by spreading,
so to speak, his wings over them. There being a wide distance between
God and us, Hezekiah embraced that token of adoption. Yet there was
nothing gross or earthly in his conceptions of God, as superstitious men
would desire to bring him down from heaven, but, satisfied with the
promise which he had received, he expresses his firm belief that we do
not need to go far to seek the grace of God.

<span id="vi.i-p150"></span>This mode of expression, therefore, deserves
our attention, and teaches us, that while we gradually ascend to heaven
by the light of the word which leads the way, still, in order to obtain
assistance, we must not think of God as absent; for he has chosen his
dwelling in the midst of us. Since his majesty far exceeds heaven and
earth, we must not limit him within the capacity of our understanding;
and yet, as he has revealed himself to us by the word, we may comprehend
him in proportion to the small ability and measure of our understanding,
not that we may bring him down from his heavenly throne, but that our
understandings, which are naturally feeble and sluggish, may approach to
him by degrees; for it is proper that we should strive to approach to
his loftiness, since he invites us by the Word and sacraments. If we are
skillful interpreters, the spiritual knowledge of God will always
flourish among us; we shall not give the name of God to stones, or wood,
or trees; there will be nothing earthly or gross in our conceptions of
him; but the nearer he comes down to us, the more earnestly shall we
labor to make a proper use of those aids which he holds out, that our
minds may not grovel on the earth; since God accommodates himself to our
weakness for no other reason than that the sacraments may serve to us
the purpose of ladders,  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) which
superstition abuses for a contrary purpose.

<span id="vi.i-p152"></span><span id="vi.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p153"></span>**17.** *incline thine ear, O Jehovah.* From
these words we conclude how great was the perplexity of Hezekiah; for
the earnestness that pervades the prayer breathes an amazing power of
anguish, so that it is. easily seen that he had a struggle attended by
uncommon difficulty to escape from the temptation. Though his warmth in
prayer shews the strength and eminence of his faith, yet at the same
time it exhibits, as in a mirror, the stormy passions. Whenever we shall
be called to sustain such contests, let us learn by the example of the
pious king to combat our passions by everything that is fitted to
strengthen our faith, so that the very disturbance may conduct us to
safety and peace, and that we may not be terrified by a conviction of
our weakness, if at any time we shall be powerfully assailed by fear and
perplexity. It is, indeed, the will of the Lord that we shall toil hard,
and sweat and shiver; for we must not expect to gain the victory while
we repose in indolence, but after diversified contests he promises to us
a prosperous issue, which he will undoubtedly grant.

<span id="vi.i-p154"></span>But why does Hezekiah demand that God should
listen? Does he think float he is asleep or does not hear? By no means;
but in a matter of such difficulty we frequently speak in such a manner
as if we thought that God was absent or did not attend to our
afflictions. He shews that he was oppressed by so great perplexity that
he almost thought that God had forsaken him; that is, according to the
eyes of the flesh; for if he had not by the eyes of faith beheld God as
present, he would have lost courage.

<span id="vi.i-p155"></span>*Open thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see.* It is
as if Hezekiah had prayed that the assistance of God, which he had long
kept in his heart committed to the guardianship of hope, would be
actually and publicly manifested; and therefore he prays that Jehovah
would “open his eyes and see;” that is, would shew that he cares about
these matters. Hezekiah shews plainly what was the subject about which
he was most anxious, namely, that God would revenge the insults offered
to him; for although he was deeply affected by anxiety about his kingdom
and people, yet he set a higher value on the glory of God than on all
other sources of uneasiness. The advancement of that glory ought:,
indeed, above all things, to move and impress our hearts, and the more
especially because we know that it is closely connected with our
salvation.

<span id="vi.i-p156"></span>Thus Hezekiah here represents this tyrant as
an enemy of God, who dishonors him by reproaches and curses because
Jerusalem glories in his name and protection, and concludes that God
cannot forsake the city which he hath undertaken to defend, without at
the same time abandoning his own name. Since, therefore, God in his
infinite goodness chooses to connect our salvation with his glory, we
ought to lay held on those promises for the purpose of strengthening our
hearts, that although the wicked, while they reproach God and pour and
vomit out the venom of their breast, harden themselves in the vain hope
that they shall not be punished, still there will not be a syllable
which the Lord does not hear, and which he does not at length call to
account.

<span id="vi.i-p157"></span><span id="vi.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p158"></span>**18.** and **19.** *Truly, O Jehovah.* Here
Hezekiah begins to distinguish between the false gods and the true God,
which we also ought to do very carefully. Wicked men, who have no light,
indulge in some confused imaginations about God, which quickly pass
away, so that they think that there is no God, or care nothing about
him.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) But God does not wish that
his people shall be moved by a slight and passing opinion, but that he
shall be acknowledged by them as the true God, who drives away all
superstitions by the brightness of his power.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) It is not; enough, therefore, that we
believe in something which heathens imagine to be a deity, but we must
believe in God in such a manner as to distinguish him from pretended
gods, and to separate truth from falsehood; and, indeed, when he has
once shone into our hearts, those false religions which formerly
occupied our minds immediately give way.

<span id="vi.i-p161"></span>This doctrine ought to be the more carefully
held, because many persons rest satisfied with dark speculations, and
think that it is enough if they acknowledge some deity. They evidently
do not know whether they ought to worship the God of the Mahometans or
of the Jews; and fly in the air, so that, as the saying is, they neither
touch heaven nor earth. Nothing can be more destructive than this
imagination; for it mingles and confounds idols with God, whose majesty
does not hold its due rank. if it does not reign in solitary grandeur
over the ruins of all the false gods. Thus the beginning of true piety
is, that from the whole multitude of false gods we shall wisely
distinguish that one God to whom we ought to be entirely devoted.

<span id="vi.i-p162"></span><span id="vi.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p163"></span>*For they are not gods, but the work of the
hands of man, wood and stone.* By two arguments Hezekiah shews that
“they were not gods;” first, because they consisted of matter,  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) and secondly, because they were formed by
the hands of men. Nothing can be more absurd than for a man to assume
the right to create a god, not only because he had a beginning, while
God is eternal, but because not even for a single moment does he subsist
by his own power. Let the whole world collect all its strength into a
single man,  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) he will not even be
able to create a fica. What presumption is it, therefore, that every
mortal man shall make for himself either one god or many!  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) Since, therefore, there is nothing in us
but what is frail and fading, we shall never be able to produce a deity.

<span id="vi.i-p167"></span>Besides, it is in the highest degree absurd
to attempt, as an exercise of skill, to frame some deity out of matter
which is corruptible and devoid of feeling, as if “wood or stone,”
whenever it received a shape, began to be a god. In this manner,
therefore, all the superstitions that men have ever invented are
speedily overturned; for the existence of those gods can be found
nowhere but in their own brains, and, indeed, all that they have of
themselves contrived is condemned as empty and false.

<span id="vi.i-p168"></span><span id="vi.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p169"></span>**20.** *And now, O Jehovah our God.* At the
conclusion of his prayer, the pious king now rises above that fear with
which he had struggled; for the aids by which he had hitherto fortified
himself undoubtedly encouraged him boldly to add this short clause.
Although God does not always deliver his people from temporal evils, yet
as he had promised that he would be the protector of the city, Hezekiah
could firmly believe that all the efforts of that wicked tyrant, which
were directed to the destruction of that city, would be fruitless.

<span id="vi.i-p170"></span>*May know that thou alone art Jehovah.* When
he pleads it as an argument with God that the deliverance of the city
will be an occasion of promoting his glory, we conclude that nothing is
more desirable than to make his name glorious in every possible way; and
this is even the chief design of our salvation, from which we are not at
liberty to depart, if we desire that God should be gracious to us. Hence
we conelude that those men are unworthy of his assistance, who,
satisfied with their own salvation, disregard or forget the reason why
God chooses to preserve them. Not only do they dishonor God by this
ingratitude, but they likewise inflict grievous injury on themselves, by
separating those things which God had joined; for in saving his people
he glorifies his name, which must be, as we have already said, our
highest consolation. Besides, Hezekiah does not only desire that the God
of Israel shall hold a certain rank, but that all idols shall be
abolished, and that he shall reign alone; for at that time many
idolaters would have allowed him to be worshipped along with others,
but, since he does not admit companions, every deity framed by the hand
of man must be destroyed, that He may hold the undivided sovereignty.

<span id="vi.i-p171"></span><span id="vi.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p172"></span>**21.** *Then Isaiah sent to Hezekiah.* This
shews the result of the prayer; for, as soon as matters have come to an
extremity, God suddenly holds out his hand to assist the pious king by
the Prophet Isaiah. (<span id="vi.i-p172.1"></span>[2Ki
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p172.1"></span>..md)
Not that he immediately stretches out his arm to drive away the enemies,
but he promises deliverance by the mouth of the Prophet, and thus calls
even now into exercise the faith of his servant. Isaiah undoubtedly
could not of himself render any assistance, and therefore it would have
been foolish for him to promise this or that, if Hezekiah had not been
convinced that God had sent him. Thus, until God should give a
manifestation of his power, he rested satisfied with this consolation.

<span id="vi.i-p173"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel.* Here
we are taught that we ought always to ask at the mouth of God, if we
wish to obtain any alleviation in our anxieties and distresses; for if
we reject the doctrine which he communicates to us by the hand of
faithful teachers, we are utterly unworthy of receiving any consolation.
Fed and nourished by it, we ought to make continual progress, and to
seek from it new confirmations, that new remedies may be constantly
found for new distresses, and that we may never be destitute of
consolation even amidst the sharpest afflictions; for even they whose
resources and means of defense are most extensive cannot be too
abundantly supplied with this doctrine. In Hezekiah a striking instance
of faith and steadfastness is here exhibited; and yet the Lord does not
merely comfort him once or only by a single prophecy, but confirms him
by many prophecies, in order that we, who are far removed from such
steadfastness, may know that we need many and various aids, to give
uninterrupted support to our faith.

<span id="vi.i-p174"></span>*Since thou hast prayed to* me. In the
sacred history (<span id="vi.i-p174.1"></span>[2Ki
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020)<span id="vi.i-p174.1"></span>.md)
the word *I have heard,* is used; and consequently in that passage <span
id="vi.i-p174.2"></span>אשר (*asher*) is a relative pronoun; but here,
as in many other passages, it is introduced either for the sake of
explanation or in assigning a reason.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) To supply the word *I have heard,* as
some commentators do, is harsh and unnatural; and the sentence flows on
in unbroken connection, when God declares that he grants it as an answer
to the prayers of Hezekiah, that he will frustrate all the efforts of
the tyrant, and restrain his violence and rage; as if he had said, that
God’s answer corresponded to the prayers of the pious king. And, indeed,
whoever addresses prayers to him will at length experience how ready he
is to answer; but very frequently he is silent, and offers no
consolation from his word, because amidst our distresses we are dumb.

<span id="vi.i-p176"></span>*Concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria.*
The prediction amounts to this, that there is no reason why Hezekiah,
under a consciousness of destitution and weakness, should faint or
despair, when he sees the insolence of this haughty tyrant; because God
will interpose between them. Sennacherib having offered those insults to
the wretched Jews, God declares that he takes this cause into his own
hands, because the affront was directed against himself. By these words
he shews that he will take vengeance, when his grace is despised by
unbelievers; and he advises believers not to be greatly distressed on
account of their being despised by the world, provided that their
weakness finds assistance ready prepared in heaven.

<span id="vi.i-p177"></span><span id="vi.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p178"></span>**22.** *The virgin daughter of Zion.* There
is greater emphasis in this address to the whole Church than if he had
said the same tiring to Hezekiah as a private individual; for this
circumstance heightens the baseness of treating with scorn the
defencelessness of a wretched people, as if the aid of heaven had been
of no avail. Thus he censures the blindness of Sennacherib, in
disregarding God and haughtily despising an afflicted Church. Cities are
frequently called *daughters.* (<span id="vi.i-p178.1"></span>[Ps
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p178.1"></span>..md)
Sometimes also, as we have formerly seen, delicate cities are called
*virgins.* (<span id="vi.i-p178.2"></span>[Isa.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008.md), [Isa.
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012)<span id="vi.i-p178.2"></span>..md)
But here he intended to express the weakness of the city of Jerusalem,
because she was like an orphan and destitute *virgin,* who was insulted
by this base ruffian and infamous robber; while God, as the father to
whom this insult is offered, declares that he knows well what are the
schemes of that wicked man, and what is the condition of the whole of
Judea.

<span id="vi.i-p179"></span><span id="vi.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p180"></span>**23.** *Whom hast thou reproached?* In the
former verse he describes the fact, such as it might be seen and beheld
by all; but now he raises their minds higher, by shewing that this
tyrant insults not only Jerusalem but God himself. Let this passage be
brought to our remembrance, whenever we see ourselves exposed to the
taunts and insolence of wicked men; for, though we have no armor, and
though no one undertakes our defense, and though our weakness prompts
our enemies to growing insolence, yet the Lord is near and will defend
us as with an ample shield, for they who fight against us wage war with
the living God. Nor were these words spoken merely for the sake of a
single age, but on the contrary, as this promise is perpetual,

<span id="vi.i-p181"></span>“I will be thy God and thy shield,”  
(<span id="vi.i-p181.2"></span>[Gen.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md), [Gen.
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p181.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="vi.i-p182"></span>“I will be a friend to thy friends, and an
adversary to thy adversaries,”  
(<span id="vi.i-p182.2"></span>[Ge
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.i-p182.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p182.3"></span>[Ex
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p182.3"></span>,.md)

<span id="vi.i-p183"></span>so the less strength that is left to us, let
us be more fully convinced that the power of God is close at hand. Since
therefore the Lord hath entered into covenant with us on the condition
of undertaking our cause, let us not doubt that he will actually fulfill
it, and will shew that the insults which are offered to us are offered
to himself. In a word, he is joined to us in such a manner that he
wishes all that belongs to him and to us to be in common.

<span id="vi.i-p184"></span>Besides, those reproaches which Sennacherib
had thrown out against the Church God applies to himself, in order to
shew that wicked men are greatly mistaken when they are proud of their
greatness, as if they would escape punishment for treading on the
Church, because she is lying at their feet. We know that they treat with
contempt the providence of God; and especially when they see believers
groaning under the yoke, they think them unworthy of receiving
assistance from God, who therefore rises up and testifies that the
contempt shewn to his poor flock grieves him as much as if his majesty
were openly dishonored. Although, therefore, enemies think that we are
forsaken by God when they see us destitute of earthly resources, and on
that account commit grosser outrage, as if we were given to them for a
prey, yet, on the other hand, God declares that our salvation is dear
and precious to him.

<span id="vi.i-p185"></span>*Against whom hast thou raised thy voice?*
The Prophet employs a variety of terms in describing the disdain and
insolence of this haughty man, as one who in speech, in face, in
gesture, in his eyes, and, in short, in the whole attitude of his body,
was absolutely intolerable; for tyrants, having such an opinion of
themselves, assume such airs and look down on every one else as if they
had fallen down from heaven.

<span id="vi.i-p186"></span>*Against the Holy One of Israel.* At length
he adds, that, although the affairs of the nation are at a low ebb,
still God, under whose protection they are placed, remains in heaven as
powerful as ever, he thus censures the madness of Sennacherib in judging
of a nation from earthly appearances, and not considering that they were
dedicated and consecrated to God. In order, therefore, that we may
remain safe through the power of God: and that his arm may give us
seasonable aid, we must be his *Israel;* which will be the case if,
relying on his word, we

<span id="vi.i-p187"></span>“recline under the shadow of his wings.”
(<span id="vi.i-p187.1"></span>[Ps
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p187.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p188"></span><span id="vi.i-p188.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p189"></span>**24.** *By the hand of thy servants.* This
also heightens the baseness and cruelty of the insult, for it is harder
to bear reproaches from a servant than from his master, the insult being
rendered more grievous by the meanness of the person. Renee also proud
and insolent men, in order to render their threatenings more galling and
offensive, boast that they will do this or that by one of their servants
or footmen, for the purpose of testifying more strongly their
contemptuous feelings towards those whom they hate. The Prophet
therefore intended to represent more strongly the baseness of the
blasphemy by this circumstance, that Sennacherib had not only vomited it
out of his own mouth, but had employed *“his servant”* Rabshakeh to
utter scornful language against the holy name of God.

<span id="vi.i-p190"></span>*I will ascend the heights of the mountains,
the sides of Lebanon.* What he now repeats as having been spoken by
Sennacherib, some understand to relate generally to former victories
which he had gained, and by which, as we have already said, he had
vanquished many nations. But I choose rather to take a more simple view,
and to interpret it as relating to the present siege. Perceiving almost
the whole of Judea subjected to his power, having taken possession of
the hills which surrounded that country on all sides, he swells with
insolence as if he had gained a complete victory, and threatens that he
will take within his grasp those battlemerits and Mount Lebanon, with
its cedars and firs and ether attractions; as if he had said that
nothing shall hinder him from taking possession of the bulwarks,
castles, and best fortified places, and wielding the whole of Judea at
his pleasure. Thus do tyrants, though they acknowledge that war is
doubtful, still dream of having in their power the successful results of
battles.

<span id="vi.i-p191"></span><span id="vi.i-p191.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p192"></span>**25.** *I shall dig and drink water.* The
tyrant still goes on to boast of his strength, and threatens that e will
bring so powerful an army that by means of their numbers he will dry up
all the fountains and rivers. Yet, when he says, “With the sole of my
feet I shall dry up all the lakes of the siege,” by *the lakes of the
siege*  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) some understand the
fountain of Siloah, and the cisterns and pools of which the besieged
Jews could not be deprived without being consumed by thirst. And,
indeed, in the former clause he appears to say that, though the whole
country were dry, still he does not dread a scarcity of water, because
his vast military forces will be abundantly able to dig wells. In the
second clause he adds, that he will have at his command the means of
drying up all the waters of the city, so as to slay the Jews by thirst.
In short, he means that Jerusalem will be unable to resist the siege,
and will not be able to stand out any longer, but must immediately
surrender. But while wicked men thus vaunt, God sits in heaven, from
which he will at length execute judgment against them; for this
narrative of the Prophet is intended to lead us to consider the
stupendous judgment of God against that tyrant.

<span id="vi.i-p194"></span><span id="vi.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p195"></span>**26.** *Hast thou not heard?* The greater
part of commentators explain this verse as if the Lord declared that
nothing was now done, or had formerly been done by this tyrant, which he
had not foretold by the mouth of the Prophet, and thus affirmed that he
was the author of those things. But I explain it in a different manner,
which is, that Jerusalem will be preserved by the assistance of God,
because he is the protector of it.

<span id="vi.i-p196"></span>*That I made it long ago.* For the sake of
giving greater emphasis, he suppresses the name of the city, and employs
the demonstrative pronoun *it,* as if all other cities had been of no
value in the sight of God.  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) Others
view the pronoun *it* as referring to the deliverance which depended on
the secret decree of God; but whoever examines judiciously the design
and words of the Prophet, will acknowledge that *it* rather denotes
Jerusalem. God had complained that he was dishonored by base reproaches;
and yet, in repeating the words of Sennacherib, he mentioned only
“Lebanon” and the adjacent country. In order now to shew that under the
name “Lebanon” war has been declared against himself, he affirms, as in
many other passages of Scripture, that Jerusalem was founded by his own
hand and built by his direction, and therefore that, until he was
conquered, Sennacherib could not overthrow it.

<span id="vi.i-p198"></span>This doctrine is found everywhere, and
frequently repeated in the Scriptures, (<span
id="vi.i-p198.1"></span>[Ps. 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008.md),
[Ps. 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md), [Ps.
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069.md)<span id="vi.i-p198.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p198.2"></span>[Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032)<span id="vi.i-p198.2"></span>,.md)
and contains a remarkable consolation, by which the godly may be
sustained amidst the severest afflictions that can befall them; and that
consolation is, that they will continually be under God’s protection,
because he has elected them. He employs this argument, “I have founded
the Church, and therefore the salvation of the Church shall always be my
care; because I will not leave unfinished the work which I have begun,
but will carry it forward to perfection.” In short, the Lord testifies
that he defends and preserves his work, because it involves his honor
and our salvation. Yet he is called “the maker of the Church,” in a
different sense from that in which he is commonly called the Creator of
heaven and earth; for we are his peculiar work, “his workmanship, (<span
id="vi.i-p198.4"></span>τὸ ποίημα,) created anew by his Spirit,” as Paul
speaks, and as we have formerly explained on other passages.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) This work is, therefore, more excellent
than the whole creation of the world; that no one may ascribe it to his
own exertions or power that he has been adopted into the Church of God;
for it is not without good reason that we are called “his workmanship.”

<span id="vi.i-p200"></span>It may be asked, “Why does the Lord say that
*he formed Jerusalem from ancient days?* for there were other cities far
more ancient.” I reply, this must not be viewed as referring to the
outward form or structure of the city, but to that eternal decree by
which he chose it to be his dwelling-place; for although it was
declared, even when the ark was built, “This is my rest, here will I
dwell,” (<span id="vi.i-p200.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p200.1"></span>;.md)
and again by Moses,

<span id="vi.i-p201"></span>“Wherever I shall record my name, I will
come to thee and will bless thee,” (<span id="vi.i-p201.1"></span>[Ex
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span id="vi.i-p201.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="vi.i-p202"></span>yet it had been ordained by God long before.
“We were chosen,” as Paul also informs us,

<span id="vi.i-p203"></span>“before the foundations of the world were
laid,”  
(<span id="vi.i-p203.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p203.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="vi.i-p204"></span>and James declares that

<span id="vi.i-p205"></span>“we were begotten by the word of truth, that
we might be as it were the first-fruits of all the creatures.” (<span
id="vi.i-p205.1"></span>[Jas 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.i-p205.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p206"></span> He will, therefore, preserve us above all
creatures, and will never allow us to perish; and indeed, for the same
reason that Christ is called “the firstborn of every creature,” (<span
id="vi.i-p206.1"></span>[Col 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.i-p206.1"></span>) “the Church, which is his body,” (<span
id="vi.i-p206.2"></span>[Eph. 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span id="vi.i-p206.2"></span>,.md)
possesses the highest honor and dignity in the whole world. I leave to
the Rabbins their dreams, that God created the Messiah and Jerusalem
with a throne of glory before he created heaven and earth. But we must
maintain this doctrine, that God will be the faithful guardian of his
Church, because he has deigned to prefer her to the whole world.

<span id="vi.i-p207"></span>*And should I now bring it to be
desolation?* Others take these words in a different sense. I acknowledge
that the Prophet’s words are in the past tense, *Now have I brought and
placed it;* but as the change of tenses is frequent in the Hebrew
language, the Prophet, after having said that God is the founder of his
Church, and that it is the most illustrious of all his works,
undoubtedly argues from it that it is impossible that he shall involve
his Church in the same ruin as ordinary things. We must therefore read
it as a question, “Shall I now bring it?” or, “Shall I now have brought
it?*”* As if he had said, “Should I allow it to be ruined, like other
cities that have been destroyed and razed?”  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) For he compares Jerusalem to other cities
which had been overthrown by the king of Assyria, and subjected to his
power, that no one may think that the tyrant can so easily overturn it;
because it holds a different position from other cities which have been
destroyed and levelled with the ground. It ought not therefore to be
compared even to the best fortified cities, for they quickly fall with
their earthly strength; but the Church, though small and feeble, has a
firm and solid foundation.in the election of God, and cannot be
overturned by any billows or tempests.

<span id="vi.i-p209"></span>We see wonderful changes that have often
taken place throughout the whole world, republics subverted, empires
overthrown, very powerful nations subdued, their name extinguished, and
their glory effaced. Where is now the majesty of the Roman Empire? Where
is the grandeur of that nation which was mistress of the whole world? If
there are any remains of it, (and they are few,) do they not aid the
wretched bondage of that detestable monster, Antichrist, whose tyranny
is exercised over the whole world? Where is now the liberty of Rome?
Where is the beauty of that illustrious republic? May not Rome be justly
called the workshop of iniquity, and the lodginghouse of every crime?

<span id="vi.i-p210"></span>But amidst those frightful changes, the Lord
declares that he will assist Jerusalem, that is, his Church, and that
although amidst those changes she may be afflicted and tossed in various
ways, yet she shall stand erect, or at least the shaking and oppression
which she may suffer shall not hinder her from being renewed and
multiplied from age to age by various resurrections. Although there are
not always in the world the same members of the Church, yet it is the
same body joined to the same head, that is, Christ. The Lord will
therefore defend his city, and will cause

<span id="vi.i-p211"></span>“the children of his servants to continue,
that their seed may be established for ever.” (<span
id="vi.i-p211.1"></span>[Ps
102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028)<span id="vi.i-p211.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p212"></span><span id="vi.i-p212.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p213"></span>**27.** *For their inhabitants were maimed.*
 <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) Here the Prophet expresses more
fully what he had formerly glanced at briefly, that we ought not to
judge of the condition of the Church from the stability of this world;
for although fortified cities are taken, and the strongest men lose
courage and fall into the hands of their enemies, yet the Church shall
stand and flourish, because it does not rest on its own strength, and
has its foundation not on the earth but in heaven. There is thus an
implied contrast between fortified cities, which alarmed and
terrorstruck inhabitants are unable to defend, and the Church of God,
which rests on his grace alone, and therefore resists every attack, so
that it never fails; for the Church refers everything to God alone, from
whom she receives the commencement of life, uninterrupted strength,
perseverance, every part of salvation, and every blessing.

<span id="vi.i-p215"></span>Hence we learn that all fortresses are of no
avail, if the hand of the Lord do not assist. All human strength will be
broken and decay, if it be not supported by his power; castles,
bulwarks, and the most powerful armies will be of no use without him.
This is expressed more fully by the following metaphors,

<span id="vi.i-p216"></span>*Like the grass of the field and the green
herb.* It is of importance that believers should be led to admire the
wonderful grace which God exercises towards them, that they may not envy
the earthly wealth possessed by irreligious men. Although their power be
dazzling and magnificent, yet he shews that they are like “the green
herb and the grass,” which indeed flourish for a time, but quickly
wither. He dwarfs them still more by another metaphor which he adds,

<span id="vi.i-p217"></span>*The grass of the housetops.* It is indeed
lofty and seen by all, but the more elevated its position, it is the
nearer to the heat, and withers more quickly, and is of no use whatever;
and it is said also in the psalm, that

<span id="vi.i-p218"></span>“they who pass by do not bless it.” (<span
id="vi.i-p218.1"></span>[Ps 129:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.i-p218.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p219"></span>Though the enemies of the Church  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) are high, and as it were exalted to
heaven, though they flourish and have abundant wealth, yet they quickly
fall. In like manner, therefore, as the corn which lies on the ground at
our feet is more valuable than the unfruitful herb that grows on the
housetops; so the Lord shews that the low condition of his servants is
far more desirable than that of those who, leaning on their own
strength, vaunt themselves above others, and boast against God himself.
 <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

<span id="vi.i-p222"></span>*Which withereth before it is ripe.* Some
think that this is a fourth comparison, but I think that the Prophet
added it for the sake of exposition; as if he had said, that grass of
this kind withers before it come into the stalk, that is, before it is
fully ripe; in the same manner as it is said in the psalm, “Before it is
grown up, it withereth.” (<span id="vi.i-p222.1"></span>[Ps
129:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p222.1"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p223"></span><span id="vi.i-p223.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p224"></span>**28.** *I know thy sitting down and thy
rising up.* He returns to the insufferable pride of that tyrant, who
claimed everything for himself, as if he had not been subject to any
one, and dared to despise God as compared to himself, and to load him
with reproaches. He rebukes that man’s pride and insolence, “But I know
thy sitting down.” This being the cause of the fierceness of wicked men,
that they think that no one is above them, and that they are not even
subject to the providence of God, he shews that they can absolutely do
nothing except so far as he permits them. By *sitting down, and rising
up,* are here denoted deliberations, plans, and schemes. Wicked and
irreligious men enter into various deliberations how they may be able to
oppress and destroy the people of God; but to whatever hand they turn,
and which way soever they pursue, they will accomplish nothing without
the will of God. The providence of God restrains them, and drives them
hither and thither, so that frequently, contrary to their intention,
they are conducted to a very good end, as God thinks fit, to whom it
peculiarly belongs to “direct the steps of men.” (<span
id="vi.i-p224.2"></span>[Pr 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.i-p224.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p225"></span>*And thy indignation against me.* He warns
Sennacherib that he is well aware of his rage, and declares that, while
wicked men storm on the earth, he preserves calm silence, and laughs at
their madness; and because Sennacherib was furious, and thought that he
would not be punished for it, the Prophet expressly adds this, that
believers may not think that this is new or unknown to God, or that he
pays no attention to them.

<span id="vi.i-p226"></span><span id="vi.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p227"></span>**29.** *Because thou wast angry against
me.* The more furiously wicked men rise up against God, and the more
outrageous the violence by which they are actuated, so much the more is
he wont eventually to set himself in opposition to them. For a time,
indeed, he permits them to domineer and to have everything that they
wish, but after long forbearance he restrains them, and, as it were,
puts a bridle on their neck, that they may not imagine that they have
everything in their power. Sennacherib was a remarkable instance of
this, for in his rage against God, the more insolently he vaunted, the
heavier did he find the wrath of God to be against him; which all wicked
men ought also to expect.

<span id="vi.i-p228"></span>*Therefore will I put my hook* (or, *my
ring) in thy nose.* This is pleasant mockery of stupidity and
wantonness; as if he had said, “I see how it is, by treating thee mildly
and gently, I would gain nothing; for thy rage is insatiable. But since
thou canst not be tamed, I will curb thee like a savage beast.” And in
this manner he declares more plainly, that God not only sees and knows
what is proposed or contrived by wicked men, but also subdues and
restrains their fierceness in such a manner, that he drags them
reluctantly where ever he pleases, as one would lead a wild beast held
by a bridle or a ring. <span id="vi.i-p228.1"></span>חח *(chach)*  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) is translated by some a *hook,* but I
have preferred to translate it a *ring;* because a *hook* is used for
catching fishes, and would not so well apply to a beast.

<span id="vi.i-p230"></span>Sennacherib was compelled to *return by the
way by which he came,* because, while he was revolving the project of
subduing every part of Judea and Egypt, he hastily, without having
accomplished anything, took the speediest method of returning, which he
would net have done of his own accord, if God had not drawn him back by
unseen methods.

<span id="vi.i-p231"></span><span id="vi.i-p231.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p232"></span>**30.** *And this shall be a sign to thee.*
He now directs his discourse to Hezekiah and the whole nation; for he
did not address Sennacherib as if he expected him to listen, but in
order that, by contemptuously mocking at the absent tyrant, he might
more powerfully stimulate the minds of believers to stronger confidence.
If he had simply said, “Take courage, Hezekiah; though Sennacherib is
insolent, yet in due time I will restrain him;” that discourse would
have been less impressive, than when he addresses the tyrant, and, by
thundering against him, encourages believers to despise his presumption.
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) Accordingly, the speech directed
to the tyrant is now followed by a seasonable address to Hezekiah and
the nation, and a promise of deliverance to them; not only that he will
rescue them from the jaws of a savage beast, but also that Hezekiah
shall enjoy a peaceful reign, and that the rest of the people shall have
everything necessary for leading a prosperous and happy life. Thus he
enlarges on the benefit derived from the deliverance in such a manner as
to shew that he intends, not in one way only, but in a variety of ways,
to promote the interests of his people; for not only does he once and
instantaneously rescue them from dangers, but largely and bountifully
bestows his kindness upon them, so that the fruit is seen long
afterwards.

<span id="vi.i-p234"></span>But there is an apparent impropriety in
putting as “a sign” an event which occurred later than the deliverance
itself; for if he intended to encourage the besieged to entertain
favorable hopes, he ought to have made some exhibition beforehand,
instead of relating what he would do afterwards.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) I reply, there are two kinds of signs.
Some go before the event, and lead us to it as by the hand; while others
follow for the purpose of confirming the event, that it may be more
strongly impressed upon our minds, and may never be effaced from our
remembrance. For instance, when the Lord brought back his people out of
Egypt, he gave many signs to Moses beforehand; but he also appointed
another that should be after the deliverance,

<span id="vi.i-p236"></span>“You shall sacrifice to me three days
afterwards.”  
(<span id="vi.i-p236.2"></span>[Exod.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018)<span id="vi.i-p236.2"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p237"></span>The design was, that they should not forget
so great a blessing, but should give thanks to God after having received
this additional favor. It is a sign of this nature which Isaiah here
describes; and certainly it tends greatly to confirm our faith, to place
before our eyes the uninterrupted course of God’s favours towards us,
that we may consider how various they are.

<span id="vi.i-p238"></span>When the enemy had been repelled, there was
danger from famine, which most commonly comes after war; for the wasting
and pillaging of the fields must have been followed by great scarcity of
provisions. Amidst so great scarcity as seemed likely to ensue, the Lord
promises that there will be no lack of food, and holds out this as a
very evident sign of deliverance, in order to convince them the more
that he will be the author of the deliverance, or, at least, to fix it
more deeply on their hearts. This was indeed incredible, and exceeded
all expectation and belief; but it was necessary that the faith of
Hezekiah and of the people should be excited in such a manner that,
after having heard of so great kindness, they might be more ready to
hope well, and next, that the event might shew that those illustrious
works of God could not be ascribed to chance.

<span id="vi.i-p239"></span>The meaning therefore is, “After having
driven out the enemy, God will restrain him so that he cannot bring
fresh troops, and thou shalt peacefully possess thy country; he will
also supply thee with food and nourishment, so that thou shalt be in
want of nothing.” But because, as usually happens, they had consumed a
large portion of the crop, and destroyed a part. of it, and because they
who were besieged or fugitives had it not in their power to attend to
agricultural labors, he promises that they shall have food without
sowing till they sow on the third year.

<span id="vi.i-p240"></span><span id="vi.i-p240.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p241"></span>**31.** *And that which shall be preserved
of the house of Judah.* He follows out the former statement; for he
declares that the Lord will deliver Jerusalem so as not to east away his
care of her afterwards, but will be her savior to the end. And indeed
all the blessings that the Lord bestows upon us are a sign and testimony
of continued kindness towards us, that we may know that we shall never
be forsaken by him. But here we ought chiefly to remember what we
formerly remarked, that the defense of Jerusalem belonged to God,
because he had chosen it to be his sanctuary, and because the Messiah
would proceed from it.

<span id="vi.i-p242"></span>*And that which shall be left.* <span
id="vi.i-p242.1"></span>פליטה *(peletah)* literally signifies
*deliverance;* but here it is a collective noun for “men delivered,” in
the same manner as in other passages, “captivity” is put for “captives.”
(<span id="vi.i-p242.2"></span>[Ps.
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007.md), [Ps.
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.i-p242.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p242.3"></span>[Jer
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p242.3"></span>..md)
And it is not without reason that he promises increase to a small
remnant; for although the siege had been raised, still the people, being
greatly diminished, had slight cause of joy, and full restoration could
scarcely be expected by so small a number of persons. For the purpose of
soothing this grief, therefore, he declares that the land will be full
of inhabitants, as if a very abundant harvest would fill the granaries
which had formerly been empty.

<span id="vi.i-p243"></span>Nor was it merely the desolation of the land
of Judah that might have discouraged the hearts of believers or pierced
them with sorrow, but likewise that greater diminution which arose from
the ten tribes being led into captivity. (<span
id="vi.i-p243.1"></span>[2 Kings
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md), [2 Kings
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p243.1"></span>..md)
Although they have been thus cut down, Isaiah declares that the Lord
will cause them to recover their former condition, and a vast multitude
to spring up; for the Lord permits his people to be thus diminished and
brought very low, that his glory may afterwards be illustriously
displayed in their deliverance. What he accomplished at that time ought
also to be expected in the present day; so that in proportion as we see
the strength of the Church weakened and brought low, we may be more
fully convinced that. God has in his power the means of multiplying a
small number; for this restoration must not be measured by our powers of
judging.

<span id="vi.i-p244"></span>*Shall strike root downward.* He declares
that there will be so great desolation that it shall seem as if the
Church had been uprooted, and had utterly perished; and indeed the
destruction of the kingdom of Israel was a very sad spectacle of cutting
off. But the Prophet says, that there shall be such an increase that the
tree which had been nearly torn up shall “strike its roots” deep; for
although the Church does not make professions of towering greatness, as
is commonly done by the rulers of this world, yet the Lord imparts a
secret vigor which causes it to spring up and grow beyond human
expectation. Let us not be terrifled, therefore, when no roots are seen,
or when we think that they are dead; for he hath promised that he will
cause it to “strike root downwards.”

<span id="vi.i-p245"></span>*And bear fruit upwards.* This is added,
because the Church does not only flourish like grass, (which was
formerly said of the condition of the wicked,  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) .md) but brings forth abundant fruit; and
thus the Lord completes in her what he hath once begun.

<span id="vi.i-p247"></span><span id="vi.i-p247.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p248"></span>**32.** *For out of Jerusalem shall go forth
a remnant.* Formerly by the metaphor of a root and of fruits he foretold
the deliverance of the Church; he now declares the same thing without a
figure. He alludes to the siege by which a small number of people, who
had been left in the city, were shut up as in a prison and reduced to
very great straits; he says that they shall now go out, and that the
whole country shall be open to them, and that they shall be at liberty
to move wherever they please without fear. The *going forth* is thus
contrasted with the narrow limits within which the trembling Jews had
been forced by the dread of enemies to confine themselves. Yet by this
word he expresses not only liberty to go out, but the increase of the
nation, which had been reduced to a small number. When not only was
Judea again covered by a multitude of men, but from the remnant there
sprung vast multitudes who were spread over the various countries of the
world, this could not have been done, unless out of that small number
the Lord had created not merely a single nation, but many nations.

<span id="vi.i-p249"></span>*The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will do this.*
Not only does he contrast “the zeal of God” with the purposes of men, in
order to extol the excellence of the work, but he states that it is
sufficient for every purpose, that God may give an astonishing
demonstration of his power. At first sight, as we have said, the thing
was incredible; there were obstacles on every side, and no means of
relief; and therefore he declares that God regards his Church with such
fervent love, that he does not hesitate to work in an extraordinary
manner for promoting her salvation. The same mode of expression was
employed by him on a similar occasion. (<span
id="vi.i-p249.1"></span>[Isa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.i-p249.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.i-p250"></span><span id="vi.i-p250.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p251"></span>**33.** *Therefore thus saith Jehovah.* He
now returns to the deliverance of which he had formerly spoken; for God
proraised, first, that he would drive out Sennacherib; secondly, that he
would grant food and nourishment for the sustenance of the people,
though the country had been wasted and pillaged; and, thirdly, that he
would cause flint small number to grow into a vast multitude. Having
made these declarations, he returns to the first, because without it all
the rest might appear to be useless; that is, if the people were not
rescued from the hands, of that tyrant.

<span id="vi.i-p252"></span>*He shall not enter into the city.* God
threatens that he will be as a fortress, to hinder him from “entering
into the city,” and that he will even meet him, so as to hinder him from
coming nearer or fighting against it; for he says that he shall not
*cast an arrow* nor a *balister.* I think that in this passage <span
id="vi.i-p252.1"></span>סללה *(solelah)* denotes a balister, or some
such machine for throwing darts, rather than a *mound;* for “mounds” are
not thrown or poured.

<span id="vi.i-p253"></span><span id="vi.i-p253.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p254"></span>**34.** *By the way that he came shall he
return.* We have formerly explained what it is to return by the same
way, that is, to depar without having accomplished anything, as we
commonly say, (*Il* *s’en est retourne comme il est venu,)* “he returned
as he came,” when nothing has been accomplished, and the efforts are
unsuccessful. To confirm this, he adds, that “thus hath the Lord
spoken;” for as soon as he “who cannot lie” (<span
id="vi.i-p254.1"></span>Titus 1:2) hath spoken, we ought to embrace and
kiss his word, as if the result were rendered certain by the removal of
every obstruction.

<span id="vi.i-p255"></span><span id="vi.i-p255.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p256"></span>**35.** *And I will be a protector.* This is
the reason of the preceding statement, why Sennacherib should not enter
into the city; because the Lord will protect it. The Prophet therefore
bids Hezekiah and the whole nation turn their eyes towards God, because
the sight of that tyrant was so alarming that they might tremble at it.
In like manner, if we now contemplate the power of our enemies, we shall
be overpowered by fear, and there will scarcely be any room for hope;
but we ought to look directly to God, and embrace his promises, by which
we are defended as by a shield; and since God is sufficiently powerful
to restrain a mortal man, to him ought we to turn our eyes; for this
promise must not be limited to that time, but ought to be extended to
all times. Yet the expression used by the Prophet is more extensive, and
conveys fuller meaning; for God affirms that he will be the guardian and
protector of the city; that is, because he had pledged himself to defend
it. Hence he infers that it will be preserved, because God’s protection
renders its preservation certain.

<span id="vi.i-p257"></span>*For my own sake.* When he says that he will
do this “for his own sake,” he calls on Hezekiah and all believers to
remember his gracious covenant For the Jews, though often and severely
chastised, had obstinately provoked the wrath of God against them, and
therefore deserved not only that he should deprive them of all
assistance, but that he should execute against them the highest examples
of dreadful vengeance. In order therefore to prevent them from
despairing, he shews that God will be their defender, not because he
finds any cause in them, but rather because he looks to himself first,
that he may adhere firmly to his purpose, not to cast away the posterity
of Abraham which he adopted, not to abolish religious worship, not to
blot out the remembrance of his name on the earth by destroying his
sanctuary; and, secondly, not to expose his name to the jeers and
blasphemies of the nations. And these words contain an implied reproof
which that nation ought to have felt to be severe, and justly; because
the good king had more difficulty in pacifying them than in repelling
the enemy; for they distrusted, and stormed, and thought that no hope of
safety was left for them. The Lord, therefore, did not look at the
merits of the people or of any other person, but only had regard to his
own glory; for the contrast which is expressed by Ezekiel must here be
understood, “Not for your sakes, O house of Israel, will I do this, but
for my own sake.”  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) (<span
id="vi.i-p258.2"></span>[Eze
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)<span id="vi.i-p258.2"></span>..md)
Now, since we have the same argument to plead in the present day, let us
not hesitate to make use of this shield against our sins, “Though we
most highly deserve a thousand deaths, yet it is enough for God to look
to his goodness and faithfulness, that he may fulfill what he hath
promised.” Though it is of no advantage to hypocrites that God is the
continual protector of his Church, yet the elect will always have this
as a very safe refuge, that although they bring nothing of their own to
appease the wrath of God, yet since God, moved by nothing else than his
infinite goodness, built his Church and determined to defend it, he will
never suffer it to perish.

<span id="vi.i-p259"></span>*And for my servant David’s sake.* This is
highly worthy of observation; for although God needed not to seek in any
one but in himself the reason why he embraced that nation with a
gracious regard, yet it is not without good reason that he brings
forward, as a very sure pledge of his love, *David,* by whose hand he
had made a covenant, and to whom he, had promised to be a Father. (<span
id="vi.i-p259.1"></span>[2Sa 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.i-p259.1"></span>.) The Prophet does not speak of David as a
private individual, but as a holy king whose throne was established by
the hand of God, under whose guidance the Church would continue to be
safe, and, in short, who would be the mediator between God and the
Church; for in this capacity he surpassed even the angels themselves, so
far as he represented the person of Christ. His throne was, indeed, soon
afterwards cast down, and his crown torn in pieces, yet this was no
unmeaning confirmation, that God intended to protect the city for a
time, because he determined not to make void what he had testified to
David concerning the eternity of his kingdom. And we know that the
captivity of the people did not wholly set aside the kingly power in the
posterity of David till at length Christ came, who on this account is
called *David* in other passages. (<span id="vi.i-p259.2"></span>[Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.i-p259.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p259.3"></span>[Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.i-p259.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p259.4"></span>[Ho
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span id="vi.i-p259.4"></span>..md)

<span id="vi.i-p260"></span>This shews the great absurdity of the
Papists in alleging that it is through the merits of the saints that God
pardons us; for here the case of David is widely different from that of
other saints, on account of the promise which had been made to him. He
might have named Abraham, or any other person, who possessed no small
authority in the Church; but since he was now speaking of the
preservation of the Church, and of the eternity of the kingdom of
Christ, he named in a peculiar manner him who expressly, along with
others, received that promise, “This is my rest, here will I dwell.”
(<span id="vi.i-p260.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="vi.i-p260.1"></span>..md)
Since therefore this passage has regard to the promise, and not to the
person, the Papists are doubly foolish in thinking that it affords
support to the intercession of the saints, which is of their own
contrivance. On the contrary, what they plead in their own behalf
absolutely contradicts their error; because David is here represented as
the type of the only Mediator, who sets aside the intercessions which
they have invented.

<span id="vi.i-p261"></span><span id="vi.i-p261.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p262"></span>**36.** *And the angel of Jehovah went out.*
The Prophet now relates what happened to the Assyrian, that we may not
think that the Lord spoke in vain. He shews, therefore, that his
prediction was proved by the event, that it might clearly appear that
God had sent him, and that he had not uttered anything rashly. Yet we
ought not to limit so remarkable a work of God to a single prediction;
but the authority of the Prophet was sustained, and his calling
sanctioned, as to the whole course of his doctrine. He has related a
singular and wellknown event which had recently happened, in order to
prove, by means of it, to the end of the world, that God had spoken by
his mouth.

<span id="vi.i-p263"></span>Where that slaughter was carried into effect
by the angel is not very evident. The opinion generally entertained is,
that it happened at the siege of Jerusalem; but it is also possible that
it may have happened during the march of Sennacherib’s army; that is,
while he was coming to besiege the city. I leave that matter uncertain,
because it is of little importance. From the context, certainly, we may
clearly learn that the tyrant did not approach so near as to be able to
throw a dare into the city.

<span id="vi.i-p264"></span>We must indeed reject that invention by
which Satan, through profane historians, has attempted to obscure this
extraordinary judgment of God, that, in consequence of a part of the
army having been destroyed by a plague during the war in Egypt,
Sennacherib returned into his own dominions. So great a number of
persons dying in one night cannot be attributed to a plague; and the
father of lies, with his wonted cunning, has turned aside into Egypt the
blessing which God bestowed on his Church. The event itself cries aloud
that Jerusalem was miraculously rescued, as it were, out of the midst of
destruction; especially since Isaiah had already delivered that message
by which God testified, in a manner which could not be mistaken, that
God would bestow this deliverance on the Jews and not on the Egyptians.

<span id="vi.i-p265"></span>*And slew in the camp ofthe Assyrians.* That
no one may ascribe the miracle to natural causes, it is expressly added,
that so great a multitude was slain by the hand of *the angel.* Nor is
it a new thing for the Lord to make use of the ministractions of angels
to promote the safety of believers, for whose advantage he appointed all
the armies of heaven; and it tends greatly to confirm our faith when we
learn that an infinite number of guardians keep watch over us. (<span
id="vi.i-p265.1"></span>[Ps 91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.i-p265.1"></span>.) The Lord alone, indeed, is of himself able,
and undoubtedly he alone preserves us; for the angels may be regarded as
his hand, and on that account they are called “principalities and
powers.” (<span id="vi.i-p265.2"></span>[Ro
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md)<span id="vi.i-p265.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.i-p265.3"></span>[Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021)<span id="vi.i-p265.3"></span>..md)
But it contributes much to aid our weakness that he hath appointed
heavenly messengers to be our defenders and guardians. Yet all the
praise is due to God alone, of whom the angels are only instruments; and
therefore we must beware of falling into the superstition of the
Papists, who, by their absurd worship of angels, ascribe to them that
power which belongs to God; an error with which we know that some very
learned men in all ages have been chargeable. Whether it was done by the
hand of one angel or of many angels, we cannot absolutely ascertain, nor
is it a matter of great importance; for the Lord can do it as easily by
one angel as by a thousand, and does not make use of their agency as if
he needed the assistance of others, but. rather, as we have formerly
said, in order to support our weakness. Yet it is more probable, and
agrees better with the words of the Prophet, that a single angel was
commissioned to execute this judgment, as in the ancient redemption an
angel passed through the whole of Egypt to slay the firstborn. (<span
id="vi.i-p265.4"></span>[Ex 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.i-p265.4"></span>.) Although God sometimes executes his vengeance
by means of evil angels, yet he chose one of his willing servants, that
by means of him he might provide for the safety of the Church.

<span id="vi.i-p266"></span>*A hundred and eighty-five thousand.* That
the army was so vast need not make us wonder, as ignorant people do, who
reckon it to be incredible and fabulous when they are told that so great
a multitude went into the field of battle, because we are accustomed to
carry on war with much smaller troops. But that the case was very
different with eastern nations, is fully testified by historians and by
wellknown transactions of the present day. Nor ought we to be astonished
at the vast forces which they led into battle, for they are much more
capable of enduring heat, and toil, and hunger, and are satisfied with a
much smaller portion of food, and do not care about those luxuries by
which our soldiers in the present day are corrupted.

<span id="vi.i-p267"></span>As to the way and manner of the slaughter,
this passage gives no definite statement. The Jews conjecture that the
soldiers were struck by thunder, but they do so without any authority or
probable evidence; for, being bold in contriving fables, they
unwarrantably affirm as certain whatever comes into their mind, as if it
were supported by some history.

<span id="vi.i-p268"></span>*Behold, they were all dead corpses.* That
the slaughter was not done so openly as the Jews allege is very evident
from this narrative, which states that they were lying dead. Now, if
they had been struck by a thunderbolt, every person must have known it,
and it would not have been omitted by the Prophet. This might serve to
refute the conjecture of the Jews, but I choose rather to leave the
matter doubtful. It is enough that the Lord, having determined to save
Jerusalem from the hand of the Assyrian, cut off his army by a sudden
death, without any agency of man.

<span id="vi.i-p269"></span><span id="vi.i-p269.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p270"></span>**37.** *Then Sennacherib, king of Assyria,
went away and returned.* He now shows how disgraceful was the retreat of
this haughty tyrant, who in the wishes of his heart had already devoured
the whole of Judea, and formerly dared to pretend to be more powerful
than God himself. By employing a variety of words to express his
departure, the Prophet indirectly censures the shameful flight; for the
repetition is not superfluous, “He set out, he went away, he returned.”
The title of *king* is added for the sake of greater disgrace. “Lo, this
is the great king of whose power Rabshakeh boasted so highly.”

<span id="vi.i-p271"></span>*And dwelt in Nineveh.* He did not come into
Judea, that: he might depart from it in that disgraceful manner; and
therefore the hand of God throws him back, even as straw is driven by
the wind. The circumstance of his dwelling in Nineveh reminds us also
that he had lost his courage as well as his forces; for he would not
willingly have remained at rest, if despair had not held him like a
chain. This means, therefore, that he was satisfied with his ancient
domains, of which Nineveh was the chief city and royal residence. At a
later period, when the Assyrians were conquered by the Chaldeans, the
seat of government was removed to Babylon, that is, ten years after the
death of Sennacherib, and during the reign of Esarhaddon, his successor,
who is here mentioned, for since parricides did not want defenders, a
nation torn by factions was easily subdued and conquered by foreign
enemies. Availing himself of this opportunity, Merodach invaded the
Assyrians, and subjected them to his power.

<span id="vi.i-p272"></span><span id="vi.i-p272.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p273"></span>**38.** *While he was worshipping.* Here the
Jews allow themselves that liberty of conjecture in which they are
always accustomed to indulge. They contrive a stow, that Sennacherib
consulted an oracle, and asked why he could not conquer the Jews; that
the answer was, that Abraham wished to sacrifice his son to God; that
the tyrant, following that example, then determined to slay his son, in
order to appease his god; and that his sons, enraged at the cruel design
of their father, slew him in the temple of his idol. But it is
unnecessary to spend time in such conjectures, in which the Jews display
excessive impudence.

<span id="vi.i-p274"></span>Here it is highly important to behold, as in
a picture, the unhappy death of tyrants, whom the Lord destroys without
the agency of men, when everything appears about to be overthrown by
their violence, and whom he exposes with all their power to universal
scorn. Sennacherib, who had come into Judea with a vast army, returns
home with few soldiers, and is led in triumph, as it were, by God as a
conqueror. But the matter does riot end here; for in the very heart of
his empire, in the metropolis, in the temple itself, the reverence for
which defended the meanest persons from the mob, he is slain, not by a
foreign enemy, not by a people in a state of sedition, not by traitors,
and in a word, not by servants, but by his own sons, that the murder may
be more disgraceful. It ought to be observed, that those insatiable
gluttons, who freely wallow in the blood of others, are slain by their
own followers, and are punished by those from whom above all others they
ought to have been safe. This is more shocking than if they had been put
to death by strangers; but God thus punishes the cruelty of those who,
in their eagerness to enjoy power, did not even spare the innocent. Even
in profane historians we find various examples of this kind, in which we
may easily behold the judgments of the Lord.

<span id="vi.i-p275"></span>Besides, the insatiable ambition of
Sennacherib receives its just reward, because, while he is intent on the
wide extension of his territories, he cannot secure the peace of his own
family, by leading his children to live at peace; for out of his neglect
of some, and undue attachment to others, the conspiracy arose. And not
only was this tyrant slain, but his kingdom also was soon afterwards
overthrown, as we have already said; and, in the meantime, that his
successor might not dare to make any attempt against the Jews, God kept
him also within the country by internal broils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc15005.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="vi.i-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p93"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p93.1"></span>Tellement
qu’ils ne marchent qu’en trainant les jambes ou a clochepied,” “So that
they walk only by dragging their limbs or limping.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc15005.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="vi.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p97"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p97.1"></span>Paraventure,
ou possible.” “Perhaps, or possible.”

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc15005.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="vi.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p110"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p110.1"></span>En les
punissant.” “By punishing them.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc15005.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="vi.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p112"></span> “The word translated *servants,* is not the
same with that in the preceding verse, but strictly means young men or
boys, and is so translated in the *Targ.* and *Vulg.* Many interpreters
regard it as a contemptuous description, and it is so translated by
Hitzig, *(*<span id="vi.i-p112.1"></span>*knappen,* attendants.)
Umbreit, *(*<span id="vi.i-p112.2"></span>*buben,* boys or lads,)
Henderson, (striplings,) and in other modern versions.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc15005.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="vi.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p116"></span> <span id="vi.i-p116.1"></span>ἀκούσας
ἀγγελίαν*,* “having heard a message.” “<span
id="vi.i-p116.2"></span>Havendo inteso un certo grido,” “having heard a
certain noise.” — *Ital.* “<span id="vi.i-p116.3"></span>Uno foll etmas
heren,” “and shall hear something.” — *Luth. Germ.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc15005.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="vi.i-p137.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p138"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p138.1"></span>Et jetter au
sein d’iceluy sa tristesse et soliciltude.” “And to pour into his bosom
his grief and anxiety.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc15005.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="vi.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p151"></span> <span id="vi.i-p151.1"></span>D’escheles.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc15005.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="vi.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p159"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p159.1"></span>Encor qu’il
y en air un.” “Though there be a God.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc15005.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="vi.i-p159.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p160"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p160.1"></span>Dechassant
par la splendeur de sa vertu toutes tenebres d’ignorance.” “Who drives
away by the brightness of his power all the darkness of ignorance.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc15005.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="vi.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p164"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p164.1"></span>D’autant
qu’ils estoyent de matire corruptible.” “Because they were of
corruptible matter.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc15005.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="vi.i-p164.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p165"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p165.1"></span>En un seul
homme.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc15005.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="vi.i-p165.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p166"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p166.1"></span>Quel orgueil
estce donc que le premier qui voudra mettre la main a la besogne se face
autant de dieux que bon luy semblera!” “What presumption is it then that
whoever shall first put his hand to the work shall make as many gods as
he thinks proper!”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc15005.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="vi.i-p174.3"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p175"></span> That is, it means either *since* or
*because.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc15005.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="vi.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p193"></span> The rivers of besieged places. — (Eng.
Ver.)

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc15005.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="vi.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p197"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p197.1"></span>Comme si
toutes les autres villes n’estoyent rien derant Dieu au pris de
cesteci.” “As if all other cities were nothing before God in comparison
of this.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc15005.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="vi.i-p198.5"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p199"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, pp. 26 and
83.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc15005.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="vi.i-p207.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p208"></span> “The marginal reading of the English
version runs thus, “Hast thou not heard how I have made it long ago, and
formed it of ancient times? Should I now bring it to be laid waste, and
defenced cities to be ruinous heaps?” The coincidence with the version
given by Calvin is striking. Was it accidental? — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc15005.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="vi.i-p213.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p214"></span> “Their inhabitants were of small power.
*Heb.,* short of hand.” — (Eng. Ver.) “Their inhabitants are short of
hand, that is, I have made them weak, they are *ashamed and confounded*.
By these and the following expressions he shews how easily the nations
were vanquished by the king of Assyria, when it had been so determined
by Jehovah.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc15005.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="vi.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p220"></span> <span id="vi.i-p220.1"></span>Les ennemis
de l’Eglise.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc15005.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="vi.i-p220.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p221"></span> “On the flat roofs of the east, if they be
not carefully kept clean, herbage grows from seeds, which perhaps had
been left there while they were in process of being dried, or had been
brought thither by the wind. But in consequence of the want of soil it
quickly withered.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc15005.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="vi.i-p228.2"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p229"></span>*”*<span id="vi.i-p229.1"></span>חה
*(chach)* denotes a *ring* inserted in the nose pierced for that
purpose, by means of which the Arabs and neighboring nations are wont to
tame and guide buffaloes and camels, and which is so much the more
powerful instrument in curbing the camel, that by drawing a rein which
hangs from it on both sides, the obstinate and refractory animal is
prevented from breathing.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc15005.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="vi.i-p232.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p233"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p233.1"></span>A ne tenir
conte des menaces d’iceluy.” “To pay no attention to his threatenings.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc15005.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="vi.i-p234.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p235"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p235.1"></span>Il devoit
(ce semble) monstrer la vertu de bonne heure, et non pas declarer ce
qu’il feroit apres le siege leve.” “He ought (one would think) to have
shewn his power at an early period, and not to have declared what he
would do after the siege had been raised.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc15005.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="vi.i-p245.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p246"></span> See verse 28.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc15005.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="vi.i-p257.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p258"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p258.1"></span>Pour l’amour
de mon sainct nom,” “For the love of my holy name.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](cc15006.md)
