[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15010)  [Next](cc15012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 43

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
43:1-28](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** But now thus saith the LORD that
created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for
I have redeemed thee, I have called *thee* by thy name; thou *art* mine.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et nunc sic dicit Iehova creator tuus,
Iacob; fictor tuus, Israel. Ne timeas, quoniam redemi (to,) vocavi to
nomine tuo; meus (es) tu.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** When thou passest through the waters,
I *will be* with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned;
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quum transieris per aquas, ego tecum
(ero;) in fluminibus, non inundabunt to. Quum transieris per ignem
ipsum, non combureris; nec flamma ardebit in to.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For I *am* the LORD thy God, the Holy
One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt *for* thy ransom, Ethiopia and
Seba for thee.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quoniam ego Iehova Deus tuus, Sanctus
Israel, servator tuus; dedi pretium redemptionis true, Aegyptum,
Aethiopiam, et Saba in vicem tuam.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give
men for thee, and people for thy life.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quia pretiosus fuisti in oculis meis,
honoratus es, et ego dilexi to. Tradam hominem in vicem tuam, et populos
in vicem animae tuae.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Fear not: for I *am* with thee: I
will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ne timeas, quia ego tecum. Ab Oriente
adducam semen tuum, et ab Occidente colligam to.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6.** I will say to the north, Give up; and
to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters
from the ends of the earth;

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Dicam Aquiloni, Da, et Austro, Ne
prohibeas. Adducito filios meos e longinquo, et filias meas ab extremo
terrae.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7.** *Even* every one that is called by my
name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I
have made him.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Omnes vocati nomine meo, et ad
gloriam meam creavi cos; formavi eos, adeoque feel eos.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Bring forth the blind people that
have eyes, and the deaf that have ears.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Ut educam populum caecum, cut oculi;
et surdos, quibus aures.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Let all the nations be gathered
together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare
this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses,
that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, *It: is* truth.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Omnes gentes congregentur simul, et
colligantur populi. Quis eat in els qui istud annuntiet: ac priora nos
audire faciat? Proferant testes suos, justi pronuntientur; sed audiant,
et dicent, Verum est.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Ye *are* my witnesses, saith the
LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe
me, and understand that I *am* he: before me there was no God formed,
neither shall there be after me.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Vos testes met, dicit Iehova, et
servus meus quem elegi. Propterea scietis, et credetis mihi, et
intelligetis quod ego sum; ante me non est formatus Deus, nee post me
erit.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11.** I, *even* I, *am* the LORD; and
besides me *there is* no saviour.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ego, ego sum Iehova, et nullus
praeter me servator.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12.** I have declared, and have saved, and
I have shewed, when *there was* no strange *god* among you: therefore ye
*are* my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I am God.

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ego annuntiavi, et servavi, et
audire feteram; et non in vobis alienus. Vos ergo testes mei, dicit
Iehova, quod ego sim Deus.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Yea, before the day *was* I *am* he;
and *there is* none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and
who shall let it?

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Etiam antequam dies esset, ego eram;
et non est qui e manu mea eruat; faciam, et quis avertet illud?

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Thus saith the LORD, your redeemer,
the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have
brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry *is* in the
ships.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sic dicit Iehova redemptor rester,
Sanctus Israelis: Propter vos misi in Babylonem, et descendere feci.
Omnes ipsi fugitivi; et Chaldaeorum clamor in navibus.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15.** I *am* the LORD, your Holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ego Iehova, Sanctus rester, creator
israel, Rex rester.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a
way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Sic dicit Iehova, qui dat in mari
viam, et in aquis violentis semitam.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Which bringeth forth the chariot and
horse, the army, and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall
not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Quum educit, currus et equus,
exercitus et robur simul jacent, ut non surgant. Extincti sunt; sicut
linum extincti sunt.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Remember ye not the former things,
neither consider the things of old.

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Ne reeordemini priorum, et antiqua
ne memoretis.

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Behold, I will do a new thing: now
it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in
the wilderness, *and* rivers in the desert.

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ecce ego facio rem novato; jam
orietur; an non earn cognoscetis? Hac vice *(vel, utique)* ponam in
deserto viam; flumina in solitudine.

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**20.** The beast of the field shall honour
me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness,
*and* rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Honorabit me bestia agri; dracones,
et pulli struthionis; quia dederim in deserto aquas, flumina in
solitudine, ad potandum populum meum, electum meum.

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>**21.** This people have I formed for
myself; they shall shew forth my praise.

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Populum hunc creavi mihi; laudem
meam narrabit.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>**22.** But thou hast not called upon me, O
Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et non me invocasti, Iacob; quin
fatigatus es in me, Israel.

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>**23.** Thou hast not brought me the small
cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy
sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor
wearied thee with incense.

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Non adduxisti mihi pecus
holocaustorum tuorum, et sacrificiis tuis non honorasti me; non feci to
servire in oblatione, nec laborare in suffitu.

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span>**24.** Thou hast bought me no sweet cane
with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices:
but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with
thine iniquities.

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Non emisti mihi pecunia calamum, nec
adipe victimarum tuarum inebriasti me; sed me servire fecisti in
peccatis tuis, et me laborare fecisti in iniquitatibus tuis.

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>**25.** I, *even* I, *am* he that blotteth
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins.

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Ego, ego sum qui deleo iniquitates
tuas propter me; ideo peccatorum tuorum non recordabor.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span>**26.** Put me in remembrance: let us plead
together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Reduc mihi in memoriam; judicemur
simul; narra tu, ut justificeris.

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span>**27.** Thy first father hath sinned, and
thy teachers have transgressed against me.

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Pater tuus primus peceavit, et
doctores tui in me praevaricati sunt.

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span>**28.** Therefore I have profaned the
princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel
to reproaches.

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Ideo poiluam Principes sanctuarii,
et ponam in execrationem Iacob, et Israel in opprobrium.

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span><span id="xii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span>**1.** *And now thus saith Jehovah.* It is
hard to say whether this is a different discourse or the same with the
former; for the Prophets, whose writings have come down to us, did not
separate their discourses into distinct chapters, so as to enable us to
know what they spoke each day. For my own part, I think it is probable
that this doctrine is connected with the preceding; for, having formerly
spoken severely against the Jews, and threatened destruction to them, he
wished to moderate that severity. The Lord always cares for the godly;
and wickedness never abounds to such an extent that he does not at the
same time preserve his people, and provide for their safety, that they
may not be involved in similar destruction. I think, therefore, that the
copulative <span id="xii.i-p60.1"></span>ו *(vau)* should be viewed as
disjunctive, “*And* *yet* the Lord will leave some consolation to the
godly who shall remain.”

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span>This passage ought to be carefully observed;
for, although it may appear as if all had leagued for our destruction,
although the anger of the Lord burn fiercely, and we think that we are
very near destruction; yet, if but two or three godly persons are left,
we ought not to despair; for Jehovah addresses them in this manner,
*Fear not.* The adverb *Now,* which is here used, has great weight; for
it means a present or immediate calamity, and, in short, a time when it
appeared as if all were lost and ruined; because at that very time God
does not cease to comfort his people, and gently to soothe their
sorrows, that amidst the utmost despair they may preserve their hope
firm and unshaken.

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span>Such is the purport of the preface, *thy
Creator and Maker;* for otherwise the door would have been shut against
the execution of these predictions. Besides, from other passages we may
conclude, that the Lord does not here speak of universal creation, such
as we share with the rest of men, and by which we are born mortal, but
of regeneration to the hope of a heavenly life, on account of which we
are also called new creatures. This is the sense in which Paul calls us
“the workmanship of God,” (<span id="xii.i-p62.2"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xii.i-p62.2"></span>,.md)
as on former occasions we have fully explained.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) In this sense also he calls himself
the *Maker;* as if he had said, that God did not “make” his Church, in
which the brightness of his glory shone conspicuously, in order to undo
so excellent a work. Hence we ought to observe, that the Church has
nothing that is properly her own, but everything in which she excels
ought to be ascribed to the gift of God.

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span>*For I have redeemed thee.* This is added as
the reason of the former statement, and may appropriately be viewed as
referring both to the future and to the past; for the first deliverance
from Egypt gave hope of another deliverance to come. Although he
describes a future deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, yet the
past tense is not inapplicable; for God hath redeemed us to himself
before the effect of redemption reaches us; and therefore when he wishes
to testify what he has decreed, namely, to redeem his Church, which
appeared to have perished, he uses with propriety the past tense.

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span>*I have called thee by thy name.* To “call
by one’s name” means here, to admit into close relationship, as when we
are adopted by God to be his children. The reason of this mode of
expression is, that God rejects the reprobate in such a manner that he
appears to have forgotten them. Hence, also, the Scripture says, that
“he knoweth them not.” (<span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>[Mt
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p65.2"></span>[Lu
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027)<span id="xii.i-p65.2"></span>..md)
From a contrast of this sort we learn more fully what is meant by being
“called by God.” It is when he passes by others, and deigns to bestow on
us a peculiar honor, and, from being strangers, to make us members of
his household, and next takes us under his care and guardianship, so as
to direct us and all our affairs. For the same reason he adds, *Thou art
mine,* that believers may know that there will always be left a Church
among the elect people, because God refuses to be deprived of his
rightful possession. In short, he declares that they are his dear
inheritance, of which he will never suffer himself to be robbed.

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span><span id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span>**2** *When thou shalt pass through the
waters.* This is an anticipation by which he declares that they who rely
on God’s immediate assistance have no reason for sinking under
adversity. That is stated more fully than in the preceding verse,
because while he shews that the Church will not be exempt from
calamities and afflictions, but must maintain a constant warfare, he
encourages to patience and courage; as if he had said, “The Lord hath
not redeemed thee that thou mightest enjoy pleasures and luxuries, or
that thou mightest abandon thyself to ease and indolence, but rather
that thou shouldest be prepared for enduring every kind of evils.”

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span>By *fire* and *water* he means every kind of
miseries to which we are liable in this life; for we must contend not
with calamities of one kind only, but with infinitely diversified
calamities. At one time we must “pass through wares” and at another
“through fire.” (<span id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>[Ps
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>..md)
In like manner the Apostle James exhorts believers not to faint when
they “fall into various temptations.” (<span
id="xii.i-p68.2"></span>[Jas 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.i-p68.2"></span>.) And, indeed, faith needs to be put to the
trial in many ways; for it often happens that he who has been victorious
in one combat has been baffled by another kind of temptation. We are
therefore tried by afflictions, but are at length delivered; we are
baffled by the billows, but are not swallowed up; we are even scorched
by the flames, but are not consumed. We have, indeed, the same feeling
of pain as other men, but we are supported by the grace of God, and
fortified by the spirit of patience, that we may not faint; and at
length he will stretch out his hand and lift us up on high.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md)

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span><span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span>**3.** *For I am Jehovah thy God.* He
confirms the preceding statement by the experience of the past; for the
Lord had formerly assisted his people in such a manner that it was
reasonable and proper that believers should safely rely on his grace. We
must always remember what we had in the former verse, — “Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee; I am thy Lord.” These ought to be read unitedly and
in immediate connection, because they have the same object; for if the
Lord is our God, it follows that he is on our side, and therefore we
shall find that he is our Savior. But if we wish to know by experience
that he is our Savior, we must be a part of Israel, not in name only,
but so as to give true evidences of godliness during the whole course of
our life. This is therefore the foundation of our confidence, that
“Jehovah is our God;” and hence it follows that they who do not
acknowledge God to be their Father, and who do not rely on his kindness,
are wretched, and tremble continually. Wicked men, indeed, indulge in
mirth, and even act disdainfully towards God; but their indifference is
intoxication and madness of mind, by which they are the more rapidly
carried headlong to their destruction. To believers alone this brings
the assurance, that he who hath chosen them wishes to be continually
their God, and to preserve them; and therefore hath separated them to be
his inheritance.

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span>In this sense he calls himself *The Holy One
of Israel,* because while the whole human race is by nature estranged
from him, he hath chosen his people that he might set them apart to be
his own. Now, though external separation is of little moment, unless God
sanctify the elect by the power of his Spirit, yet, because Israel had.
openly polluted himself, God declares that still his covenant shall not
be made void, because he is always like himself. Besides, it is well
known that the word *holy* is used in an active sense for “him who
sanctifies;” and therefore if we wish to be certain of God’s love
towards us, let us always remember the testimony of our adoption, by
which we are confirmed in our hearts, as by a sure pledge, and let us
with all earnestness ask it from God.

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span>*I have given the price of thy redemption.*
I make no remarks on those repetitions which are frequently used by the
Prophet, and are customary in the Hebrew language; for the two phrases
in this verse, *I have given the price,* and *I* *have given instead of
thee,* are used by him in the same sense. We have said that the Prophet
confirms believers by bringing forward earlier proofs of the grace of
God; as if he had said, “You have already known by experience that God
cares for your salvation; for how could it have happened that
Sennacherib turned his forces against Egypt, Ethiopia, and other
nations, but because the Lord spared you, and directed the attack of
your enemy to another quarter? Since therefore he has hitherto
manifested so great anxiety on your behalf, you have no need to be
anxious about the future.” Thus if at any time doubts arise in our minds
about the providence of God, or about his promises, we ought to bring to
remembrance the benefits which he has already bestowed upon us; for we
shall be chargeable with extreme ingratitude if, after having received
from God so many benefits, we doubt of his kindness for the future.

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span>But a question arises. In what sense does he
call “Egypt and Ethiopia the price of the redemption” of the Church? for
heathen men are not of so high value as to redeem the children of God.
But the Prophet borrowed this mode of expression from the ordinary
language of men; as if he had said, “The Egyptians, the Ethiopians, and
the Sabeans came in thy room, and, as if an exchange had been made, were
constrained to suffer the destruction to which thou wast exposed; for,
in order to preserve thee, I destroyed them, and delivered them instead
of thee into the hand of the enemy.” But we must attend to the history.
While Sennacherib was rushing on with his whole might against Judea, the
Lord, by throwing over him a bridle, suddenly checked him, and entangled
him by other wars, so that he was constrained to withdraw his army; and
thus the Egyptians and Ethiopians were signally defeated, while the
people of God were allowed to breathe. (<span
id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>[2Ki
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028.md)<span id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p74.2"></span>[Isa
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p74.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span>We too may readily acknowledge, if we are
not worse than stupid, that the same providence and infinite mercy of
God have been manifested toward us, when tyrants who would have wished
to destroy us, and who joined in opening their mouths with eagerness to
devour us, are made by him to engage in wars against each other, and
when the rage with which they burned against us is directed by him to
another quarter; for by doing so he preserves us, so as to give them as
the price of our redemption. When we see irreligious men, amidst the
uproar and confusion of mutual wars, pause in their efforts to destroy
us, while it is manifest that they do not pause of their own accord, let
us lift up our eyes to heaven, and learn that God, in order to spare us,
miraculously substitutes others in our room; for we were “like sheep
appointed for slaughter,” (<span id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>[Ps
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>;.md)
swords were drawn on every hand, if he had not snatched them from the
hands of wicked men, or given them a different direction.

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span>Hence we ought to draw a general doctrine,
that the Lord takes such care of all believers (<span
id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>[1Pe 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007.md)<span
id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>) that he values them more highly than the whole
world. Although, therefore, we are of no value, yet let us rejoice in
this, that the Lord sets so high a value upon us, and prefers us to the
whole world, rescues us from dangers, and thus preserves us in the midst
of death. If everything were at peace with us, and if we had no
troubles, we should not see this grace of God; for when a thousand
deaths appear to hang over us, and when there appears no way of escape,
and when he suddenly drives back the tyrants, or turns them in another
direction, we then know by experience what the Prophet says, and
perceive his invaluable kindness toward us.

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span><span id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span>**4.** *Because thou wast precious.* Others
interpret it “Thou wast honorable, because I raised thee to honor;” but
I think that God assigns the reason why he gave up Egypt and Ethiopia to
the enemies in their room. It was because he loved them, and because
they were dear to him. It ought to be explained thus, — “Because I loved
thee, therefore I gave a man for thee.” By these words he excludes all
personal worth on the part of the people, that they may not boast of
having obtained anything by their own merit; and, indeed, the cause of
salvation, and of all the blessings which we receive, is the undeserved
love of God; it is also the cause of all our excellence; for, if he
judge of us according to our own qualifications, he will not value us a
straw. We must therefore set aside every idea of merit, or of personal
worth, of which we have none, and must ascribe everything to the grace
of God alone. He means that this love is not of an ordinary kind when he
says that we are “precious;” and for the same reason he calls us “his
first-born,” (<span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>,.md)
and “his friends.” (<span id="xii.i-p78.2"></span>[Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p78.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span>*I will give a man.* Here he adds nothing
new, but rather explains the preceding statement, and employs the word
“man” collectively for “men;” as if he had said, “There will be no man
whom God will not take away and destroy, in order to preserve his
people; for he sets a higher value on a single believer than on the
whole world.” At the same time he reminds believers that they are
redeemed at the expense of those who do not at all differ from them in
origin or in nature.

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span><span id="xii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span>**5.** *Fear not.* When Isaiah frequently
repeats this exhortation, we ought not to look upon it as superfluous;
for we know and feel how prone we are by nature to distrust. Scarcely
any words can express the greatness of the alarm by which the Church was
at that time shaken. As soon as we begin to call in question the
promises of God, our minds are distracted by various thoughts; we are
alarmed and continually tormented by the greatness and diversity of the
dangers, till at length we are stupified, and have no perception of the
grace of God. Accordingly, before despair seize our hearts, it is not
without good reason that he so frequently repeats *I am with thee,* in
order that he may either destroy altogether or partially mitigate the
fear which is seated in our hearts; for, when it has taken root, there
is no method of curing it. This should lead us also to remark, that we
ought not to place our safety in anything else than in the presence of
God; for if he be absent, we shall either shudder with fear, or become
stupid, or run headlong like drunkards. And yet it is not the will of
God that we shall be so devoid of fear as to give ourselves up to
slothfulness and indifference; but when we are informed that he is at
hand and will assist us, cheerful confidence ought to be victorious in
the midst of fears.

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span>*I will bring thy seed from the east.* This
passage is evidently taken front the writings of Moses, as we said at
the beginning of this commentary,  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) that the prophets are his
interpreters, and draw their doctrine from his books; and therefore the
Prophet applies this passage to that particular event which he had in
view in the present discourse. Moses had thus foretold,

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span>“The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity,
and will have compassion on thee, and will turn and gather thee out of
all the nations into which thy God hath scattered thee. Even if thou
shalt be driven to the utmost parts of heaven, thence will thy God
gather thee, and thence will he take thee.” (<span
id="xii.i-p84.1"></span>[Deut. 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p84.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span>What Moses spoke in general terms the
Prophet here confirms in a particular instance, and again declares with
a slight change of the words. The amount of what is stated is, that it
is as difficult to gather a people that is not only scattered, but
driven to the most distant countries of the world, as it is to gather
ashes that have been scattered here and there; but that God, by his
wonderful power, will cause those dislocated members to unite again in
one body.

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span><span id="xii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span>**6.** *I will say to the north.* Under
these four parts he includes the whole world, which is very customary in
all languages. But Isaiah speaks in somewhat loftier language than
Moses, because he wished the people to view the event as if it had
actually occurred; and, to such a purpose those lively descriptions
which may be said to place it before our eyes, are admirably adapted. He
might, indeed, have said it in a single word, but this manner of address
is far more forcible; for he represents God as commanding, with supreme
authority, all the creatures, and every part of the world, to set his
people free.

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span>*Bring my sons.* He means that not all
Israel shall be gathered, but only that which is the true Israel; for
not all who are the descendants of Abraham according to the flesh are
true Israelites, but very many of them are bastards. (<span
id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>[Rom. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>..md)
These belong to the true and lawful seed; for that vast multitude of
people was not saved, but only “a remnant,” as we saw in a former
chapter. (<span id="xii.i-p88.2"></span>[Isa.
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p88.2"></span>..md)
There was a vast number of people who were carried away into captivity,
but there were few who were brought back. Among them was preserved a
seed; and the Lord would not suffer that seed to perish, or the covenant
which he had made with their fathers to be broken. These things were
very hard to be believed by the Jews, who were despised by all, and were
exposed not only to the hatred but to the curses of almost the whole
world, and were scarcely reckoned to belong to the number of men; and
therefore they must have depended solely on the promises. They knew that
Cyrus (<span id="xii.i-p88.3"></span>[Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p88.3"></span>.md)
would come, but who he was they were not yet able to conceive, for he
had not yet been born; and therefore they needed to be armed with very
excellent and steadfast faith, in order to wait for the Lord with
unshaken confidence, while many reckoned these predictions to be fables.
Let us learn also flora this example to look to God alone, so as not to
doubt that he will assist us and will abide by his promises at the
proper time.

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span><span id="xii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span>**7.** *All called.* Such is my
interpretation of this clause, for the Prophet has made use of the
singular number instead of the plural. Interpreters have mistaken the
import of this mode of expression; for they explain it thus, “Whosoever
have been called by my name, I have formed them to my glory.” But I
understand it thus, “All called,” that is, “All shall be called by my
name;” as he says in other passages, “My name shall be called upon
them.” (<span id="xii.i-p90.1"></span>[Ge
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016.md)<span id="xii.i-p90.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p90.2"></span>[De
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.i-p90.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p90.3"></span>[Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p90.3"></span>..md)
Why so? “Because I have created them, I have formed them, I have made
them for my glory.” He pursues the subject which he formerly handled
about gathering the people into one body, though they have been
scattered into various and distant parts of the world; as if he had
said, “If this work appears to be incredible, you ought not to judge of
it by the ordinary course of nature, but you ought to look to his
power.”

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span>*By my name;* that is, “under my direction;”
as we have also said, in expounding another passage, (<span
id="xii.i-p91.1"></span>[Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025)<span id="xii.i-p91.1"></span>,.md)
that God is reconciled to us, because by the right of adoption we are
accounted his people. Now, because the Jews were to be brought back
under his guidance and command, and not by the power or assistance of
men, he declares that his name will be rendered illustrious in this
deliverance, in order that men may learn not to form their judgments
from the views of the flesh or from natural means.

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span>*For my glory.* The Prophet adds the reason,
which contains strong ground of confirmation; that is, that he wishes
his glory to be manifested in them. He therefore testifies that the
salvation of his people concerns himself, that he can no more throw away
the care of his people than he can expose his name to reproach and
disgrace, which he will never do, and, in a word, that his glow, of
which he is the continual defender, is intimately connected with the
salvation of his people.

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>*I have formed him, yea, I have made him.*
For the sake of amplification he repeats the same thing in many forms of
language, that they may be more fully convinced that he wishes to
conduct to the end the work which he has begun. Such is the force of the
particle <span id="xii.i-p93.1"></span>אף, *(aph,)* which means
“likewise,” or “even,” and sometimes, as we say, “for this time.”
Accordingly, the meaning is generally supposed to be, “In like manner,
as I have created and formed that people, so I desire to elevate them to
a new rank, and to restore them to their ancient freedom.” It may also
be rendered and so, and, as I have said, I prefer this rendering, so as
to mean not only that the people have nothing but from his grace, but
that he is deeply concerned about their salvation, because he cannot
despise his own work, a work so remarkable and excellent. This passage,
therefore, recommends to us the extraordinary grace of God, by which we
are not only born to be men, but likewise formed anew after his image.

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span><span id="xii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span>**8.** *That I may bring out.* The brevity
of the words makes the meaning somewhat obscure. Some translate it thus,
“I will bring out the blind, and him who hath eyes,” that is, both the
blind and them that see, both the deaf and them that hear. Some explain
*blind* to mean those who have indeed eyes, but so dim that they cannot
perceive the secrets of heavenly wisdom. But when I take a careful
survey of the whole, I prefer to interpret those phrases separately. “I
will bring out the blind, so as to restore sight to them; I will bring
out the deaf, so that they shall recover their hearing.” And thus the
meaning of the words is, “To bring out the blind, and they shall have
eyes; and to bring out the deaf, and they shall have ears.” The people
are first delivered, and then eyes and ears are restored to them.

<span id="xii.i-p96"></span>The Lord did this when he brought his people
out of Babylon; but undoubtedly the Prophet looks farther, that is, to
the kingdom of Christ; for at that time believers were gathered not only
out of Babylon, but out of all places of the earth. This was seen openly
and singularly at Peter’s first sermon, when many persons from various
countries united in the same confession of faith. (<span
id="xii.i-p96.1"></span>[Ac 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md)<span
id="xii.i-p96.1"></span>.) But afterwards others, who appeared to be
altogether strangers, united in the same body, and shewed that they were
children of Abraham. If, therefore, we wish to find the full truth of
this prophecy, we must come to Christ, by whom alone we are rescued from
the bondage of the devil and restored to liberty. (<span
id="xii.i-p96.2"></span>[Joh 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036.md)<span
id="xii.i-p96.2"></span>.) It is he who restores to us eyes and ears,
though formerly we were by nature both blind and deaf. Yet it is proper
to remember what I have repeatedly stated on former occasious, that the
return of the people is closely connected with the renewal of the
Church, which was accomplished by Christ; for what God began by bringing
his people out of captivity he continued till Christ, and then brought
to perfection; and so it is one and the same redemption. Hence it
follows that the blessings which are here mentioned ought not to be
limited to a short time.

<span id="xii.i-p97"></span><span id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p98"></span>**9.** *Let all the nations be gathered
together.* Here the Prophet, as on former occasions, speaks in the
person of God, and bids defiance to all idols. It is highly necessary,
and was at that time especially necessary, to distinguish between the
true God and false gods. It is easy indeed to ascribe to God the glory
of divinity, but it is very difficult to claim it for him so
exclusively, that all false gods shall be reduced to nothing; and at
that time the error regarding them had received greater confirmation,
for at the ruin of the nation unbelievers applauded the gods as if they
had vanquished the true God. The Prophet therefore suggests to believers
the reply which they should make to the jeers of their enemies, and,
although they should sally forth in crowds to defend their errors,
enjoins the small number to stand firm against all their forces.

<span id="xii.i-p99"></span>*Who is there among them to declare this?*
We formerly said that foreknowledge and power belong to God alone; for
he has all things under his eye, and governs all things according to his
pleasure; and, accordingly, by these two arguments he formerly proved
against all the false gods the charge of vanity, lie now repeats the
same charge, not to reclaim from this error the Gentiles, who did not
read those prophecies, but to confirm the faith of the Jews, who were
assured that they alone knew the true God. At present, indeed, this
doctrine belongs both to Gentiles and to Jews; and not only so, but when
the Jews shewed themselves to be unworthy, (<span
id="xii.i-p99.1"></span>[Ac 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md)<span
id="xii.i-p99.1"></span>,) their privileges were extended to the
Gentiles; but at that time Isaiah chiefly addressed the Jews, that,
although they saw the Gentiles succeeding in everything to their wish,
still they might abhor their idols and superstitions.

<span id="xii.i-p100"></span>*Let them produce their witnesses.* After
haying summoned unbelievers to plead the cause of their gods, or rather,
after having held it to be acknowledged that it was to no purpose that
they spent their time in the worship of idols, because they had no power
of predicting future events, he adds that there will be no *witnesses*
to testify with truth that any prediction ever proceeded from false
gods, and consequently that their cause is destitute of lawful defense.
There never was a time, indeed, when there were not many fables told
about idols, as we constantly hear of innumerable fables of that kind
which are widely circulated, and the silliness with which unbelievers
pour forth their lies is equalled by the obstinacy with which they
defend them; but if we come to examine them, we shall find them to be
supported by no proof, but to be absolute tricks and foolish inventions.
On this account the Prophet willingly yields the victory, if they shall
bring forward competent and trustworthy “witnesses.” To God alone,
therefore, this glory belongs; for he has “witnessess,”

<span id="xii.i-p101"></span>*But let them hear.* At length, as if the
matter had been fully proved, he rises more confidently, and commands
the vanquished to keep silence. When he bids them *hear,* he means that
the only obstacle to their acknowledgment of the truth is, that they are
prejudiced by their error, and refuse to hear God; for this contempt
causes them not to repent, but, on the contrary, to defend their error
with stubbornness. Now, the Lord was ready to teach if they had only
been willing to hear him with candor; and a better teacher could not be
desired, but pride and haughtiness will not suffer them to see the truth
or to listen to God. They are, therefore, without excuse; for they
disdainfully reject his public instructions, and do not assent to his
doctrine. Isaiah justly declares that, if they gave due attention, they
would be constrained to acknowledge it to be true;  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) and indeed all who shall shew
themselves to be obedient will readily acknowledge that the truth of God
is founded on a firm and solid judgment, and not on an uncertain and
doubtful opinion.

<span id="xii.i-p103"></span><span id="xii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p104"></span>**10.** *Ye* *are my witnesses.* After
having summoned the Gentiles to a contest, and after having proved that
the stories which they circulated concerning their idols were false and
unfounded, God now separates himself from the multitude of them, and
produces his “witnesses,” that he may not be thought to be of the same
class with them. He justly boasts, therefore, that they are his
witnesses, and that he has true witnesses; for the Jews had been
instructed by heavenly oracles, as far as was necessary for attaining
perfect certainty. Yet he indirectly reproaches them with ingratitude,
if they do not openly declare that they know everything that is
necessary for maintaining the glory of God; and, indeed, he calls them
to bear witness, and adjures them not to cover with silence those
predictions by which the true religion might be proved, because that
would be unjustly to defraud a good cause of their support.

<span id="xii.i-p105"></span>*And my servant.* By the word “servant”
some think that Isaiah is meant, but I prefer to take it collectively,
for all the prophets; for there is a change of number. Now, this name
was peculiarly bestowed on the prophets, whom the Lord chose for the
purpose of maintaining his truth; and yet, in making use of the singular
number, there can be no doubt that he looked chiefly to Christ, in whom
all the prophecies are contained and accomplished. (<span
id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>[Joh
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045.md)<span id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p105.2"></span>[Ac
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.i-p105.2"></span>,
and 10:43; <span id="xii.i-p105.3"></span>[Rom.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.i-p105.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p105.4"></span>[Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p105.4"></span>..md)
It is also certain that by him chiefly, as the highest witness, all men
are convinced. Yet we ought to observe God’s design, which I formerly
mentioned, to call the Jews to be witnesses, that he might accuse them
of ingratitude, if they did not freely utter what is demanded by the
faith of those who, after having received proofs so numerous and so
remarkable, could not be ignorant of the power and goodness of God, or
call them in question without the greatest treachery. At the same time,
he shows in general that the Lord hath chosen the Church, in order to
bear testimony to his truth; and on that ground Paul calls the Church

<span id="xii.i-p106"></span>“the pillar and foundation of truth.”
(<span id="xii.i-p106.1"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p106.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p107"></span>It is therefore the duty of the Church to
defend and publish the truth, that it may be honored by posterity from
age to age; not that the Lord needs this assistance, but because in this
way he wishes to prove and establish its truth among men. Here Isaiah
includes all believers, for this office of bearing testimony is binding
on all, but especially on ministers, who ought to be standard-bearers,
and to set an example before others. For this reason also they are
particularly mentioned; but in general no man ought to be accounted a
believer, who conceals the knowledge of God within his own heart, and
never makes an open confession of the truth.

<span id="xii.i-p108"></span>*Therefore ye shall know.* That it may not
be thought that the Lord asks them to bear witness about what is
unknown, he adds, “Ye shall know, ye shall believe, ye shall
understand;” and by this order of the words he shews that faith goes
before confession. If, therefore, confession proceed from the top of the
lips, and not from the heart, it is vain and useless, and is not such as
the Lord demands or approves. Yet there is still some difficulty in the
order of those words, “to know, to believe, to understand;” for we do
not say that all who know believe, and, in the ordinary manner of
speaking, where there is knowledge, there may not be faith. Besides, it
is doubtful what is meant by “understanding,” which is mentioned after
faith, as if it differed from knowledge.

<span id="xii.i-p109"></span>But in this passage the Prophet shows that
there is a kind of preparation for faith, by which God procures
reverence for his word, when he sees that it needs such assistance. The
beginning of faith, indeed, is humility, by which we yield our senses as
captives to God; but because we do not embrace the doctrine offered to
us with such certainty as is needful, God confirms us by proofs, that we
may fully believe. Thus John relates that he and Peter “believed the
Scriptures,” (<span id="xii.i-p109.1"></span>[Joh
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p109.1"></span>,.md)
when they beheld in the grave the tokens of Christ’s resurrection; and
in another passage he says that “the disciples believed in Christ,” when
that which they had heard from his mouth was accomplished. (<span
id="xii.i-p109.2"></span>[Joh
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p109.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p110"></span>We may therefore sum it up in this manner.
“The Jews shall actually feel it, when their faith shall have been aided
by signs to worship the true God.” At the same time, a distinction is
made between true faith and that credulity which lightly carries away
fickle men; and God always bestows on his elect knowledge and judgment,
that they may distinguish truth from falsehood. Next follows faith and
firm certainty, so that they embrace without hesitation all that the
Lord hath spoken; and afterwards faith kindles in our hearts more and
more the light of understanding, and even in proportion to the progress
which we make in it, our knowledge grows and becomes brighter. But these
things are not done by our own judgment, but by the power of the Holy
Spirit, so far as we are enlightened by him.

<span id="xii.i-p111"></span>*That I am he.* He means here that it is
requisite, in order to faith, that we know who is our God, and that it
is he whom we worship, and no other; that our minds may not foolishly
waver, and go astray, and admit everything that shall be supported by
the opinion of men. Thus, faith is not that which frames anything
according to its own fancy, or thoughtlessly assents to any assertion,
or doubts and hesitates, but that which rests on firm certainty, so
that, yielding obedience to the one true God, it surveys as from a lofty
position, and despises all false gods, and frees and delivers their
minds from the dread of error.

<span id="xii.i-p112"></span>Hence we see what we ought to think of the
perplexed faith of Papists; for they think that men who are stupid and
void of understanding, who can scarcely utter a syllable about God, whom
they know not, or of whom they are uncertain, are believers, provided
that they profess that they believe what their holy mother, the Church,
believes. But the Lord does not approve of a thing so trivial, but has
united faith with understanding, that we may not imagine that the one
can be separated from the other. Besides, there is no faith, unless you
believe that it is God who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
who spoke by the prophets and apostles; for it will not be faith, but a
vain and wandering imagination, if we do not believe in that God.

<span id="xii.i-p113"></span>*Before me there was no God formed.* In
order to confirm still more what he lately said, that he is the only
God, he again adds that “there was no other God before him.” Yet <span
id="xii.i-p113.1"></span>לא נוצר *(lo notzar) may* be taken in a passive
sense, so as to convey a different meaning, that of a “creature,” or
“workmanship,” or “work”  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) of
God; but as that appears to be a forced sense, I willingly concur with
the ordinary opinion, that “no other God had been formed before him.”
This contains a kind of irony, as if it had been said, that there was no
other god that had not been made and formed by mortals, and
consequently, that none can be compared with the eternal God.

<span id="xii.i-p115"></span>*And after me there shalt not be.* He adds
that “there shall be none afterwards,” because God always preserves his
dominion entire and unimpaired, and does not fail through old age or
length of days. His object is to shew that, until we rely on him, there
is no faith in us. They who know that there is some deity, but do not
understand what it is, continually hesitate, and entangle themselves in
strange labyrinths. Let us, therefore, believe that he alone is God, and
for that reason cannot permit any one to be equal to him, or to share
with him in his majesty.

<span id="xii.i-p116"></span><span id="xii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p117"></span>**11.** *I, I*  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) *am Jehovah.* Here the Lord employs
lofty language, as having obtained the victory. Already he had
sufficiently explained in what manner he must be known, and had shewn
that there is no God except himself; and now, in order to confirm this
doctrine, he exclaims, “I alone am Jehovah, there is none besides me.”
This shews how dangerous it is to contrive anything about God out of our
own fancy; for when we make any kind of graven image, we produce an idol
instead of God. We ought, therefore, to embrace nothing but what has
proceeded from God, so as not to allow ourselves any liberty on this
subject. After God has revealed himself to us, we ought to make progress
in the knowledge of him, and to grow and be strengthened every day; for
this is the meaning of the repetition, I, I.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md)

<span id="xii.i-p120"></span>*And there is no Savior besides me.* That
we may not suppose that his eternal essence only is here exhibited, but
also his power and goodness, which he constantly exercises towards us,
and by which he is fully revealed, he adds an epithet as a
distinguishing mark, that “he is the only Savior.” The world falls into
the mistake of giving a naked and empty name to God, and at the same
time conveying his authority to another, as in Popery God is indeed
mentioned, but is robbed of his honor, when one part of it is given to
St. Peter, and another to St. Paul, and another to St. William, and
another to St. George; that is, his offices are distributed into so many
parts, that hardly anything is left to him but a naked and empty name.
They boast, indeed, of worshipping God alone; but when we come to what
it belongs to God to do, they make as many gods as they have creatures,
and distribute among them his power and authority. But the Lord has
determined that these shall remain entire and uninfringed, and they
cannot be conveyed to another without shocking blasphemy; for he alone
does good to men, he alone defends and preserves them. The last clause
of the verse expresses that knowledge which is derived from experience,
that we may not seek salvation in any other than in him who its the only
author of it. Hence we learn that the chief part of the worship of God
consists in faith, when he is acknowledged to be the beginning and the
end of life, when we bestow on him the title of Savior, and do not
convey to another what he declares to belong to himself and to reside in
him alone.

<span id="xii.i-p121"></span><span id="xii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p122"></span>**12.** *I have told and have saved.* This
verse is a sort of recapitulation (<span
id="xii.i-p122.1"></span>ἀνακεφαλαίωσις) of the preceding; for Jehovah
again relates that he foretold future events, and that he had actually
accomplished what he foretold. To *tell* relates to foreknowledge, and
to *save* relates to power and goodness. In a word, he means that he
alone is God, who both knows and does all things. Although these things
were spoken to the Jews, yet let us know that they belong to us also;
for all the predictions that have come down to us ought to be regarded
by us as so many proofs both of the knowledge and of the power of God,
that we may rely on him alone.

<span id="xii.i-p123"></span>*And there is no strange god among* you.
That superstitions may be banished, and that he may be elevated to the
throne of his heavenly doctrine, he again mentions that he displayed his
power, and gave tokens of his grace, without being aided by any one; and
hence it follows, that they who shall not be satisfied with him alone,
will be excessively ungrateful and wicked. “At the time,” says he, “when
ye worshipped no strange god, I openly and publicly displayed my power;
and therefore it is unlawful to bestow on false gods what belongs to
me.” And yet in these words he does not so much commend the piety or
religion of the people, as he excludes all foreign aid; as if he had
said, that while the Jews knew no other God, the miracles wrought by him
were so numerous and so great, that it was perfectly evident that none
but he is God. At the same time Isaiah remarks that our unbelief hinders
God from displaying his power amongst us. Away, then, with all errors
and all wavering and doubtful opinions about God, if we wish to have
experience of his power! for if we turn our minds to superstitions or
idols, we shall undoubtedfly render ourselves unworthy of his assistance
and kindness.

<span id="xii.i-p124"></span>*Ye are therefore my witnesses.* At length
he again summons them as *witnesses,* accusing them of base and shameful
ingratitude, if they conceal what he had abundantly made known to them;
for the greater and more numerous the testimonies by which he has
manifested to us his power and might, so much the more are we bound to
declare them to others.

<span id="xii.i-p125"></span><span id="xii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p126"></span>**13.** *Even before the day was.* He now
speaks of the eternity of God; but we must attend to the Prophet’s
design; for he who has a beginning and is not from himself, cannot rule
by his dominion, or govern according to his pleasure, what he has not
created. When, therefore, God declares that he is eternal, he reminds us
that the world is his workmanship; for this order of nature did not
spring up by chance, but proceeded from the wonderful purpose and.
wisdom of God. (<span id="xii.i-p126.1"></span>[Ge
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p126.1"></span>..md)
In this sense he afterwards adds, —

<span id="xii.i-p127"></span>*There is none to deliver out of my hand.*
Hence we shall clearly see that his supreme and infinite power is proved
from his eternity; for if he were not eternal, he could neither exercise
authority over all things, nor be the defender of his people, nor
dispose of the creatures according to his pleasure; but since he is
eternal, all things must be subject to his authority. To the same
purpose is what he says, that no obstacle can prevent what he hath
decreed to do, that the Jews may not be alarmed or dispirited by the
forces or number of the enemies.

<span id="xii.i-p128"></span><span id="xii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p129"></span>**14.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* The Prophet
shews that Cyrus will be but a hired soldier, to render his services to
the Lord for delivering his people. He does not indeed name Cyrus, but
speaks of the army which he has under his command for subduing the
Babylonians. ‘We know that this was accomplished by Cyrus and Darius,
and that under the direction of God, who had foretold it long before.
And not only does he speak to those who beheld the accomplishment of
these things, but to all others whom the Lord wished to comfort by this
hope of deliverance, of which they could not have formed the smallest
conception. He addresses captives, who, having been oppressed by the
cruel tyranny of the Babylonians, appeared to be beyond all hope of
obtaining deliverance, and who might be apt to regard those promises as
absurd, because in the opinion of men there was no visible hope of
redemption. But we should yield this honor to the word, to believe what
is otherwise incredible, that we may be encouraged to “hope against
hope.” (<span id="xii.i-p129.1"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="xii.i-p129.1"></span>..md)
Such is the power of faith, that it must not be limited to the view of
external objects, but rise above the heavens, and reach even to God
himself.

<span id="xii.i-p130"></span>*For your sake I have sent to Babylon.*
This is highly emphatic; for, while Cyrus was instigated by ambition and
by an insatiable desire of power, and while there were many causes of
the war, nothing was further from being generally believed, than that
the destruction of that monarchy would shake the world, so that the Jews
who were at that time most despicable in the eyes of men, would return
to their native land. But God testifies that he will grant easy
victories to the Persians, so that they shall subdue the East, because
he will be reconciled to his Church.

<span id="xii.i-p131"></span>For the same reason he begins by saying,
that he is *the Redeemer of his people,* and *the Holy One,* to shew
more clearly that he holds dear and precious those whom he has chosen to
be his peculiar people. (<span id="xii.i-p131.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p131.1"></span>..md)
But this appears to be inconsistent with what we have formerly seen,

<span id="xii.i-p132"></span>“We to thee who plunderest, for thou shalt
be exposed to plunder,” (<span id="xii.i-p132.1"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p132.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="xii.i-p133"></span>for the Lord declared that he would punish
the cruelty of the Babylonians, and repay to them what they had
deserved; but now he affirms that he sends the Persians to deliver his
people. But these statements may easily be reconciled. Though the Lord
punished the Babylonians, yet he had also a care of his people; for, as
the providence of God extends throughout the whole world, so he takes a
peculiar care of his Church, and, as the elect are the object of his
special love, so he directs all things for their salvation. It is not
without good reason, therefore, that he says that he sent, and that he
was induced by undeserved favor to send, because he wished to be the
Savior of his people.

<span id="xii.i-p134"></span>*And I made them come down.* For the same
reason as before, he now adds that they shall come down at his command,
because, although the Persians and Medes will have another object in
view, yet their march shall be guided by heavenly impulse; and in this
manner he wished to give an early testimony of his grace to the elect
people, that they might not faint under many very distressing
calamities. This promise ought therefore to have brought vast
consolation to believers, that, although they were despised, and hated,
and even abhorred by all, still they were dear to God; because he would
at length assist them, and on their account would destroy the kingdom of
the Babylonians.

<span id="xii.i-p135"></span>*They are all fugitives.*  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) By saying that “they shall be
fugitives,” he shews that he will give to Cyrus such success, that the
Babylonians shall tremble at his arrival, and in terror shall throw down
their arms, and betake themselves to flight. It often happens that a
very powerful prince, abundantly supplied with military preparations,
undertakes a war, but conducts it unsuccessfully; and therefore it was
not enough that Cyrus should be sent with a powerful army, if he were
not also crowned with success.

<span id="xii.i-p137"></span>*And a cry of the Babylonians in the
ships.* To describe more fully the sudden flight, he adds that there
shall be “a *cry* or noise in the ships;” for they were unable to escape
by land. They had, indeed, a very convenient river, the Euphrates, which
united with the river Tigris, by which they might easily have escaped.
Yet even in this respect their expectation was disappointed on account
of the bed of the river being dried up.

<span id="xii.i-p138"></span><span id="xii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p139"></span>**15.** *I Jehovah.* This verse contains no
statement, and only shews who it is that speaks, how great is his power
and majesty, and, in a word, how warmly he loves the elect people, so as
to give greater weight to the former promise. In short, it may be viewed
as the seal of the preceding statement, more powerfully confirming what
was formerly said, that it is God who makes these promises. But what
God?

<span id="xii.i-p140"></span>*Your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your
King.* He is called *Holy,* because he has chosen and separated a
people, that he might consecrate them to himself; for by this title he
reminds them of the adoption by which he united them to himself in a
peculiar manner, that they may understand that he will be their Father
and Savior. And for the same reason we ought now to acknowledge him as
our Holy One, because he has set us apart to be members of the Church,
of which we are assured by our calling. The name *Creator* must not be
viewed as referring to universal creation, by which unbelievers also are
created, but to the new creation, on account of which we are also called
(<span id="xii.i-p140.2"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xii.i-p140.2"></span>.md)
“his workmanship,” (<span id="xii.i-p140.3"></span>τὸ ποίημα) as we have
formerly stated, while expounding other passages.

<span id="xii.i-p141"></span>Your King. This might indeed be thought to
be absurd; for not even the semblance of a kingdom was visible, and
nothing was to be seen among the Jews but what was covered with shame
and disgrace, in consequence of their having been deprived of all aid
and relief. Yet there was room for the exercise of faith, that they
might hope for the restoration of the kingdom, though apparently ruined
and almost extinguished, and might acknowledge God to be their King.

<span id="xii.i-p142"></span><span id="xii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p143"></span>**16.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* He again
repeats and confirms what was otherwise incredible; and, in order that
this confirmation may have greater weight, he personates God himself.

<span id="xii.i-p144"></span>*Who maketh a way in the sea.* He reminds
them of former benefits, that, having experienced his power and
kindness, they may believe that he will not be less gracious for the
future, nor less powerful to deliver them. As if he had said, “The Lord
who speaks will actually shew how vast is the greatness of his power.
Your fathers experienced it, and you will not experience it the less.”
Now, we are ungrateful to God, if former benefits do not lead us to
entertain hope for the future; and especially when he intended to give a
sure and striking proof of continual favor towards us. He brought the
Jews out of Egypt on the express condition, that the deliverance which
was accomplished should never be forgotten. (<span
id="xii.i-p144.1"></span>[Ex 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009.md)<span
id="xii.i-p144.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p145"></span>The Prophet therefore represents God as
actually present, and declares that he is the same God who surmounted
every obstacle by his power, that he might be the Redeemer of his
people. At that time he opened up a way through the sea, (<span
id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>[Ex
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)<span id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>,.md)
and afterwards *through the mighty waters,* that is, through Jordan,
which the Lord dried up, though it was running very rapidly. (<span
id="xii.i-p145.2"></span>[Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)<span id="xii.i-p145.2"></span>..md)
And these prodigious miracles he expressly relates, because they might
think that their return to Judea was closed up, and that all that was
promised concerning it was fabulous.

<span id="xii.i-p146"></span><span id="xii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p147"></span>**17.** *When he bringeth out.* He shows
that no power or forces shall hinder him from delivering his people,
whenever he shall think proper. The sea which lay between them could not
prevent God from “bringing out” his people; but he divided its waters in
the midst, and drowned the pursuing enemies, with their horses and
chariots. (<span id="xii.i-p147.1"></span>[Ex
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)<span id="xii.i-p147.1"></span>..md)
This is therefore an amplification; as if he had said, “Though the whole
world be leagued for your destruction, and attempt, to hinder the
deliverance of my Church, yet it will gain nothing; for not only will
the Lord find out a way through whirlpools, when he thinks proper, but
he will overthrow and scatter all opposing efforts, and will crush them
so that they shall never again raise their head.”

<span id="xii.i-p148"></span>*They are quenched like flax.* It is
possible that he who was vanquished in one battle may renew his strength
in another, and at length be victorious; but here the Lord promises a
continual victory, for he declares that the enemies shall be subdued in
such a manner that they shall be completely extinguished. By the
metaphor of *flax,* he expresses more vividly the sudden destruction of
the enemies; for *flax* may indeed burn and give light, but is
immediately consumed.

<span id="xii.i-p149"></span><span id="xii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p150"></span>**18.** *Remember not former things.*
Hitherto the Prophet shewed how great was the power of God in delivering
the people. He now declares that all the miracles which God wrought in
that first redemption were of little importance as compared with the
more remarkable miracle which should soon be wrought; that is, that the
glory of this second deliverance shall be so great as to throw the
former into the shade. Yet he does not mean that the Jews should forget
so great a benefit, which he had commanded them to publish in every age,
and to inscribe on permanent records; for in his preface to the Law he
begins in this manner,

<span id="xii.i-p151"></span>“I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.” (<span
id="xii.i-p151.1"></span>[Ex 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.i-p151.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p152"></span>He even enjoined parents to repeat it
frequently to their children, and from hand to hand to deliver it to
their grandchildren and to posterity. This must therefore be understood
to be by comparison, like that saying’ of Jeremiah,

<span id="xii.i-p153"></span>“Behold the days come,” saith the Lord,
“that it shall no longer be said, The Lord liveth, who brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, who
led and brought out the seed of the house of Israel from the land of the
north, and from all the countries into which I had driven them; and they
shall dwell in their land.” (<span id="xii.i-p153.1"></span>[Jer.
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#008)<span id="xii.i-p153.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p154"></span>In short, he shews that this latter
redemption, when compared with the former, shall be far more
illustrious. Hence it follows, that it is improper to limit this
prediction to a small number of years; for the Prophet does not separate
between its commencement and its progress, but extends the blessed
consequences of their return till Christ, who, by his coming, actually
set up the priesthood and the kingdom.

<span id="xii.i-p155"></span><span id="xii.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p156"></span>**19.** *Behold,* *I do a new thing.* This
shews more clearly what the Prophet meant in the preceding verse, for he
declares that there shall be “a new work,” that is, a work unheard of
and uncommon, and which, on account of its greatness and excellence,
shall throw into the shade the reputation of all other works; in the
same manner as the brightness of the sun, when it fills heaven and
earth, causes the stars to disappear.

<span id="xii.i-p157"></span>*Now it shall arise.* He means that the
time shall not be long. Yet these things were not so speedily
accomplished; but, if we look to God, four hundred or even a thousand
years are counted as a moment before him; how much less ought a delay of
seventy years to wear out and discourage them? When he adds, *Shall ye
not know it?* this question is more forcible and impressive than a bare
affirmation, and this form of question is more frequently employed by
Hebrew writers than in the Greek and Latin languages. When he promises
*a way in the wilderness,* he alludes to that wilderness which lay
between Judea and Babylon; for he speaks of the return of the people.
Accordingly to the *way* he adds *rivers;* for in travelling through a
dry country they might have been parched and died of thirst. On this
account, the Lord says that he will supply them with water and
everything that is necessary for the journey; as if he had said, “I will
furnish you with provisions, so that under my guidance you shall return
to your native land.”

<span id="xii.i-p158"></span>But it may be thought that the Prophet is
excessive, and that his language is altogether hyperbolical, when he
extols this deliverance in such lofty terms; for we read that rivers
were turned into blood, (<span id="xii.i-p158.1"></span>[Ex
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p158.1"></span>,.md)
the air was covered with darkness, (<span id="xii.i-p158.2"></span>[Ex
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p158.2"></span>,.md)
the first-born were slain, (<span id="xii.i-p158.3"></span>[Ex
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span id="xii.i-p158.3"></span>,.md)
insects were sent forth to destroy the whole country, (<span
id="xii.i-p158.4"></span>[Ex
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p158.4"></span>,.md)
and that other prodigies of the same kind happened in Egypt, while
nothing of this sort was done in Babylon. What then is meant by this new
redemption? This consideration has compelled almost all Christian
commentators to interpret this passage as referring absolutely to the
coming of Christ, in which they are undoubtedly mistaken; and the Jews
are also in the wrong, when they limit it to the redemption from
Babylon. Accordingly, as I have frequently remarked, we ought here to
include the whole period which followed the redemption from Babylon,
down to the coming of Christ.

<span id="xii.i-p159"></span>The redemption from Egypt may be regarded
as having been the first birth of the Church; because the people were
gathered into a body, and the Church was established, of which formerly
there was not the semblance; but that deliverance is not limited to the
time when the people went out of Egypt, but is continued down to the
possession of the land of Canaan, which was delivered to the people,
when the kings had been driven out. (<span id="xii.i-p159.1"></span>[Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)<span id="xii.i-p159.1"></span>..md)
We ought to take the same view of this new birth, (<span
id="xii.i-p159.2"></span>περὶ ταύτης παλιγγενεσίας,) by which the people
were rescued from Babylon, and brought back to their native land; for
that restoration must not be limited to the departure from Babylon, but
must be extended to Christ, during the whole of which period great and
wonderful events undoubtedly happened. Was it not astonishing that a
captive people, whom all despised as some contemptible slave, and who
were even held to be accursed, should receive freedom and liberty to
return from heathen kings; and not only so, but should be furnished with
provisions, and with everything else that was necessary both for the
journey and for settling at home, for rearing the city and for
rebuilding the Temple? (<span id="xii.i-p159.3"></span>[Ezr
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p159.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p160"></span>But far greater events followed, when but a
few persons were willing to return, and the greater part were so
discouraged as to prefer wretched bondage to blessed freedom. When, in
comparison of that vast multitude which had been carried away, a few
persons returned to Judea, still greater obstacles arose. Conspiracies
were formed, the people formerly abhorred became the objects of keener
resentments, the work was interrupted, and every method was tried for
putting a full stop to the design. (<span id="xii.i-p160.1"></span>[Ezr
4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#000)<span id="xii.i-p160.1"></span>..md)
Thus it appeared as if in vain the Lord had brought them back, for they
were exposed to dangers much greater than before. When the temple had
been built, they did not enjoy greater peace; for they were hedged in on
all sides by very cruel and deadly enemies, from whom they often
sustained great hardships. They were afterwards afflicted by distresses,
and calamities, and various persecutions, so that they were supposed to
be struck down and overwhelmed, and utterly ruined. And yet, in the
midst of fire and sword, God wonderfully preserved them; and if we
consider their wretched and miserable condition, and the grievous
persecutions of tyrants, we shall wonder that even a single individual
of them could survive.

<span id="xii.i-p161"></span>In order that we may understand how great
was the excellence of this latter redemption, and how far it excelled
the former, we must: continue and bring it down to the time of Christ,
who at length gave an immense addition to the former benefits. Thus,
beyond all question, the second redemption leaves the first far behind.
There is nothing forced in this interpretation, and it corresponds to
the ordinary language of the prophets, who always have the Messiah for
their end, and keep him constantly in their eye. But this will appear
more clearly from what is related by Haggai; for, when the Temple began
to be rebuilt, the old men, who had seen the glory of the ancient
temple, mourned, and were not far from thinking that God had forsaken
them, and that his promises had failed. But Haggai, in order to comfort
them and to prove that the glory of this second would be greater than
the glory of the first, though the structure of the building was far
inferior, leads them to the Redeemer.

<span id="xii.i-p162"></span>“Thus saith the Lord of hosts,” says he,
“Yet once, and within a short time, I will shake the heavens, and the
earth, the sea, and the continent, and all the nations; and the Desire
of all nations shall come; and I will fill this house with glory, saith
the Lord of hosts. The silver is mine, the gold is mine, saith the Lord
of hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory
of the former.” (<span id="xii.i-p162.1"></span>[Hag
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p162.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p163"></span>Thus, as Haggai brings the restoration of
the Temple down to Christ, and refers to him its true glory; so this
deliverance (for the two things are connected, or rather they are the
same) extended even to Christ. Consequently, we need not wonder if it
surpassed the Egyptian deliverance in every respect.

<span id="xii.i-p164"></span><span id="xii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p165"></span>**20.** *The beast of the field shall honor
me.* He adorns the preceding statement; for, amidst such a desperate
condition of affairs, it was proper that magnificent language should be
employed in extolling the power of God, that words might supply what
seemed to be wanting in the reality. The meaning is, that the power of
God will be so visible and manifest, that the very beasts, impressed
with the feeling of it, shall acknowledge and worship God. This
prediction corresponds to the song,

<span id="xii.i-p166"></span>“The sea saw and fled, Jordan was driven
back. The mountains leaped like rams, and the hills like lambs. At the
face of the Lord the earth trembled.” (<span
id="xii.i-p166.1"></span>[Ps. 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p166.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p167"></span>Isaiah here ascribes the same feeling to
brute animals, because by a secret impulse they shall be constrained to
retire, so as to allow his people to pass safely. And yet the cause
assigned is more extensive, that they will stand still, as if in
astonishment, when they see the miracles. In a word, God declares that
he will not suffer his people, in their journey homeward, to be
destitute of the means of subsistence, but describes in exaggerated
language his love toward the Jews, that by the height of their hope they
may rise above the world. When we hear these statements, let us also not
measure the power of God by the nature of things, but let us be exalted
by faith above all that can be seen or known.

<span id="xii.i-p168"></span>*My people, my chosen.* That these wretched
exiles may not be driven from the hope of heavenly grace and assistance,
he reminds them of their adoption; as if he had said, that amidst this
ruinous and melancholy condition they still continued to be the people
of God, because he who once *chose* them does not change his purpose.
Accordingly, whenever we need to be excited to cherish favorable hope,
let us remember God’s calling; for, although we are unworthy, still it
ought to be reckoned enough that the Lord has deigned to bestow on us so
great an honor.

<span id="xii.i-p169"></span><span id="xii.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p170"></span>**21.** *This people have I created for
myself.* The Prophet means that the Lord will necessarily do what he
formerly said, because it concerns his glory to preserve the people whom
he has chosen for himself; and therefore these words are intended for
the consolation of the people. “Do you think that I will suffer my glory
to fall to the ground? It is connected with your salvation, and
therefore your salvation shall be the object of my care. In a word, know
that you shall be saved, because you cannot perish, unless my glory
likewise perish. Ye shall therefore survive, because I wish that you may
continually proclaim my glory.”

<span id="xii.i-p171"></span>When he says that he has *created* the
people, let us learn that it proceeds from supernatural grace that we
are the people of God; for we must remember that principle of which we
have formerly spoken, that he does not now speak of the ordinary nature
of men, but of spiritual regeneration, or of the adoption by which he
separates the Church from the rest of the world, and that with
everything that belongs to it. Let no one therefore ascribe his
regeneration to himself or to any human merits; but let us acknowledge
that it is entirely to the mercy of God that we owe so great a favor.

<span id="xii.i-p172"></span>*They shall declare my praise.* Though it
is the design of the Prophet to shew what I have said, that his people
shall be saved because it concerns the glory of God, yet we also learn
from it, that the end of our election is, that we may shew forth the
glory of God in every possible way. (<span
id="xii.i-p172.1"></span>[Exod. 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018)<span id="xii.i-p172.1"></span>..md)
The reprobate are, indeed, the instruments of the glory of God, but it
is said to shine in us in a very different manner; for “he hath chosen
us,” says Paul, “that we might be holy and without blame before him
through love, who predestinated us that he might adopt us to be his
children through Jesus Christ, in himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace by which
he hath made us accepted through the Beloved.” (<span
id="xii.i-p172.2"></span>[Eph
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p172.2"></span>..md)
Such also is the import of the words of Peter when he says, that we were
brought out of darkness into the wonderful kingdom of God, that we may
declare his perfections, (<span id="xii.i-p172.3"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="xii.i-p172.3"></span>;.md)
and likewise the words of Zacharias,

<span id="xii.i-p173"></span>“That, being delivered out of the hand of
our enemies, we may serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life.” (<span
id="xii.i-p173.1"></span>[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074.md),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="xii.i-p173.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p174"></span>This, then, is the end of our calling,
that, being consecrated to God, we may praise and honor him during our
whole life.

<span id="xii.i-p175"></span><span id="xii.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p176"></span>**22.** *And thou hast not called on me.*
He confirms by an indirect reproof what he said in the preceding verse,
that it was not by any merits of his people that he was induced to act
so kindly towards them. This deliverance, therefore, ought to be
ascribed to no other cause than to the goodness of God. In order to
prove this, he says, “Thou hast not called on me.” *Calling on* the name
of God includes the whole of the worship of God, the chief part of which
is “calling upon him;” and, therefore, following the ordinary manner of
Scripture, he has put a part for the whole. But in other passages the
Lord plainly shews that calling upon him is the chief part of his
worship; for, after having said that he despises sacrifices and outward
ceremonies, he adds,

<span id="xii.i-p177"></span>“Call upon me in the day of trouble.”
(<span id="xii.i-p177.1"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p177.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p178"></span>Hence also Scripture, when it speaks of the
worship of God, chiefly mentions “calling on him;” for when Moses states
that the worship of God had been restored, he says, “Then began men to
call on the name of the Lord.” (<span id="xii.i-p178.1"></span>[Ge
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026)<span id="xii.i-p178.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p179"></span>*But thou hast been wearied of me.* In this
second clause I consider the particle <span id="xii.i-p179.1"></span>כי
(*ki*) to be disjunctive, “But rather thou hast been wearied of me.”
Others render it “Because thou hast wearied;” as if he had said, “Thou
hast received with dislike what was enjoined on thee;” which amounts to
nearly the same thing. As the Lord demands obedience, so he wishes all
that worship him to be ready and cheerful; as Paul testifies, that “the
Lord loveth a cheerful giver,” (<span id="xii.i-p179.2"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p179.2"></span>,.md)
and they who obey reluctantly cannot be called, and are not reckoned by
him, true and sincere worshippers. Thus, in order to show that the Jews
have not worshipped him as they ought to have done, he says that they
did it reluctantly. If any one choose rather to view it as assigning the
reason, and render it thus, — “Thou hast not called on me, *for* thou
hast rendered to me no worship without regret, and what may be said to
have been extorted from thee by violence,” as it makes little difference
in the meaning, I do not greatly object; but the translation which I
have given appears to convey more clearly what the Prophet intends.
Besides, the contrast contains within itself the assigning of a reason;
and therefore, if we wish that God should accept of our service, let us
obey him with a cheerful disposition.

<span id="xii.i-p180"></span><span id="xii.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p181"></span>**23.** *Theft hast not brought to me.* A
question arises, “Why does the Prophet bring this reproach against the
Jews, who, it is evident, were very careful to offer sacrifices
according to the injunction of the Law?” Some refer this to the time of
the captivity, when they could not have offered sacrifices to God though
they had been willing to do so; for it was not lawful for them to offer
sacrifices in any other place than Jerusalem, and therefore they could
not appease God by sacrifices. (<span id="xii.i-p181.1"></span>[De
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#013)<span id="xii.i-p181.1"></span>..md)
But I rather think that it is a general reproach; for at the very time
when the people were sacrificing, they could not boast of their merits
or personal worth, as if they had laid God under obligations in this
manner; for they were wanting in the sacrifices which God chiefly
approves, that is, faith and obedience, without which nothing can be
acceptable to God. There was no integrity of heart, “their hands were
full of blood,” (<span id="xii.i-p181.2"></span>[Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p181.2"></span>;.md)
everything was filled with fraud and robbery, and there was no room for
justice or equity. Although, therefore, they daily brought beasts to the
temple, and sacrificed them, yet he justly affirms that they offered
nothing to him. Sacrifices could not be accepted by God when they were
separated kern truth, and were offered to another rather than to God;
for he did not demand them in themselves, but so far as the people
treated them as exercises of faith and obedience, Hence we infer that
the Prophet says nothing new, but continues to exhibit the same
doctrine, namely, that God rejects all services that are rendered in a
slavish spirit, or in any other respect are defective.

<span id="xii.i-p182"></span><span id="xii.i-p182.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p183"></span>**24.** *Thou hast not bought cane for me.*
He means the *cane* or *calamus* of which the precious ointment was
composed, as we are informed, (<span id="xii.i-p183.1"></span>[Ex
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)<span id="xii.i-p183.1"></span>;.md)
for the high priests, the tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of
the testimony, together with its vessels, were anointed with it he says,
therefore, “Although thou buy cane for me with money, yet thou oughtest
not to reckon that to be expense bestowed on me, as if I approved of
it.” They lost their pains in all those ceremonies, because they did not
look to the proper end, since they did not exercise faith, or worship
God with a pure conscience.

<span id="xii.i-p184"></span>*And thou hast not made me drunk.* This
corresponds to a mode of expression employed in the law, in which God
testifies that sacrifices are pleasant and delightful feasts to him; not
that he took pleasure in the slaughter of animals, but that by these
exercises he wished to lead his people to true obedience. He means that
here, on the contrary, the people did not offer sacrifices in a proper
manner, because they polluted everything with impiety; and,
consequently, that he might be said to be hungry and faint, because they
offered nothing in a right manner, but everything was corrupted and was
without savor.

<span id="xii.i-p185"></span>*But thou hast made me to serve with thy
sins.* The Prophet now aggravates the heinousness of that offense, by
saying that the people not only were deficient in their duty, and did
not submit to God, but that they even endeavored to make God submit to
them, and “to serve” their will, or rather their lust. They who explain
this passage as referring to Christ torture the Prophet’s meaning, and
therefore I consider this interpretation to be more natural. The Lord
complains that men compelled him to carry a heavy burden, instead of
submitting to him with reverence, as they ought to have done; for when
we rise up against God, we treat him as a slave by our rebellion and
insolence. He explains this more fully when he says, *Ye have wearied
me;* that is, that God suffered much uneasiness on account of the
wickedness of his people; for in some respects we wound and “pierce
him,” as the Prophet says, (<span id="xii.i-p185.1"></span>[Zec
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="xii.i-p185.1"></span>,.md)
when we reject his voice, and do not suffer ourselves to be governed by
him. Apparently he alludes to what he had formerly said about the
weariness or uneasiness of the people in worshipping God; for God
declares, on the contrary, that the people have given him great
distress.

<span id="xii.i-p186"></span><span id="xii.i-p186.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p187"></span>**25.** *I, I am he.*  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) He concludes the former statement by
this exclamation, as if he had said, that he may boast of his right,
that he blots out the iniquities of his people, and restores them to
freedom; for they have no merits by which they could obtain it, since
they deserve the severest punishment, and even destruction. The same
word is twice repeated by him, that he may more sharply rebuke the
ingratitude of men who are wont to rob him of that honor which belongs
to him alone, or in some way to throw it into the shade.

<span id="xii.i-p189"></span>*He that blotteth out thy iniquities.*
<span id="xii.i-p189.1"></span>הוא (*hu*) is the demonstrative pronoun
*He,* used instead of a noun, as in many other passages. It is but a
poor and feeble meaning that is attached to the words of the Prophet by
those who think that God claims for himself the privilege and authority
of pardoning sins, for he rather contrasts his mercy with all other
causes, as if he declared that he is not induced by anything else to
pardon sins, but is satisfied with his mere goodness, and, consequently,
that it is wrong to ascribe either to merits or to any sacrifices the
redemption of which he is the Author by free grace. The meaning may be
summed up by saying, that the people ought to hope for their return for
no other reason than because God will freely pardon their sins, and,
being of his own accord appeased by his mercy, will stretch out his
fatherly hand.

<span id="xii.i-p190"></span>The present subject is the pardon of sins;
we must see on what occasion it has been introduced. Undoubtedly the
Prophet means that there will be a freely bestowed redemption, and
therefore he mentions forgiveness rather than redemption, because, since
they had received a severe punishment for their sins, they must have
been pardoned before they were delivered. The cause of the disease must
be taken away, if we wish to cure the disease itself; and so long as the
Lord’s anger lasts, his chastisements will also last; and consequently
his anger must be appeased, and we must be reconciled to God, before we
are freed from punishments. And this form of expression ought to be
carefully observed in opposition to the childish distinction of the
Sophists, who say that God does indeed pardon guilt, but that we must
make satisfaction by penances. Hence proceeded satisfactions,
indulgences, purgatory, and innumerable other contrivances.

<span id="xii.i-p191"></span>The Prophet does not only speak of guilt,
but speaks expressly of punishment which is remitted, because sins have
been freely pardoned. This is still more clearly expressed by the
addition of the phrase *for mine own sake.* It is certain that this
limitation is contrasted with all merits, that is, that God pays no
regard to us, or to anything that is in us, in pardoning our sins, but
that he is prompted to it solely by his goodness; for if he had regard
to us, he would be in some respects our debtor, and forgiveness would
not be of free grace. Accordingly, Ezekiel explains the contrast,

<span id="xii.i-p192"></span>“Not for your sakes will I do this, O house
of Jacob, but for mine own sake.” (<span id="xii.i-p192.1"></span>[Eze
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p192.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p193"></span>Hence it follows that God is his own
adviser, and is freely inclined to pardon sins, for he does not find any
cause in men.

<span id="xii.i-p194"></span>*Therefore I will not remember thy sins.*
The Prophet added this for the consolation of the godly, who, oppressed
by the consciousness of their transgressions, might otherwise have
fallen into despair. On this account he encourages them to cherish good
hope, and confirms them in that confidence by saying, that although they
are unworthy, yet he will pardon their sins, and will thus deliver them.
Hence we ought to draw a useful doctrine, that no one can be certain of
obtaining pardon, unless he rely on the absolute goodness of God. They
who look to their works must continually hesitate, and at length
despair, because, if they are not deceived by gross hypocrisy, they will
always have before their eyes their own unworthiness, which will
constrain them to remain in doubt as to the love of God.

<span id="xii.i-p195"></span>When it is said that ministers also forgive
sins, (<span id="xii.i-p195.1"></span>[Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span id="xii.i-p195.1"></span>,.md)
there is no inconsistency with this passage, for they are witnesses of
this freely bestowed forgiveness. The ordinary distinction is that God
forgives sins by his power, and ministers by their office; but as this
distinction does not explain the Prophet’s meaning, we must keep by what
I have stated, that God not only forgives sins in the exercise of his
authority, but that all the blessings for which we ought to hope flow
from the fountain of his absolute bounty. Thus the Lord adorned the
preaching of the gospel, and its ministers, in such a manner as to
reserve the full authority for himself.

<span id="xii.i-p196"></span><span id="xii.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p197"></span>**26.** *Bring to my remembrance.* Because
the pride of men cannot be easily corrected, the Lord pursues this
argument, and dwells much upon it, in order to lead the Jews to throw
away all confidence in their works, and to make them more humble, he
gives them liberty to say and argue whatever they please, in order to
support their cause, if they do not acknowledge that they are
vanquished. By a sort of admission in their favor, he bids them call to
his remembrance; as if he had said, “If thou thinkest me to be
forgetful, tell it thyself; remind me, if thou canst allege anything
good; speak in thy turn, I shall be silent.” By this form of expression
he taunts men more than if he had stated in the usual way how the matter
stood. He shews that it is exceedingly foolish in men to claim anything
for themselves; for, though he gives them liberty of boasting, they will
be found utterly unable to plead, and will have nothing to say in
defense of their cause.

<span id="xii.i-p198"></span>*That thou mayest be justified,* that is,
“In order that thou mayest gain thy cause, and carry off the victory, I
allow thee to say whatever thou pleasest.” This is vehement mockery,
which shuts the mouths of men more completely than if he pronounced the
sentence in his own person and with the authority of a judge. Yet we
must also observe the design of the Prophet; for he found it necessary
to strip the Jews of the mask of personal worth, that they might humbly
and meekly receive the grace of God.

<span id="xii.i-p199"></span><span id="xii.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p200"></span>**27.** *Thy first father sinned.* This
passage is almost universally understood to refer to the “first parent”
Adam. (<span id="xii.i-p200.1"></span>[Ge
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p200.1"></span>..md)
Some prefer to interpret it as relating to Abraham; as if he had said,

<span id="xii.i-p201"></span>“You have not alone sinned, but your father
Abraham himself sinned, though he was a man of eminent holiness.”  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) (<span id="xii.i-p202.2"></span>[Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p202.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p203"></span>By the *teachers* are understood to be
meant Moses and Aaron, who were men of extraordinary holiness, and yet
sinned: “how much more you who are far inferior to theme” (<span
id="xii.i-p203.1"></span>[Nu
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)<span id="xii.i-p203.1"></span>..md)
That would be an argument from the greater to the less. But I view the
matter differently; for under the word *Father* he includes not one or a
few of their ancestors, but many. It is an interchange of the singular
and plural number, which is very frequently employed by Hebrew writers.
This reproof occurs very frequently in the prophets and in the Psalms;
for, knowing that God reckoned them to be “a holy people,” (<span
id="xii.i-p203.2"></span>[Ex 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md)<span
id="xii.i-p203.2"></span>,) as if this honor had been due to the
excellence or merits of the fathers, they rose fiercely against God
himself, and swelled with pride on account of their hereditary
privilege. On this account the prophets in every age expose the crimes
of the fathers; and Stephen, who followed them, says, that “they always
resisted the Holy Spirit;” (<span id="xii.i-p203.3"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span id="xii.i-p203.3"></span>;.md)
as if he had said, “You do not now for the first time begin to be
wicked; long ago your fathers were base and infamous. From a bad crow
has come a bad egg. But you are far worse, and exceed your fathers in
wickedness; so that if I had looked at you alone, you would long ago
have been destroyed and completely ruined.”

<span id="xii.i-p204"></span>*And thy teachers.*  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) He now adds the teachers, in order to
shew that the blame did not lie with the people alone; for they who
ought to have been the guides of others, that is, the priests and the
prophets, were the first to stumble, and led others into error. In a
word, he shews that no class was free from vices and corruptions. “Let
them now go and boast of their virtues, and let them produce the very
smallest reason why I ought to protect them, except my own goodness.” If
it be objected that there is no reason why the sins of their fathers
should be brought as an accusation against them, because it is written,

<span id="xii.i-p206"></span>“The soul that hath sinned shall die, and
the children shall not be punished instead of the fathers,” (<span
id="xii.i-p206.1"></span>[Eze
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p206.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="xii.i-p207"></span>the answer will be easy. The Lord makes the
children to bear the punishment of the sins of the fathers, when they
resemble their fathers; and yet they are not punished for other men’s
sins, for they themselves have sinned; and when the Lord chastises the
whole body, he puts the fathers and the children together, so as to
involve all in the same condemnation.

<span id="xii.i-p208"></span><span id="xii.i-p208.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p209"></span>**28.** *Therefore I will pollute.* The
copulative <span id="xii.i-p209.1"></span>ו *(vau)* here means
*therefore,* and the preterite tense, *I have polluted,* ought to have a
future signification, though it may also be rendered in the past tense;
but I have preferred the future, in order to apply it to the time of the
captivity; for he directly addresses those who were to live under the
captivity. If it be thought preferable to extend it to various
calamities, by which God had covered his people with disgrace, and at
the same time to connect with it their exile in Babylon, there will be
no impropriety; and indeed it will be more appropriate to view it as a
description of what frequently happened to them in former times, that
they may be warned for the future, that they have no privilege which can
defend them from receiving again with the deepest disgrace the
punishment of their ingratitude, tie shews, therefore, the cause of this
destruction. It was because the transgressions of the fathers and of the
children must be punished, that is, when there was no end of sinning,
but when they daily kindled the wrath of God against them, till he at
length punished them.

<span id="xii.i-p210"></span>The Lord is said to “pollute” or “profane”
his Church, when he despises and throws it aside as a thing of no value.
In this sense the word is used in <span id="xii.i-p210.1"></span>[Ps
89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039.md)<span id="xii.i-p210.1"></span>,
and in many other passages. Having been set apart and sanctified by him,
we dwell under his protection and guardianship, so long as we are holy;
and in like manner when we are deprived of it, we are said to be
“profaned,” because we cease to be sacred, and are rendered unworthy of
his protection; and he exposes as a prey to enemies those whom he
formerly called “his anointed,” and forbade men to “touch.” (<span
id="xii.i-p210.2"></span>[Ps
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015.md)<span
id="xii.i-p210.2"></span>.) But it may be thought strange that the
priests, who were Christ’s representatives, should be “profaned;” and
the reason is, that they transgressed, while they ought to have been
“teachers” of others.

<span id="xii.i-p211"></span>*And I will make Jacob a curse.* The Hebrew
word <span id="xii.i-p211.1"></span>הרם, *(herem,)* which we have
translated *a curse,* signifies “destruction,” but likewise signifies “a
curse;” and I have thought that the latter meaning is more appropriate
to this passage, for it afterwards follows, *a reproach.* These
statements are borrowed by the Prophet from Moses, whose description he
follows so closely, that it is easy to perceive the style of Moses in
these words, and to see that the prophets bring forward nothing that is
new or strange. The words of Moses are:

<span id="xii.i-p212"></span>“And thou shalt be an astonishment, a
proverb, and a by-word among all the nations to which the Lord shall
lead thee.” (<span id="xii.i-p212.1"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)<span id="xii.i-p212.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p213"></span>He therefore threatens that he will afflict
the people in such a manner as to make them “accursed” by all; so that
whoever shall wish to pronounce a “curse” may take it for an example,
and that it may be a form of “cursing;” that he will expose them to the
ridicule of men, so that they shall serve as a proverb in the mouth of
all who wish to utter scorn; just as at the present day we see that the
name of a Jew, though in itself honorable, is in the highest degree
ignominious and disgraceful. The Lord pronounced those dreadful
threatenings by Isaiah, that they might know that a punishment
sufficiently severe, as compared with the enormity of their
transgressions, could not be inflicted; that when the Lord should
chastise them, they might not complain that the punishments which they
endured were too severe, or think that the Prophet’s reproofs were too
sharp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc15011.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="xii.i-p62.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span> See Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, pages 83
and 264, and page 132 of the present volume.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc15011.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="xii.i-p68.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>Jusqu’ ace
qu’il nons esleve en haut a soy.” “Till he raise us on high to himself.”

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc15011.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 1, p. 26.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc15011.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="xii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p102"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p102.1"></span>Qu’ils
seroyent constrains de signer leur condamnation.” “That they would be
constrained to sign their condemnation.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc15011.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="xii.i-p113.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p114"></span> The translation which Calvin mentions, but
rejects, appears to be, “There was no creature of God.” — *Ed*.  
“Various attempts have been made to explain away the singular
expression, *there was no god formed before me,* as a solecism, or at
least an inaccuracy of expression; whereas nothing else could have
conveyed the writer’s meaning, in a form at once sarcastic,
argumentative, and graphic. Instead of saying, in a bald prosaic form,
‘All other gods are the work of men’s hands, but I am uncreated and
exist from all eternity,’ he condenses all into the pregnant
declaration, ‘There was no god manufactured before me,’ that is, ‘All
other gods were made, but none of them was made before I had a being.’”
— *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc15011.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="xii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p118"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p118.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I.”

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc15011.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="xii.i-p118.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p119"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p119.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc15011.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="xii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p136"></span> “All their nobles, (Heb., bars.)” — Eng.
Ver. “From the earliest times <span id="xii.i-p136.1"></span>ברחים
*(barichim)* has received a twofold explanation, namely, that of
Fugitives, as in the Septuagint, and that of Bars, as in the Vulgate.
The same question arises in the exposition of chap. 15:5.” — Alexander.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc15011.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="xii.i-p187.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p188"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p188.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc15011.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="xii.i-p201.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p202"></span> Jarchi adopts this view, and paraphrases
the clause thus; “‘Thy first father sinned,’ that is, when he said, ‘How
shall I know that I shall inherit it?’” (<span
id="xii.i-p202.1"></span>[Ge 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.i-p202.1"></span>.) This passage was not likely to have occurred
to modern readers as the most striking fact in Abraham’s history for
proving that that eminently holy man was not absolutely perfect; and the
selection of it is a curious specimen of Jewish interpretation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc15011.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="xii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p205"></span> “Thy teachers. Hebrews Interpreters.” —
(Eng. Ver.) “Interpreters, or organs of communication, is a title given
elsewhere to ambassadors, (<span id="xii.i-p205.1"></span>[2Ch
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031)<span id="xii.i-p205.1"></span>,.md)
and to an interceding angel. (<span id="xii.i-p205.2"></span>[Job
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023)<span id="xii.i-p205.2"></span>..md)
It here denotes all those who, under the theocracy, acted as organs of
communication between God and the people, whether prophets, priests, or
rulers.” — *Alexander.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](cc15012.md)
