[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc15002)  [Next](cc15004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 35

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** The wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the
rose.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Laetabuntur solitudo et desertum;
exultabit locus squalidus, et florebit quasi lilium.

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** It shall blossom abundantly, and
rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given
unto it, the execellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory
of the LORD, *and* the excellency of our God.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Florens florebit, et exultabit adhuc
*(vel, etiam)* exultatione, at. que jubilabit; gloria Libant dabitur ei,
decor Carmel et Saron. Ipsi videbunt gloriam Iehovae, majestatem Dei
nostri.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Strengthen ye the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Confortate manus remissas, genua
labantia roborate.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Say to them *that are* of a fearful
heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come *with* vengeance,
*even* God *with* a recompence; he will come and save you.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dicite eis qui trepidi sunt corde:
confortemini, ne timeatis. Ecce Deus vester cum ultione veniet; cum
retributione Deus *(vel, Dei)* ipse veniet, et salvabit nos.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**5.** Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped:

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc aperientur oculi caecorum, et
antes surdorum aperientur.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>**6.** Then shall the lame *man* leap as an
hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall
waters break out, and streams in the desert.

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Tunc saliet instar cervi claudus,
clare personabit lingua muti; quoniam effodientur in deserto aquae, et
flumina in solitudine.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the parched ground shall become a
pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of
dragons, where each lay, *shall be* grass, with reeds and rushes.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Vertetur locus aridus in stagnum, et
regio siticulosa in scaturigines aquarum; in habitaculo draconum,
cubili, inquam, ejus locus erit arundini et junco.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And an highway shall be there, and a
way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not
pass over it; but it *shall be* for those: the wayfaring men, though
fools, shall not err *therein.*

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et erit illic semita et via, et via
suncta vocabitur. Per cam non transibit immundus; et erit illis ambulans
in via, ut stulti non errent.

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span>**9.** No lion shall be there, nor *any*
ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the
redeemed shall walk *there*:

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Non erit illic leo, nec fera bestia
ascendet per eam, neque ibi invenietur, ut redempti ambulent.

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the ransomed of the LORD shall
return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away.

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Itaque redempti Jehovae redibunt, et
venient in Sion cum exultatione; et gaudium perpetuum erit super caput
eorum; et apprehendent gaudium et laetitiam, fugientque tristitia et
gemitus.

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>**1.** *The wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad.* Here the Prophet describes a wonderful change; for
having in the former chapter described the destruction of Idumaea, and
having said that it would be changed into a wilderness, he now promises,
on the other hand, fertility to the wilderness, so that barren and waste
lands shall become highly productive. This is God’s own work; for, as he
blesses the whole earth, so he waters some parts of it more lightly, and
other parts more bountifully, by his blessing, and afterwards withdraws
and removes it altogether on account of the ingratitude of men.

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span>This passage is explained in various ways. I
pass by the dreams of the Jews, who apply all passages of this kind to
the temporal reign of the Messiah, which they have contrived by their
own imagination. Some explain it as referring to Judea, and others to
the calling of the Gentiles. But let us see if it be not more proper to
include the whole world along with Judea; for he predicted the
destruction of the whole world in such terms as not to spare Judea, and
not only so, but because “the judgment of God begins at his house or
sanctuary,” (<span id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>,.md)
the singularly melancholy desolation of the Holy Land was foretold, that
it might be a remarkable example. Thus beginning appropriately and
justly with Judea, he calls the whole world a *wilderness,* because
everywhere the wrath of God abounded; and, therefore, I willingly view
this passage as referring to Judea, and afterwards to the other parts of
the world. As if he had said, “After the Lord shall have punished the
wickedness and crimes of men, and taken vengeance on Jews and Gentiles,
the wilderness shall then be changed into a habitable country, and the
face of the whole earth shall be renewed.” Now this restoration is a
remarkable instance of the goodness of God; for, when men have provoked
him by their revolt, they deserve to perish altogether, and to be
utterly destroyed, especially they whom he has adopted to be his
peculiar people. Isaiah has his eye chiefly on the Jews, that in their
distressful condition they may not faint.

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>Let us now see when this prophecy was
fulfilled, or when it shall be fulfilled. The Lord began some kind of
restoration when he brought his people out of Babylon; but that was only
a slight foretaste, and, therefore, I have no hesitation in saying that
this passage, as well as others of a similar kind, must refer to the
kingdom of Christ; and in no other light could it be viewed, if we
compare it to other prophecies. By “the kingdom of Christ,” I mean not
only that which is begun here, but that which shall be completed at the
last day, which on that account is called “the day of renovation and
restoration,” (<span id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>[Ac
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)<span id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>;.md)
because believers will never find perfect rest till that day arrive. And
the reason why the prophets speak of the kingdom of Christ in such lofty
terms is, that they look at that end when the true happiness of
believers, shall be most fully restored.

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span>After having spoken of dreadful calamities
and predicted the lamentable ruin of the whole world, the Prophet
comforts believers by this promise, in which he foretells that all
things shall be restored. This is done by Christ, by whom alone they can
be renewed and made glad; for he alone renews everything, and restores
it to proper order; apart from him there can be nothing but filth and
desolation, nothing but most miserable ruin both in heaven and in earth.
But it ought to be carefully observed, that the world needed to be
prepared by chastisements of this nature, in order that it might be fit
and qualified for receiving such distinguished favor, and that the grace
of Christ might be more fully manifested, which would have been
concealed if everything had remained in its original state. It was
therefore necessary that the proud and fierce minds of men should be
east down and subdued, that they might taste the kindness of Christ, and
partake of his power and strength.

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span>**2.** *Flourishing it shall flourish.* He
describes more fully how great, will be the effect of the grace of
Christ, by whose power and might those places which had been overgrown
with filthy and noxious weeds “flourish” exceedingly and regain their
vigor. This repetition is used for the sake of amplification. The
doubling of the word “flourish” may be taken in two senses; either to
denote the prolongation of time in incessant vegetation; as if he had
said, “It shall not flourish with a passing or fading blossom, so as to
return immediately to the foul condition in which it once was, but with
a continual, uninterrupted, and long-continued bloom, which can never
fade or pass away;” or to denote the increase and daily or yearly
progress of improvement; for Christ enriches us in such a manner as to
increase his grace in us from day to day.

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span>*The glory of Lebanon, the beauty of Carmel
and Sharon.* These metaphors display more fully the fertility already
described; for the Prophet is not satisfied with saying that where
formerly there was a gloomy wilderness smiling fields will be seen, and
that dry places will be clothed with the beauty of flowers, but adds
that there will be such luxuriant beauty as “Lebanon, Carmel, and
Sharon” were celebrated for possessing. Though *Carmel* denotes a
cultivated and fertile field, yet here it is a proper name, like the
other two. We have seen in other passages  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) that these mountains were highly
celebrated, and throughout the whole of Judea held the undisputed
preeminence both for delightfulness and for abundance of fruits.

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span>*They shall see the glory of Jehovah.* What
he had formerly spoken metaphorically he now explains clearly and
without a figure. Till men learn to know God, they are barren and
destitute of everything good; and consequently the beginning of our
fertility is to be quickened by the presence of God, which cannot be
without the inward perception of faith. The Prophet undoubtedly intended
to raise our minds higher, that we may contemplate the abundance and
copiousness of heavenly benefits; for men might be satisfied with bread
and wine and other things of the same kind, and yet not acknowledge God
to be the author of them, or cease to be wretched; and indeed men are
often blinded and rendered more fierce by enjoying abundance. But when
God makes himself visible to us, by causing us to behold *his glory and
beauty,* we not only possess his blessings, but have the true enjoyment
of them for salvation.

<span id="iv.i-p33"></span><span id="iv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p34"></span>**3.** *Strengthen ye the weak hands.* We
might explain this passage generally, as if he had said, “Let those who
have feeble hands strengthen them, let; them whose knees tremble and
totter compose and invigorate their hearts.” But the following verse
shews that the whole of this passage relates to the ministers of the
word; for he addresses the teachers of the Church, and enjoins them to
exhort, arouse, and encourage weak men whose hearts are broken or east
down, that they may be rendered more firm and cheerful. This exhortation
is seasonably introduced, because he saw that so many tokens of God’s
anger, of which he had spoken, could not do otherwise than fill even the
strongest minds with alarm and dread; for, seeing that we are always
enfeebled by adversity, when God himself proclaims what may be called
open war against us on account of our sins, who would not tremble? But
the Prophet commands that they who are cast down and almost lifeless
shall be enlivened, and the manner of doing it is explained by him in
the following verse.

<span id="iv.i-p35"></span><span id="iv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p36"></span>**4.** *Say to them that are faint hearted.*
That strength of which he spoke is breathed into our hearts by God
through his word, as “by faith alone we stand” (<span
id="iv.i-p36.1"></span>[2Co 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.i-p36.1"></span>) and live; and therefore he adds the promise of
grace yet to come.

<span id="iv.i-p37"></span>*Behold, your God will come.* First, it ought
to be observed that God does not wish that his grace should remain
concealed and unknown, but rather that it should be proclaimed and
imparted, that they who totter and tremble may compose and invigorate
their hearts. And this is one method by which our hearts may be cheered
amidst heavy distresses; for if we are not supported by the word of the
Lord, we must faint and despair. This, then, is the office assigned to
the teachers of the word, to raise up them that are fallen down,  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) to strengthen the feeble, to upheld the
tottering.

<span id="iv.i-p39"></span>We ought also to observe how great is the
efficacy of the word in “invigorating the feeble hands and strengthening
the tottering knees;” for if it had not been a powerful instrument in
communicating this strength, the Prophet would never have spoken in this
manner; and, indeed, if God struck only our ears by his word, and did
not pierce our hearts, these words would have been spoken in vain.
Since, therefore, the Lord assigns this office to the word, let us know
that he also imparts this power to it, that it may not be spoken in
vain, but may inwardly move our hearts, not always indeed or
indiscriminately, but where it pleases God by the secret power of his
Spirit to work in this manner. And hence we infer that the same word
makes us disposed to obey him; for otherwise we shall be indolent and
stupid; all our senses shall fail, and we shall not only waver, but
shall be altogether stupified by unbelief. We, therefore, need to
receive aid from the Lord, that the removal of our fear and the cure of
our weakness may enable us to walk with agility.

<span id="iv.i-p40"></span>*Fear not; behold, your God will come.* This
warning deeply fixed in our minds will banish slothfulness. As soon as
men perceive that God is near them, they either cease to fear, or at
least rise superior to excessive terror.

<span id="iv.i-p41"></span>“Be not anxious,” says Paul, “for the Lord is
at hand.” (<span id="iv.i-p41.1"></span>[Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iv.i-p41.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p42"></span>On this subject we have spoken largely on
other occasions; and the Apostle to the Hebrews appears to allude to
this passage, when, after having charged them not to be wearied and
faint-hearted, he quotes the words of the Prophet. (<span
id="iv.i-p42.1"></span>[Heb. 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012)<span id="iv.i-p42.1"></span>..md) Yet
he directs this discourse to every believer, that they may be excited to
perseverance*,* and because they have many struggles to maintain, may
advance steadfastly in their journey. Nor is it superfluous that he adds
*your God;* for if we do not know that he is our God, his approach will
produce terror, instead of giving cause of joy. Not the majesty of God,
which is fitted to humble the pride of the flesh, but his grace, which
is fitted to comfort the fearful and distressed, is here exhibited; and,
therefore, it is not without reason float he is represented as a
guardian, to shield them by his protection.

<span id="iv.i-p43"></span>If it be objected that he brings terror when
he comes to take vengeance, I reply that this vengeance, is threatened
against wicked men and enemies of the Church. To the latter, therefore,
he will be a terror, but to believers he will be a consolation; and
accordingly he adds that he will come to save them, because otherwise it
might be objected, “What is it to us if our enemies be punished? What
good does it do to us? Must we take delight in the distresses of
enemies?” Thus he expressly declares that it will promote our
“salvation;” for the vengeance which God takes on wicked men is
connected with the salvation of the godly. In what manner the godly are
delivered from anxiety and dread by the favor of God and by the
expectation of his aid, has been explained at a former passage).  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) (<span id="iv.i-p44.2"></span>[Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004)<span id="iv.i-p44.2"></span>..md) At
present it ought to be observed, that God is prepared and armed with
vengeance, that believers may learn to lean on his aid, and not to fancy
some deity unemployed in heaven. Such is also the object of the
repetition of the words, “he will come;” because distrust is not all at
once banished from the hearts of men.

<span id="iv.i-p45"></span>The end of the verse may either be rendered,
*God himself will come with a recompense,* or *He will come with the
recompense of God;* but as the meaning is the same, the reader may make
his choice Yet if it be thought preferable to view <span
id="iv.i-p45.1"></span>אלהים *(elohim)* as in the genitive case, *“of
God,”* then by “the recompense of God” is emphatically meant that which
belongs peculiarly to God, that believers may be fully convinced that he
is a “rewarder” as truly as he is God.  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)

<span id="iv.i-p47"></span><span id="iv.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p48"></span>**5.** *Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened.*  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) He continues the promise
about the restoration of the Church, in order to encourage the hearts of
the godly, who must have been grievously dismayed by the frightful
calamities which he foretold. Since a true restoration is accomplished
by Christ, we must therefore come to him, if we wish to know the meaning
of the words which Isaiah employs in this passage; and indeed it is only
by his kindness that we rise again to the hope of a heavenly life.
Isaiah probably alludes to a former prediction, (<span
id="iv.i-p49.1"></span>[Isa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.i-p49.1"></span>,) in which he threatened against the Jews
dreadful blindness, madness, and total stupefaction of the soul. He now
promises that, when Christ shalt shine forth, those senses of which they
were deprived for a time shall be renovated and brightened to a new
life. There is weight in the adverb *Then;* for we ought to infer from
it that, so long as we are alienated from Christ, we are dumb, blind,
and lame, and, in short, that we are destitute of all ability to do what
is good, but that we are renewed by the Spirit of Christ, so as to enjoy
real health.

<span id="iv.i-p50"></span>By the *tongue* and *ears* and *feet* he
means all the faculties of our soul, which in themselves are so corrupt
that nothing that is good can be obtained from them till they are
restored by the kindness of Christ. The eyes cannot see what is right,
and the ears cannot hear, and the feet cannot guide us in the right way,
till we are united to Christ. Though the senses of men are abundantly
acute wherever they are impelled by sinful passions; though the tongue
is eloquent for slander, perjury, lying, and every kind of foolish
speaking; though the hands are too ready for thefts, extortions, and
cruelty; though the feet are swift to do injury; and, in short, though
the whole of our nature is not only willing but strongly bent on doing
what is evil; yet we are altogether slothful and dull to do what is
good, and therefore every part of us must be created anew by the power
of Christ, that it may begin to understand aright, to feel, to speak,
and to perform its offices; for

<span id="iv.i-p51"></span>“no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by
the Holy Spirit.” (<span id="iv.i-p51.1"></span>[1Co
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="iv.i-p51.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p52"></span>This renewal proceeds from the grace of
Christ alone, and, therefore, sound strength is regained by those who
are converted to Christ, and who formerly were in all respects useless,
and resembled dead men; for, while we are separated from Christ, we
either are destitute of everything that is good, or it is so greatly
corrupted in us, that it cannot be applied to its proper use, but on the
contrary is polluted by being abused. Christ gave abundant proofs and
examples of this, when he restored speech to the dumb, eyes to the
blind, and perfect strength to the feeble and lame; but what he bestowed
on their bodies was only a token of the far more abundant and excellent
blessings which he imparts to our souls.

<span id="iv.i-p53"></span><span id="iv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p54"></span>**6.** *For waters shall be dug.* He next
adds other blessings with which believers shall be copiously supplied,
as soon as the kingdom of Christ is set up; as if he had said, that
there will be no reason to dread scarcity or want, when we have been
reconciled to God through Christ, because perfect happiness flows to us
from him. But he represents this happiness to us under metaphorical
expressions; and, first, he says that “waters shall be dug;” because,
where formerly all was barren, there the highest fertility shall be
found. Now, we are poor and barren, unless God bless us through Christ;
for he alone, brings with him the blessing of the Father, which he
bestows upon us. Wicked men, indeed, have often a great abundance of
good things, but their wealth is wretched; for they have not Christ,
from whom alone proceeds a true and salutary abundance of all blessings.
Death unquestionably would be more desirable than that abundance of wine
and of food with which we, at the same time, swallow the curse of God.
When, therefore, Christ shall gloriously arise, rivers and waters shall
flow out and yield true and valuable advantage.

<span id="iv.i-p55"></span><span id="iv.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p56"></span>**7.** *The dry place shall be changed into a
pool.* He confirms the former statement, that Christ will come in order
to enrich his people with all abundance of blessings; for waters shall
flow out of “dry places.”  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) We must
keep in remembrance what we mentioned a little before, that the Prophet
delineates to us what may be called a picture of a happy life; for
although this change was not openly visible at the coming of Christ, yet
with good reason does the Prophet affirm that, during his reign, the
whole earth shall be fruitful; for he had formerly said that without
Christ all things are cursed to us.

<span id="iv.i-p58"></span>*In the habitation of dragons.* The whole
world, therefore, shall resemble a parched wilderness, in which lions,
“dragons,” and other wild beasts prowl, till the kingdom of Christ shall
be set up; and, on the other hand, when he is established on his throne,
the godly shall lack nothing. An instance of this was given, when the
Lord delivered his people and brought them out of Babylon; but the
accomplishment of this prophecy must be looked for in Christ, through
whom their ruinous condition is amended and restored; for that
deliverance was but a feeble representation of it. And yet the full
accomplishment of this promise ought not to be expected in the present
life; for as it is through hope that we are blessed, (<span
id="iv.i-p58.1"></span>[Ro 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.i-p58.1"></span>,) so our happiness, which is now in some
respects concealed, must be an object of hope till the last day; and it
is enough that some taste of it be enjoyed in this world, that we may
more ardently long for that perfect happiness.

<span id="iv.i-p59"></span><span id="iv.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p60"></span>**8.** *And a path shall be there.* Here it
is promised to the Jews that they shall be allowed to return to their
native country, lest, when they were carried into Babylon, they should
think that they were led into perpetual banishmerit. Yet this statement
is, in my opinion, extended much farther by the Prophet; for, as he
promised a little before, that there would be plenty and abundance of
provisions where there had been barrenness, so now he says that those
places where formerly no man dwelt shall be occupied with the.journeys
and habitations of a vast multitude of men; and, in short, that the
whole of Judea shall enjoy such harmony and peace with other countries,
that men shall pass from the one country to the other without fear; for
where there are no inhabitants, there can be no intercourse and no
roads. He therefore means that the Jews will carry on intercourse and
merchandise with other nations, after having been brought back and
restored to their own land.

<span id="iv.i-p61"></span>*And it shall be called, The holy way.* Not
without reason does the Prophet add that “the way shall be holy;” for
wherever there is a great multitude of men, innumerable vices and
corruptions abound. What else is done by a crowd of men than to pollute
the land by infecting each other with mutual contagion? The Prophet
therefore means that not only the earth, but also the minds of men are
renewed by the kindness of Christ, so that they sanctify the earth which
they formerly were wont to corrupt by their pollution. Yet what I stated
briefly ought to be remembered, that the Jews, to whom the way shall be
consecrated, will return to their native country, that they may worship
their Redeemer in it in a holy manner; as if he had said that the land
will be cleansed from the disgraceful rabble of a wicked people, that it
may be inhabited by the true worshippers of God.

<span id="iv.i-p62"></span>*The unclean person shall not pass through
it.* He now adds a more full explanation; for polluted persons shall not
tread the land which God hath set apart for his children; as if he had
said, that the Lord will separate believers in such a manner that they
shall not be mingled with the reprobate. This ought, unquestionably, to
be reckoned among the most valuable blessings of the Church; but it is
not fulfilled in this life; for both despisers of God and hypocrites
rush indiscriminately into the Church and hold a place there. Yet some
evidence of this grace becomes visible, whenever God, by various
methods, cleanses his Church; but the full cleansing of it must be
expected at the last day. Even the worshippers of God, whom he has
regenerated by his Spirit, are attended by much uncleanness. Though they
have been sanctified by God, yet their holiness cannot be perfect; their
flesh is not wholly dead, but subdued and restrained so as to obey the
Spirit. Now, it is because the Lord reigns in them, and subdues their
natural dispositions, that, on account of that part of them which is the
most important, they are called Saints.

<span id="iv.i-p63"></span>*And he shall be to them one that walketh in
the way.* This clause has been tortured in various ways by commentators.
Some render it “This shall be their road; they who have been used to the
road, and they who are unacquainted with it, shall not go astray.”
Others render it, “This shall be the road for the children of Israel,
and they who walk shall not go astray, though they be unacquainted with
it.” But the demonstrative pronoun <span id="iv.i-p63.1"></span>הוא,
(hu,) *he,* is more correctly, in my opinion, viewed as referring to
God; as if he had said, that God will go before them to lead and direct
the way. And the context absolutely demands it; for it would not be
enough to have the way opened up, if God did not go before to guide his
people. The Prophet therefore extols this inestimable kindness, when he
represents God as journeying along with his people; for, if he do not
point out the road, our feet will always lead us astray, for we are
wholly inclined to vanity. Besides, though the road be at hand, and
though it be plain before our eyes, yet we shall not be able to
distinguish it from the wrong road, and if we begin to walk in it, our
folly will quickly lead us off on the right hand or on the left. But the
Prophet shews that we shall be in no danger of going astray, when we
shall follow God as the leader of the way; for he condescends to perform
this office; and he probably alludes to the history of the first
redemption, for at that time God directed his people

<span id="iv.i-p64"></span>“by means of a cloud by day, and of a pillar
of fire by night.” (<span id="iv.i-p64.1"></span>[Ex
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span id="iv.i-p64.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p65"></span>At the same time he points out how necessary
it is that God should govern us, in directly laying folly to our charge,
when he adds —

<span id="iv.i-p66"></span>*Fools shall not go astray;* for they who are
wise in their own eyes, and who rely on their own guidance, will be
permitted by God to wander in uncertain courses; and therefore, if we
wish that he should walk along with us, let us know that we need his
guidance. Yet he offers us this most excellent reward, that they who
follow him, even though they did not formerly possess any wisdom, shall
be in no danger of going astray. Yet the Prophet does not mean that
believers, after the Lord has taken them by the hand, will be ignorant;
but he shews what they are before the Lord becomes their leader.

<span id="iv.i-p67"></span><span id="iv.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p68"></span>**9.** *There shall not be there a lion.* He
adds another favor of God, that the people, though they travel through a
wilderness, will be protected against every hostile attack. Formerly he
mentioned it (<span id="iv.i-p68.1"></span>[Isa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)<span id="iv.i-p68.1"></span>.md) as
one of the curses of God, that wild beasts would meet the Jews wherever
they went; but now he declares that, when they have been received into
favor, no lions and no beasts of prey shall attack them; because the
Lord will ward them off, so as to open up a way for his people free from
all danger and from all fear. For although they had received liberty to
return, yet they might have met with many obstacles; and therefore he
says that the Lord will remove every annoyance and obstruction.

<span id="iv.i-p69"></span>We may draw from this a profitable doctrine,
namely, that God not only begins, but conducts to the end, the work of
our salvation, that his grace in us may not be useless and unprofitable.
As he opens up the way, so he paves it, and removes obstacles of every
description, and is himself the leader during the whole journey. In
short, he continues his grace towards us in such a manner that he at
length brings it to perfection. And this ought to be applied to the
whole course of our life. Here we walk as on a road, moving forward to
that blessed inheritance. Satan presents numerous obstructions, and
dangers surround us on every side; but the Lord, who goes before and
leads us by the hand, will not leave us in the midst of the journey, but
at length will perfectly finish what he has begun in us by his Spirit.
(<span id="iv.i-p69.1"></span>[Php
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="iv.i-p69.1"></span>..md) Yet
it ought to be observed that the very beasts, through God’s kindness,
shall be tamed, so as not to direct their rage and cruelty against us,
as it is said,

<span id="iv.i-p70"></span>“I will make a covenant for you with the
fowls of heaven, and with the beasts of prey.” (<span
id="iv.i-p70.1"></span>[Ho 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.i-p70.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p71"></span><span id="iv.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p72"></span>**10.** *Therefore the redeemed of Jehovah
shall return.* The Prophet confirms the former doctrine, that God hath
determined to redeem his people, and therefore that nothing can resist
his decree. He calls them “the redeemed of God,” that they may consider
his power, and may not estimate by human means the promise which he has
made about their return. He says also, that *they will come to Zion,*
because God does not in vain wish to bring them out of Babylon, and to
leave them when they have commenced their journey. At the same time, it
ought to be observed, that we have no means of entering the Church but
by the redemption of God; for under the example of the ancient people, a
general representation is placed before our eyes, that we may know that
no man is rescued from the tyranny of the devil, to which we are all
subject, till the grace of God go before; for no man will redeem
himself. Now, since this redemption is a gift peculiar to the kingdom of
Christ, it follows that he is our only deliverer, as is also attested by
the declaration,

<span id="iv.i-p73"></span>“If the Son shall make you free,  
you shall be free indeed.” (<span id="iv.i-p73.2"></span>[Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="iv.i-p73.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p74"></span>Yet it is not enough that we have once been
redeemed; for the design is, that we should dwell in the Church of God,
and make progress from day to day. Since therefore we have been
delivered by Christ, we ought to labor with all our might, and
continually to strive to gain that end. If it be said that we do not
need to perform a long journey, in order to be admitted into the Church
of God, (for we are received into it by baptism,) I reply, that here the
Prophet discourses metaphorically about the whole course of life;
because the time when” the redeemed of God” shall actually “come to
Zion,” is when the course of life is closed, and they pass into a
blessed life. And it ought also to be observed, that the greater the
progress which we make in the grace of God, and the more close our
alliance to the Church, the nearer do we approach to Zion.

<span id="iv.i-p75"></span>*And they shall obtain joy and gladness.* By
the words “joy and gladness,” he means that there will be so great
happiness under the reign of Christ, that we shall have abundant reason
to rejoice. And indeed the true and only ground of rejoicing is, to know
that we are reconciled to God, whose favor is sufficient for our perfect
happiness, “so that we may glory even in tribulation,” (<span
id="iv.i-p75.1"></span>[Ro 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.i-p75.1"></span>;) and, on the other hand, when Christ does not
enlighten us, we must, be darkened by sorrow. Besides, it is certain
that the godly do not rejoice in a proper manner without also expressing
grafftude to God; and therefore this spiritual joy must be distinguished
from that ordinary joy in which irreligious men indulge; for the
reprobate also rejoice, but their end at length shews how pernicious is
the wantonness of the flesh, which leads them to take delight in
despising God. This kind of “joy” Paul justly (<span
id="iv.i-p75.2"></span>[Ro 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i-p75.2"></span>; <span id="iv.i-p75.3"></span>[Ga
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="iv.i-p75.3"></span>.md)
calls spiritual; for it does not depend on fading things, such as honor,
property, riches, and other things of that nature which quickly perish;
but this joy is secret and has its seat in the hearts, from which it
cannot be shaken or torn away in any manner, though Satan endeavors by
every method to disturb and afflict us; and therefore the Prophet justly
adds —

<span id="iv.i-p76"></span>*Sorrow and sighing shall flee away.* The joy
is everlasting, and all “sadness flees away;” for although many bitter
griefs are daily endured by the children of God, yet so great is the
power and strength of their consolation, that it swallows up all sorrow.
“We glory,” says Paul, “in our tribulations,” (<span
id="iv.i-p76.1"></span>[Ro 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.i-p76.1"></span>;) and this glorying cannot be without joy. The
Apostles

<span id="iv.i-p77"></span>“departed from the presence of the council,
rejoicing that they were accounted worthy of suffering dishonor for the
name of Jesus.” (<span id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>[Ac
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i-p78"></span>Yet the godly often suffer heavy distresses,
and are not exempt from grief. This is undoubtedly true, but they are
not overwhelmed; for they look straight towards God, by whose power they
become victorious, just as if a person, elevated on a lofty mountain,
looking at the sun, and enjoying his brightness, beheld others in a low
valley, surrounded by clouds and darkness, whom that brightness could
not reach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc15003.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol 2, pp. 330 and
420.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc15003.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p38"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p38.1"></span>Fortifler ceux
qui sont prests a tomber.” “To support those who are ready to fall.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc15003.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iv.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p44"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol 1, p. 232.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc15003.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iv.i-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p46"></span> “Vengeance shall come. The meaning is the
same as if he had said, ‘God will come in vengeance, or as an avenger.’
Again, the retribution of God shall come against your enemies and
deliver you.” — *Jarchi.* “The construction of the second clause is
greatly perplexed by making <span id="iv.i-p46.1"></span>אלהים
*(elohim)* the subject of <span id="iv.i-p46.2"></span>יבוא *(yabo.)*
The true construction as given by Junius, Cocceius, Vitringa, and most
later writers, makes *behold your God* an exclamation, and vengeance the
subject of the verb.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc15003.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iv.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p49"></span> “That is,” says Jarchi, “who have hitherto
been blind so as not to know the reverence (or fear) of me upon them.”
Or, as explained by his annotator Breithaupt, “Who have hitherto shaken
off the yoke of the fear of God, and have not manifested the reverence
that is due to God.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc15003.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iv.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p57"></span> “Instead of the general meaning put upon
<span id="iv.i-p57.1"></span>שרב *(sharab,)* by the older writers
following the Septuagint (<span id="iv.i-p57.2"></span>ἄνυδρος) and the
Vulgate (<span id="iv.i-p57.3"></span>*quoe erat arida*) it is now
agreed that the word denotes the illusive appearance caused by the
unequal refraction in the lower strata of the atmosphere, and often
witnessed both at sea and land, called in English, *looming,* in
Italian, <span id="iv.i-p57.4"></span>*fata morgana,* and in French,
<span id="iv.i-p57.5"></span>*mirage* In the deserts of Arabia and
Africa, the appearance presented is precisely that of an extensive sheet
of water, tending not only to mislead the traveler, but to aggravate his
thirst by disappointment. The phenomenon is well described by Quintus
Curtius, in his Life of Alexander the Great.” — *Alexander*.  
The same view is given by Vitringa, who speaks of it as held by other
learned men, and illustrates it very happily. It is also maintained by
Rosenmuller, who supports it by curious and instructive extracts from
Arabic scholiasts, and from the Koran, and by a host of other
authorities. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](cc15004.md)
