[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc15006)  [Next](cc15008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 39

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** At that time Merodachbaladan, the son
of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezzekiah:
for he had heard that he had been sick and was recovered.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Tempore illo misit Merodach Baladan,
filius Baladan, rex Babel, ad Ezechiam literas et munus, ex quo audieret
eum aegrotasse, et convaluisse

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Hezekiah was glad of them, and
shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold,
and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his
armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in
his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Laetatus est autum de iis Ezechias,
et ostendit illis domum thesauri sui, argentum et aurum et aromata,
unguentum pretiosum, et omne armamentarium suum, et quicquid
inveniebatur in thesauris suis: non fuit res ulla, quam non ostenderit
Ezechias in domo sua, totoque regno suo.

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Then came Isaiah the prophet unto
king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? And from whence
came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country
unto me, *even* from Babylon.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tum venit Isaias propheta ad regem
Ezechiam, dixitique illi: Quid dixerunt viri isti? Et unde venerunt ad
te? Respondit Ezechias, E terra longinqua venerunt ad me, e Babel

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Then said he, What have they seen in
thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that *is* in mine house have
they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed
them.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tunc dixit: Quid viderunt domi tuae?
Et dixit Ezechias: Cuncta quae domi meae sunt viderunt; nec res ulla
est, quam non illis ostenderim in thesauris meis.

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Then Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the
word of the LORD of hosts:

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc ait Isais Ezechiae: Audi verbum
Iehovae exercituum.

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Behold, the days come, that all that
*is* in thine house and *that* which thy fathers have laid up in store
until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left,
saith the LORD.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ecce dies veniunt, ut tollatur in
Babylonem quicquid est domituae, et quicquid recondiderunt patres tui ad
hunc usque diem; nec residuum quicquam manebit, dicit Iehova.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And of thy sons that shall issue
from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall
be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span>**7.** E filiis tuis qui egressi fuerint ex
te, quos genueris, tollent; eruntque eunuchi in palatio regis Babel.

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good
*is* the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For
there shall be peace and truth in my days.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Dixit Ezechias Isiae: Bonus est
sermo Iehovae quem pronumtiasti. Et dixit: Saltem erit pax et stabilitas
in diebus meis.

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span><span id="viii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**1.** *At that time.* Some think that this
was the first king of the Chaldee nation; for his father, *Baladin,* had
held the government over the Babylonians without the title of king. This
Merodach, therefore, after having reigned twelve years, subdued the
Assyrians, and made them tributaries to the Chaldeans; for it is a
mistake to suppose that the war was begun by Nebuchadnezzar. It is
indeed possible that he completed the subjugation of them; but it is
probable that already they were half subdued, so that nothing else
remained than to establish the royal power gained by the victory of his
predecessor.

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span>*Sent letters and a present to Hezekiah*
Although the Prophet simply relates that messengers were sent, yet it is
of importance to observe that this was done craftily by the Babylonian,
in order to flatter and cajole Hezekiah. He was at this time threatening
the Assyrians, whom he knew to be justly disliked by the Jews on account
of their continual wars; and therefore, in order to obtain Hezekiah as
an ally and partisan in the war which was now waging against him,
endeavors to obtain his friendship by indirect methods. The mind of the
good king was corrupted by ambition, so that he too eagerly *accepted*
the false blandishments of the tyrant, and swallowed the bait.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>The pretence was, to congratulate Hezekiah
on having recovered from his disease. And yet sacred history appears to
assign another reason, which was, that Merodach was induced by a
miracle. (<span id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>[2Ch
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031)<span id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>.)
There is certainly no doubt that the report of that prodigy, which took
place when the sun went back, was yew widely spread; and it might have
produced an impression on many nations. Yet it can hardly be believed
that a heathen had any other object in view than to draw Hezekiah into
his net; but since, by a remarkable sign, God had shewn that he cared
for the safety of Hezekiah, and since wicked men commonly apply to a
base purpose all the proofs of God’s favor, Merodach thought that, if he
could obtain the alliance of Hezekiah, he would carry on war under the
protection and favor of heaven.  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>The consequence was, that he sent
messengers to Hezekiah with presents, for the sake of expressing his
good-will; for he wished to obtain his favor, believing that his
friendship would be useful and advantageous to him; and his intention
was, to make use of him afterwards against the Assyrians, to whom he
knew well that the Jews entertained a deadly hatred. Such are the
designs of kings and princes, to transact their affairs by fraud and
craftiness, and bysome means to gain as many allies as possible, that
they may employ their exertions against their enemies

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span><span id="viii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>**2.** *And Hezekiah was glad* The Prophet
performs the part of the historian; for he merely relates what Hezekiah
did, and will afterwards explain why he did it; that is, that Hezekiah,
blinded by ambition, made an ostentatious display to the messengers;
while he censures an improper kind of joy, which afterwards gave rise to
an eager desire of treating them in a friendly manner.

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span>Any person who shall barely read this
history will con-elude that Hezekiah did nothing wrong; for it was an
act of humanity to give a cheerful and hospitable reception to the
messengers, and to shew them every proof of good-will; and it would have
been the act of a barbarian to disdain those who had come to him on a
friendly visit, and to spurn the friendship of so powerful a king. But
still there lurked in his heart a desire of vain ostentation; for he
wished to make a favorable display of himself, that the Babylonian might
be led to understand that this alliance would not be without advantage
to him, and might ascertain this from his wealth, and forces, and
weapons of war. He deserved to be reproved on another ground, that he
directed his mind to foreign and unlawful aid, and to that extent denied
honor to God, whom he had recently known to be his deliverer on two
occasions; for otherwise the Prophet would not have censured this act so
severely.

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span>This is a remarkable example; and it
teaches us that nothing’ is more dangerous than to be blinded by
prosperity. It proves also the truth of the old proverb, that “it is
more difficult to bear prosperity than adversity;” for when everything
goes on to our wish, we grow wanton and insolent, and cannot be kept in
the path of duty by any advices or threatenings. When this happened to
Hezekiah, on whom the Prophet had bestowed the high commendation, that
“the fear of God was his treasure,” (<span id="viii.i-p28.1"></span>[Isa
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p28.1"></span>,)
we ought to be very much afraid of falling into the same dangers. He is
carried away by idle boasting, and does not remember that formerly he
was half-dead, and that God rescued him from death by an extraordinary
miracle. Formerly he made a solemn promise that he would continually
celebrate the praises of God in the assembly of the godly, (<span
id="viii.i-p28.2"></span>[Isa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020)<span id="viii.i-p28.2"></span>,)
and now, when he sees that his friendship is sought, and that a powerful
monarch sends to salute him, he forgets God and the benefits which he
had received from him. When we see that this good king’ so quickly falls
and is carried away by ambition, let us learn to lay upon ourselves the
restraint of modesty, which will keep us constantly and diligently in
the fear of God.

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span><span id="viii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span>**3.** *Then came Isaiah the Prophet* He
continues the same narrative, but likewise adds doctrine. Although he
does not say that God had sent him, yet it is certain that he did this
by the influence of the Holy Spirit and by the command of God; and,
therefore, he bestows on himself the designation of *the Prophet,* by
which he intimates that he did not come as a private individual, but to
perform an office which God had enjoined on him, that Hezekiah might
clearly see that he had not to deal with a mortal man.

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>Now, when he says that he *came, we* ought
to infer that he was not sent for, but was allowed to remain quietly at
home, while Hezekiah was making’ a boastful display of his treasures;
for prophets are not usually invited to consultations of this sort. But
formerly, while he was weighed down by extreme distress, while Rabshakeh
insulted him so fiercely, and uttered such daring’ blasphemies against
God, he sent, to Isaiah, and requested him to intercede with God, and to
soothe his anguish by some consolation. (<span
id="viii.i-p31.1"></span>[Isa. 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#004)<span id="viii.i-p31.1"></span>.)
Thus in adversity and distress the prophets are sought, but in
prosperity are disregarded or even despised; because they disturb our
mirth by their admonitions, and appear to give occasion of grief. But
Isaiah *came,* though he was not invited; and in this we ought to
observe and praise his steadfastness, and are taught by his example that
we ought not to wait till we are sent for by men who need the discharge
of our duty, when they flatter themselves amidst the heaviest
distresses, and bring danger on themselves either by levity, or by
ignorance, or even by malice; for it is our duty to gather the wandering
sheep, and we ought to do this diligently, even though we be not
requested by any person.

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span>Though Hezekiah may be justly blamed for
having been corrupted by the flatteries of the king of Babylon so as not
to ask counsel of God, yet it is a manifestation of no ordinary modesty,
that he does not drive away or despise the Prophet, as if he had found
fault without reason, but replies gently, and at length receives calmly
and mildly a very severe reproof. It would have been better that he had,
from the beginning’, inquired at the mouth of God, as it is said in the
psalm,

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>“Thy commandments are the men of my
counsel,”  
(<span id="viii.i-p33.2"></span>[Ps
119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i-p33.2"></span>;)

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span>but, having committed a mistake, it was his
next duty to receive submissively the remedy for the fault.

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span>*What did those men say?* The Prophet does
not immediately inflict on him the pain of a severe reproof, but wounds
him gently, so as to lead him to a confession of his sin; for Hezekiah
flattered himself, and thought that all was going well with him, and,
therefore, needed to be gradually aroused from his slothfulness. Still
these words gave a sharp wound; as if he had said, “What have you to do
with *those men?* Ought you not to keep at the greatest distance from a
plague so contagious?” He likewise inquires about the contents of the
message, in order to make Hezekiah ashamed of not having perceived the
deceit that was practiced on him; for *there* is reason to believe that
he would not have censured the congratulation, if there had not been
some poison mingled with it, but he points out those snares in which the
Babylonians wished to entangle him.

<span id="viii.i-p36"></span>And yet it is evident from the reply, that
Hezekiah was not yet struck by that gentle reproof; for he is still on
good terms with himself, and boasts that those men *came from a distant
country, from Babylon* There is reason to believe that Isaiah was not
ignorant of that country, so that Hezekiah did not need to express the
distance in such magnificent language; but he boasts in this manner,
because he was under the influence of ambition. It was therefore
necessary that he should be more keenly pressed, and that sharper spurs
should be applied.

<span id="viii.i-p37"></span><span id="viii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p38"></span>**4.** *Then he said.* Isaiah proceeds in
his indirect admonition, to see if Hezekiah shall be moved by it and
displeased with himself. But still he does not succeed, though it can
hardly be believed that the king was so stupid as not to feel the
punctures of the spur; for he knew that the Prophet had not come, as
persons addicted to curiosity are wont to do, for the purpose of hunting
out news; and he knew also that the Prophet had not come to jest with
him, but to state something of importance. However that may be, we ought
to put a favorable construction on his mild reply; for he does not break
out against the Prophet, but modestly confesses the state of the fact,
though he does not yet acknowledge that he has sinned, or at least is
not brought to repentance; for he does not judge of his sin from that
concealed disposition. Ambition deludes men so much, that by its
sweetness it not only intoxicates but drives them mad, so that, even
when they have been admonished, they do not immediately repent. When,
therefore, we see the godly Hezekiah struck with such stupidity as not
to perceive that he is reproved, or at least not to be stung by it so as
to know himself, we ought carefully to guard against so dangerous a
disease.

<span id="viii.i-p39"></span><span id="viii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p40"></span>**5.** *Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah.* From
this judgment of God we perceive that the sin of Hezekiah was not small,
though common sense judges differently; for since God always observes
the highest moderation in chastising men, we may infer from the severity
of the punishment that it was no ordinary fault, but a highly aggravated
crime. Hence also we are reminded that men judge amiss of words or
actions, but that God alone is the competent judge of them. Hezekiah
shewed his treasures. Had they been heaped up, that they might always
lie hidden in the earth? He received the messengers kindly. Should he
have driven them away? He lent an ear to their instructions. But that
was when the rival of the Assyrian voluntarily desired his friendship.
Ought he to have rejected so valuable an advantage? In a word, so far as
appearances go, we shall find nothing for which an apology may not be
offered.

<span id="viii.i-p41"></span>But God, from whom nothing is hidden,
observes in Hezekiah’s joy, first, ingratitude; because he is unmindful
of the distresses which lately pressed him down, and, in some respects,
substitutes the Chaldeans in the room of God himself, to whom he ought
to have dedicated his own person and all that he possessed. Next, he
observes pride; because Hezekiah attempts too eagerly to gain reputation
by magnificence and riches He observes a sinful desire to enter into an
alliance which would have been destructive to the whole nation. But the
chief fault was ambition, which almost entirely banishes the fear of God
from the hearts of men. Hence Augustine justly exclaims, “How great and
how pernicious is the poison of pride, which cannot be cured but by
poison!” For he has his eye on that passage in one of Paul’s Epistles,
in which he says that “a messenger of Satan had been given to buffet
him, that he might not be puffed up by the greatness of revelations.”
(<span id="viii.i-p41.1"></span>[2Co
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="viii.i-p41.1"></span>.)
Hezekiah was unshaken, when all was nearly ruined; but he is vanquished
by these flatteries, and does not resist vain ambition. Let us,
therefore, attentively and diligently consider what a destructive evil
this is, and let us be so much the more careful to avoid it.

<span id="viii.i-p42"></span>*Hear the word of Jehovah of hosts* Being
about to be the bearer of a harsh sentence, he begins by saying that he
is God’s herald, and a little afterwards, he again repeats that God has
commanded him to do this, not merely for the purpose of protecting
himself against hatred,  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) but in
order to make a deep impression on the heart of the king’. Here again we
see his steadfastness and heroic courage. He does not dread the face of
the king, or fear to make known his disease, and to announce to him the
judgment of God; for although, at that time as well as now, kings had
delicate ears, yet, being fully aware that God had enjoined this duty
upon him, he boldly executes his commission, however much it might be
disliked. Prophets were, indeed, subject to kings, and claimed nothing
for themselves, unless when it was their duty to speak in the name of
God; and in such cases there is nothing so lofty that it ought not to be
abased before the majesty of God. And if his object had been to gain the
good graces of his prince, he would have been silent like other
flatterers; but he has regard to his office, and endeavors to discharge
it most faithfully.

<span id="viii.i-p44"></span><span id="viii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p45"></span>**6.** *And nothing shall be left* It is
proper to observe the kind of punishment which the Lord inflicts on
Hezekiah; for he takes from his successors those things of which he
vaunted so loudly, in order that they may have no ground for boasting of
them. Thus the Lord punishes the ambition and pride of men, so that
their name or kingdom, which they hoped would last for ever, is blotted
out, and they are treated with contempt, and the remembrance of them is
accursed. In a word, he overthrows their foolish thoughts, so that they
find by experience the very opposite of those inventions by which they
deceive themselves.

<span id="viii.i-p46"></span>If it be objected that it is unreasonable,
that the sacking of a city and the captivity of a nation should be
attributed to the fault of a single man, while the Holy Spirit
everywhere declares (<span id="viii.i-p46.1"></span>[2Ch
36:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i-p46.1"></span>) that general obstinacy was the reason why God
delivered up the city and the country to be pillaged by the Babylonians;
I answer, that there is no absurdity in God’s punishing the sin of a
single man, and at the same time the crimes of a whole nation. For when
the wrath of the Lord overspread the whole country, it was the duty of
all to unite in confessing their guilt., and of every person to consider
individually what he had deserved; that no man might throw the blame on
others, but that every man might lay it on himself. Besides, since the
Jews were already in many ways liable to the judgment of God, he justly
permitted Hezekiah to fail in his duty to the injury of all, that he
might hasten the more his own wrath, and open up a way for the execution
of his judgment. In like manner we see that it happened to David; for
Scripture declares that it was not an accidental occurrence that David
numbered the people, but that it took place by the fault of the nation
itself, whom the Lord determined to punish in this manner.

<span id="viii.i-p47"></span>“The anger of the Lord was kindled against
the nation, and he put it into the heart of David to number the people.”
(<span id="viii.i-p47.1"></span>[2Sa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p47.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p48"></span>Thus in this passage also punishment is
threatened against Hezekiah; but his sin, by which he provoked God’s
anger, was also the vengeance of God against the whole nation.

<span id="viii.i-p49"></span><span id="viii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p50"></span>**7.** *Of thy sons* It might be thought
that this was far more distressing to Hezekiah, and therefore it is put
last for the sake of heightening the picture. Even though any calamity
spread widely in a nation, it is commonly thought that kings and their
families will be exempted, as if they were not placed in the same rank
with other men. When he understood, therefore, that his sons would be
made captives and slaves, this must have appeared to him to be
exceedingly severe. Hence again we may learn how much God was displeased
with Hezekiah for seeking aid from earthly wealth, and boasting of it in
the presence of wicked men, when God by a dreadful example punishes it
as an unpardonable crime, that Hezekiah made an ambitious display of his
wealth in presence of unbelievers.

<span id="viii.i-p51"></span><span id="viii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p52"></span>**8.** *Good is the word of Jehovah* From
this reply we learn, that Hezekiah was not a stubborn or obstinately
haughty man, since he listened patiently to the Prophet’s reproof,
though he was little moved by it at the commencement. When he is
informed that the Lord is angry, he unhesitatingly acknowledges his
guilt, and confesses that he is justly punished. Having heard the
judgment of God, he does not argue or contend with the Prophet, but
conducts himself with gentleness and modesty, and thus holds out to us
an example of genuine submissiveness and obedience.

<span id="viii.i-p53"></span>Let us therefore learn by the example of
the pious king’ to listen with calmness to the Lord, not only when he
exhorts or admonishes, but even when he condemns and terrifies by
threatening just punishment. When he says that “the word of God is
good,” he not only gives him the praise of justice, but patiently
acquiesces in that which might have been unwelcome on account of its
harshness; for even the reprobate have sometimes been compelled to
confess their guilt; while their rebellion was not subdued so as to
refrain from murmuring against their Judge. In order, therefore, that
God’s threatenings may be softened to us, we must entertain some hope of
*mercy,* otherwise our hearts will always pour forth unavailing
bitterness; but he who shall be convinced that God, when he punishes,
does not in any degree lay aside the feeling of a father’s affection,
will not only confess that God is just, but will calmly and mildly bear
his temporary severity. In a word, when we shall have a powerful
conviction of the grace of God, so as to believe that he is our Father,
it will not be hard or disagreeable to us to stand and fall according to
his pleasure; for faith will assure us that nothing is more advantageous
to us than his fatherly chastisement.

<span id="viii.i-p54"></span>Thus David, having been very severely
reproved by Nathan, humbly replies, *“It* is the Lord, let him do
whatever is right in his eyes;”  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)
for undoubtedly the reason why he is dumb is, not only because it would
be of no use to murmur, but because he willingly submits to the judgment
of God. Such is also the character of Saul’s silence, when he is
informed that the kingdom shall be taken from him. (<span
id="viii.i-p55.3"></span>[1Sa
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020)<span id="viii.i-p55.3"></span>.)
But because it is only punishment that terrifies him, and he is not
moved by repentance for his sin, we need not wonder if he be full of
cruelty within, though apparently he acquiesces, because he cannot
resist, which otherwise he would willingly do, like malefactors who,
while they are held bound by chains or fetters, are submissive to their
judges, whom they would willingly drag down from the place of authority
and trample under their feet. But while David and Hezekiah are “humbled
under the mighty hand of God,” (<span id="viii.i-p55.4"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p55.4"></span>,)
still they do not lose the hope of pardon, and therefore choose rather
to submit to the punishment which he inflicts than to withdraw from his
authority.

<span id="viii.i-p56"></span>*Which thou hast spoken.* It is worthy of
notice that he acknowledges not only that the sentence which God has
pronounced is just, but that the word which Isaiah has spoken is good;
for there is great weight in this clause, since he does not hesitate to
receive the word with reverence, though it is spoken by a mortal man,
because he looks to its principal Author. The freedom used by Isaiah
might undoubtedly be harsh and unpleasant to the king; but acknowledging
him to be the servant of God, he allows himself to be brought to
obedience. So much the more insufferable is the delicacy of those who
are offended at being’ admonished or reproved, and scornfully reply to
teachers and ministers of the word, “Are not you men as well as we?” As
if it were not our duty to obey God, unless he sent angels from heaven,
or came down himself.

<span id="viii.i-p57"></span>Hence also we learn what opinion we ought
to form concerning fanatics, who, while they pretend to adore God,
reject the doctrine of the prophets; for if they were ready to obey God,
they would listen to him when he spoke by his prophets, not less than
when he thundered from heaven. I admit that we ought to distinguish
between true and false prophets, between *“the* voice of the shepherd
(<span id="viii.i-p57.1"></span>[John
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p57.1"></span>) and
the voice of the stranger;” but we must not reject all without
distinction, if we do not wish to reject God himself; and we ought to
listen to them, not only when they exhort or reprove, but also when they
condemn, and when they threaten, by the command of God, the just
punishment of our sins.

<span id="viii.i-p58"></span>*At least*  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) *there shall be peace* The particle
<span id="viii.i-p59.1"></span>כי *(ki)* sometimes expresses opposition,
but, here it denotes an exception, and therefore I have translated it
*at least;* for Hezekiah adds something new, that is, he gives thanks to
God for mitigating the punishment which he had deserved; as if he had
said, “The Lord might have suddenly raised up enemies, to drive me out
of my kingdom; but he now spares me, and, by delaying, moderates the
punishment which might justly have been inflicted on me.” Yet this
clause may be explained as a prayer,  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) expressing Hezekiah’s desire that the
punishment should be delayed till a future age. But it is more probable
that what the Prophet had said about the days that were to come,
Hezekiah applied for soothing his grief, to encourage himself to
patience, because sudden vengeance would have alarmed him still more.
This exception, therefore, is highly fitted to induce meekness of
spirit, *“At least* God will spare our age.” But if any person prefer to
view it as assigning a reason, “*For* there shall be peace,”  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) him enjoy his opinion.

<span id="viii.i-p62"></span>*Peace and Truth.* Some think that <span
id="viii.i-p62.1"></span>אמת, *(emeth,) Truth,* denotes the worship of
God and pure religion, as if he were thanking God that, when he died, he
would leave the doctrine of godliness unimpaired. But I consider it to
denote “permanency,” or a peaceful condition of the kingdom; if it be
not thought preferable to view it as denoting, by the substitution of
one word for another, that there will be certain and long-continued
prosperity.

<span id="viii.i-p63"></span>But it may be thought that Hezekiah was
cruel in taking no care about posterity, and not giving himself much
trouble about what should happen afterwards. Such sayings as, (<span
id="viii.i-p63.1"></span>ἐμοῦ θανόντος γαῖα μιχθήτω πυρί,) “When I am
dead, let the earth be committed to the flames,” that is, “When I am
dead, all are dead;” and other sayings of the same kind, which are now
in the mouths of many swine and Epieureans, are profane and shocking.
But Hezekiah’s meaning was quite different; for, while he wished well to
those who should live after him, yet it would have been undutiful to
disregard that token of forbearance which God gave by delaying his
vengeance; for he might have been led by it to hope that this mercy
would, in some degree, be extended to posterity.

<span id="viii.i-p64"></span>Some reply that he rejoiced at the delay,
because

<span id="viii.i-p65"></span>“we ought not to be anxious about
to-morrow, seeing that sufficient for the day is its own affliction.”
(<span id="viii.i-p65.1"></span>[Mt
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="viii.i-p65.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p66"></span>But this does not apply to the present
passage; for Hezekiah does not disregard posterity, but, perceiving that
God moderates the punishment by forbearance, he gives thanks to God, as
we have already said; for although this punishment awaited a future age,
still it was his duty to acknowledge the present favor. And indeed we
ought to labor most for our own age, and to pay our chief regard to it.
The future ought not to be overlooked; but what is present and immediate
has stronger claims on our services; for we who live at the same time
are bound by God with a stronger tie, in order that, by mutual
intercourse, we may assist each other, as far as shall be in our power.
It ought likewise to be observed that, while the Lord had formerly
promised a lengthened life to hezekiah, when he was very near death,
there was now strong reason to fear that he would again cut short his
life on account of that sin. When he is informed that the promise is
ratified, he gives thanks to God, and bears more patiently the calamity
which was to come, though he felt it to be grievous and distressing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc15007.htm#fr_97) <span
id="viii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p23.1"></span>Que la
guerre qu’il entreprendoit de faire auroit heureuse issue, et seroit
benite du ciel.” “That war which he carried on would have a successful
result, and would be blest of heaven.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc15007.htm#fr_98) <span
id="viii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p43"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p43.1"></span>Non pas
que pour crainte d’estre mal voulu, il se descharge sur le Seigneur.”
“Not that, through fear of bringing ill-will on himself, he throws the
blame on the Lord.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc15007.htm#fr_99) <span
id="viii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p55"></span> Our author, quoting from memory, relates
the words, not of David to Nathan, (<span id="viii.i-p55.1"></span>[2Sa
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p55.1"></span>,)
but of Eli to Samuel. (<span id="viii.i-p55.2"></span>[1Sa
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#018)<span id="viii.i-p55.2"></span>) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc15007.htm#fr_100) <span
id="viii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p59"></span> “For there shall be peace.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc15007.htm#fr_101) <span
id="viii.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p60"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p60.1"></span>Au moins
qu’il y ait paix.” “At least let there be peace.”

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc15007.htm#fr_102) <span
id="viii.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p61"></span> <span id="viii.i-p61.1"></span>Car il y
aura paix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](cc15008)
