<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](xft14)  [Next](xft16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Kaffir (Xhosa) Folk-Lore*, by George McCall Theal, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# STORY OF THE CANNIBAL'S WONDERFUL BIRD.

A NUMBER of girls once went away their homes early in the morning
purpose of getting imbola (the red ith which they colour their bodies
and clothes). Among them was the daughter of a chief, a very pretty
girl. After they had collected the imbola, they were about to return
home, when one of them proposed that they should bathe in a large pool
of water that was there. To this they all agreed, and so they went into
the water and played about in it for a long time. At last they dressed
themselves again, and set out for home; but when they had gone some
distance, the chief's daughter noticed that she had forgotten one of her
ornaments, which she had taken off when they went to bathe. So she asked
her cousin to return with her to get it. The cousin refused. Then she
asked another girl, and another, but one and all refused to go back. She
was thus obliged to return to the water alone, while the other girls
went home.

On arriving at the pool, a big ugly cannibal with only one leg came up
to her, caught her, and put her in his bag. She was so frightened that
she lay quite still. The cannibal then took her round to the different
villages and made her sing for him. He called her his bird.

When he came to a village he asked for meat, and when it was given to
him he said "Sing, my bird." But he would never open the bag, so that
any one could see what sort of a bird he had.

When the girls reached home, they told the chief that his daughter had
reached the age of ntonjane, and they selected one of themselves and
shut her up in a hut. The chief believed that story, and so he killed a
large ox and said the people must eat. That day they ate fat beef, and
were very merry. The boys took meat, and went away from the village to
eat it.

The cannibal, who did not know that the girl's father was chief at this
place, came there just at this time. He said to the boys if they would
give him meat he would make his bird sing for them. So they gave him
meat, and he said: "Sing, my bird." The girl's brother was among those
boys, and he thought the bird sang like his sister, but he was afraid to
ask the cannibal to let him see. He advised the cannibal to go to the
village where the men were, and told him there was plenty of meat that
day.

The cannibal then went to the village and made his bird sing. The chief
wanted very much to see the bird, but the cannibal would not open the
bag. The chief offered him an ox for the bird, but the cannibal declined
the offer. Then the chief made a plan. He asked the cannibal to go for
some water, and said he would give him plenty of beef when he returned.
The cannibal said he would go if they would promise not to open his bag
while he was away. They all promised not to touch the bag. They gave the
cannibal a leaky pot to carry the water in, so that he was gone a long
time.As soon as he was out of sight the chief opened the bag and took
his daughter out. At first he could not believe it was his daughter, for
he thought she was observing ntonjane. But when he knew how those other
girls had deceived him he said they must all die, and so they were
killed. Then he put snakes and toads in the bag, and tied it up again.

When the cannibal came back he complained of the leaky pot, but they
gave him plenty of meat to satisfy him, so he picked up his bag and went
away. He did not know what had happened while he was absent. When he
came near his own house he called to his wife: "Make ready to cook." He
sent and called all the other cannibals to come to a feast, and they
came expecting to get something nice. He let them wait a little to get
very hungry. Then he opened his bag and thought to take the girl out,
but found only snakes and toads in it. The other cannibals were so angry
when they saw this, that they killed him and made their feast of him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story Of The Cannibal Mother And Her Children](xft16)

</div>
