<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](xft22)  [Next](xft24.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Kaffir (Xhosa) Folk-Lore*, by George McCall Theal, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE STORY OF THE GLUTTON.

THERE was once a man who quarrelled with his wife, so that she left him,
and went home to her father's place.

When she got home she found nobody, for all the people had been
swallowed by a monster. She went into the house that used to be her
father's, and noticed that there were footprints of animals and spots of
blood all over the floor. She then got into the top of the hut and hid
herself. She heard the monster corning, saying

"O man, O man,  
I have eaten,  
And I am still living."

She kept awake. Shortly the house was filled with all kinds of animals,
which made a fire, cooked their food, ate it up, and slept. Next morning
they awoke, and all went out to search for something to eat.

The woman had two children born while the animals were away. She came
down from her hiding-place, and took up a stone used for raising pots
above the fire (called isoko), and went again into her hiding-place.

The animals returned in the evening; and while their pots were on the
fire, she threw down the stone into one of them. The animals all rushed
out of the house. Outside they held a consultation, and their chief
decided that those living in holes should go to the holes, that those
living in forests should go to the forests, and that those living in
rivers should go to the rivers.

After this, the woman set a trap, and succeeded in catching a buffalo,
but she could not skin it. She saw a glutton (called an igongqongqo, a
fabulous monster, like a man, but capable of devouring enormous
quantities of food) coming, and asked him to help her. He consented.

He pulled out his knife and skinned the buffalo. She gathered some wood,
and kindled a fire for the purpose of roasting the liver. The glutton
roasted it. She went away and picked up an empty calabash, and when she
returned she found the glutton roasting the legs, having already eaten
the liver. She then said I am going for water."

She ot behind a bush, and blew the empty calabash. The glutton wondered
what this was, and called her. She continued blowing until the glutton
was so frightened that he took his bag and put the remainder of the meat
into it, and ran away.

She followed him, still blowing, until he threw away the bag containing
the meat. She still followed, blowing. The glutton stumbled, and fell
into a thorny bush, where he was held fast. The woman then ceased
blowing, and heard him blubbering out:

"Let me alone, lu bo bo,  
Let me alone, lu bo bo."

She blew again, and he struggled and got free. He ran away with all his
might. She then took the bag home with her, made a fire, and cooked the
meat. When it was ready, she took it to her hiding-place, and lived on
it till her children were able to run about outside.

One day, these twins asked their mother to make bows and arrows for
them. Their mother advised them not to wander away from the house,
saying to them The glutton will swallow you."

But at a certain time they left home, and went in the direction where
the monster lived. They found it asleep, and shot it with their arrows
in both eyes. The boys returned home and told their mother. Next day
they went to the place, and found the glutton dead.

The boys heard people talking inside the glutton. Having told their
mother, she took a knife and cut it open, when people came out, and
cattle, and dogs. The people asked: Who killed the glutton?"

The mother of the twins told them, and they rewarded the boys with a
large number of cattle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Story Of The Great Chief Of The Animals](xft24.md)

</div>
