[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ami05)  [Next](ami07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G1ZZEM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Amitabha, A Story of Buddhist Theology*, by Paul Carus, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### GANDHARA.

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> the night was far advanced, the royal
messenger allowed his horses a short rest in the Vihâra, and set out
with Charaka at an early hour the following morning. The two travelers
could not, however, make rapid progress, for the atmosphere was murky,
and the fogs of the rainy season obscured the way. They passed a picket
of Gandhâra soldiers who were on the lookout for the hostile
mountaineers. The mounted messenger showed them his passport, and the
two men reached the capital only when the shades of evening were
settling upon the valley. The gates were carefully guarded by armed men.
The sentinel led the two horsemen to the officer at the gate, who seemed
satisfied with the report that Charaka had nowhere encountered enemies;
but the home news was very bad, for one of the princes had died and
Chandana (commonly

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

called Kanishka), the third and youngest son of the king, was thought to
be critically ill.

The night was darker than usual, and the town made a gloomy impression.
The inhabitants were restless and seemed to be prepared for a dire
calamity.

Charaka was at once conducted to the royal palace. He passed through a
line of long streets which seemed narrow and dismal. The people whom
they met on their way, being wrapped in a veil of mist, resembled even
at a short distance dim dusky specters, like guilty ghosts condemned for
some crime to haunt the scene of their former lives. At last they
reached the palace, and Charaka was ushered into the dimly lighted
bedroom of Prince Kanishka. Charaka stood motionless and watched the
heavy breathing of the patient. He then put his hand gently upon the
feverish forehead and in a low voice demanded water to cool the burning
temples of the sick man. Turning to the attendants, he met the
questioning eye of a tall and beautiful woman, an almost imperious
figure. He knew her well; it was Princess

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kamalavatî, the
king's daughter and a younger half-sister of the prince.

"His condition is very bad," whispered Charaka in reply to the unuttered
question that was written in her face, "but not yet hopeless. Where are
the nurses who assist you in ministering unto the patient?"

Two female attendants appeared, and the physician withdrew with them
into an adjoining room where he listened to their reports. "The king and
his second son have died of the same disease, and the situation is very
critical," said Charaka; "but we may avoid the mistakes made in the
former cases and adjust the diet strictly to the condition of the
patient."

Charaka and Kanishka were of the same age. They had for some time been
educated together and were intimate friends. But when the prince joined
the royal army, Charaka studied the sciences under the direction of
Jivaka, the late court physician of Gandhâra, and knowing how highly the
latter had praised the young man as his best disciple, the prince had
unbounded confidence in the medical skill of his boyhood companion. He
had suggested

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

calling him when his father, the king, fell sick, but his advice had
remained unheeded, and now being himself ill, he was impatient to have
the benefit of his friend's assistance.

Charaka gave his instructions to the princess and the other attendants
and then sat down quietly by the bedside of the patient. When Kanishka
awoke from his restless slumber, he extended his hand and tried to
speak, but the physician hushed him, saying: "Keep quiet, and your life
will be saved."

"I will be quiet," whispered Kanishka, not without great effort, "but
save my life,—for the sake of my country, not for my own sake." After a
pause he continued: "Tell my sister to call Matura, our brave and
faithful Matura, to my bedside."

Matura, the scion of a noble Gandhâra family, had served his country on
several occasions and was at present at the capital. He came and waited
patiently till Charaka gave him permission to see the patient.

In this interview the prince explained to Matura the political situation
since his father's death. His royal brother, now in the field

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

against the Parthians, was at present the legitimate king. "During his
absence," said Kanishka, "the duty devolves on me, as the vicegerent of
the crown, to keep the mountaineers out of the kingdom, and I call upon
you to serve me as a chancellor in this critical situation. Raise troops
to expel the marauders, but at the sane time exhaust diplomatic methods
by appealing to the honor and dignity of the kingdom of Magadha of which
these robber tribes are nominal subjects."

Thus Matura took charge of state affairs and Charaka and Kamalavatî
united in attending to the treatment of the sick prince. They had weary
nights and hours of deep despondency when they despaired of the recovery
of their beloved patient, but the crisis came and Kanishka survived it.
He regained strength, first slowly, very slowly, then more rapidly,
until he felt that he was past all danger.

The rainy season had given the people of Gandhâra a respite from the
suffering caused by the hostilities of their enemies. The king,
Kanishka's elder brother, continued to wage war against the Parthians
and concentrated

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

his forces for striking a decisive blow. But while the best troops of
the country had thus still to be employed against a formidable foe, the
mountaineers renewed their raids, and the king of Magadha, too weak to
interfere with his stubborn vassals, pleaded their cause declaring that
they had grievances against the kingdom of Gandhâra and could therefore
not be restrained. The prince accordingly declared war on the kingdom of
Magadha. He raised an army, and the young men of the peasantry, who had
suffered much from this state of unrest, gladly allowed themselves to be
enlisted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: King Kanishka](ami07)
