[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ami13)  [Next](ami15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G1ZZEM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Amitabha, A Story of Buddhist Theology*, by Paul Carus, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### THE PARABLE OF THE ELEPHANT.

<span class="smallcaps">Açvaghosha</span> saw that every eye was  intent
upon him, and so he told the story of the white Elephant. He said:

"There was a noble and mighty elephant, an elephant white in color, with
a strong trunk and long tusks, trained by a good master, and willing and
serviceable in all the work that elephants are put to. And this noble
and mighty elephant being led by his guide, the good master who had
trained him, came to the land of the blind. And it was noised about in
the land of the blind that the noble and mighty elephant, the king of
all beasts, the wisest of all animals, the strongest and yet the meekest
and kindliest of creatures, had made his appearance in their country. So
the wise men and teachers of the blind came to the place where the
elephant was and every one began to investigate his shape and figure and
form. And when

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the elephant was gone they met and discussed the problem of the noble
and mighty beast, and there were some who said he was like a great thick
snake; others said he was like a snake of medium size. The former had
felt the trunk, the latter the tail. Further there were some who claimed
that his figure was like that of a high column, others declared he was
large and bulky like a big barrel, still others maintained he was smooth
and hard but tapering. Some of the blind had taken hold of one of the
legs, others had reached the main body, and still others had touched the
tusks. Every one proposed his view and they disputed and controverted,
and wrangled, and litigated, and bickered, and quarreled, and called
each other names, and each one imprecated all the others, and each one
denounced all the others, and they abused and scolded, and they
anathematised and excommunicated, and finally every one of them swore
that every one else was a liar and was cursed on account of his
heresies. These blind men, every one of them honest in his contentions,
being sure of having the truth and relying upon his own experience,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

formed schools and sects and factions and behaved in exactly the same
way as you see the priests of the different creeds behave. But the
master of the noble, mighty elephant knows them all, he knows that every
one of them has a parcel of the truth, that every one is right in his
way, but wrong in taking his parcel to be the whole truth.

"Not one of these sectarians observed the fact that the elephant was
perfectly white and a marvel to see, for all of them were purblind. Yet
I would not say that they were either dishonest or hypocrites. They had
investigated the truth to the best of their ability.

"The master of the elephant is the Tathâgata, the Enlightened One, the
Buddha. He has brought the white elephant representing the truth, the
noble and mighty elephant, symbolising strength and wisdom and devotion,
into the land of the blind, and he who listens to the Tathâgata will
understand all the schools, and all the sects and all the factions that
are in possession of parcels of the truth. His doctrine is
all-comprehensive, and he who

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

takes refuge in Him will cease to bicker, and to contend, and to
quarrel."[23](ami16.htm#an_23)

\*        \*        \*

When Açvaghosha had finished the parable of the noble and mighty
elephant, the two kings returned from the summer palace carrying with
them in a solemn procession the slain tiger, and close behind on a white
charger decked with garlands and gay ribbons, rode the hero of the day,
one of the generals from the South, whose dart had struck the tiger with
fatal precision and death-dealing power.

"Behold the hero of the day!" said Charaka. "And had the conspiracy not
miscarried the same man might now be an assassin and a miscreant."

"There is a lesson in it!" replied Açvaghosha, "existence is not
desirable for its own sake. That which gives worth to life is the
purpose to which it is devoted.

"Our aim is not to live, but whether we die or live, to avoid wrong
doing and to let right and justice and lovingkindness prevail. Says the
Tathâgata:

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<div style="margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%;">

"Commit no wrong, but good deeds do,  
 And let thy heart be pure.  
 All Buddhas teach this doctrine true  
 Which will for aye endure."[24](ami16.htm#an_24)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Double Wedding](ami15)
