[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre10)  [Next](gre12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# CHAP. VI.

AND now it came to pass that Biorn, the father of Thrand, died; and when
Grim the hersir hears thereof he went to meet Ondott Crow, and claimed
the goods left by Biorn; but Ondott said that Thrand had the heritage
after his father; Grim said that Thrand was west over seas, and that
Biorn was a Gothlander of kin, and that the king took the heritage of
all outland men. Ondott said that he should keep the goods for the hands
of Thrand, his daughter's son; and therewith Grim gat him gone, and had
nought for his claiming the goods.

Now Thrand had news of his father's death, and straightway got ready to
go from the South-isles, and Onund Treefoot with him; but Ufelgh Grettir
and Thormod Shaft went out to Iceland with their kith and kin, and came
out to the Eres in the south country, and dwelt the first winter with
Thorbiorn Salmon-Carle.

Thereafter the settled Gnup-Wards'-rape, Ufeigh, the outward part,
between Thwart-river and Kalf-river, and he dwelt at Ufeigh's-stead by
Stone-holt; but Thormod settled the eastward part, and abode at
Shaft-holt.

The daughters of Thormod were these: Thorvor, mother of Thorod the
Godi <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6) of Hialli, and Thora, mother of
Thorstein, the Godi, the father of Biarni the Sage.

Now it is to be said of Thrand and Onund that they sailed from the lands
west over the Sea toward Norway, and

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

had fair wind, and such speed, that no rumour of their voyage was abroad
till they came to Ondott Crow.

He gave Thrand good welcome, and told him how Grim the hersir had
claimed the heritage left by Biorn. "Meeter it seems to me, kinsman,"
said he, "that thou take the heritage of thy father and not
king's-thralls; good luck has befallen thee, in that none knows of thy
coming, but it misdoubts me that Grim will come upon one or other of us
if he may; therefore I would that thou shouldst take the inheritance to
thee, and get thee gone to other lands."

Thrand said that so he would do, he took to him the chattels and got
away from Norway at his speediest; but before he sailed into the sea, he
asked Onund Treefoot whether he would not make for Iceland with him;
Onund said he would first go see his kin and friends in the south
country.

Thrand said, "Then must we part now, but I would that thou shouldst aid
my kin, for on them will vengeance fall if I get off clear; but to
Iceland shall I go, and I would that thou withal shouldst make that
journey."

Onund gave his word to all, and they parted in good love. So Thrand went
to Iceland, and Ufeigh and Thormod Shaft received him well. Thrand dwelt
at Thrand's-holt, which is west of Steer's-river.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[11:\*](gre11.htm#fr_6) "Gadi" is the name for
the rulers of the thirty-nine districts into which the republic of
Iceland was anciently divided. While the ancient religion lasted, their
office combined in itself the highest civil and sacerdotal functions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](gre12)
