[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre24)  [Next](gre26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

# CHAP. XX.

How Thorfinn met Grettir at Haramsey again.

AFTER Yule Thorfinn made ready for coming home, and he let those folk go
with good gifts whom he had bidden to his feast. Now he fares with his
following till he comes hard by his boat-stands; they saw a ship lying
on the strand, and soon knew it for Thorfinn's bark, the big one. Now
Thorfinn had as yet had no news of the vikings, he bade his men hasten
landward, "For I fear," said he, "that friends have not been at work
here."

Thorfinn was the first to step ashore before his men, and forthwith he
went up to the boat-stand; he saw a keel standing there, and knew it for
the bearserks' ship. Then he said to his men, "My mind misgives me much
that here things have come to pass, even such as I would have given the
whole island, yea, every whit of what I have herein, that they might
never have happed."

They asked why he spake thus. Then he said, "Here have come the vikings,
whom I know to be the worst of all Norway, Thorir Paunch and Ogmund the
Evil; in good sooth they will hardly have kept house happily for us, and
in an Icelander I have but little trust."

Withal he spoke many things hereabout to his fellows.

Now Grettir was at home, and so brought it about, that folk were slow to
go down to the shore; and said he did not care much if the goodman
Thorfinn had somewhat of a shake at what he saw before him; but when the
mistress asked him leave to go, he said she should have her will as to
where she went, but that he himself should stir nowhither.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

She ran swiftly to meet Thorfinn, and welcomed him cheerily. He was glad
thereof, and said, "Praise be to God that I see thee whole and merry,
and my daughter in likewise. But how have ye fared since I went from
home?"

She answered, "Things have turned out well, but we were near being
overtaken by such a shame as we should never have had healing of, if thy
winter-guest had not holpen us."

Then Thorfinn spake, "Now shall we sit down, but do thou tell us these
tidings."

Then she told all things plainly even as they had come to pass, and
praised greatly Grettir's stoutness and great daring; meanwhile Thorfinn
held his peace, but when she had made an end of her tale, he said, "How
true is the saw, *Long it takes to try a man*. But where is Grettir now?

The goodwife said, "He is at home in the hall."

Thereupon they went home to the farm.

Thorfinn went up to Grettir and kissed him, and thanked him with many
fair words for the great heart which he had shown to him; "And I will
say to thee what few say to their friends, that I would thou shouldst be
in need of men, that then thou mightest know if I were to thee in a
man's stead or not; but for thy good deed I can never reward thee unless
thou comest to be in some troublous need; but as to thy abiding with me,
that shall ever stand open to thee when thou willest it; and thou shalt
be held the first of all my men."

Grettir bade him have much thank therefor. "And," quoth he, "this should
I have taken even if thou hadst made me proffer thereof before."

Now Grettir sat there the winter over, and was in the closest friendship
with Thorfinn; and for this deed he was now well renowned all over
Norway, and there the most,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

where the bearserks had erst wrought the greatest ill deeds.

This spring Thorfinn asked Grettir what he was about to busy himself
with: he said he would go north to Vogar while the fair was. Thorfinn
said there was ready for him money as much as he would. Grettir said
that he needed no more money at that time than faring-silver: this,
Thorfinn said, was full-well due to him, and thereupon went with him to
ship.

Now he gave him the short-sword, the good one, which Grettir bore as
long as he lived, and the choicest of choice things it was. Withal
Thorfinn bade Grettir come to him whenever he might need aid.

But Grettir went north to Vogar, and a many folk were there; many men
welcomed him there right heartily who had not seen him before, for the
sake of that great deed of prowess which he had done when he saw the
vikings; many high-born men prayed him to come and abide with them, but
he would fain go back to his friend Thorfinn. Now he took ship in a bark
that was owned of a man hight Thorkel, who dwelt in Salft in Halogaland,
and was a high-born man. But when Grettir came to Thorkel he welcomed
him right heartily, and bade Grettir abide with him that winter, and
laid many words thereto.

This offer Grettir took, and was with Thorkel that winter in great
joyance and fame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI: Of Grettir and Biorn and the Bear](gre26)
