[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre27)  [Next](gre29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXIII.

The Slaying of Hiarandi.

IT happened one day that Grettir and Arnbiorn were walking through some
streets for their sport, that as they came past a certain court gate, a
man bounded forth therefrom with axe borne aloft, and drave it at
Grettir with both hands; he was all unwares of this, and walked on
slowly; Arnbiorn caught timely sight of the man, and seized Grettir, and
thrust him on so hard that he fell on his knee; the axe smote the
shoulder-blade, and cut sideways out under the arm-pit, and a great
wound it was. Grettir turned about nimbly, and drew the short-sword, and
saw that there was Hiarandi. Now the axe stuck fast in the road, and it
was slow work for Hiarandi to draw it to him again, and in this very
nick of time Grettir hewed at him, and the blow fell on the upper arm,
near the shoulder, and cut it off; then the fellows of Hiarandi rushed
forth, five of them, and a fight forthwith befell, and speedy change
happed there, for Grettir and Arnbiorn slew those who were

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

with Hiarandi, all but one, who got off, and forthwith went to the Earl
to tell him these tidings.

The Earl was exceeding wroth when he heard of this, and the second day
thereafter he had a Thing summoned. Then they, Thorfinn and Grettir,
came both to the Thing. The Earl put forth against Grettir the guilt for
these manslaughters; he owned them all, and said he had had to defend
his hands.

"Whereof methinks I bear some marks on me," says Grettir, "and surely I
had found death if Arnbiorn had not saved me."

The Earl answered that it was ill hap that Grettir was not slain.

"For many a man's bane wilt thou be if thou livest, Grettir."

Then came to the Earl, Bessi, son of Skald-Torfa, a fellow and a friend
to Grettir; he and Thorfinn went before the Earl and prayed him respite
for Grettir, and offered, that the Earl alone should doom in this
matter, but that Grettir might have peace and leave to dwell in the
land.

The Earl was slow to come to any settlement, but suffered himself to be
led thereto because of their prayers. There respite was granted to
Grettir till the next spring; still the Earl would not settle the peace
till Gunnar, the brother of Biorn and Hiarandi, was thereat; now Gunnar
was a court-owner in Tunsberg.

In the spring, the Earl summoned Grettir and Thorfinn east to Tunsberg,
for he would dwell there east while the most sail was thereat. Now they
went east thither, and the Earl was before them in the town when they
came. Here Grettir found his brother, Thorstein Dromond, who was fain of
him and bade him abide with him: Thorstein was a court-owner in the
town. Grettir told him all about his matters,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and Thorstein gave a good hearing thereto, but bade him beware of
Gunnar. And so the spring wore on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV: Of the Slaying of Gunnar, and Grettir's strife with
Earl Svein](gre29)
