[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre31)  [Next](gre33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# CHAP. XXVII.

The Suit for the Slaying of Thorgils Makson.

A MAN hight Thorgils abode at Reek-knolls in those days, he was the son
of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli the Red, the son of Ulf the
Squinter, who settled at Reekness; the mother of Thorgils Arison was
Thorgerd, the daughter of Alf a-Dales; another daughter of Alf was
Thorelf, mother of Thorgeir Havarson. There had Thorgeir good kinship to
trust in, for Thorgils was the greatest chief in the Westfirthers'
quarter. He was a man of such bountifulness, that he gave food to any
free-born man as long as he would have it, and therefore there was at
all times a throng of people at Reek-knolls; thus had Thorgils much
renown of his house-keeping. He was a man withal of good will and
foreknowledge. Thorgeir was with Thorgils in winter, but went to the
Strands in summer.

After the slaying of Thorgils Makson, Thorgeir went to Reek-knolls and
told Thorgils Arison these tidings; Thorgils said that he was ready to
give him harbour with him, "But, methinks," he says, "that they will be
heavy in the suit, and I am loth to eke out the troubles. Now I shall
send a man to Thorstein and bid weregild for the slaying of Thorgils;
but if he will not take atonement I shall not defend the case stiffly."

Thorgeir said he would trust to his foresight. In autumn Thorgils sent a
man to Thorstein Kuggson to try settling the case, but he was
cross-grained to deal with as to the taking money for the blood-suit of
Thorgils Makson; but about the other manslayings, he said he would do as
wise

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

men should urge him. Now when Thorgils heard this, he called Thorgeir to
him for a talk, and asked him what kind of aid he now deemed meetest for
him; Thorgeir said that it was most to his mind to go abroad if he
should be outlawed. Thorgils said that that should be tried. A ship lay
up Northriver in Burgfirth; in that keel Thorgils secretly paid faring
for the foster-brothers, and thus the winter passed. Thorgils heard that
Asmund and Thorstein drew together many men to the Althing, and sat in
Liarskogar. He drew out the time of riding from home, for he would that
Asmund and Thorstein should have ridden by before him to the south, when
he came from the west; and so it fell out. Thorgils rode south, and with
him rode the foster-brothers. In this ride Thorgeir killed Bundle-Torfi
of Marswell, and Skuf withal, and Biarni in Dog-dale; thus says Thormod
in Thorgeir's-Drapa--

"Mighty strife the warrior made,  
When to earth was Makson laid,  
Well the sword-shower wrought he there,  
Flesh the ravens got to tear;  
Then when Skuf and Biarni fell,  
He was there the tale to tell;  
Sea-steed's rider took his way  
Through the thickest of the fray."

Thorgils settled the peace for the slaying of Skuf and Biarni then and
there in the Dale, and delayed no longer than his will was before;
Thorgeir went to ship, but Thorgils to the Althing, and came not thither
until men were going to the courts.

Then Asmund the Greyhaired challenged the defence for the blood-suit on
the slaying of Thorgils Makson.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Thorgils went to the court and offered weregild for the slaying, if
thereby Thorgeir might become free of guilt; he put forth for defence in
the suit whether they had not free catch on all common foreshores. The
lawman was asked if this was a lawful defence. Skapti was the lawman,
and backed Asmund for the sake of their kinship. He said this was law if
they were equal men, but said that bonders had a right to take before
batchelors. Asmund said that Thorgils had offered an even sharing to the
foster-brothers in so much of the whale as was uncut when they came
thereto; and therewith that way of defence was closed against them. Now
Thorstein and his kin followed up the suit with much eagerness, and
nought was good to them but that Thorgeir should be made guilty.

Thorgils saw that one of two things was to be done, either to set on
with many men, not knowing what might be gained thereby, or to suffer
them to go on as they would; and, whereas Thorgeir had been got on board
ship, Thorgils let the suit go on unheeded.

Thorgeir was outlawed, but for Thormod was taken weregild, and he to be
quit. By this blood-suit Thorstein and Asmund were deemed to have waxed
much. And now men ride home from the Thing.

Some men would hold talk that Thorgils had lightly backed the case, but
he heeded their talk little, and let any one say thereon what he would.

But when Thorgeir heard of this outlawry, he said--

"Fain am I that those who have made me an outlaw should have full pay
for this, ere all be over."

There was a man called Gaut Sleitason, who was akin to Thorgils Makson.
Gaut had made ready to go in this same ship wherein Thorgeir was to
sail. He bristled up against Thorgeir, and showed mighty ill-will
against him

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and went about scowling; when the chapmen found this out, they thought
it far from safe that both should sail in one ship. Thorgeir said he
heeded not how much soever Gaut would bend his brows on him, still it
was agreed that Gaut should take himself off from the ship, whereupon he
went north into the upper settlements, and that time nought happed
between him and Thorgeir, but out of this sprang up between them ill
blood, as matters showed after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII: Grettir comes out to Iceland again.](gre33)
