[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre29)  [Next](gre31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# CHAP. XXV.

The Slaying of Thorgils Makson.

ASMUND the Greyhaired lived on at Biarg, while Grettir was abroad, and
by that time he was thought to be the greatest of bonders in Midfirth.
Thorkel Krafla died during those seasons that Grettir was out of
Iceland. Thorvald Asgeirson farmed then at the Ridge in Waterdale, and
waxed a great chief. He was the father of Dalla whom Isleif had to wife,
he who afterwards was bishop at Skalholt.

Asmund had in Thorvald the greatest help in suits and in many other
matters. At Asmund's grew up a man, hight Thorgils, called Thorgils
Makson, near akin to Asmund. Thorgils was a man of great strength and
gained much money by Asmund's foresight.

Asmund bought for Thorgils the land at Brookmeet, and there he farmed.
Thorgils was a great store-gatherer, and went a-searching to the Strands
every year, and there he gat for himself whales and other gettings; and
a stout-hearted man he was.

In those days was at its height the waxing of the foster brothers,
Thorgeir Havarson and Thormod Coalbrowskald, they had a boat and went
therein far and wide, and were not thought men of much even-dealing. It
chanced one summer that Thorgils Makson found a whale on the common
drift-lands, and forthwith he and his folk set about cutting, it up.

But when the foster-brothers heard thereof they went thither, and at
first their talk had a likely look out. Thorgils

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

offered that they should have the half of the uncut whale; but they
would have for themselves all the uncut, or else divide all into halves,
both the cut and the uncut. Thorgils flatly refused to give up what was
cut of the whale; and thereat things grew hot between them, and
forthwithal both sides caught up their weapons and fought. Thorgeir and
Thorgils fought long together without either losing or gaining and both
were of the eagerest. Their strife was both fierce and long, but the end
of it was, that Thorgils fell dead to earth before Thorgeir; but Thormod
and the men of Thorgils fought in another place; Thormod had the best of
that strife, and three of Thorgils' men fell before him. After the
slaying of Thorgils, his folk went back east to Midfirth, and brought
his dead body with them. Men thought that they had the greatest loss in
him. But the foster-brothers took all the whale to themselves.

This meeting Thormod tells of in that drapa that he made on Thorgeir
dead. Asmund the Greyhaired heard of the slaying of Thorgils his
kinsman; he was suitor in the case for Thorgils' slaying, he went and
took witnesses to the wounds, and summoned the case before the Althing,
for then this seemed to be law, as the case had happened in another
quarter. And so time wears on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI: Of Thorstein Kuggson, and the gathering for the
Bloodsuit for the Slaying of Thorgils Makson](gre31)
