[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre33)  [Next](gre35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXIX.

Of the Horse-fight at Longfit.

THAT summer was settled to be a great horse-fight at Longfit, below
Reeks. Thither came many men. Atli of Biarg had a good horse, a
black-maned roan of Keingala's kin, and father and son had great love
for that horse. The brothers, Kormak and Thorgils of Meal, had a brown
horse, trusty in fight. These were to fight their horse against Atli of
Biarg. And many other good horses were there.

Odd the Foundlingskald, of Kormak's kin, was to follow the horse of his
kinsman through the day. Odd was then

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

growing a big man, and bragged much of himself, and was untameable and
reckless. Grettir asked of Atli his brother, who should follow his
horse.

"I am not so clear about that," said he.

"Wilt thou that I stand by it?" said Grettir.

"Be thou then very peaceable, kinsman," said Atli, "for here have we to
deal with overbearing men."

"Well, let them pay for their own insolence," said Grettir, "if they
know not how to hold it back."

Now are the horses led out, but all stood forth on the river-bank tied
together. There was a deep hollow in the river down below the bank. The
horses bit well at each other, and the greatest sport it was.

Odd drave on his horse with all his might, but Grettir held back, and
seized the tail with one hand, and the staff wherewith he goaded the
horse he held in the other. Odd stood far before his horse, nor was it
so sure that he did not goad Atli's horse from his hold. Grettir made as
if he saw it not. Now the horses bore forth towards the river. Then Odd
drave his staff at Grettir, and smote the shoulder-blade, for that
Grettir turned the shoulder towards him: that was so mighty a stroke,
that the flesh shrank from under it, but Grettir was little scratched.

Now in that nick of time the horses reared up high, and Grettir ran
under his horse's hocks, and thrust his staff so hard at the side of Odd
that three ribs brake in him, but he was hurled out into deep water,
together with his horse. and all the horses that were tied together.
Then men swam out to him and dragged him out of the river; then was a
great hooting made thereat; Kormak's folk ran to their weapons, as did
the men of Biarg in another place. But when the Ramfirthers and the men
of Waterness saw that, they went betwixt them, and they were parted and

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

went home, but both sides had ill-will one with the other, though they
sat peacefully at home for a while. Atli was sparing of speech over
this, but Grettir was right unsparing, and said that they would meet
another time if his will came to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Of Thorbiorn Oxmain and Thorbiorn Tardy, and of
Grettir's meeting with Kormak on Ramfirth-neck](gre35)
