[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre48)  [Next](gre50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

# CHAP. XLIV.

The Suit for the Slaying of the Sons of Thorir of the Pass.

THORBIORN Oxmain took on himself the suit for the slaying of the sons of
Thorir of the Pass. He made ready a suit against Grim and Atli, but they
set forth for their defence onset and attack, to make those brothers
fall unatoned. The suit was brought to the Hunawater Thing, and men came
thronging to both sides. Atli had good help because he was exceeding
strong of kin.

Now the friends of both stood forth and talked of peace, and all said
that Atli's ways were good, a peaceful man, but stout in danger
none-the-less.

Now Thorbiorn deemed that by nought would his honour be served better
than by taking the peace offered. Atli laid down before-hand that he
would have neither district outlawry nor banishment.

Then were men chosen for the judges. Thorvald, son of Asgeir, on Atli's
side, and on Thorbiorn's, Solvi the Proud, who was the son of Asbrand,
the son of Thorbrand, the son of Harald Ring, who had settled all
Waterness from the Foreland up to Bond-maids River on the west, but on
the east all up to Cross-river, and there right across to Berg-ridge,
and all on that side of the Bergs down to the sea: this Solvi was a man
of great stateliness and a wise man, therefore Thorbiorn chose him to be
judge on his behoof.

Now they set forth their judgment, that half-fines should be paid for
the sons of Thorir, but half fell away because of the onslaught and
attack, and attempt on Atli's life, the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

slaying of Atli's house-carle, who was slain on Ramfirth-neck, and the
slaying of those twain who fell with the sons of Thorir were set off one
against the other. Grim Thorhallson should leave dwelling in the
district, but Atli alone should pay the money atonement.

This peace pleased Atli much, but Thorbiorn misliked it, but they parted
appeased, as far as words went; howsoever it fell from Thorbiorn that
their dealings would not be made an end of yet, if things went as he
would.

But Atli rode home from the Thing, and thanked Thorvald well for his
aid. Grim Thorhallson went south to Burgfirth, and dwelt at Gilsbank,
and was a great bonder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV: Of the Slaying of Atli Asmundson](gre50)
