[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre46)  [Next](gre48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XLII.

Of the Death of Asmund the Greyhaired.

NOW must the tale be taken up where it was left before, for Thorbiorn
Oxmain heard how Thorbiorn Tardy was slain, as aforesaid, and broke out
into great wrath, and said it would please him well that *now this and
now that should have strokes in his garth*.

Asmund the Greyhaired lay long sick that summer, and when he thought his
ailings drew closer on him, he called to him his kin, and said that it
was his will, that Atli should have charge of all his goods after his
day.

"But my mind misgives me," said Asmund, "that thou mayst scarce sit
quiet because of the iniquity of men, and I would that all ye of my kin
should help him to the uttermost,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

but of Grettir nought can I say, for methinks overmuch on a whirling
wheel his life turns; and though he be a mighty man, yet I fear me that
he will have to heed his own troubles more than the helping of his kin:
but Illugi, though he be young, yet shall he become a man of prowess, if
he keep himself whole."

So, when Asmund had settled matters about his sons as be would, his
sickness lay hard on him, and in a little while he died, and was laid in
earth at Biarg; for there had he let make a church; but his death his
neighbours deemed a great loss.

Now Atli became a mighty bonder, and had many with him, and was a great
gatherer of household-stuff. When the summer was far gone, he went out
to Snowfellness to get him stockfish. He drave many horses, and rode
from home to Meals in Ramfirth to Gamli his brother-in-law; and on this
journey rode with him Grim Thorhallson, Gamli's brother, and another man
withal. They rode west to Hawkdale Pass, and so on, as the road lay west
to Ness: there they bought much stockfish, and loaded seven horses
therewith, and turned homeward when they were ready.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII: The Onset on Atli at the Pass and the Slaying of
Gunnar and Thorgeir](gre48)
