[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre43)  [Next](gre45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

# CHAP. XXXIX.

How Grettir would fain bear Iron before the King.

NOW on a day when the king sat in council, Grettir went before the king
and greeted him well. The king looked at him and said, "Art thou Grettir
the Strong?"

He answered, "So have I been called, and for that cause am I come to
thee, that I hope from thee deliverance from the evil tale that is laid
on me, though I deem that I nowise wrought that deed."

King Olaf said, "Thou art great enough, but I know not what luck thou
mayest bear about to cast off this matter from thee; but it is like,
indeed, that thou didst not willingly burn the men."

Grettir said he was fain to put from him this slander, if the king
thought he might do so; the king bade him tell truthfully, how it had
gone betwixt him and those men: Grettir told him all, even as has been
said before, and this withal, that they were all alive when he came out
with the fire--

"I And now I will offer to free myself in such wise as ye may deem will
stand good in law therefor."

Olaf the king said, "We will grant thee to bear iron for this matter if
thy luck will have it so."

Grettir liked this exceeding well; and now took to fasting for the iron;
and so the time wore on till the day came whereas the trial should come
off; then went the king to

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the church, and the bishop and much folk, for many were eager to have a
sight of Grettir, so much as had been told of him.

Then was Grettir led to the church, and when he came thither, many of
those who were there before gazed at him and said one to the other, that
he was little like to most folk, because of his strength and greatness
of growth.

Now, as Grettir went up the church-floor, there started up a lad of ripe
growth, wondrous wild of look, and he said to Grettir--

"Marvellous is now the custom in this land, as men are called Christians
therein, that ill-doers, and folk riotous, and thieves shall go their
ways in peace and become free by trials; yea, and what would the evil
man do but save his life while he might? So here now is a misdoer,
proven clearly a man of misdeeds, and has burnt sackless men withal, and
yet shall he, too, have a trial to free him; ah, a mighty ill custom!"

Therewith he went up to Grettir and pointed finger, and wagged head at
him, and called him mermaid's son, and many other ill names.

Grettir grew wroth beyond measure hereat, and could not keep himself in;
he lifted up his fist, and smote the lad under the ear, so that
forthwith he fell down stunned, but some say that he was slain there and
then. None seemed to know whence that lad came or what became of him,
but men are mostly minded to think, that it was some unclean spirit,
sent thither for Grettir's hurt.

Now a great clamour rose in the church, and it was told the king, "He
who should bear the iron is smiting all about him;" then King Olaf went
down the church, and saw what was going on, and spake--

"A most unlucky man art thou," said he, "that now the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

trial should not be, as ready as all things were thereto, nor will it be
easy to deal with thine ill-luck."

Grettir answered, "I was minded that I should have gained more honour
from thee, Lord, for the sake of my kin, than now seems like to be;" and
he told withal how en were faring to King Olaf, as was said afore, "and
now I am fain," said he, "that thou wouldest take me to thee; thou hast
here many men with thee, who will not be deemed more like men-at-arms
than I?"

"That see I well," said the king, "that few men are like unto thee for
strength and stoutness of heart, but thou art far too luckless a man to
abide with us: now shalt thou go in peace for me, wheresoever thou wilt,
the winter long, but next summer go thou out to Iceland, for there will
it be thy fate to leave thy bones."

Grettir answered, "First would I put from me this affair of the burning,
if I might, for I did not the deed willingly."

"It is most like," said the king; "but yet, because the trial is now
come to nought for thy heedlessness' sake, thou wilt not get this charge
cast from thee more than now it is, *For ill-heed still to ill doth
lead*, and if ever man has been cursed, of all men must thou have been."

So Grettir dwelt a while in the town thereafter, but dealt no more with
the king than has been told.

Then he fared into the south country, and was minded east for Tunsberg,
to find Thorstein Dromond, his brother, and there is nought told of his
travels till he came east to Jadar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL: Of Grettir and Snækoll](gre45)
