[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre57)  [Next](gre59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LIII.

Grettir with Thorstein Kuggson.

WHEN the autumn was somewhat spent, Grettir turned back by the south,
and made no stay till he came to Liarskogar to Thorstein Kuggson, his
kinsman, and there had he good welcome, for Thorstein bade him abide
there through the winter, and that bidding he agreed to. Thorstein was a
busy man and a good smith, and kept men close to their work; but Grettir
had little mind to work, wherefore their tempers went but little
together.

Thorstein had let make a church at his homestead; and a bridge he had
made out from his house, wrought with great craft; for in the outside
bridge, under the beams that held it up, were rings wrought all about,
and din-bells, so that one might hear over to Scarf-stead, half a
sea-mile off, if aught went over the bridge, because of the shaking of
the rings. Thorstein had much to do over this work, for he was a great
worker of iron; but Grettir went fiercely at the iron-smiting, yet was
in many minds thereover; but he was quiet through the winter, so that
nought befell worthy telling. But when the Ramfirthers knew that Grettir
was with Thorstein,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

they had their band afoot as soon as spring came. So when Thorstein knew
that, he bade Grettir seek some other shelter than his house, "For I see
thou wilt not work, and men who will do nought are not meet men for me."

"Where wouldst thou have me go, then?" said Grettir.

Thorstein bade him fare to the south country, and find his kin, "But
come to me if they avail thee not."

Now so Grettir wrought that he went south to Burgfirth, to Grim
Thorhallson, and dwelt there till over the Thing. Then Grim sent him on
to Skapti the Lawman at Hjalli, and he went south by the lower heaths
and stayed not till he came to Thorhall, son of Asgrim, son of
Ellida-grim, and went little in the peopled lands. Thorhall knew Grettir
because of his father and mother, and, indeed, by then was the name of
Grettir well renowned through all the land because of his great deeds.

Thorhall was a wise man, and he did well to Grettir, but would not let
him abide there long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIV: Grettir meets Hallmund on the Keel](gre59)
