[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre76)  [Next](gre78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. LXXII.

Of the Sports at Heron-ness Thing.

NOW the days wore till such time as men went to the Heron-ness Thing in
spring-tide, and many came thronging there from that part of the
country, wherefrom men had to go to that Thing for their suits. Men sat
there long time both over the suits and over sports, for there were many
blithe men in that country-side. But when Grettir heard that all men
fared to the Thing, he made a plot with his friends; for he was in
goodwill with those who dwelt nighest to him, and for them he spared
nought that he

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

could get. But now he said that he would go aland, and gather victuals,
but that Illugi and Noise should stay behind. Illugi thought this ill
counselled, but let things go as Grettir would.

So Grettir bade them watch the ladders well, for that all things lay
thereon; and thereafter he went to the mainland, and got what he deemed
needful: he hid himself from men whereso he came, nor did any one know
that he was on the land. Withal he heard concerning the Thing, that
there was much sport there, and was fain to go thither; so he did on old
gear and evil, and thus came to the Thing, whenas men went from the
courts home to their booths. Then fell certain young men to talking how
that the day was fair and good, and that it were well, belike, for the
young men to betake them to wrestling and merrymaking. Folk said it was
well counselled; and so men went and sat them down out from the booths.

Now the sons of Thord, Hialti and Thorbiorn Angle, were the chief men in
this sport; Thorbiorn Angle was boisterous beyond measure, and drove men
hard and fast to the place of the sports, and every man must needs go
whereas his will was; and he would take this man and that by the hands
and drag him forth unto the playing-ground.

Now first those wrestled who were weakest, and then each man in his
turn, and therewith the game and glee waxed great; but when most men had
wrestled but those who were the strongest, the bonders fell to talking
as to who would be like to lay hand to either of the Thords, who have
been aforenamed; but there was no man ready for that. Then the Thords
went up to sundry men, and put themselves forward for wrestling, but
*the nigher the call the further the man*. Then Thorbiorn Angle looks
about, and sees where a man sits, great of growth, and his face hidden

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

somewhat. Thorbiorn laid hold of him, and tugged hard at him, but he sat
quiet and moved no whit. Then said Thorbiorn,

"No one has kept his place before me to-day like thou hast; what man art
thou?"

He answers, "Guest am I hight."

Said Thorbiorn, "Belike thou wilt do somewhat for our merriment; a
wished-for guest wilt thou be."

He answered, "About and about, methinks, will things change speedily;
nor shall I cast myself into play with you here, where all is unknown to
me."

Then many men said he were worthy of good at their hands, if he, an
unknown man, gave sport to the people. Then he asked what they would of
him; so they prayed him to wrestle with some one.

He said he had left wrestling, "though time agone it was somewhat of a
sport to me."

So, when he did not deny them utterly, they prayed him thereto yet the
more.

He said, "Well, if ye are so fain that I be dragged about here, ye must
do so much therefor, as to handsel me peace, here at the Thing, and
until such time as I come back to my home."

Then they all sprang up and said that so they would do indeed; but Haft
was the name of him who urged most that peace should be given to the
man. This Hafr was the son of Thorarin, the son of Haft, the son of
Thord Knob, who had settled land up from the Weir in the Fleets to
Tongue-river, and who dwelt at Knobstead; and a wordy man was Hafr.

So now he gave forth the handselling grandly with open mouth, and this
is the beginning thereof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIII: The Handselling of Peace](gre78)
