[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre80)  [Next](gre82) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

# CHAP. LXXVI.

How Noise let the Fire out on Drangey, and how Grettir must needs go a
land for more.

So the tale tells, that by then they had been two winters on Drangey,
they had slaughtered well-nigh all the sheep that were there, but one
ram, as men say, they let live; he was piebald of belly and head, and
exceeding big-homed; great game they had of him, for he was so wise that
he would stand waiting without, and run after them whereso they went;
and he would come home to the hut a-nights and rub his horns against the
door.

Now they deemed it good to abide on the island, for food was plenty,
because of the fowl and their eggs; but fire-wood was right hard to come
by; and ever Grettir would let the thrall go watch for drift, and logs
were often drifted there, and he would bear them to the fire; but no
need had the brothers to do any work beyond climbing into the cliffs
when it liked them. But the thrall took to loathing his work, and got
more grumbling and heedless than he was wont heretofore: his part it was
to watch the fire night by night, and Grettir gave him good warning
thereon, for no boat they had with them.

Now so it befell that on a certain night their fire went out; Grettir
was wroth thereat, and said it was but his due if Noise were beaten for
that deed; but the thrall said that his life was an evil life, if he
must lie there in outlawry, and be shaken and beaten withal if aught
went amiss.

Grettir asked Illugi what rede there was for the matter, but he said he
could see none, but that they should abide

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

there till some keel should be brought thither: Grettir said it was but
blindness to hope for that. "Rather will I risk whether I may not come
aland."

"Much my mind misgives me thereof," said Illugi, "for we are all lost if
thou comest to any ill."

"I shall not be swallowed up swimming," said Grettir; "but henceforward
I shall trust the thrall the worse for this, so much as lies hereon."

Now the shortest way to the mainland from the island was a sea-mile
long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVII: Grettir at the Home-stead of Reeks](gre82)
