[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre96)  [Next](gre98) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

# CHAP. XCII.

Of the Oath that Spes made before the Bishop.

NOW that day past, and time wore on to the day when Spes should make
oath, and she bade thereto all her friends and kin, and arrayed herself
in the best attire she had, and many noble ladies went with her.

Wet was the weather about that time, and the ways were miry, and a
certain slough there was to go over or ever they might come to the
church; and whenas Spes and her company came forth anigh this slough, a
great crowd was there before them, and a multitude of poor folk who
prayed them of alms, for this was in the common highway, and all who
knew her deemed it was their part to welcome her, and prayed for good
things for her as for one who had oft holpen them well.

A certain staff-propped carle there was amidst those poor folk, great of
growth and long-bearded. Now the women made stay at the slough, because
that the great people deemed the passage across over miry, and therewith
when that staff-carle saw the goodwife, that she was better arrayed than
the other women, he spake to her on this wise,

"Good mistress," said he, "be so lowly as to suffer me to bear thee over
this slough, for it is the bounden duty of us staff-carles to serve thee
all we may."

"What then," says she, "wilt thou bear me well, when thou mayst not bear
thyself?"

"Yet would it show forth thy lowliness," says he, "nor may I offer
better than I have withal; and in all things wilt

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

thou fare the better, if thou hast no pride against poor folk."

"Wot thou well, then," says she, "that if thou bearest me not well it
shall be for a beating to thee, or some other shame greater yet."

"Well, I would fain risk it," said he; and therewithal he got on to his
feet and stood in the slough. She made as if she were sore afeard of his
carrying her, yet nathless she went on, borne on his back; and he
staggered along exceeding slowly, going on two crutches, and when he got
midmost of the slough he began to reel from side to side. She bade him
gather up his strength.

"Never shalt thou have made a worse journey than this if thou castest me
down here."

Then the poor wretch staggers on, and gathers up all his courage and
strength, and gets close to the dry land, but stumbles withal, and falls
head-foremost in such wise, that he cast her on to the bank, but fell
into the ditch up to his armpits, and therewithal as he lay there caught
at the goodwife, and gat no firm hold of her clothes, but set his miry
hand on her knee right up to the bare thigh.

She sprang up and cursed him, and said that ever would evil come from
wretched gangrel churles: "and thy full due it were to be beaten, if I
thought it not a shame, because of thy misery."

Then said he, "Meted in unlike ways is man's bliss; methought I had done
well to thee, and I looked for an alms at thy hands, and lo, in place
thereof, I get but threats and ill-usage and no good again withal;" and
he made as if he were exceeding angry.

Many deemed that he looked right poor and wretched, but she said that he
was the wiliest of old churles; but whereas many prayed for him, she
took her purse to her,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

and therein was many a penny of gold; then she shook down the money and
said,

"Take thou this, carle; nowise good were it, if thou hadst not full pay
for the hard words thou hadst of me; now have I parted with thee, even
according to thy worth."

Then he picked up the gold, and thanked her for her good deed. Spes went
to the church, and a great crowd was there before her. Sigurd pushed the
case forward eagerly, and bade her free herself from those charges he
had brought against her.

She said, "I heed not thy charges; what man dost thou say thou hast seen
in my chamber with me? Lo now oft it befalls that some worthy man will
be with me, and that do I deem void of any shame; but hereby will I
swear that to no man have I given gold, and of no man have I had fleshly
defilement save of my husband, and that wretched staff-carle who laid
his miry hand on my thigh when I was borne over the slough this same
day."

Now many deemed that this was a full oath, and that no shame it was to
her, though the carle had laid hand on her unwittingly; but she said
that all things must be told even as they were.

Thereafter she swore the oath in such form as is said afore, and many
said thereon that she showed the old saw to be true, swear loud and say
little. But for her, she said that wise men would think that this was
not done by guile.

Then her kin fell to saying that great shame and grief it was for
high-born women to have such lying charges brought against them
bootless, whereas it was a crime worthy of death if it were openly known
of any woman that she had done whoredoms against her husband.
Therewithal

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

Spes prayed the bishop to make out a divorce betwixt her and her husband
Sigurd, because she said she might nowise bear his slanderous lying
charges. Her kinsfolk pushed the matter forward for her, and so brought
it about by their urgency that they were divorced, and Sigurd got little
of the goods, and was driven away from the land withal, for here matters
went as is oft shown that they will, and *the lower must lowt*; nor
could he bring aught about to avail him, though he had but said the very
sooth.

Now Spes took to her all their money, and was deemed the greatest of
stirring women; but when folk looked into her oath, it seemed to them
that there was some guile in it, and were of a mind that wise men must
have taught her that way of swearing; and men dug out this withal, that
the staff-carle who had carried her was even Thorstein Dromund. Yet for
all that Sigurd got no righting of the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCIII: Thorstein and Spes come out to Norway](gre98)
