[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre97)  [Next](gre99) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XCIII.

Thorstein and Spes come out to Norway.

THORSTEIN Dromund was with the Varangians while the talk ran highest
about these matters; so famed did he become that it was deemed that
scarce had any man of the like prowess come thither; the greatest
honours he gat from Harald Sigurdson, for he was of his kin; and after
his counsels did Thorstein do, as men are minded to think.

But a little after Sigurd was driven from the land, Thorstein fell to
wooing Spes to wife, and she took it meetly, but went to her kinsmen for
rede; then they held

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

meetings thereon, and were of one accord that she herself must rule the
matter; then was the bargain struck, and good was their wedded life, and
they were rich in money, and all men deemed Thorstein to be a man of
exceeding good luck, since he had delivered himself from all his
troubles.

The twain were together for two winters in Micklegarth, and then
Thorstein said to his goodwife that he would fain go back to see his
possessions in Norway. She said he should have his will, so they sold
the lands they had there, and gat them great wealth of chattels, and
then betook them from that land, with a fair company, and went all the
way till they came to Norway. Thorstein's kin welcomed them both right
heartily, and soon saw that Spes was bountiful and high-minded, and she
speedily became exceeding well befriended. Some children they had
between them, and they abode on their lands, and were well content with
their life.

In those days was Magnus the Good king over Norway. Thorstein soon went
to meet him, and had good welcome of him, for he had grown famous for
the avenging of Grettir the Strong (for men scarce know of its happening
that any other Icelander, save Grettir Asmundson, was avenged in
Micklegarth); and folk say that Thorstein became a man of King Magnus,
and for nine winters after he had come to Norway he abode in peace, and
folk of the greatest honour were they deemed, he and his wife.

Then came home from Micklegarth King Harald Sigurdson, and King Magnus
gave him half Norway, and they were both kings therein for a while; but
after the death of King Magnus many of those who had been his friends
were ill content, for all men loved him; but folk might not abide the
temper of King Harald, for that he was hard and was wont to punish men
heavily.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

But Thorstein Dromund was fallen into eld, though he was still the
halest of men; and now was the slaying of Grettir Asmundson sixteen
winters agone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCIV: Thorstein Dromund and Spes leave Norway
again](gre99)
