[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39019)  [Next](cc39021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Follow after charity, and desire
spiritual *gifts,* but rather that ye may prophesy.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sectamini caritatem: aemulamini
spiritualia, magis autem ut prophetetis.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** For he that speaketh in an *unknown*
tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth
*him;* howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Nam qui loquitur lingua, non hominibus
loquitur sed Deo: nullus enim audit; Spiritu vero loquitur mysteria.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**3.** But he that prophesieth speaketh unto
men *to* edification, and exhortation, and comfort.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Caeterum qui prophetat, heminibus
loquitur ad aedificationem, exhortationem, et consolationem.

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**4.** He that speaketh in an *unknown*
tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Qui loquitur lingua, se ipsum
aedificat; at qui prophetat, Ecclesiam aedificat.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**5.** I would that ye all spake with
tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: for greater *is* he that
prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret,
that the church may receive edifying.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Volo autem omnes vos loqui linguis,
magis tamen ut prophetetis; maior enim qui prophetat, quam qui linguis
loquitur; nisi interpretetur, ut Ecclesia aedificationem accipiat.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**6.** Now, brethren, if I come unto you
speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to
you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by
doctrine?

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Nunc autem, fratres, si venero ad vos
linguis loquens, quil vobis prodero, nisi vobis loquar aut per
revelationem, aut per scientiam, aut per prophetiam, aut per doctrinam?

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span><span id="xxi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>As he had previously exhorted them to
*follow after the more excellent gifts,* (<span
id="xxi.i-p16.1"></span>[1Co
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="xxi.i-p16.1"></span>,)
so he exhorts them now to *follow after love,*  <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) for that was the distinguished
excellence,  <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) which he had
promised that he would show them. They will, therefore, regulate
themselves with propriety in the use of gifts, if *love* prevails among
them. For he tacitly reproves the want of *love,* as appearing in this —
that they had hitherto abused their gifts, and, inferring from what goes
before, that where they do not assign to *love* the chief place, they do
not take the right road to the attainment of true excellence, he shows
them how foolish their ambition is, which frustrates their hopes and
desires.

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>1. *Covet spiritual gifts.* Lest the
Corinthians should object that they wronged God, if they despised his
gifts, the Apostle anticipates this objection by declaring, that it was
not his design to draw them away even from those gifts that they had
abused — nay rather he commends the pursuit of them, and wishes them to
have a place in the Church. And assuredly, as they had been conferred
for the advantage of the Church, man’s abuse of them ought not to give
occasion for their being thrown away as useless or injurious, but in the
meantime he commends *prophecy* above all other gifts, as it was the
most useful of them all. He observes, therefore, an admirable medium, by
disapproving of nothing that was useful, while at the same time he
exhorts them not to prefer, by an absurd zeal, things of less
consequence to what was of primary importance. Now he assigns the first
place to *prophecy. Covet,* therefore, *spiritual gifts* — *that* is,
“Neglect no gift, for I exhort you to seek after them all, provided only
*prophecy* holds the first place.”

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span><span id="xxi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**2.** *For he that speaketh in another*
 <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) *tongue, speaketh,* etc. He now
shows from the effect, why it was that he preferred *prophecy* to other
gifts, and he compares it with the gift of *tongues,* in which it is
probable the Corinthians exercised themselves the more, because it had
more of show connected with it, for when persons hear a man speaking in
a foreign tongue, their admiration is commonly *excited.* He accordingly
shows, from principles already assumed, how perverse a thing this is,
inasmuch as it does not at all contribute to the edifying of the Church.
He says in the outset — He *that speaketh in another tongue, speaketh
not unto men, but unto God:* that is, according to the proverb, “He
sings to himself and to the Muses.”  <span
id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) In the use of the word *tongue,* there
is not a *pleonasm,*  <span id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) as in
those expressions — “She spake thus *with her mouth,”* and *“I* caught
the sound *with these ears.”* The term denotes *a foreign language.* The
reason why he does not speak to men is — because *no one heareth,* that
is, *as an articulate voice.* For all hear a sound, but they do not
understand what is said.

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>He *speaketh in the Spirit* — *that* is,
“*by a* spiritual gift, (for in this way I interpret it along with
Chrysostom.) He speaketh *mysteries* and hidden things, and things,
therefore, that are of no profit.” Chrysostom understands *mysteries*
here in a good sense, as meaning — special revelations from God. I
understand the term, however, in a bad sense, as meaning — dark sayings,
that are obscure and involved, as if he had said, *“He* speaks what no
one *understands.”*

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span><span id="xxi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>**3.** *He that prophesieth, speaketh unto
men* “Prophecy,” says he, “is profitable to all, while a foreign
language is a treasure hid in the earth. What great folly, then, it is
to spend all one’s time in what is useless, and, on the other hand, to
neglect what appears to be most useful!” To *speak to edification,* is
to speak what contains doctrine fitted to edify. For I understand this
term to mean doctrine, by which we are trained to piety, to faith, to
the worship and fear of God, and the duties of holiness and
righteousness. As, however, we have for the most part need of goads,
while others are pressed down by afflictions, or labor under weakness,
he adds to doctrine, *exhortation and consolation* It appears from this
passage, and from what goes before, that *prophecy* does not mean the
gift of foretelling future events: but as I have said this once before,
I do not repeat it.

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span><span id="xxi.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>**4.** *He that speaketh in another tongue,
edifieth himself. In* place of what he had said before — that he
*speaketh unto God,* he now says — he *speaketh to himself* But whatever
is done in the Church, ought to be for the common benefit. Away, then,
with that *misdirected* ambition, which gives occasion for the advantage
of the people generally being hindered! Besides, Paul speaks by way of
concession: for when ambition makes use of such empty vauntings,  <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) there is inwardly no desire of doing
good; but Paul does, in effect, order away from the common society of
believers those men of mere show, who look only to themselves.

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span><span id="xxi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>**5.** *I would that ye all spake with
tongues* Again he declares that he does not give such a *preference* to
prophecy, as not to leave some place for foreign tongues. This must be
carefully observed. For God has conferred nothing upon his Church in
vain, and languages were of some benefit.  <span
id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) Hence, although the Corinthians, by a
misdirected eagerness for show, had rendered that gift partly useless
and worthless, and partly even injurious, yet Paul, nevertheless,
commends the use of tongues. So far is he from wishing them abolished or
thrown away. At the present day, while a knowledge of languages is more
than simply necessary, and while God has at this time, in his wonderful
kindness, brought them forward from darkness into light, there are at
present great theologians, who declaim against them with furious zeal.
As it is certain, that the Holy Spirit has here honored the use of
tongues with never-dying praise, we may very readily gather, what is the
kind of spirit that actuates those reformers,  <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) who level as many reproaches as they
can against the pursuit of them. At the same time the cases are very
different. For Paul takes in languages of any sort — such as served
merely for the publication of the gospel among all nations. They, on the
other hand, condemn those languages, from which, as fountains, the pure
truth of scripture is to be drawn. An exception is added — that we must
not be so taken up with the use of languages, as to treat with neglect
*prophecy,* which ought to have the first place.

<span id="xxi.i-p35"></span>*Unless he interpret.* For if interpretation
is added, there will then be prophecy. You must not, however, understand
Paul to give liberty here to any one to *take* up the time of the Church
to no profit by muttering words in a foreign tongue. For how ridiculous
it were, to repeat the same thing in a variety of languages without any
necessity! But it often happens, that the use of a foreign tongue is
seasonable. In short, let us simply have an eye to this as our end —
that edification may redound to the Church.

<span id="xxi.i-p36"></span><span id="xxi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p37"></span>**6.** *Now, brethren, if I should come. He*
proposes himself as an example, because in his person the case was
exhibited more strikingly  <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) The
Corinthians experienced in themselves abundant fruit from his doctrine.
He asks them, then, of what advantage it would be to them, if he were to
make use of foreign languages among them. He shows them by this
instance, how much better it were to apply their minds to prophesyings.
Besides, it was less invidious to reprove this vice in his own person,
than in that of another.

<span id="xxi.i-p39"></span>He mentions, however, four different kinds
of edification — *revelation, knowledge, prophesying,* and *doctrine* As
there are a variety of opinions among interpreters respecting them, let
me be permitted, also, to bring forward my conjecture. As, however, it
is but a conjecture, I leave my readers to judge of it. *Revelation* and
*prophesying I* put in one class, and I am of opinion that the latter is
the administration of the former. I am of the same opinion as to
*knowledge* and *doctrine* What, therefore, any one has obtained by
*revelation,* he dispenses by *prophesying. Doctrine* is the way of
communicating knowledge. Thus a *Prophet* will be — one who interprets
and administers *revelation.* This is rather in favor of the definition
that I have given above, than at variance with it. For we have said that
*prophesying* does not consist of a simple and bare interpretation of
Scripture, but includes also *knowledge* for applying it to present use
— which is obtained only by *revelation,* and the special inspiration of
God.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
14:7-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007)<span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** And even things without life giving
sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the
sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Quin et inanimia vocem reddentia,
sive tibia, sive cithara, nisi distinctionem sonis dederint: quomodo
cognoscetur, quod tibia canitur aut cithara?

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span>**8.** For if the trumpet give an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Etenim si incertam vocem tuba
dederit, quis apparabitur ad bellum?

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span>**9.** So likewise ye, except ye utter by
the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.

<span id="xxi.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Sic et vos per linguam, nisi
significantem sermonem dederitis: quomodo intelligetur quod dicitur?
eritis enim in aerem loquentes.

<span id="xxi.ii-p8"></span>**10.** There are, it may be, so many kinds
of voices in the world, and none of them *is* without signification.

<span id="xxi.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Tam multa, verbi gratia, genera
vocum sunt in mundo, et nihil horum mutum.

<span id="xxi.ii-p10"></span>**11.** Therefore if I know not the meaning
of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that
speaketh *shall be* a barbarian unto me.

<span id="xxi.ii-p11"></span>**11.** Itaque si nesciero vim voeis, ero
ei qui loquitur, barbarus: et qui loquitur, apud me barbarus.

<span id="xxi.ii-p12"></span>**12.** Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are
zealous of spiritual *gifts*, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of
the church.

<span id="xxi.ii-p13"></span>**12.** Itaque et vos, quandoquidem
sectatores estis spirituum, ad aedificationera Ecclesiae quaeerite, ut
excellatis.

<span id="xxi.ii-p14"></span>**13.** Wherefore let him that speaketh in
an *unknown* tongue pray that he may interpret.

<span id="xxi.ii-p15"></span>**13.** Quapropter qui loquitur lingua,
oret ut interpretetur.

<span id="xxi.ii-p16"></span>**14.** For if I pray in an *unknown*
tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.

<span id="xxi.ii-p17"></span>**14.** Nam si orem lingua, spiritus meus
orat, mens autem mea fructu caret.

<span id="xxi.ii-p18"></span>**15.** What is it then? I will pray with
the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing
with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.

<span id="xxi.ii-p19"></span>**15.** Quid igitur est? orabo spiritu, sed
orabo et mente: canam spiritu, sed canam et mente.

<span id="xxi.ii-p20"></span>**16.** Else when thou shalt bless with the
spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen
at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?

<span id="xxi.ii-p21"></span>**16.** Alioqui si benedixeris spiritu, is
qui implet locum idiotae, quomodo dicturus est Amen ad tuam gratiarum
actionem? quandoquidem quid dicas, nescit.

<span id="xxi.ii-p22"></span>**17.** For thou verily givest thanks well,
but the other is not edified.

<span id="xxi.ii-p23"></span>**17.** Nam tu quidem bene gratias agis,
sed alius non aedificatur.

<span id="xxi.ii-p24"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ii-p25"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p26"></span>**7.** *Nay even things without life.* He
brings forward similitudes, first from musical instruments, and then
afterwards from the nature of things generally, there being no voice
that has not some peculiarity, suitable for distinction.  <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) *“Even things without life,”* says he,
*“instruct* us.” There are, it is true, many random sounds or crashes,
without any modulation,  <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) but
Paul speaks here of voices in which there is something of art, as though
he had said — “A man cannot give life to a harp or flute, but he makes
it give forth a sound that is regulated in such a manner, that it can be
distinguished. How absurd then it is, that even men, endowed with
intelligence, should utter a confused, indistinguishable sound!”

<span id="xxi.ii-p29"></span>We must not, however, enter here upon any
minute discussion as to musical harmonies, inasmuch as Paul has merely
taken what is commonly understood; as, for example, the sound of the
trumpet,  <span id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) of which he speaks
shortly afterwards; for it is so much calculated to raise the spirits,
that it rouses up — not only men, but even horses. Hence it is related
in historical records, that the Lacedemonians, when joining battle,
preferred the use of the flute,  <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817)
lest the army should, at the first charge, rush forward upon the enemy
with too keen an onset.  <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) In
fine, we all know by experience what power music has in exciting men’s
feelings, so that Plato affirms, and not without good reason, that music
has very much effect in influencing, in one way or another, the manners
of a state. To speak into the air is to beat the air (<span
id="xxi.ii-p32.1"></span>[1Co
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026)<span id="xxi.ii-p32.1"></span>)
to no purpose. “Thy voice will not reach either God or man, but will
vanish into air.”

<span id="xxi.ii-p33"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p34"></span>**10.** *None of them dumb*  <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) He now speaks in a more general way,
for he now takes in the natural voices of animals. He uses the term
*dumb* here, to mean *confused* — as opposed to an articulate voice; for
the barking of dogs differs from the neighing of horses, and the roaring
of lions from the braying of asses. Every kind of bird, too, has its own
particular way of singing and chirping. The whole order of nature,
therefore, as appointed by God, invites us to observe a distinction.
 <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820)

<span id="xxi.ii-p37"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p38"></span>**11.** *I shall be to him that speaketh a
barbarian*  <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) The tongue ought to
be an index of the mind — not merely in the sense of the proverb, but in
the sense that is explained by Aristotle in the commencement of his book
— “On Interpretation.”  <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) How
foolish then it is and preposterous in a man, to utter in an assembly a
voice of which the hearer understands nothing — in which he perceives no
token from which he may learn what the person means! It is not without
good reason, therefore, that Paul views it as the height of absurdity,
that a man should be a *barbarian* to the hearers, by chattering in an
unknown tongue, and at the same time he elegantly treats with derision
the foolish ambition of the Corinthians, who were eager to obtain praise
and fame by this means. “This reward,” says he, “you will earn — that
you will be a *barbarian.”* For the term *barbarian,* whether it be an
artificial one, (as Strabo thinks,  <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) ) or derived from some other origin,
is taken in a bad sense. Hence the Greeks, who looked upon themselves as
the only persons who were good speakers, and had a polished language,
gave to all others the name of *barbarians,* from their rude and rustic
dialect. No language, however, is so cultivated as not to be reckoned
barbarous, when it is not understood. “*He that heareth,”* says Paul,
“*will* be unto me a *barbarian,* and I will be so to him in return.” By
these words he intimates, that to speak in an unknown tongue, is not to
hold fellowship with the Church, but rather to keep aloof from it, and
that he who will act this part, will be deservedly despised by others,
because *he* first despises *them.*

<span id="xxi.ii-p42"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p43"></span>**12.** *Since you are in pursuit of
spiritual gifts* Paul concludes that the gift of tongues has not been
conferred with the view of giving occasion of boasting to a few, without
yielding advantage to the Church. “If spiritual gifts,” says he,
“delight you, let the end be edification. *Then* only may you reckon,
that you have attained an excellence that is true and praiseworthy —
when the Church receives advantage from you. Paul, however, does not
hereby give permission to any one to cherish an ambition to excel, even
to the benefit of the Church, but by correcting the fault, he shows how
far short they come of what they are in pursuit of, and at the same time
lets them know who they are that should be most highly esteemed. He
would have a man to be held in higher estimation, in proportion as he
devotes himself with eagerness to promote edification. In the meantime,
it is our part to have this one object in view — that the Lord may be
exalted, and that his kingdom may be, from day to day, enlarged.

<span id="xxi.ii-p44"></span>The term *spirits,*  <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) he employs here, by metonymy, to
denote *spiritual* *gifts,* as the *spirit* of doctrine, or of
understanding, or of judgment, is employed to denote spiritual doctrine,
or understanding, or judgment. Otherwise we must keep in view what he
stated previously, that it is one and the same Spirit, who *distributeth
to every man* various gifts *according to his will.* (<span
id="xxi.ii-p45.2"></span>[1Co
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="xxi.ii-p45.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.ii-p46"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p47"></span>**13.** *Wherefore let him that speaketh in
another tongue* This is an anticipation, by way of reply to a question
which might very readily be proposed to him. *“If* any one, therefore,
is able to speak a foreign language, will the gift be useless? Why
should that be kept back, which might be brought out to light, to the
glory of God?” He shows the remedy. *“Let* him,” says he, *“ask* from
God the gift of interpretation also. If he is without this, let him
abstain in the meantime from ostentation.”  <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825)

<span id="xxi.ii-p49"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p50"></span>**14.** *For if I pray in another tongue.*
 <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) While this example, too, serves
to confirm what he has previously maintained, it forms, at the same
time, in my opinion, an additional particular. For it is probable that
the Corinthians had been in fault in this respect also, that, as they
discoursed, so they also prayed in foreign tongues. At the same time,
both abuses took their rise from the same source, as indeed they were
comprehended under one class. What is meant by *praying in a tongue,*
 <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) appears from what goes before —
to frame a prayer in a foreign language.

<span id="xxi.ii-p53"></span>The meaning of the term *spirit,* however,
is not so easily explained. The idea of Ambrose, who refers it to the
Spirit that we receive in baptism, has not only no foundation, but has
not even the appearance of it. Augustine takes it in a more refined way,
as denoting that apprehension, which conceives ideas and signs of
things, so that it is a faculty of the soul that is inferior to the
understanding. There is more plausibility in the opinion of those who
interpret it as meaning the breathing of the throat — that is, the
breath. This interpretation, however, does not accord with the meaning
which the term invariably bears in Paul’s discussion in this place: nay
more, it appears to have been repeated the oftener by way of concession.
For they gloried in that honorary distinction, which Paul, it is true,
allows them, while, on the other hand, he shows how preposterous it is
to abuse  <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) a thing that is good
and *excellent.* It is as though he had said — “Thou makest thy boast to
me of *spirit,* but to what purpose, if it is useless?” From this
consideration, I am led to agree with Chrysostom, as to the meaning of
this term, who explains it, as in the previous instance, (<span
id="xxi.ii-p54.2"></span>[1Co
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#012)<span id="xxi.ii-p54.2"></span>,)
to mean a spiritual gift. Thus *my spirit* will *mean* — *the gift
conferred upon me.*  <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)

<span id="xxi.ii-p56"></span>But here a new question arises; for it is
not *credible* (at least we nowhere read of it) that any spoke under the
influence of the Spirit in a language that was to themselves unknown.
For the gift of tongues was conferred — not for the mere purpose of
uttering a sound, but, on the contrary, with the view of making a
communication. For how ridiculous a thing it would be, that the tongue
of a Roman should be framed by the Spirit of God to pronounce Greek
words, which were altogether unknown to the speaker, as parrots,
magpies, and crows, are taught to mimic human voices! If, on the other
hand, the man who was endowed with the gift of tongues, did not speak
without sense and understanding, Paul would have had no occasion to say,
that *the spirit prays, but the understanding is unfruitful,* for the
*understanding* must have been conjoined with the *spirit*

<span id="xxi.ii-p57"></span>I answer, that Paul here, for the sake of
illustration, makes a supposition, that had no reality, in this way: “If
the gift of tongues be disjoined from the understanding, so that he who
speaks is a *barbarian* to himself, as well as to others, what good
would he do by babbling in this manner?” For it does not, appear that
the mind is here said to be *unfruitful, (*<span
id="xxi.ii-p57.1"></span>ἄκαρπον*)* on the ground of no advantage
accruing to the Church, inasmuch as Paul is here speaking of the private
prayers of an individual. Let us therefore keep it in view, that things
that are connected with each other are here disjoined for the sake of
illustration — not on the ground that it either can, or usually does, so
happen. The meaning is now obvious. “If, therefore, I frame prayers in a
language that is not understood by me, and the *spirit* supplies me with
words, the *spirit* indeed itself, which regulates my tongue, will in
that case *pray,* but my mind will either be wandering somewhere else,
or at least will have no part in the prayer.”

<span id="xxi.ii-p58"></span>Let us take notice, that Paul reckons it a
great fault if the mind is not occupied in prayer. And no wonder; for
what else do we in prayer, but pour out our thoughts and desires before
God? Farther, as prayer is the spiritual worship of God, what is more at
variance with the nature of it, than that it should proceed merely from
the lips, and not from the inmost soul? And these things must have been
perfectly familiar to every mind, had not the devil besotted the world
to such a degree, as to make men believe that they pray aright, when
they merely make their lips move. So obstinate, too, are Papists in
their madness, that they do not merely justify the making of prayers
without understanding, but even prefer that the unlearned should mutter
in unknown mumblings.  <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) Meanwhile
they mock God by an acute sophism  <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) — that the *final intention* is
enough, or, in other words, that it is an acceptable service to God, if
a Spaniard curses God in the German language, while in his mind he is
tossed with various profane cares, provided only he shall, by setting
himself to his form of prayer, make up matters with God by means of a
thought that quickly vanishes.  <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832)

<span id="xxi.ii-p62"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p63"></span>**15.** *I will pray with the spirit* Lest
any one should ask, by way of objection, *“Will* the spirit then be
useless in prayer?” he teaches, that it is lawful, indeed, to *pray with
the spirit,* provided the mind be at the same time employed, that is,
the *understanding* He allows, therefore, and sanctions the use of a
spiritual gift in prayer, but requires, what is the main thing, that the
mind be not unemployed.  <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)

<span id="xxi.ii-p65"></span>When he says, I *will sing Psalms,* or, I
*will sing,* he makes use of a particular instance, instead of a general
statement. For, as the praises of God were the subject-matter of the
Psalms, he means by *the singing of Psalms*  <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) — *blessing God,* or *rendering
thanks* to him, for in our supplications, we either ask something from
God, or we acknowledge some blessing that has been conferred upon us.
From this passage, however, we at the same time infer, that the custom
of singing was, even at that time, in use among believers, as appears,
also, from Pliny, who, writing at least forty years, or thereabouts,
after the death of Paul, mentions, that the Christians were accustomed
to sing Psalms to Christ before day-break.  <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) I have also no doubt, that, from the
very first, they followed the custom of the Jewish Church in singing
Psalms.

<span id="xxi.ii-p68"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p69"></span>**16** *Else, if thou wilt bless with the
spirit.* Hitherto he has been showing, that the prayers of every one of
us will be vain and unfruitful, if the understanding does not go along
with the voice. He now comes to speak of public prayers also. “If he
that frames or utters forth prayers in the name of the people is not
understood by the assembly, how will the common people add an expression
of their desires in the close, so as to take part in them? For there is
no fellowship in prayer, unless when all with one mind unite in the same
desires. The same remark applies to *blessing,* or giving thanks to
God.”

<span id="xxi.ii-p70"></span>Paul’s expression, however, intimates,
 <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) that some one of the ministers
uttered or pronounced prayers in a distinct voice, and that the whole
assembly followed in their minds the words of that one person, until he
had come to a close, and then they all said *Amen* — *to* intimate, that
the prayer offered up by that one person was that of all of them in
common.  <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) It is known, that
*Amen* is a Hebrew word, derived from the same term from which comes the
word that signifies *faithfulness* or *truth.*  <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) It is, accordingly, a token of
confirmation,  <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) both in alarming,
and in desiring.  <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) Farther, as
the word was, from long use, familiar among the Jews, it made its way
from them to the Gentiles, and the Greeks made use of it as if it had
belonged originally to their own language. Hence it came to be a term in
common use among all nations. Now Paul says — “If in public prayer thou
makest use of a foreign tongue, that is not understood by the
*unlearned* and the common people among whom thou speakest, there will
be no fellowship, and thy *prayer* or *blessing* will be no longer a
public one.” “Why?” “No one,” says he, “*can* add his *Amen to* thy
prayer or psalm, if he does not understand it.”

<span id="xxi.ii-p76"></span>Papists, on the other hand, reckon that to
be a sacred and legitimate observance, which Paul so decidedly rejects.
In this they discover an amazing impudence. Nay more, this is a clear
token from which we learn how grievously, and with what unbridled
liberty, Satan rages in the dogmas of Popery.  <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) For what can be clearer than those
words of Paul — than an *unlearned* person cannot take any part in
public prayer if he does not understand what is said? What can be
plainer than this prohibition — “let not prayers or thanksgivings be
offered up in public, except in the vernacular tongue.” In doing every
day, what Paul says should not, or even cannot, be done, do they not
reckon *him* to be *illiterate*? In observing with the utmost strictness
what he forbids, do they not deliberately contemn God? We see, then, how
Satan sports among them with impunity. Their diabolical obstinacy shows
itself in this — that, when admonished, they are so far from repenting,
that they defend this gross abuse by fire and sword.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 14:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>**18.** I thank my God, I speak with
tongues more than ye all:

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span>**18.** Gratias ago Deo meo, quod magis
quam vos omnes linguis loquor:

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span>**19.** Yet in the church I had rather
speak five words with my understanding, that *by my voice* I might teach
others also, than ten thousand words in an *unknown* tongue.

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span>**19.** Sed in Ecclesia volo quinque verba
mente mea loqui, ut et alios instituam, potius quam decem millia
verborum, lingua.

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span>**20.** Brethren, be not children in
understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be
men.

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span>**20.** Fratres, ne sitis pueri sensibus,
sed malitia pueri sitis: sensibus vero sitis perfecti.

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span>**21.** In the law it is written, With *men
of* other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet
for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.

<span id="xxi.iii-p9"></span>**21.** In lege scriptum est: (<span
id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>[Isa. 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012)<span id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>;)
Alienis linguis et labiis alienis loquar populo huic: et ne sic quidem
audient me, dicit Dominus.

<span id="xxi.iii-p10"></span>**22.** Wherefore tongues are for a sign,
not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying
*serveth* not for them that believe not, but for them which believe.

<span id="xxi.iii-p11"></span>**22.** Itaque linguae signi vice sunt,
non iis qui credunt, sed ineredulis: contra prophetia non incredulis,
sed s credentibus.

<span id="xxi.iii-p12"></span>**23.** If therefore the whole church be
come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come
in *those that are* unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye
are mad?

<span id="xxi.iii-p13"></span>**23.** Ergo si convenerit Ecclesia tota
simul, et omnes linguis loquantur, ingrediantur autem indocti aut
increduli, nonne dicent vos insanire?

<span id="xxi.iii-p14"></span>**24.** But if all prophesy, and there
come in one that believeth not, or *one* unlearned, he is convinced of
all, he is judged of all:

<span id="xxi.iii-p15"></span>**24.** Quodsi omnes prophetent,
ingrediatur autem ineredulus aut indoctus, coarguitur ab omnibus,
diiudieatur ab omnibus,

<span id="xxi.iii-p16"></span>**25.** And thus are the secrets of his
heart made manifest; and so falling down on *his* face he will worship
God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

<span id="xxi.iii-p17"></span>**25.** Et sic occulta cordis eius
manifesta fiunt; atque ita procidens in faciem, adorabit Deum,
renuntians, quod Deus revera in vobis sit.

<span id="xxi.iii-p18"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iii-p19"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p20"></span>**18.** *I thank,* etc. As there are many
that detract from another’s excellencies, in which they cannot
themselves have distinction, Paul, that he might not seem to depreciate,
through malignity or envy, the gift of tongues, anticipates that
suspicion, by showing that he is, in this respect, superior to them all.
“See,” says he, “how little occasion you have to suspect the design of
my discourse, as if I depreciated what I myself lacked; for if we were
to contend as to tongues, there is not one of you that could bear
comparison with me. While, however, I might display myself to advantage
in this department., I am more concerned for edification.” Paul’s
doctrine derives no small weight from the circumstance, that he has not
an eye to himself. Lest, however, he should appear excessively arrogant,
in preferring himself before all others, he ascribes it all to God. Thus
he tempers his boasting with modesty.

<span id="xxi.iii-p21"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p22"></span>**19.** *I would rather speak five words.*
This is spoken *hyperbolically,* unless you understand *five words,* as
meaning *five sentences.* Now as Paul, who might otherwise have exulted
loftily in his power of speaking with tongues, voluntarily abstains from
it, and, without any show, aims at *edification* exclusively, he
reproves, by this means, the empty ambition of those, that are eagerly
desirous to show themselves off with empty *tinkling.* (<span
id="xxi.iii-p22.1"></span>[1Co
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="xxi.iii-p22.1"></span>.)
The authority of the Apostle ought, also, to have no little weight in
drawing them off from vanity of this kind.

<span id="xxi.iii-p23"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p24"></span>**20.** *Brethren, be not children in
understanding* He proceeds a step farther; for he shows that the
Corinthians are so infatuated, that they, of their own accord. draw down
upon themselves, and eagerly desire, as though it were a singular
benefit, what the Lord threatens that he will send, when he designs to
inflict upon his people the severest punishment. What dreadful madness
is this — to pursue eagerly with their whole desire, what, in the sight
of God, is regarded as a curse! That we may, however, understand more
accurately Paul’s meaning, we must, observe, that this statement is
grounded on the testimony of Isaiah, which he immediately afterwards
subjoins. (<span id="xxi.iii-p24.1"></span>[Isa.
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012)<span id="xxi.iii-p24.1"></span>.)
And as interpreters have been misled, from not observing the connection
to be of this nature, to prevent all mistake, we shall first explain the
passage in Isaiah, and then we shall come to Paul’s words.

<span id="xxi.iii-p25"></span>In that chapter the Prophet, inveighs with
severity against the ten tribes, which had abandoned themselves to every
kind of wickedness. The only consolation is, that God had still a people
uncorrupted in the tribe of Judah; but straightway he deplores the
corruption of that tribe also; and he does so the more sharply, because
there was no hope of amendment. For thus he speaks in the name of God —
*Whom shall I teach knowledge? those that are weaned from their mother?
those that are drawn from the breasts* By this he means, that they are
no more capable of instruction than little children but lately weaned.

<span id="xxi.iii-p26"></span>It is added — *Precept upon precept,
instruction upon instruction, charge upon charge, direction upon
direction, here a little, and there a little* In these words he
expresses, in the style of a mimic,  <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) the slowness and carelessness by which
they were kept back. “In teaching them, I lose my labor, for they make
no progress, because they are beyond measure uncultivated, and what they
had been taught by means of long-continued labor, they in a single
moment forget.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p28"></span>It is added still farther — *He that
speaketh to that people is like one that maketh use of stammering lips,
and a foreign language* This is the passage that Paul quotes. Now the
meaning is,  <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) that the people
have been visited with such blindness and madness, that they no more
understand God when speaking to them, than they would some barbarian or
foreigner, stammering in an unknown tongue — which is a dreadful curse.
He has not, however, quoted the Prophet’s words with exactness, because
he reckoned it enough to make a pointed reference to the passage, that
the Corinthians, on being admonished, might attentively consider it. As
to his saying that it was *written in the law,*  <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) this is not at variance with common
usage; for the Prophets had not a ministry distinct from the law, but
were the interpreters of the law, and their doctrine is, as it were, a
sort of appendage to it; hence the law included the whole body of
Scripture, up to the advent of Christ. Now Paul from this infers as
follows — “Brethren, it is necessary to guard against that childishness,
which is so severely reproved by the Prophet — that the word of God
sounds in your ears without any fruit. Now, when you reject prophecy,
which is placed within your reach, and prefer to stand amazed at empty
sound, is not this voluntarily to incur the curse of God?  <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845)

<span id="xxi.iii-p32"></span>Farther, lest the Corinthians should say
in reply, that to be spiritually *children,* is elsewhere commended,
(<span id="xxi.iii-p32.1"></span>[Mt
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#004)<span id="xxi.iii-p32.1"></span>,)
Paul anticipates this objection, and exhorts them, indeed, to be
*children in malice,* but to beware of being *children in understanding*
Hence we infer how shameless a part those act, who make Christian
simplicity consist in ignorance. Paul would have all believers to be, as
far as possible, in full maturity as to *understanding* The Pope,
inasmuch as it is easier to govern asses than men, gives orders, under
pretext of simplicity, that all under him shall remain uninstructed.
 <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) Let us from this draw a
comparison between the dominion of Popery, and the institution of
Christ, and see how far they agree.  <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847)

<span id="xxi.iii-p35"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p36"></span>**22.** *Therefore tongues are for a sign*
This passage may be explained in two ways, by considering the word
*therefore* as referring merely to the preceding sentence, or as having
a bearing generally on the whole of the foregoing discussion. If it is a
particular inference, the meaning will be — *“*You see, brethren, that
what you so eagerly desire is not a blessing bestowed by God upon
believers, but a punishment, by which he inflicts vengeance upon
unbelievers.” In this way, Paul would not be viewed as taking in the use
of tongues under all circumstances, but simply as touching upon what had
in *one* instance occurred. Should any one, however, prefer to extend it
to the whole discussion, I have no objection, though I do not dislike
the former interpretation.

<span id="xxi.iii-p37"></span>Taking it in a general way, the meaning
will be *“Tongues,* in so far as they are given *for a sign* — that is,
for a miracle — are appointed not properly for *believers,* but for
*unbelievers.”* The advantages derived from *tongues* were various. They
provided against necessity — that diversity of *tongues* might not
prevent the Apostles from disseminating the gospel over the whole world:
there was, consequently, no nation with which they could not hold
fellowship. They served also to move or terrify *unbelievers* by the
sight of a miracle — for the design of this miracle, equally with
others, was to prepare those who were as yet at a distance from Christ
for rendering obedience to him. Believers, who had already devoted
themselves to his doctrine, did not stand so much in need of such
preparation. Hence, the Corinthians brought forward that gift improperly
and out of its right place, allowing prophecy in the meantime to be
neglected, which was peculiarly and specially set apart for *believers,*
and ought, therefore, to be familiar to them, for in *tongues* they
looked to nothing farther than the miracle.

<span id="xxi.iii-p38"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p39"></span>**23.** *If therefore the whole Church
come together* As they did not see their fault, in consequence of having
their minds pre-occupied with a foolish and depraved desire, he tells
them that they will be exposed to the scorn of the wicked or the
unlearned, if any, on coming into their assembly, should hear them
uttering a sound, but not speaking. For what unlearned person will not
reckon those to be out of their right mind, who, in place of speech,
utter empty sound, and are taken up with that vanity, while they were
gathered together for the purpose of hearing the doctrine of God? This
statement has much that is cutting: “You applaud yourselves in your own
sleeve; but the wicked and the unlearned laugh at your fooleries. You do
not, therefore, see what to the unlearned and unbelieving is *perfectly*
manifest.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p40"></span>Here Chrysostom starts a question’ “If
*tongues* were given to unbelievers *for a sign,* why does the Apostle
say now, that they will be derided by them?” He answers, that they are
*for a sign* to fill them with astonishment — not to instruct them, or
to reform them. At the same time he adds, that it is owing to their
wickedness, that they look upon the sign as madness. This explanation
does not satisfy me; for however an unbeliever or unlearned person may
be affected by a miracle, and may regard with reverence the gift of God,
he does not cease on that account to deride and condemn an unseasonable
abuse of the gift,  <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) and think
thus with himself: “What do these men mean, by wearying out themselves
and others to no purpose? Of what avail is their speaking, if nothing is
to be learned from it?” Paul’s meaning, therefore, is — that the
Corinthians would be justly *convicted* of madness by the unbelieving
and unlearned, however much they might please themselves.  <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849)

<span id="xxi.iii-p43"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p44"></span>**24.** *But if all prophesy* As he had
previously showed them, how much more advantageous prophecy is to *those
that are of the household of faith* (<span id="xxi.iii-p44.1"></span>[Ga
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="xxi.iii-p44.1"></span>)
than the gift of tongues, so he now shows that it would be useful also
to *those that are without.* (<span id="xxi.iii-p44.2"></span>[1Co
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013)<span id="xxi.iii-p44.2"></span>.)
This is a most powerful consideration for showing the Corinthians their
error. For what a base part it is to depreciate a gift that is most
useful both within and without, and to be wholly taken up with another
gift which is useless to those that are *within* the house; and, in
addition to this, gives occasion of offense to those that are *without.*
He sets before them this advantage of prophecy, that it summons the
*consciences* of the wicked to the tribunal of God, and strikes them
with a lively apprehension of divine judgment in such a manner, that he
who before in utter regardlessness despised sound doctrine, is
constrained to give glory to God.

<span id="xxi.iii-p45"></span>*We* shall find it, however, much easier
to understand this passage, if we compare it with another that occurs in
the Epistle to the Hebrews (<span id="xxi.iii-p45.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="xxi.iii-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.iii-p46"></span>The Word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword; piercing to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow — a discerner of the
thoughts of the heart.  <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850)

<span id="xxi.iii-p48"></span>For in both passages, it is the same kind
of efficacy of the Word of God that is spoken of: only in that other
passage it is spoken of more fully and distinctly. So far as the passage
before us is concerned, it is not difficult to understand now, what is
meant by being *convinced* and *judged.* The consciences of men are in a
torpid state,  <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) and are not
touched with any feeling of dissatisfaction on account of their sins, so
long as they are enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. In short,
unbelief is like a lethargy that takes away feeling. But the Word of God
penetrates even to the farthest recesses of the mind, and by
introducing, as it were, a light, dispels darkness, and drives away that
deadly torpor. Thus, then, unbelievers are *convinced,* inasmuch as they
are seriously affected and alarmed, on coming to know that they have to
do with God; and, in like manner, they are *judged* in this respect,
that whereas they were previously involved in darkness, and did not
perceive their own wretchedness and baseness, they are now brought into
the light of day, and are constrained to bear witness against
themselves.

<span id="xxi.iii-p50"></span>When he says, that they are judged and
convinced *by all,* you must understand him as meaning *all that
prophesy;* for he had said a little before, *If ye all prophesy,* (<span
id="xxi.iii-p50.1"></span>[1Co
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.iii-p50.1"></span>.) He has expressly made use of a general
term, with the view of removing the dislike that they felt for prophecy.
 <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) The unbeliever, I say, is
*convinced* — *not* as if the Prophet pronounced a judgment upon him
either silently in the mind, or openly with the mouth, but because the
conscience of the hearer apprehends from the doctrine his own judgment.
He is *judged,* inasmuch as he descends into himself, and, after
thorough examination, comes to know himself, while previously he was
unmindful of himself. To the same purpose, too, is that saying of
Christ:

<span id="xxi.iii-p52"></span>The Spirit, when he is come, will convince
the world of sin,  
(<span id="xxi.iii-p52.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="xxi.iii-p52.2"></span>;)

<span id="xxi.iii-p53"></span>and this is what he immediately adds —
that *the secrets of his heart are made manifest* For he does not mean,
in my opinion, that it becomes manifest to others what sort of person he
is, but rather that his own conscience is aroused, so that he perceives
his sins, which previously lay hid from his view.

<span id="xxi.iii-p54"></span>Here again Chrysostom asks, how it comes
to pass that prophecy is so effectual for arousing *unbelievers,* while
Paul had said a little before that it was not given to them. He answers,
that it was not given to them as a useless sign, but for the purpose of
instructing them. For my part, however, I think that it will be simpler,
and therefore more suitable, to say that it was not given to
unbelievers, who perish, whose hearts

<span id="xxi.iii-p55"></span>Satan has blinded, that they may not see
the light which shines forth from it.  
(<span id="xxi.iii-p55.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="xxi.iii-p55.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.iii-p56"></span>It will also suit better to connect this
statement with the prophecy  <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) of
Isaiah (<span id="xxi.iii-p57.2"></span>[Isa.
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012)<span id="xxi.iii-p57.2"></span>,)
because the Prophet speaks of unbelievers, among whom prophecy is of no
profit or advantage.

<span id="xxi.iii-p58"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p59"></span>**25.** *Falling down on his face, he will
worship* For it is only the knowledge of God that can bring down the
pride of the flesh. To that, prophecy brings us. Hence, it is its proper
effect and nature to bring down men from their loftiness, that they may,
with prostrate homage, render worship to God. To many, however, prophecy
also is of no benefit — nay more, they are made worse by what they hear.
Nor was it even Paul’s intention to ascribe this effect to prophecy, as
if it were always the result of it. He simply designed to show how much
advantage is derived from it, and what is its office. It is therefore a
singular commendation, that it extorts from unbelievers this confession
— that God is present with his people, and that his majesty shines forth
in the midst of their assembly.

<span id="xxi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
14:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)<span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p2"></span>**26.** How is it then, brethren? when ye
come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a
tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be
done unto edifying.

<span id="xxi.iv-p3"></span>**26.** Quid igitur est, fratres? Quoties
convenitis, unusquisque vestrum canticum habet, doctrinam habet, linguam
habet, revelationem habet, interpretationem habet: omnia ad
aedificationem fiant.

<span id="xxi.iv-p4"></span>**27.** If any man speak in an *unknown*
tongue, *let it be* by two, or at the most *by* three, and *that* by
course; and let one interpret.

<span id="xxi.iv-p5"></span>**27.** Sive lingua quis loquitur, fiat per
duos, aut ad summum tres, idque vicissim, et unus interpretetur.

<span id="xxi.iv-p6"></span>**28.** But if there be no interpreter, let
him keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to
God.

<span id="xxi.iv-p7"></span>**28.** Quodsi non sit interpres, taceat in
Ecclesia: caeterum sibi ipsi loquatur et Deo.

<span id="xxi.iv-p8"></span>**29.** Let the prophets speak two or three,
and let the other judge.

<span id="xxi.iv-p9"></span>**29.** Prophetae autem duo aut tres
loquantur, et caeteri diiudicent.

<span id="xxi.iv-p10"></span>**30.** If *any thing* be revealed to
another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.

<span id="xxi.iv-p11"></span>**30.** Quodsi alii fuerit revelatum
assidenti, prior taceat:

<span id="xxi.iv-p12"></span>**31.** For ye may all prophesy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

<span id="xxi.iv-p13"></span>**31.** Potestis enim singulatim omnes
prophetare, ut omnes discant, et omnes consolationem accipiant.  <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854)

<span id="xxi.iv-p15"></span>**32.** And the spirits of the prophets are
subject to the prophets.

<span id="xxi.iv-p16"></span>**32.** Et spiritus prophetarum prophetis
sunt subiecti:

<span id="xxi.iv-p17"></span>**33.** For God is not *the author* of
confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.

<span id="xxi.iv-p18"></span>**33.** Non enim seditionis est Deus, sed
pacis, quemadmodum in omnibus Ecclesiis sanctorum.  <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)

<span id="xxi.iv-p20"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iv-p21"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p22"></span>**26.** *What is it then?* He now shows the
way in which they may remedy those evils. In the first place, each gift
must have its place, but in order and in measure. Farther, the Church
must not be taken up to no purpose with unprofitable exercises, but
must, in whatever is done, have an eye to edification. He speaks,
however, in the first place of edification in this way: “Let every one,
according as he has been endowed with some particular gift, make it his
aim to lay it out for the advantage of all.” For it is in this way that
we must understand the word rendered *every one* — *that* no one may
take it as implying universality, as though all to a man were endowed
with some such gift.

<span id="xxi.iv-p23"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p24"></span>**27.** *If any one speak in another
tongue* He now describes the order and limits the measure. *“If* you
have a mind to speak with other tongues, *let only two speak, or, at
most, not more than three, and let there be at the same time an
interpreter sitting by* Without an interpreter, *tongues* are of no
advantage: let them, therefore be dispensed with.” It is to be observed,
however, that he does not *command,* but merely *permits;* for the
Church can, without any inconvenience, dispense with *tongues,* except
in so far as they are helps to prophecy, as the Hebrew and Greek
languages are at this day. Paul, however, makes this concession, that he
may not seem to deprive the assembly of believers of any gift of the
Spirit.

<span id="xxi.iv-p25"></span>At the same time, it might seem as if even
this were not agreeable to reason, inasmuch as he said before, (<span
id="xxi.iv-p25.1"></span>[1Co
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)<span id="xxi.iv-p25.1"></span>,)
that *tongues,* in so far as they are for a *sign,* are suited to
*unbelievers.* I answer, that, while a miracle may be performed more
particularly with a view to unbelievers, it, nevertheless, does not
follow, that it may not be of some advantage to believers also. If you
understand, that an unknown tongue is a sign to unbelievers in the sense
that Isaiah’s words  <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) bear, the
method of procedure, which Paul here prescribes, is different. For he
allows of other tongues in such a way that, interpretation being joined
with them, nothing is left obscure. He observes, therefore, a most
admirable medium in correcting the fault of the Corinthians. On the one
hand, he does not at all set aside any gift of God whatever,  <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) in order that all his benefits may be
seen among believers. On the other hand he makes a limitation — that
ambition do not usurp the place that is due to the glory of God, and
that no gift of inferior importance stand in the way of those that are
of chief moment; and he adds the *sauce*  <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) — that there be no mere ostentation,
devoid of advantage.

<span id="xxi.iv-p29"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p30"></span>**28.** *Let him speak to himself and to
God* “Let him enjoy,” says he, “his gift in his own conscience, and let
him give thanks to God.” For in this way I explain the expression to
*speak to himself and to God,* as meaning — to recognize in his own mind
with thanksgiving the favor conferred upon him,  <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) and to enjoy it as his own, when there
is not an opportunity for bringing it forward in a public manner. For he
draws a contrast between this *secret* way of speaking, and speaking
*publicly* in the Church — which he forbids.  <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860)

<span id="xxi.iv-p33"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p34"></span>**29.** *Prophets, two or three.* As to
*prophecy,* too, he prescribes limits, because “multitude,” as they
commonly say, “breeds confusion.” This is true, for we know it by every
day’s experience. He does not, however, restrict the number so
definitely, as when he was treating of tongues, for there is less
danger, in the event of their applying themselves for a longer time to
prophesyings, nay more, continued application would be the most
desirable thing of all; but Paul considered what the weakness of men
could bear.

<span id="xxi.iv-p35"></span>There still remains, however, a question —
why it is that he assigns the like number to prophesyings and to
tongues, except that, as to the latter, he adds particularly — at *the
most,* for if *tongues* are less useful, there ought assuredly to be a
more sparing use of them? I answer, that even in *tongues,* as he takes
the term, prophecy is included; for *tongues* were made use of either
for discourses,  <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) or for prayers.
In the former department, the interpreter was in the place of the
prophet: thus it was the principal and more frequent exercise of it.
Only he limits the measure of it, lest it should fall into contempt
through a feeling of disgust, and lest those who were less skillful
should prevent those that were better qualified from having time and
opportunity of speaking; for he would, undoubtedly, have those to whom
he assigns the duty of speaking, to be of the more select class, and
appointed by their common suffrages.  <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) None, however, are more inclined to
push themselves forward, than those who have but a slight smattering of
learning, so that the proverb holds good, “Ignorance is pert.”  <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) Paul had it in view to remedy this
evil, by assigning the office of speaking to *two* or *three*

<span id="xxi.iv-p39"></span>*Let the others judge*. Lest he should give
any occasion to *the others* to complain — as though he were desirous
that the gift of God  <span id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) should be
suppressed among them and buried, he shows in what way they may lawfully
make use of it for the benefit of the Church, even by keeping silence —
if they set themselves to *judge* of what is said by others. For it is
of no small advantage, that there should be some that are skillful in
judging, who will not allow sound doctrine to be perverted by the
impostures of Satan, or to be otherwise corrupted by silly trifles.
Paul, accordingly, teaches that the other prophets will be useful to the
Church, even by keeping silence.

<span id="xxi.iv-p41"></span>It may seem, however, to be absurd that men
should have liberty given them to judge of the doctrine of God, which
ought to be placed beyond all controversy. I answer, that the doctrine
of God is not subjected to the scrutiny of men, but there is simply
permission given them to judge by the Spirit of God, whether it is his
word that is set before them, or whether human inventions are, without
any authority, set off under this pretext, as we shall have occasion to
notice again ere long.

<span id="xxi.iv-p42"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p43"></span>**30.** *But if anything be revealed to
another*. Here is another advantage — that whenever there will be
occasion, the way will also be open to them.  <span
id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865) Hence they have no longer any occasion
to complain, that the Spirit is bound, or that his mouth is shut. For
all have opportunity and liberty allowed them of speaking, when there is
occasion for it, provided only no one unseasonably intrudes — having it
in view to please himself, rather than to serve some useful purpose. Now
he requires this modesty on the part of all — that every one in his
place shall give way to another that has something better to bring
forward.  <span id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) For this only is the
true liberty of the Spirit — not that every one be allowed to blab out
rashly whatever he pleases, but that all, from the highest to the
lowest, voluntarily allow themselves to be under control, and that the
one Spirit be listened to, by whatever mouth he speaks. As to the
certainty of the revelation, we shall see ere long.

<span id="xxi.iv-p46"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p47"></span>**31.** *You can all, one by one.* In the
first place, when he says *all*, he does not include believers
universally, but only those that were endowed with this gift. Farther,
he does not mean that all ought to have equally their turn, but that,
according as it might be for the advantage of the people, each one
should come forward to speak either more frequently or more seldom.
 <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) “No one will remain always
unemployed; but an opportunity of speaking will present itself,
sometimes to one and at other times to another.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p49"></span>He adds, *that all may learn*. This is
applicable, it is true, to the whole of the people, but it is
particularly suited to the Prophets, and Paul more especially refers to
them. For no one will ever be a good teacher, who does not show himself
to be teachable, as no one will ever be found who has, in himself alone,
such an overflowing in respect of perfection of doctrine, as not to
derive benefit from listening to others. Let all, therefore, undertake
the office of teaching on this principle, that they do not refuse or
grudge, to be scholars to each other in their turn, whenever there shall
be afforded to others the means of edifying the Church.

<span id="xxi.iv-p50"></span>He says, in the second place, *that all may
receive consolation*. Hence we may infer, that the ministers of Christ,
so far from envying, should rather rejoice with all their heart, that
they are not the only persons that excel, but have fellow-partakers of
the same gift — a disposition which Moses discovered, as is related in
sacred history. (<span id="xxi.iv-p50.1"></span>[Nu
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#028)<span id="xxi.iv-p50.1"></span>.)
For when his servant, inflamed with a foolish jealousy, was greatly
displeased, because the gift of prophecy was conferred upon others also,
he reproves him: “Nay,” says he, “would that all the people of God were
sharers with me in this superior gift!” And, undoubtedly, it is a
special consolation for pious ministers, to see the Spirit of God, whose
instruments they are, working in others also, and they derive also from
this no small confirmation. It is a consolation, too, that it
contributes to the spread of the word of God, the more it has of
ministers and witnesses.

<span id="xxi.iv-p51"></span>As, however, the word <span
id="xxi.iv-p51.1"></span>παρακαλεῖσθαι, which Paul here employs, is of
doubtful signification,  <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) it
might also be rendered may receive exhortation.  <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) Nor would this be unsuitable, for it
is sometimes of advantage to listen to others, that we may be more
powerfully stirred up to duty.

<span id="xxi.iv-p54"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p55"></span>**32.** *And the spirits of the Prophets*.
This, too, is one of the reasons, why it is necessary for them to take
turns — because it will sometimes happen that, in the doctrine of one
Prophet, the others may find something to reprove. “It is not
reasonable,” says he, “that any one should be beyond the sphere of
scrutiny. In this way it will sometimes come to a person’s turn to
speak, who was among the audience and was sitting silent.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p56"></span>This passage has been misunderstood by
some, as if Paul had said, that the Lord’s Prophets were not like
persons taken with a sudden frenzy, who, when a divine impulse (<span
id="xxi.iv-p56.1"></span>ἐνθουσιασμὸς) had once seized them,  <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) were no longer masters of themselves.
 <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) It is indeed true that God’s
Prophets are not disordered in mind; but this has nothing to do with
this passage of Paul’s writings. For it means, as I have already stated,
that no one is exempted from the scrutiny of others, but that all must
be listened to, with this understanding, that their doctrine is,
nevertheless, to be subjected to examination. It is not, however,
without difficulty, for the Apostle declares that their *spirits are
subject*. Though it is of gifts that he speaks, how can prophecy, which
is given by the Holy Spirit, be judged of by men, so that the Spirit
himself is not judged by them? In this manner, even the word of God,
which is revealed by the Spirit; will be subjected to examination. The
unseemliness of this needs not be pointed out, for it is of itself
abundantly evident. I maintain, however, that neither the Spirit of God
nor his word is restrained by a scrutiny of this kind. The Holy Spirit,
I say, retains his majesty unimpaired, so as to

<span id="xxi.iv-p62"></span>judge all things, while he is judged by no
one.  
(<span id="xxi.iv-p62.2"></span>[1Co
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span id="xxi.iv-p62.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.iv-p63"></span>The sacred word of God, too, retains the
respect due to it, so that it is received without any disputation, as
soon as it is presented.

<span id="xxi.iv-p64"></span>“What is it, then,” you will say, “that is
subjected to examination?”’ I answer — If any one were furnished with a
full revelation, that man would undoubtedly, along with his gift, be
above all scrutiny. There is, I say, no subjection, where there is a
plenitude of revelation; but as God has distributed his spirit to every
one in a certain measure, in such a way that, even amidst the greatest
abundance, there is always something wanting, it is not to be wondered,
if no one is elevated to such a height, as to look down from aloft upon
all others, and have no one to pass judgment upon him. We may now see
how it is, that, without any dishonor to the Holy Spirit, his gifts
admit of being examined. Nay more, where, after full examination,
nothing is found that is worthy of reproof, there will still be
something, that stands in need of polishing. The sum of all, therefore,
is this — that the gift is subjected to examination in such a way, that
whatever is set forth, the Prophets consider as to it — whether it has
proceeded from the Spirit of God; for if it shall appear that the Spirit
is the author of it, there is no room left for hesitation.

<span id="xxi.iv-p65"></span>It is, however still farther asked — “What
rule is to be made use of in examining?” This question is answered in
part by the mouth of Paul, who, in <span id="xxi.iv-p65.1"></span>[Ro
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)<span id="xxi.iv-p65.1"></span>,
requires that prophecy be regulated according to the *proportion of
faith.* As to the passing of judgment, however, there is no doubt, that
it ought to be regulated by the word and Spirit of God — that nothing
may be approved of, but what is discovered to be from God — that nothing
may be found fault with but in accordance with his word — in fine, that
God alone may preside in this judgment, and that men may be merely his
heralds.

<span id="xxi.iv-p66"></span>From this passage of Paul’s writings, we
may conjecture how very illustrious that Church was, in respect of an
extraordinary abundance and variety of spiritual gifts. There were
colleges of Prophets, so that pains had to be taken, that they might
have their respective turns. There was so great a diversity of gifts,
that there was a superabundance. We now see our leanness, nay, our
poverty; but in this we have a just punishment, sent to requite our
ingratitude. For neither are the riches of God exhausted, nor is his
benignity lessened; but we are neither deserving of his bounty, nor
capable of receiving his liberality. Still we have an ample sufficiency
of light and doctrine, provided there were no deficiency in respect of
the cultivation of piety, and the fruits that spring from it.

<span id="xxi.iv-p67"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p68"></span>**33.** *For God is not of confusion.*
 <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) We must understand the word
Author, or some term of that kind.  <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) Here we have a most valuable
statement, by which we are taught, that we do not serve God unless in
the event of our being lovers of *peace,* and eager to promote it.
Whenever, therefore, there is a disposition to quarrel, *there,* it is
certain, God does not reign. And how easy it is to say this! How very
*generally* all have it in their mouths! Yet, in the meantime, the most
of persons fly into a rage about nothing, or *they* trouble the Church,
from a desire that *they* may, by some means, rise into view, and may
*seem to be somewhat.* (<span id="xxi.iv-p70.13"></span>[Ga
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span id="xxi.iv-p70.13"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.iv-p71"></span>Let us, therefore, bear in mind, that, in
judging as to the servants of Christ, this mark must be kept in view —
whether or not they aim at *peace* and concord, and, by conducting
themselves peaceably, avoid contentions to the utmost of their power,
provided, however, we understand by this a *peace* of which the truth of
God is the bond. For if we are called to contend against wicked
doctrines, even though heaven and earth should come together, we must,
nevertheless, persevere in the contest. We must, indeed, in the first
place, make it our aim, that the truth of God may, without contention,
maintain its ground; but if the wicked resist, we must set our face
against them, and have no fear, lest the blame of the disturbances
should be laid to our charge. For accursed is that *peace* of which
revolt from God is the bond, and blessed are those contentions by which
it is *neces*sary to maintain the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="xxi.iv-p72"></span>*As in all the Churches.* The comparison
 <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) does not refer merely to what
was said immediately before, but to the whole of the foregoing
representation. “I have hitherto enjoined upon you nothing that is not
observed in *all the Churches,* and, in this manner, they are maintained
in *peace. Let* it be your care, therefore, to borrow, what other
Churches have found by experience to be salutary, and most profitable
for maintaining *peace.”* His explicit mention of the term *saints* is
emphatic — as if with the view of exempting rightly constituted Churches
from a mark of disgrace.  <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875)

<span id="xxi.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p1"></span><span id="xxi.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
14:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)<span id="xxi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p2"></span>**34.** Let your women keep silence in the
churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but *they are
commanded* to be under obedience, as also saith the law.

<span id="xxi.v-p3"></span>**34.** Mulieres vestrae in Ecclesiis
taceant; non enim permissum est ipsis loqui, sed subiectae sint,
quemadmodum et Lex dicit.

<span id="xxi.v-p4"></span>**35.** And if they will learn anything, let
them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in
the church.

<span id="xxi.v-p5"></span>**35.** Si quid autem velint discere, domi
maritos suos interrogent: turpe enim est mulieribus in Ecclesia loqui.

<span id="xxi.v-p6"></span>**36.** What? came the word of God out from
you? or came it unto you only?

<span id="xxi.v-p7"></span>**36.** An a vobis sermo Dei profectus est,
aut ad vos solos pervenit?

<span id="xxi.v-p8"></span>**37.** If any man think himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write
unto you are the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="xxi.v-p9"></span>**37.** Si quis videtur sibi propheta esse
aut spiritualis, agnoscat, quae scribo vobis, Domini esse mandata.

<span id="xxi.v-p10"></span>**38.** But if any man be ignorant, let him
be ignorant.

<span id="xxi.v-p11"></span>**38.** Si quis autem ignorat, ignoret.

<span id="xxi.v-p12"></span>**39.** Wherefore, brethren, covet to
prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues.

<span id="xxi.v-p13"></span>**39.** Itaque, fratres, aemulamini
prophetiam, et linguis loqui ne prohibeatis.

<span id="xxi.v-p14"></span>**40.** Let all things be done decently and
in order.

<span id="xxi.v-p15"></span>**40.** Porro onmia decenter et ordine
fiant.

<span id="xxi.v-p16"></span> 

<span id="xxi.v-p17"></span><span id="xxi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p18"></span>It appears that the Church of the
Corinthians was infected with this fault too, that the talkativeness of
women was allowed a place in the sacred assembly, or rather that the
fullest liberty was given to it. Hence he forbids them to speak in
public, either for the purpose of teaching or of prophesying. This,
however, we must understand as referring to ordinary service, or where
there is a Church in a regularly constituted state; for a necessity may
occur of such a nature as to require that a woman should speak in
public; but Paul has merely in view what is becoming in a duly regulated
assembly.

<span id="xxi.v-p19"></span>**34.** *Let them be in subjection, as also
saith the law.* What connection has the object that he has in view with
the subjection under which the law places women? “For what is there,”
some one will say, “to hinder their being in subjection, and yet at the
same time teaching?” I answer, that the office of teaching  <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) is a superiority in the Church, and
is, consequently, inconsistent with *subjection.* For how unseemly a
thing it were, that one who is under subjection to one of the members,
should preside  <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) over the entire
body! It is therefore an argument from things inconsistent — If the
woman is under subjection, she is, consequently, prohibited from
authority to teach in public.  <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878)
And unquestionably,  <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) wherever
even natural propriety has been maintained, women have in all ages been
excluded from the public management of affairs. It is the dictate of
common sense, that female government is improper and unseemly. Nay more,
while originally they had permission given to them at Rome to plead
before a court,  <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) the effrontery
of Caia Afrania  <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) led to their
being interdicted, even from this. Paul’s reasoning, however, is simple
— that authority to teach is not suitable to the station that a woman
occupies, because, if she teaches, she presides over all the men, while
it becomes her to be *under subjection.*

<span id="xxi.v-p26"></span><span id="xxi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p27"></span>**35.** *If they wish to learn any thing.*
That he may not seem, by this means, to shut out women from
opportunities of learning, he desires them, if they are in doubt as to
anything, to inquire in private, that they may not stir up any
disputation in public. When he says, *husbands,* he does not prohibit
them from consulting the Prophets themselves, if necessary. For all
husbands are not competent to give an answer in such a case; but, as he
is reasoning here as to external polity, he reckons it sufficient to
point out what is unseemly, that the Corinthians may guard against it.
In the meantime, it is the part of the prudent reader to consider, that
the things of which he here treats are intermediate and indifferent, in
which there is nothing unlawful, but what is at variance with propriety
and edification.

<span id="xxi.v-p28"></span><span id="xxi.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p29"></span>**36** *Did the word of God come out from
you?* This is a somewhat sharper reproof, but nothing more than was
needful for beating down the haughtiness of the Corinthians. They were,
beyond measure, self-complacent. They could not endure that either
themselves, or what belonged to them, should be found fault with in
anything. He asks, accordingly, whether they are the only Christians in
the world; nay, farther, whether they are the first, or are to be the
last? *“Did the word of God,”* says he, *“come out from you?”* that is,
*“Did* it originate with you*?” “Has* it ended with you?” that is,
*“Will* it spread no farther*?”* The design of the admonition is this —
that they may not, without having any regard to others, please
themselves in their own contrivances or customs. And this is a doctrine
of general application; for no Church should be taken up with itself
exclusively, to the neglect of others; but on the contrary, they ought
all, in their turn, to hold out the right hand to each other, in the way
of cherishing mutual fellowship, and accommodating themselves to each
other, in so far as a regard to harmony requires.  <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882)

<span id="xxi.v-p31"></span>But here it is asked, whether every Church,
according as it has had the precedence of another in the order of time,
 <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) has it also in its power to
bind it to observe its institutions.  <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) For Paul seems to intimate this in
what he says. For example, Jerusalem was the mother of all the Churches,
inasmuch as *the word of the Lord had come out from it* Was she then at
liberty to assume to herself a superior right, so as to bind all others
to follow her? I answer, that Paul here does not employ an argument of
universal application, but one that was specially applicable to the
Corinthians, as is frequently the case. He had, therefore, an eye to
individuals, rather than to the thing itself. Hence it does not
necessarily follow, that Churches that are of later origin must be bound
to observe, in every point, the institutions of the earlier ones,
inasmuch as even Paul himself did not bind himself by this rule, so as
to obtrude upon other Churches the customs that were in use at
Jerusalem. Let there be nothing of ambition — let there be nothing of
obstinacy — let there be nothing of pride and contempt for other
Churches — let there be, on the other hand, a desire to edify — let
there be moderation and prudence; and in that case, amidst a diversity
of observances, there will be nothing that is worthy of reproof.

<span id="xxi.v-p34"></span>Let us, therefore, bear in mind, that the
haughtiness of the Corinthians is here reproved, who, concerned for
themselves exclusively,  <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) showed
no respect to the Churches of earlier origin, from which they had
received the gospel, and did not endeavor to accommodate themselves to
other Churches, to which the gospel had flowed out from them. Would to
God that there were no Corinth in our times, in respect of this fault,
as well as of others! But we see how savage men, who have *never tasted*
the gospel, (<span id="xxi.v-p35.2"></span>[Heb
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#005)<span id="xxi.v-p35.2"></span>,)
trouble the Churches of the saints by a tyrannical enforcement of their
own laws.  <span id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886)

<span id="xxi.v-p37"></span><span id="xxi.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p38"></span>**37.** *If any one thinks himself.* Mark
here the judgment, which he had previously assigned to the Prophets —
that they should receive what they recognised as being from God. He does
not, however, desire them to inquire as to his doctrine, as though it
were a doubtful matter, but to receive it as the sure word of God,
inasmuch as they will recognize it as the word of God, if they judge
rightly. Farther, it is in virtue of apostolical authority, that he
takes it upon himself to prescribe to them the sentence which they ought
to pronounce.  <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887)

<span id="xxi.v-p40"></span>There is still greater confidence in what he
immediately adds — He *that is ignorant, let him be ignorant.* This, it
is true, was allowable for Paul, who was fully assured as to the
revelation that he had received from God, and he ought also to have been
well known to the Corinthians, so that they should have looked upon him
in no other light, than as an Apostle of the Lord. It is not, however,
for every one to advance such a claim for himself, or if he does, he
will, by his boasting, throw himself open to merited derision, for
*then* only is there ground for such confidence, when what is affirmed
with the mouth shows itself in reality. It was with truth that Paul
affirmed, that his precepts were those of the Lord. Many will be
prepared to pretend the same thing on false grounds. His great object is
this — that it may be clearly perceived, that he who does not allow
himself to be under control, speaks as from the Holy Spirit, not from
his own brain. That man, therefore, who is no other than a pure organ of
the Holy Spirit, will have the courage to declare fearlessly with Paul,
that those who shall reject his doctrine, are not *Prophets* or
*spiritual* persons; and this he will do in virtue of a right that
belongs to him, in accordance with what we had in the beginning of the
Epistle — he *that is spiritual, judgeth all things.* (<span
id="xxi.v-p40.1"></span>[1Co 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.v-p40.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.v-p41"></span>But it may be asked here, how it is that
Paul declares those things to be *commandments of the Lord,* as to which
no statement is to be found in the Scriptures? Besides this, there is
also another difficulty that presents itself — that if they are the
*commandments of the Lord,* they are necessary to be observed, and they
bind the conscience, and yet they are rites connected with polity, as to
the observance of which no such necessity exists. Paul, however, merely
says, that he enjoins nothing, but what is in accordance with the will
of God. Now God endowed him with wisdom, that he might recommend this
order in external things at Corinth, and in other places — not that it
might be an inviolable law, like those that relate to the spiritual
worship of God, but that it might be a useful directory to all the sons
of God, and not by any means to be despised.

<span id="xxi.v-p42"></span><span id="xxi.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p43"></span>**38.** *But if any man be ignorant* The old
translation reads thus: *He that knows not this, will be unknown;*
 <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) but this is a mistake. For Paul
had it in view to cut off every handle from contentious persons, who
make no end of disputing, and that, under the pretense of inquiring — as
if the matter were not yet clear; or at least he intimates in general
terms, that he regarded as of no account any one that would call in
question what he said. “If any one is ignorant, I do not stop to take
notice of his doubts, for the certainty of my doctrine is not at all
impaired thereby. Let him go then, whoever he may be. As for you, do not
the less on that account give credit to Christ, as speaking by me.” In
fine, he intimates, that sceptics, contentious persons, and subtle
disputants;  <span id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) do not by the
questions they raise diminish, in any degree, the authority of sound
doctrine, and of that truth as to which believers ought to feel assured,
and at the same time he admonishes us, not to allow their doubts to be
any hindrance in our way. That elevation of mind, however, which
despises all human judgments, ought to be founded on ascertained truth.
Hence, as it would be the part of perverse rashness, either to maintain
pertinaciously, in opposition to the views of all others, an opinion
that has once been taken up, or audaciously to cling to it, while others
are in doubt, so, on the other hand, when we have felt assured that it
is God that speaks, let us fearlessly break through all human
impediments and all difficulties.  <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890)

<span id="xxi.v-p47"></span><span id="xxi.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p48"></span>**39.** *Wherefore, brethren* This is the
conclusion in connection with the principal question — that *prophecy*
is to be preferred to other gifts, because it is the most useful gift of
all, while at the same time other gifts ought not to be despised. We
must observe, however, his manner of speaking. For he intimates, that
*prophecy* is worthy of being eagerly and ardently aspired at by all. In
the meantime, he exhorts them not to envy others the rarer gift,  <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) which is not so much to be desired;
nay more, to allow them the praise that is due to them, divesting
themselves of all envy.

<span id="xxi.v-p50"></span><span id="xxi.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p51"></span>**40.** *All things decently and in order*
Here we have a more general conclusion, which does not merely include,
in short compass, the entire case, but also the different parts. Nay
farther, it is a rule by which we must regulate  <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) everything, that has to do with
external polity. As he had discoursed, in various instances, as to
rites, he wished to sum up everything here in a brief summary — that
decorum should be observed — that confusion should be avoided. This
statement shows, that he did not wish to bind consciences by the
foregoing precepts, as if they were in themselves necessary, but only in
so far as they were subservient to propriety and peace. Hence we gather
(as I have said) a doctrine that is always in force, as to the purpose
to which the polity of the Church ought to be directed. The Lord has
left external rites in our choice with this view — that we may not think
that his worship consists wholly in these things.

<span id="xxi.v-p53"></span>In the meantime, he has not allowed us a
rambling and unbridled liberty, but has inclosed it (so to speak) with
railings,  <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) or at least has laid
a restriction upon the liberty granted by him in such a manner, that it
is after all only from his word that we can judge as to what is right.
This passage, therefore, when duly considered, will show the difference
between the tyrannical edicts of the Pope, which oppress men’s
consciences with a dreadful bondage, and the godly regulations of the
Church, by which discipline and order are maintained. Nay farther, we
may readily infer from this, that the latter are not to be looked upon
as human traditions, inasmuch as they are founded upon this general
injunction, and have a manifest approval, as it were, from the mouth of
Christ himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_805"></span>[806](cc39020.htm#fr_805) <span
id="xxi.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span> “The word <span
id="xxi.i-p17.1"></span>διώκετε,” says Doddridge, “properly signifies —
to *pursue with an eagerness like that with which hunters follow their
game* And it may be intended to intimate, how hard it is to obtain and
preserve such a truly benevolent spirit in the main series of life;
considering, on the one hand, how many provocations we are like to meet
with, and on the other, the force of self-love, which will in so many
instances be ready to break in upon it.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_806"></span>[807](cc39020.htm#fr_806) <span
id="xxi.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p18.1"></span>C’estoit
ceste voye et vertu excellente;” — “This was that distinguished way and
excellence.”

<span id="fn_807"></span>[808](cc39020.htm#fr_807) <span
id="xxi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span> It is remarked by *Granville Penn*, that
“the context shows that the Apostle means, a language *foreign* to that
of the auditors, and, *therefore*, *not known* to them” — as “we learn
from verse 21 that we are to supply <span id="xxi.i-p22.1"></span>ἑτερᾳ
— ‘*other*,’ not <span id="xxi.i-p22.2"></span>αγνωστὟ — ‘unknown.’ We
have,” he adds, “had lamentable proof of the abuse to which the latter
injudicious rendering can be perverted in the hands of ignorant or
insidious enthusiasm, by assuming the term to mean, ‘a tongue *unknown
to all mankind*;’ and from thence, by an impious inference,
*supernatural and divine*; instead of relatively, ‘*unknown to another
people*.’ And yet, after all, ‘*unknown*’ is not the Apostle’s word, but
only an *Italic supplement* suggested by the English revisers of the
seventeenth century.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_808"></span>[809](cc39020.htm#fr_808) <span
id="xxi.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p23.1"></span>Comme on dit
en prouerbe — I1 presche a soy-mesme et aux murailles;” — “As they say
proverbially — He preaches to himself and the bare walls.” The proverb,
“Sibi canit et Musis” — (“He sings to himself and the Muses,”) is
believed to have originated in a saying of *Antigenides*, a celebrated
musician of Thebes, who, when his scholar Ismenias sung with good taste,
but not so as to gain the applause of the people, exclaimed — “<span
id="xxi.i-p23.2"></span>Mihi cane et Musis;” — (“Sing to me and the
Muses”) — meaning that it was enough, if he pleased good judges. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[810](cc39020.htm#fr_809) <span
id="xxi.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span> A *pleonasm* is a figure of speech —
involving a *redundancy of expression*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[811](cc39020.htm#fr_810) <span
id="xxi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p30.1"></span>Iettent
ainsi de grandes bouffees et se brauent en leur parler;” — “Make use in
this way of great puffings, and boast themselves in their talk.”

<span id="fn_811"></span>[812](cc39020.htm#fr_811) <span
id="xxi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p33.1"></span>Les langues
aidoyent lors aucunement a l’auancement des Eglises;” — “Languages, at
that time, were of some help for the advancement of the Churches.”

<span id="fn_812"></span>[813](cc39020.htm#fr_812) <span
id="xxi.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p34.1"></span>Ces gentils
reformateurs;” — “Those pretty reformers.”

<span id="fn_813"></span>[814](cc39020.htm#fr_813) <span
id="xxi.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p38"></span> “<span id="xxi.i-p38.1"></span>Estoit plus
propre pour leur imprimer ce qu’il dit;” — “Was the more calculated to
impress upon them what he says.”

<span id="fn_814"></span>[815](cc39020.htm#fr_814) <span
id="xxi.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p27.1"></span>C’est a
dire, pour signifier quelque chose;” — “That is to say, for signifying
something.”

<span id="fn_815"></span>[816](cc39020.htm#fr_815) <span
id="xxi.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p28.1"></span>Sans
mesure ou distinction;” — “Without measure or distinction.”

<span id="fn_816"></span>[817](cc39020.htm#fr_816) <span
id="xxi.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p30"></span> “It is well known that trumpets were
exclusively employed in almost all ancient armies, for the purpose of
directing the movements of the soldiers, and of informing them what they
were to do — as when to attack, advance, or retreat. This was the custom
in even the most early Jewish armies, as the Law directed two silver
trumpets to be made for the purpose. (<span
id="xxi.ii-p30.1"></span>[Num. 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009)<span id="xxi.ii-p30.1"></span>.) Of
course, a distinction of tones was necessary, to express the various
intimations which were in this manner conveyed; and if the trumpeter did
not give the proper intonation, the soldiers could not tell how to act,
or were in danger, from misconception, of acting wrongly.” *Illustrated
Commentary*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[818](cc39020.htm#fr_817) <span
id="xxi.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p31.1"></span>Ils
vsoyent plustost de fluste, que de trompette;” — “They used the flute,
rather than the trumpet.”

<span id="fn_818"></span>[819](cc39020.htm#fr_818) <span
id="xxi.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p32"></span> The use of the flute on such occasions by
the Lacedemonians, is supposed by Valerius Maximus to have “been
intended to raise the courage of the soldiers, that they might begin the
onset with greater violence and fury;” but the reason stated by Calvin
accords with the account given of it by Thucydides (with whom the rest
of the ancient historians agree) — that it was designed to “render them
cool and sedate — trumpets and other instruments being more proper to
inspire with heat and rage;” which passions they thought were “fitted
rather to beget disorder and confusion, than to produce any noble and
memorable actions — valor not being the effect of a sudden and vanishing
transport, but proceeding from a settled and habitual firmness and
constancy of mind.” Potter’s Gr. Ant. volume 2. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[820](cc39020.htm#fr_819) <span
id="xxi.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p35"></span> “That in this passage,” says Dr.
Henderson, “<span id="xxi.ii-p35.1"></span>φωνὴ, which properly
signifies *sound*, then *voice*, must be taken in the sense of
*language* or dialect, is evident: for it would not be true, that there
are no *sounds* or *voices* in the world (<span
id="xxi.ii-p35.2"></span>ἄφωνων) *without signification*, according as
these terms are usually understood. The meaning is — every language is
intelligible to some nation or other; and it is only to persons who are
ignorant of it, that its words are destitute of signification. This the
Apostle illustrates in a very forcible manner: ‘Therefore, if I know not
the, meaning of the voice, (<span id="xxi.ii-p35.3"></span>τὢς φωνὢς,
*of the language*,) I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian, and he
that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me.’ We shall be like two
foreigners, who do not understand each other’s tongue. The very use of
the term *interpret* and *interpretation*, as applied to this subject,
also proves that he could only have intelligent language in view: it
being a contradiction in terms to speak of interpreting that which has
no meaning.” Henderson on Inspiration. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_820"></span>[821](cc39020.htm#fr_820) <span
id="xxi.ii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p36"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p36.1"></span>C’est a
dire, nous monstre aucunement qu’il faut parler en sorte que nous soyons
entendus;” — “That is to say, it shows us, in a manner, that we must
speak so as to be understood.”

<span id="fn_821"></span>[822](cc39020.htm#fr_821) <span
id="xxi.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p39"></span> “The Greeks, after the custom of the
Egyptians, mentioned by; Herodotus, (lib. 2,) called all those
*barbarians* who did not speak their language. In process of time,
however, the Romans having subdued the Greeks, delivered themselves by
the force of arms from that opprobrious appellation; and joined the
Greeks in calling all barbarians who did not speak either the Greek or
the Latin language. Afterwards, *barbarian* signified any one who spoke
a language which another did not understand. Thus the Scythian
philosopher, Anacharsis, said, that among the Athenians the Scythians
were *barbarians*; and among the Scythians the Athenians were
*barbarians*. In like manner Ovid. Trist. 5. 10, ‘<span
id="xxi.ii-p39.1"></span>*Barbarus* hic ego sum, quia *non* *intelligor*
ulli;’ — ‘I am a *barbarian* here, because *I am not understood* by any
one.’ This is the sense which the Apostle affixes to the word
*barbarian*, in the present passage. *McKnight*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[823](cc39020.htm#fr_822) <span
id="xxi.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p40.1"></span>La langue
doit estre comme vn image, pour expimer et representer ce qui est en
l’entendement;” — “The tongue should be like an image, to express and
represent what is in the understanding.”

<span id="fn_823"></span>[824](cc39020.htm#fr_823) <span
id="xxi.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p41"></span> He considers the term <span
id="xxi.ii-p41.1"></span>βάρβαρος, (barbarian,) to be a term constructed
in imitation of the sense — to convey the idea of one that speaks with
difficulty and harshness. See *Strabo*, Book 14. *Bloomfield* considers
the term *barbarian* to be derived — “not” as some think, “from the
Arabic *berber*, to murmur, but from the Punic *berber*, *a shepherd* —
having been originally appropriated to the indigenous and pastoral
inhabitants of Africa; who, to their more civilized fellow-men on the
other side of the Mediterranean, appeared *rustics* and barbarians.
Hence the term <span id="xxi.ii-p41.2"></span>βάρβαρος came at length to
mean a *rustic* or *clown*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_824"></span>[825](cc39020.htm#fr_824) <span
id="xxi.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p45"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p45.1"></span>*Les dons
spirituels*, il y a mot a mot, *les esprits*;” — “*Spiritual gifts* — it
is literally, *spirits*.”

<span id="fn_825"></span>[826](cc39020.htm#fr_825) <span
id="xxi.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p48"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p48.1"></span>De parler
a ostentation;” — “From speaking for ostentation’s sake.”

<span id="fn_826"></span>[827](cc39020.htm#fr_826) <span
id="xxi.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p51"></span> “What is it,” says *Witsius*, (in his
“Sacred Dissertations,”) “to pray with the *tongue*? with the *spirit*?
with the *mind*? (<span id="xxi.ii-p51.1"></span>[1 Cor.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)<span id="xxi.ii-p51.1"></span>.)
The *tongue* means here a language unknown to others, and employed by
one who is endowed with a supernatural gift of the Holy Spirit. To *pray
with the tongue*, is to pray in a language unknown to others; as, for
instance, to pray in the Hebrew language in presence of Greeks. In that
sense he had said, (<span id="xxi.ii-p51.2"></span>[1Co
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)<span id="xxi.ii-p51.2"></span>,)
‘He that speaketh with the tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God;
for no man understandeth him;’ that is, he who speaks in a foreign
tongue, the knowledge of which he has acquired by an extraordinary gift
of the Spirit, has God only for a witness. He cannot reckon as his
witnesses, or as persons aware of what he is doing, those who are
ignorant of the language, and to whose edification he has contributed
little or nothing. The *spirit* means here that extraordinary gift, by
which a man is led to act in a certain way, accompanied by almost
ecstatic emotions, so that sometimes he is neither aware what he says,
nor do others understand what he means. To *pray with the Spirit*, is to
pray in such a manner as to show that you feel the presence of an
extraordinary gift of the Spirit, which moves and hurries you along, in
a powerful manner, to those actions which excite astonishment. <span
id="xxi.ii-p51.3"></span>Νους, *intelligence*, *mind*, seems here to be
chiefly used in a transitive sense, to mean what we give another to
understand. Such is the meaning of, <span
id="xxi.ii-p51.4"></span>תבונה, to which <span
id="xxi.ii-p51.5"></span>νους corresponds. <span
id="xxi.ii-p51.6"></span>חט אזנך לתבונתי, *incline thine ear to my
understanding*, that is, to those things which I shall give thee to
understand. (<span id="xxi.ii-p51.7"></span>[Pr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii-p51.7"></span>.)
To *pray with the mind*, is to pray in such a manner that the prayers
which you deliberately *conceive*, may be conceived and understood by
others. Paul, accordingly, proposes himself as an example of the proper
manner of conducting prayers. *If I pray in a tongue* unknown to the
assembly in whose presence I pray, but which I have learned by Divine
inspiration, *my spirit prayeth*, I am acting under the influence of
that gift, which impels and arouses me to unusual and remarkable
proceedings; but *my understanding is unfruitful*, I do not enable
another to understand with advantage the conceptions of my mind. *What
then*? *I will pray with the Spirit*; when the vehement emotion of the
Spirit comes upon me, I will not struggle against it, *but I will pray
with the understanding also*; I will show that I am not mad, but
possessed of a sound understanding; and I will endeavor that others, as
well as myself, be edified by my prayer.” Biblical Cabinet, volume 24. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_827"></span>[828](cc39020.htm#fr_827) <span
id="xxi.ii-p51.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p52"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p52.1"></span>Que c’est
que *prier de langue*, (car il y a ainsi mot a mot, la ou nous
traduisons *Prier en langage incognu*);” — “What it is to *pray in a
tongue*, for such is the literal meaning, where we render it — *to pray
in an unknown language*.” Wilclif (1380) gives the literal rendering —
*For if I preie in tunge*. Tyndale, (1534,) *If I pray with tonges*.
Cranmer, (1539,) *For if I praye with tongue*. Rheims, (1582,) *For if I
pray with the tongue*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[829](cc39020.htm#fr_828) <span
id="xxi.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p54"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p54.1"></span>Quel
danger il y a, quand on abuse;” — “What danger there is, when one
abuses.”

<span id="fn_829"></span>[830](cc39020.htm#fr_829) <span
id="xxi.ii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p55"></span> “What the Apostle means by <span
id="xxi.ii-p55.1"></span>τὸ πνεῦμα μου, (*my* *spirit*,) is, neither the
Holy Spirit moving him to speak, nor any spiritual endowment with which
he was gifted, but, as the phrase signifies in other passages in which
it occurs, (<span id="xxi.ii-p55.2"></span>[Ro
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)<span id="xxi.ii-p55.2"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p55.3"></span>[1Co
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003)<span id="xxi.ii-p55.3"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p55.4"></span>[2Ti
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#022)<span id="xxi.ii-p55.4"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p55.5"></span>[Phm
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025)<span id="xxi.ii-p55.5"></span>,)
*his own mind*, with which he engaged in the service. By <span
id="xxi.ii-p55.6"></span>νοῦς, as contrasted with this, it is manifest
he cannot mean his faculty of understanding — for it is comprehended
under the former. The word must, therefore, signify the *meaning* or
*sense* which he attached to the language he employed — an acceptation
in which he uses the term, <span id="xxi.ii-p55.7"></span>[1Co
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019)<span id="xxi.ii-p55.7"></span>.
So far as he himself was concerned, he derived benefit — connecting, as
he did, intelligent ideas with the words to which he gave utterance; but
the meaning of what he uttered (<span id="xxi.ii-p55.8"></span>ἄκαρπος)
produced *no fruit* in the hearers, inasmuch as they did not understand
him. It must be observed, however, that the Apostle is here only
supposing a case, such as that which frequently presented itself in the
Church at Corinth; not that he would have it to be believed that it ever
occurred in his own experience. On the contrary, he avers that, whenever
he engaged either in prayer or praise, it was in a way that was
intelligible, and consequently profitable both to himself and others,
<span id="xxi.ii-p55.9"></span>τῷ πνεύματι, — <span
id="xxi.ii-p55.10"></span>τῶ νωΐ, *with the* spirit — *with the
understanding*.” Henderson on Inspiration. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_830"></span>[831](cc39020.htm#fr_830) <span
id="xxi.ii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p59"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p59.1"></span>Mais qui
plus est, aiment mieux que les idiots et ignorans barbotent des
patinostres en langage qui leur est incognu;” — “But, what is more, they
like better that unlearned and ignorant persons should mutter over
paternosters in a language which they do not understand.”

<span id="fn_831"></span>[832](cc39020.htm#fr_831) <span
id="xxi.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p60"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p60.1"></span>Ils ont
vne solution bien aigue et peremptoire;” — “They have a very acute and
peremptory solution.”

<span id="fn_832"></span>[833](cc39020.htm#fr_832) <span
id="xxi.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p61"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p61.1"></span>Vne pensee
esuanouissante en l’air, qu’ils appellent Intention finale;” — “A
thought vanishing into air, which they call final Intention.”

<span id="fn_833"></span>[834](cc39020.htm#fr_833) <span
id="xxi.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p64"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p64.1"></span>Que ne
soit point sans intelligence;” — “That it be not without understanding.”

<span id="fn_834"></span>[835](cc39020.htm#fr_834) <span
id="xxi.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p66"></span> The original word is <span
id="xxi.ii-p66.1"></span>ψαλῶ — *I* *will sing Psalms* It is the same
verb that is made use of by *James*, (<span
id="xxi.ii-p66.2"></span>[Jas
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)<span id="xxi.ii-p66.2"></span>,)
<span id="xxi.ii-p66.3"></span>εὐθυμεῖ τίς; ψαλλέτω — *Is* *any one
cheerful*: *let him sing Psalms*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_835"></span>[836](cc39020.htm#fr_835) <span
id="xxi.ii-p66.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p67"></span> Pliny’s letter, referred to by Calvin,
(written A.D. 107,) is given at full length (as translated by Dr.
Lardner) in Horne’s Introduction, volume 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[837](cc39020.htm#fr_836) <span
id="xxi.ii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p71"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p71.1"></span>Signifie
et presuppose;” — “Intimates and presupposes.”

<span id="fn_837"></span>[838](cc39020.htm#fr_837) <span
id="xxi.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p72"></span> “‘*Amen*,’ or ‘So be it,’ was, among the
Jews, used by the congregation at the end of a *prayer* or *blessing*,
to denote their assent to, or appropriation of, that which one person
had pronounced. Many instances of this practice occur in the Old
Testament. From the Jewish Synagogue this, with many other customs of
worship, passed to the Christian Church, in which it is still generally
retained. Justin Martyr particularly notices the unanimous and loud
‘Amen’ at the conclusion of the Lord’s Supper, observing, that when the
minister had finished the prayer and the thanksgiving, all the people
present, with a joyful exclamation, said ‘Amen.’ — (Apol. volume 2.)”
*llustrated Commentary*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[839](cc39020.htm#fr_838) <span
id="xxi.ii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p73"></span> The word to which Calvin. refers is <span
id="xxi.ii-p73.1"></span>אמן, (*Amen*) *truth* The term occurs in <span
id="xxi.ii-p73.2"></span>[Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span id="xxi.ii-p73.2"></span>,
<span id="xxi.ii-p73.3"></span>אלחי אמן, (*Elohe Amen*,) *the God of
truth*

<span id="fn_839"></span>[840](cc39020.htm#fr_839) <span
id="xxi.ii-p73.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p74"></span> “<span
id="xxi.ii-p74.1"></span>Confirmation et approbation;” — “Confirmation
and approbation.”

<span id="fn_840"></span>[841](cc39020.htm#fr_840) <span
id="xxi.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p75"></span> “Amen,” says *Witsius*, in his
Dissertations on the Lord’s Prayer, “is a Hebrew particle, expressive
both of strong affection and of ardent desire. *Luther*, with his wonted
liveliness of manner, wrote to *Melancthon* in the following terms: — ‘I
pray for you, I have prayed, and I will pray, and I have no doubt I
shall be heard, for I feel the Amen in my heart.’” — *Biblical*
*Cabinet*, volume 24. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[842](cc39020.htm#fr_841) <span
id="xxi.ii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p77"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p77.1"></span>Par lequel
nous voyons comment Satan a tenu ses rangs, et domine en la Papaute
furieusement, et d’une license merueilleusement desbordee;” — “From
which we see how Satan has maintained his place, and has ruled in Popery
with fury, and with a liberty amazingly reckless.”

<span id="fn_842"></span>[843](cc39020.htm#fr_842) <span
id="xxi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p27"></span> *Mimetice* Our author has here evidently
in his eye the Greek adverb,<span id="xxi.iii-p27.1"></span>μιμητικῶς —
*imitatively* See Plut. 2.18. B. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_843"></span>[844](cc39020.htm#fr_843) <span
id="xxi.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p29.1"></span>Or le
Prophete signifie;” — “Now the Prophet means.”

<span id="fn_844"></span>[845](cc39020.htm#fr_844) <span
id="xxi.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p30"></span> “*It is written in the law*. ‘In the
law,’ that is, in the Scripture, in opposition to *the words of the
Scribes*; for that distinction was very usual in the schools. ‘*This* we
learn out of *the law*, and *this* from *the words of the Scribes*. The
words of *the law* (that is, of the Scripture) have no need of
confirmation, but *the words of the Scribes* have need of confirmation.’
The former Prophets, and the latter, and the Hagiographa, are each
styled by the name of *the law*.” *Lightfoot*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[846](cc39020.htm#fr_845) <span
id="xxi.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p31"></span> *Henderson* on *Isaiah*, when commenting
on the passage here quoted by the Apostle, (<span
id="xxi.iii-p31.1"></span>[Isa
28:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.iii-p31.1"></span>,) observes, that it “contains the taunting
language of the drunken priests and judges of the Jews, who repel with
scorn the idea that they should require the plain and reiterated lessons
which Jehovah taught by his messengers. Such elementary instruction was
fit” (in their view) “only for babes: it was an insult to their
understanding to suppose that they stood in need of it. The language of
verse 10” (<span id="xxi.iii-p31.2"></span>*precept pon*, *precept*,
etc.) “more resembles that of inebriated persons, than any used by
persons in a state of sobriety. The words are obviously selected to suit
the character of those supposed to employ them; and, by their
monosyllabic and repetitious forms, admirably express the initiatory
process of tuition which they indignantly despise. 13-24 The language
they employed in caviling at the Prophetic warnings was all but
barbarous: it consisted of barely intelligible sounds: they should, by
way of condign punishment, hear the foreign, and to them apparently
mocking accents of the Chaldeans, whom God would employ as the
interpreters of his severe but righteous will. The passage is employed
by Paul (<span id="xxi.iii-p31.3"></span>[1 Cor.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)<span id="xxi.iii-p31.3"></span>)
quite in the spirit of the connection in which it here stands. He
tacitly compares the Corinthian faction, which boasted of the faculty of
speaking in unknown tongues, to the puerile characters adverted to,
<span id="xxi.iii-p31.4"></span>[1Co
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#009)<span id="xxi.iii-p31.4"></span>,
(<span id="xxi.iii-p31.5"></span>παιδία, νηπάζετε, etc.) and then
reminds them, that speaking in such languages had been represented in
the Jewish Scriptures — <span id="xxi.iii-p31.6"></span>ἐν τῷ νόμῳ (*in
the law*) as a punishment, or a mark of the Divine displeasure, and not
as a matter of desire or envy.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_846"></span>[847](cc39020.htm#fr_846) <span
id="xxi.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p33.1"></span>En
ignorance et bestise“ — “In ignorance and stupidity.”

<span id="fn_847"></span>[848](cc39020.htm#fr_847) <span
id="xxi.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p34"></span> Calvin makes a similar observation when
commenting on <span id="xxi.iii-p34.2"></span>[Ephesians
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="xxi.iii-p34.2"></span>.
“<span id="xxi.iii-p34.3"></span>Nam postquam Christo nati sumus,
debemus adolescere, ita ut non simus intelligentia pueri. Hine apparet,
qualis sub Papatu sit Christianismus, ubi, quam diligentissime possunt,
in hoc laborant pastores, ut plebem in prima infantia detineant;” — “For
after being born to Christ, we ought to grow, and not to be *children in
understanding*. (<span id="xxi.iii-p34.4"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.iii-p34.4"></span>.) Hence it appears what sort of Christianity
there is in connection with Popery, in which the pastors labor as
strenuously as they can to keep the people in infancy.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[849](cc39020.htm#fr_848) <span
id="xxi.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p41"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p41.1"></span>Le sot
abus de ce don, quand on le met en auant sans raison et consideration;”
— “The foolish abuse of this gift, when they bring it forward without,
reason and consideration.”

<span id="fn_849"></span>[850](cc39020.htm#fr_849) <span
id="xxi.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p42"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p42.1"></span>En ceste
faqon de faire;” — “In this manner of acting.”

<span id="fn_850"></span>[851](cc39020.htm#fr_850) <span
id="xxi.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p47"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p47.1"></span>Des
pensees et intentions du coeur;” — “Of the thoughts and intents of the
heart.”

<span id="fn_851"></span>[852](cc39020.htm#fr_851) <span
id="xxi.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p49"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p49.1"></span>Elles
sont comme endormies et stupides;” “They are, as it were, drowsy and
stupid.”

<span id="fn_852"></span>[853](cc39020.htm#fr_852) <span
id="xxi.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p51"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p51.1"></span>Afin de
monstrer qu’il ne se faut point lasser de la prophetic;” — “In order to
show that they ought not to entertain a feeling of dislike for
prophecy.”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[854](cc39020.htm#fr_853) <span
id="xxi.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p57"></span> The reader will observe that this is the
prophecy to which the Apostle refers in <span
id="xxi.iii-p57.1"></span>[1Co
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)<span id="xxi.iii-p57.1"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[855](cc39020.htm#fr_854) <span
id="xxi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p14.1"></span>Que tous
soyent consolez, ou, exhortez;” — “That all may be comforted, or,
exhorted.”

<span id="fn_855"></span>[856](cc39020.htm#fr_855) <span
id="xxi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p19.1"></span>Comme en
toutes les Eglises des satnets, ou, comme *on voit* en toutes;” — “As in
all the Churches of the saints, or, as *one sees* in all.”

<span id="fn_856"></span>[857](cc39020.htm#fr_856) <span
id="xxi.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p26"></span> The words referred to are those which Paul
had quoted above in <span id="xxi.iv-p26.1"></span>[1Co
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)<span id="xxi.iv-p26.1"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[858](cc39020.htm#fr_857) <span
id="xxi.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p27.1"></span>Tant petit
soit-il;” — “Be it ever so small.”

<span id="fn_858"></span>[859](cc39020.htm#fr_858) <span
id="xxi.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p28.1"></span>Ascauoir
l’interpretation;” — “Namely, the interpretation.”

<span id="fn_859"></span>[860](cc39020.htm#fr_859) <span
id="xxi.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p31.1"></span>Le
benefice et don de Dieu;” — “The kindness and gift of God.”

<span id="fn_860"></span>[861](cc39020.htm#fr_860) <span
id="xxi.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p32"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p32.1"></span>En ce
cas;” — “In this case.”

<span id="fn_861"></span>[862](cc39020.htm#fr_861) <span
id="xxi.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p36.1"></span>Pour
traiter de quelques matieres de la religion;” — “For treating of some
matters of religion.”

<span id="fn_862"></span>[863](cc39020.htm#fr_862) <span
id="xxi.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p37.1"></span>Par
l’approbation commune de l’Eglise;” — “By the common approbation of the
Church.”

<span id="fn_863"></span>[864](cc39020.htm#fr_863) <span
id="xxi.iv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p38"></span> The Latins have a similar proverb — “<span
id="xxi.iv-p38.1"></span>Stater in lagena bis bis clamat;” — “A penny in
an earthen pot is constantly tinkling.” The Germans say — “The higher
the head, the humbler the heart.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[865](cc39020.htm#fr_864) <span
id="xxi.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p40.1"></span>Le don de
Dieu qu’ils ont receu;” — “The gift of God which they have received.”

<span id="fn_865"></span>[866](cc39020.htm#fr_865) <span
id="xxi.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p44"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p44.1"></span>Que toutes
fois et quantes qu’il sera besoin, eux aussi auront lieu de parler;” —
“That as often, and in as far as there will be occasion, they will also
have opportunity of speaking.”

<span id="fn_866"></span>[867](cc39020.htm#fr_866) <span
id="xxi.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p45"></span> “But *if anything be revealed to another
that sitteth by* That is very frequently said of the Jewish doctors,
<span id="xxi.iv-p45.1"></span>היה יושכ *He sat* — which means not
barely *he was sitting*, but *he taught out of the seat of the teacher*,
or *he sat teaching*, or *ready to teach* So that, indeed, *he sat* and
*he taught* are all one. Examples among the Talmudists are infinite. In
the same sense the Apostle: ‘If something be revealed to some minister,
who *hath a seat* among those that teach, etc., not revealed in that
very instant: but if he saith that he hath received some revelation from
God, then <span id="xxi.iv-p45.2"></span>ὁ πρῶτος σιγάτω — *let the
first be silent*:, let *him* be silent who <span
id="xxi.iv-p45.3"></span>ψαλμὸν ἔχει — *hath a psalm* — and give way to
him.’” *Lightfoot*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_867"></span>[868](cc39020.htm#fr_867) <span
id="xxi.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p48"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p48.1"></span>Ainsi
qu’il sera auise pour le mieux;” — “As it shall be judged for the
better.”

<span id="fn_868"></span>[869](cc39020.htm#fr_868) <span
id="xxi.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p52"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p52.1"></span>Ha double
signification;” — “Has a double signification.”

<span id="fn_869"></span>[870](cc39020.htm#fr_869) <span
id="xxi.iv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p53"></span> Thus in <span id="xxi.iv-p53.1"></span>[Ac
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032)<span id="xxi.iv-p53.1"></span>,
<span id="xxi.iv-p53.2"></span>παρεκάλεσαν means *exhorted*, while the
noun <span id="xxi.iv-p53.3"></span>παρακλήσις is used in the
immediately preceding verse in the sense of *consolation*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_870"></span>[871](cc39020.htm#fr_870) <span
id="xxi.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p57"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p57.1"></span>Depuis que
leur folie les prenoit, laquelle ils appeloyent vn mouuement Diuin;” —
“Whenever their folly seized them, which they called a Divine impulse.”

<span id="fn_871"></span>[872](cc39020.htm#fr_871) <span
id="xxi.iv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p58"></span> The reference here is manifestly to those
who practiced *divination*, (<span id="xxi.iv-p58.1"></span>Θεομαντεία)
of whom there were three sorts among the Grecians, distinguished by
three distinct ways of receiving the *divine afflatus*, (<span
id="xxi.iv-p58.2"></span>ἐνθουσιασμὸς.) See Potter’s Grecian
Antiquities, volume 1, pp. 349-354. Virgil describes in the following
terms the frantic state of the Sibyl, when pretending to be under divine
impulse: —

<span id="xxi.iv-p59"></span>“<span id="xxi.iv-p59.1"></span>Non comtaee
mansere comae; sed pectus anhelum,  
Et rabie fera corda tument: majorque videri,  
Nee mortale sonans, attlata est numine quando  
Jam propiore dei.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p60"></span>“But when the headstrong god, not yet
appeased,  
With holy frenzy had the Sibyl seized,  
Terror froze up her grisly hair; her breast  
Throbbing with holy fury, still expressed  
A greater horror, and she bigger seems,  
Swoln with the afflatus, whilst in holy screams  
She unfolds the hidden mysteries of fate.”

<span id="xxi.iv-p61"></span>*Virg. Aen.VI. 48-51.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_872"></span>[873](cc39020.htm#fr_872) <span
id="xxi.iv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p69"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p69.1"></span>Car Dieu
n’est point *Dieu* de confusion;” — “For God is not *a God* of
confusion.”

<span id="fn_873"></span>[874](cc39020.htm#fr_873) <span
id="xxi.iv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p70"></span> *Granville Penn* reads the verse as
follows: *For they are not spirits of disorder*, *but of peace* He
thinks it probable, that “the *singular*, <span
id="xxi.iv-p70.1"></span>ἐστι, has caused a vitiation of this passage,
by suggesting the introduction of a *singular* nominative to agree with
it, namely <span id="xxi.iv-p70.2"></span>ὁ Θεος, God;’ whereas in the
reading of Tertullian, as early as the second or third century, <span
id="xxi.iv-p70.3"></span>ἐστι referred to the neuter plural, <span
id="xxi.iv-p70.4"></span>πνεύματα: ‘<span id="xxi.iv-p70.5"></span>Et
spiritus prophetarum prophetis subditi sunt — non enim eversionis
*sunt*, sed pacis.’ (And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets — for *they are* not of disorder but of peace.) The Greek,
therefore, stood thus: <span id="xxi.iv-p70.6"></span>οὐ γάρ ἐστιν
ἀκαταστασίας (<span id="xxi.iv-p70.7"></span>πνεύματα), <span
id="xxi.iv-p70.8"></span>αλλ εἰρήνης. This early external testimony,
combined with the internal testimony of the context, is sufficient
evidence, that <span id="xxi.iv-p70.9"></span>Θεὸς has been unskilfully
inserted by philoponists here, as <span id="xxi.iv-p70.10"></span>Θεὸς,
<span id="xxi.iv-p70.11"></span>Κύριος, <span
id="xxi.iv-p70.12"></span>Χριστός, have been intruded into many other
passages of the Sacred Text.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_874"></span>[875](cc39020.htm#fr_874) <span
id="xxi.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p73"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p73.1"></span>Ce mot,
*Comme*;” — “This word, *As*.”

<span id="fn_875"></span>[876](cc39020.htm#fr_875) <span
id="xxi.iv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p74"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p74.1"></span>Comme s’il
vouloit dire qu’il n’y auroit point de propos d’auoir quelque souspecon
sur les Eglises bien reformees;” — “As if he meant to say, that there
was no occasion for having any suspicion as to Churches thoroughly
reformed.”

<span id="fn_876"></span>[877](cc39020.htm#fr_876) <span
id="xxi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p20"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p20.1"></span>D’enseigner
ou de prescher;” — “Of teaching or of preaching.”

<span id="fn_877"></span>[878](cc39020.htm#fr_877) <span
id="xxi.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p21"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p21.1"></span>Eust
preeminence et authorite;” — “Should have pre-eminence and authority.”

<span id="fn_878"></span>[879](cc39020.htm#fr_878) <span
id="xxi.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p22"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p22.1"></span>Elle ne pent
donc auoir authorire publique de prescher ou enseigner;” — “She cannot,
therefore, have public authority to preach or teach.”

<span id="fn_879"></span>[880](cc39020.htm#fr_879) <span
id="xxi.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p23"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p23.1"></span>Entre toutes
les nations et peuples;” — “Among all nations and peoples.”

<span id="fn_880"></span>[881](cc39020.htm#fr_880) <span
id="xxi.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p24"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p24.1"></span>On les
souffroit proposer deuant les iuges, et plaider publiquement;” — “They
were allowed to make an appearance before the judges, and plead
publicly.”’

<span id="fn_881"></span>[882](cc39020.htm#fr_881) <span
id="xxi.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p25"></span> *Caia*, *Afrania* was the wife of a
senator, Licinius Buccio. The circumstance referred to by Calvin is
related by Valerius Maximus, (lib. 8. c. 3. n. 2,) in the following
terms: — “<span id="xxi.v-p25.1"></span>Mulicbris verecundiae oblita,
suas per se causas agebat, et importunis clamoribus judicibus
obstrepebat; non quod advocati ei deessent, sed quia impudentia
abundabat. Hinc factum est. ut mulieres perfrictae frontis et matronalis
pudoris oblitae, *Afraniae* per contumeliam dicerentur;” — “Forgetful of
the modesty that becomes a femme, she pleaded her own cause in person,
and annoyed the judges with a senseless clamouring — not from any want
of advocates to take her case in hand, but from excessive impudence. In
consequence of this, women that were of bold front, and were forgetful
of the modesty that becomes a matron, were, by way of reproach, called
*Afranias*.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[883](cc39020.htm#fr_882) <span
id="xxi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p30"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p30.1"></span>Autant qu’il
est requis pour nourrir paix et concorde;” — “in so far as it is
requisite for maintaining peace and harmony.”

<span id="fn_883"></span>[884](cc39020.htm#fr_883) <span
id="xxi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p32"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p32.1"></span>Et est plus
ancienne;” — “And is more ancient.”

<span id="fn_884"></span>[885](cc39020.htm#fr_884) <span
id="xxi.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p33"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p33.1"></span>A ses
ordonnances et manieres de faire;” — “To its ordinances and methods of
acting.”

<span id="fn_885"></span>[886](cc39020.htm#fr_885) <span
id="xxi.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p35"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p35.1"></span>Ne regardans
qu’a eux mesmes, et se plaisans en leur facons de faire;” — “Looking
only to themselves, and pleasing themselves in their modes of acting.”

<span id="fn_886"></span>[887](cc39020.htm#fr_886) <span
id="xxi.v-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p36"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p36.1"></span>En voulant
d’vne faqon tyrannique contraindre tout le monde a receuoir leurs loix;”
— “By endeavoring, in a tyrannical way, to constrain every one to
receive their laws.”

<span id="fn_887"></span>[888](cc39020.htm#fr_887) <span
id="xxi.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p39"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p39.1"></span>En cest
endroit;” — “In this case.”

<span id="fn_888"></span>[889](cc39020.htm#fr_888) <span
id="xxi.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p44"></span> *Beausobre*, when adverting to this
reading, says: “<span id="xxi.v-p44.1"></span>La Vulgate porte, *il sera
ignore*, Dieu k *meconnoitra*; ce qui vent dire, *le punira* Ce sens est
fort bon;” — “The Vulgate renders it: *he will be unknown* — *God will
disown him* — meaning to say: *He will punish him* This is a very good
meaning.” In *one* Greek MS. the reading is <span
id="xxi.v-p44.2"></span>ἀγνοεῖται, — *is unknown* Wiclif, (1380) renders
it — *And if ony man unknowith*: *he schal be unknown* The view taken by
Calvin, however, is the more generally approved, and seems to accord
better with the general strain of the passage. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_889"></span>[890](cc39020.htm#fr_889) <span
id="xxi.v-p44.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p45"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p45.1"></span>Les
sophistes qui ne font iamais que disputer, sans rien resoudre ou
accorder, ne les contentieux, et subtils iaseurs;” — “Sophists who are
never but disputing, without coming to any solution or agreement, nor
contentious persons, and subtile prattlers.”

<span id="fn_890"></span>[891](cc39020.htm#fr_890) <span
id="xxi.v-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p46"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p46.1"></span>Sans nous en
soucier aucunement;” — “Without giving ourselves any concern as to
them.”

<span id="fn_891"></span>[892](cc39020.htm#fr_891) <span
id="xxi.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p49"></span> “<span id="xxi.v-p49.1"></span>Autres, qui
ont le don des langues, qui est vn don plus rare;” — “Others, who have
the gift of tongues, which is a rarer gift.”

<span id="fn_892"></span>[893](cc39020.htm#fr_892) <span
id="xxi.v-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p52"></span> “This precept is sometimes applied to
support the use of rites and ceremonies in the worship of God, not
commanded in Scripture. But any one who considers the place which it
holds in this discourse, will be sensible that it hath no relation to
rites and ceremonies, but to the *decent* and *orderly* exercise of the
spiritual gifts. Yet by parity of reasoning, it may be extended even to
the rites of worship, provided they are left free to be used by every
one as he sees them expedient.” — *McKnight*. “To adduce this text, as a
direct argument about any particular external ceremonies used in divine
worship, (which always appear *decent* and *orderly* to those who
invent, impose, or are attached to them, and the contrary to those who
dissent from them,) is doubtless wresting it from its proper meaning.”
*Scott*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[894](cc39020.htm#fr_893) <span
id="xxi.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p54"></span> <span id="xxi.v-p54.2"></span>Cancellos (ut
ita loquar) circumdedit. Calvin has here very probably in his eye an
expression made use of by Cicero, “<span id="xxi.v-p54.3"></span>Si
extra hos cancellos egredi conabor, quos mihi circumdedi;” — “If I shall
attempt to go beyond those limits, which I have marked out for myself.”
— (Cic. Quint. 10.) — *Ed*.

<span id="xxi.v-p55"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc39021)
