[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39010)  [Next](cc39012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** It is reported commonly *that there
is* fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much named
among the Gentiles, that one should have his father’s wife.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Omnino auditur in vobus scortatio, et
talis scortatio, quae ne interGentes quidem nominatur, ut quis as uxorem
patris habeat.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And ye are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be taken away
from among you.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et vos inflati estis, ac non magis
luxistis, ut e medio vestri removeretur, qui facinus hoc admisit.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For I verily, as absent in body, but
present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present,
*concerning* him that hath so done this deed,

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ego quidem certe tanquam absens
corpore, praesens autem spiritu, jam iudicavi tanquam praesens, qui hoc
ita designavit,

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power our Lord
Jesus Christ,

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** In nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi,
congregatis vobis et spiritu meo, cum potentia Domini nostri of Iesu
Christi, eiusmodi inquam hominem.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** To deliver such an one unto Satan for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tradere Satanae in exitium carnis, ut
spiritus salvus fiat in die Domini Iesu.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span><span id="xii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**1.** *It is generally reported that there
is among you.* Those contentions having originated, as has been
observed, in presumption and excessive confidence, he most appropriately
proceeds to make mention of their diseases, the knowledge of which
should have the effect of humbling them. First of all, he shows them
what enormous wickedness it is to allow one of their society to have an
illicit connection with his mother-in-law. It is not certain, whether he
had seduced her from his father as a prostitute, or whether he kept her
under pretense of marriage. This, however, does not much affect, the
subject in hand; for, as in the former case, there would have been an
abominable and execrable whoredom, so the latter would have involved an
incestuous connection, abhorrent to all propriety and natural decency.
Now, that he may not seem to charge them on doubtful suspicions, he
says, that the case which he brings forward is well known and in general
circulation. For it is in this sense that I take the particle <span
id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>ὅλως (generally) as intimating that it was no
vague rumor, but a matter well known, and published everywhere so as to
cause great scandal.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>From his saying that such a kind of whoredom
was *not named even among the Gentiles*, some are of opinion, that he
refers to the incest of Reuben, (<span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>[Ge
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022)<span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>,)
who, in like manner, had an incestuous connection with his
mother-in-law. They are accordingly of opinion, that Paul did not make
mention of Israel, because a disgraceful instance of this kind had
occurred among them, as if the annals of the Gentiles did not record
many incestuous connections of that kind! This, then, is an idea that is
quite foreign to Paul’s intention; for in making mention of the Gentiles
rather than of the Jews, he designed rather to heighten the aggravation
of the crime. “You,” says he, “permit, as though it were a lawful thing,
an enormity, which would not be tolerated even among the Gentiles — nay
more, has always been regarded by them with horror, and looked upon as a
prodigy of crime.” When, therefore, he affirms that it was *not named
among the Gentiles*, he does not mean by this, that no such thing had
ever existed among them, or was not recorded in their annals, for even
tragedies have been founded upon it;  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) but that it was held in detestation by
the Gentiles, as a shameful and abominable monstrosity, for it is a
beastly lust, which destroys even natural modesty. Should any one ask,
“Is it just to reproach all with the sin of one individual?” I answer,
that the Corinthians are accused, not because one of their number has
sinned, but because, as is stated afterwards, they encouraged by
connivance a crime that was deserving of the severest punishment.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span><span id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**2.** *And ye are puffed up* “*Are* ye not
ashamed,” says he, “to glory in what affords so much occasion for
humiliation?” He had observed previously, that even the highest
excellence gives no just ground of glorying, inasmuch as mankind have
nothing of their own, and it is only through the grace of God that they
possess any excellence. (<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>[1Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p18.1"></span>.)
Now, however, he attacks them from another quarter. “You are,” says he,
“covered with disgrace: what ground have you, then, for pride or
haughtiness? For there is an amazing blindness in glorying in the midst
of disgrace, in spite, as it were of angels and men.”

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>When he says, *and have not rather mourned*,
he argues by way of contrast; for where there is grief there is no more
glorying. It may be asked: “Why ought they to have *mourned* over
another man’s sin?” I answer, for two reasons: *first*, in consequence
of the communion that exists among the members of the Church, it was
becoming that all should feel hurt at so deadly a fall on the part of
one of their number; and *secondly*, when such an enormity is
perpetrated in a particular Church, the perpetrator of it is all
offender in such a way, that the whole society is in a manner polluted.
For as God humbles the father of a family in the disgrace of his wife,
or of his children, and a whole kindred in the disgrace of one of their
number, so every Church ought to consider, that it contracts a stain of
disgrace whenever any base crime is perpetrated in it. Nay, farther, we
see how the anger of God was kindled against the whole nation of Israel
on account of the sacrilege of one individual — Achan. (<span
id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>[Jos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)<span
id="xii.i-p19.1"></span>.) It was not as though God had been so cruel as
to take vengeance on the innocent for another man’s crime; but, as in
every instance in which anything of this nature has occurred among a
people, there is already some token of his anger, so by correcting a
community for the fault of one individual, he distinctly intimates that
the whole body is infected and polluted with the contagion of the
offense. Hence we readily infer, that it is the duty of every Church to
*mourn* over the faults of individual members, as domestic calamities
belonging to the entire body. And assuredly a pious and dutiful
correction takes its rise in our being inflamed with holy zeal through
displeasure at the offense; for otherwise severity will be felt to be
bitter.  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>*That he might be taken away from among
you.* He now brings out more distinctly what he finds fault with in the
Corinthians — remissness, inasmuch as they connived at such an
abomination. Hence, too, it appears that Churches are furnished with
this power  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) — that, whatever
fault there is within them, they can correct or remove it by strictness
of discipline, and that those are inexcusable that are not on the alert
to have filth cleared away. For Paul here condemns the Corinthians. Why?
Because they had been remiss in the punishment of one individual. Now he
would have accused them unjustly, if they had not had this power. Hence
the power of excommunication is established from this passage. On the
other hand, as Churches have this mode of punishment put into their
hands, those commit sin,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) as
Paul shows here, that do not make use of it, when it is required; for
otherwise he would act unfairly to the Corinthians in charging them with
this fault.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span><span id="xii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**3.** *I truly,* etc. As the Corinthians
were wanting in their duty, having condemned their negligence, he now
shows what ought to be done. In order that this stain may be removed,
they must cast out this incestuous person from the society of the
faithful. He prescribes, then, as a remedy for the disease,
excommunication, which they had sinfully delayed so long. When he says,
that he had, *while absent in body*, already determined this, he
severely reproves in this way the remissness of the Corinthians, for
there is here all implied contrast. It is as though he had said: “You
who are *present* ought before this time to have applied a remedy to
this disease, having it every day before your eyes, and yet you do
nothing;  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) while for my part I
cannot, even though *absent*, endure it.” Lest any one should allege
that he acted rashly in forming a judgment when at so great a distance,
he declares himself to be *present in spirit*, meaning by this, that the
line of duty was as plain to him as if he were present, and saw the
thing with his eyes. Now it is of importance to observe what he teaches
as to the mode of excommunication.

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span><span id="xii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *When you are gathered together and
my spirit* — that is, when ye are *gathered together* with me, but *in
spirit*, for they could not meet together as to bodily presence. He
declares, however, that it would be all one as though he were personally
present. It is to be carefully observed, that Paul, though an Apostle,
does not himself, as an individual, excommunicate according to his own
pleasure, but consults with the Church, that the matter may be
transacted by common authority. He, it is true, takes the lead, and
shows the way, but, in taking others as his associates, he intimates
with sufficient plainness, that this authority does not belong to any
one individual. As, however, a multitude never accomplishes anything
with moderation or seriousness, if not governed by counsel, there was
appointed in the ancient Church a Presbytery,  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) that is, an assembly of elders, who,
by the consent of all, had the power of first judging in the case. From
them the matter was brought before the people, but it was as a thing
already judged of.  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) Whatever the
matter may be, it is quite contrary to the appointment of Christ and his
Apostles — to the order of the Church, and even to equity itself, that
this right should be put into the hands of any one man, of
excommunicating at his pleasure any that he may choose. Let us take
notice, then, that in excommunicating this limitation be observed — that
this part of discipline be exercised by the common counsel of the
elders, and with the consent of the people, and that this is a remedy in
opposition to tyranny. For nothing is more at variance with the
discipline of Christ than tyranny, for which you open a wide door, if
you give one man the entire power.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>*In the name of our Lord* For it is not
enough that we assemble, if it be not *in the name of Christ*; for even
the wicked assemble together for impious and nefarious conspiracies. Now
in order that an assembly may be held in Christ’s name, two things are
requisite: *first*, that we begin by calling upon his name; and
*secondly*, that nothing is attempted but in conformity with his word.
*Then* only do men make an auspicious commencement of anything that they
take in hand to do, when they with their heart call upon the Lord that
they may be governed by his Spirit, and that their plans may, by his
grace, be directed to a happy issue; and farther, when they *ask at his
mouth*, as the Prophet speaks, (<span id="xii.i-p31.1"></span>[Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p31.1"></span>,)
that is to say, when, after consulting his oracles, they surrender
themselves and all their designs to his will in unreserved obedience. If
this is becoming even in the least of our actions, how much less ought
it to be omitted in important and serious matters, and least of all,
when we have to do with God’s business rather than our own? For example,
excommunication is an ordinance of God, and not of men; on any occasion,
therefore, on which we are to make use of it, where shall we begin if
not with God.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) In short, when
Paul exhorts the Corinthians to assemble *in the name of Christ*, he
does not simply require them to make use of Christ’s name, or to confess
him with the mouth, (for the wicked themselves can do that,) but to seek
him truly and with the heart, and farther, he intimates by this the
seriousness and importance of the action.

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>He adds, *with the power of our Lord*, for
if the promise is true,

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>As often as two or three are gathered
together in my name,  
I am in the midst of them, (<span id="xii.i-p34.2"></span>[Mt
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p34.2"></span>,)

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>it follows, that whatever is done in such an
assembly is a work of Christ. Hence we infer, of what importance
excommunication, rightly administered, is in the sight of God, inasmuch
as it rests upon the power of God. For that saying, too, must be
accomplished,

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven. (<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>[Mt
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>As, however, this statement ought to fill
despisers  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) with no ordinary
alarm, so faithful pastors, as well as the Churches generally, are by
this admonished in what a devout spirit  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) they should go to work in a matter of
such importance. For it is certain that the power of Christ is not tied
to the inclination or opinions of mankind, but is associated with his
eternal truth.

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span><span id="xii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**5.** *To deliver to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh.* As the Apostles had been furnished with this
power among others, that they could *deliver over to Satan* wicked and
obstinate persons, and made use of him as a scourge to correct them,
Chrysostom, and those that follow him, view these words of Paul as
referring to a chastisement of that kind, agreeably to the exposition
that is usually given of another passage, in reference to Alexander and
Hymeneus, (<span id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>[1Ti
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span id="xii.i-p41.1"></span>.)
*To deliver over to Satan*, they think, means nothing but the infliction
of a severe punishment upon the body. But when I examine the whole
context more narrowly, and at the same time compare it with what is
stated in <span id="xii.i-p41.2"></span>[2Co
2:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#005)<span id="xii.i-p41.2"></span>,
I give up that interpretation, as forced and at variance with Paul’s
meaning, and understand it simply of excommunication. For *delivering
over to Satan* is an appropriate expression for denoting
excommunication; for as Christ reigns *in* the Church, so Satan reigns
*out of* the Church, as Augustine, too, has remarked,  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) in his sixty-eighth sermon on the
words of the Apostle, where he explains this passage.  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) As, then, we are received into the
communion of the Church, and remain in it on this condition, that we are
under the protection and guardianship of Christ, I say, that he who is
cast out of the Church is in a manner delivered over to the power of
Satan, for he becomes an alien, and is cast out of Christ’s kingdom.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>The clause that follows, *for the
destruction of the flesh*, is made use of for the purpose of softening;
for Paul’s meaning is not that the person who is chastised is given over
to Satan to be utterly ruined, or so as to be given up to the devil in
perpetual bondage, but that it is a temporary condemnation, and not only
so, but of such a nature as will be salutary. For as the salvation
equally with the condemnation of the spirit is eternal, he takes the
*condemnation of the flesh* as meaning *temporal* condemnation. “We will
condemn him in this world for a time, that the Lord may preserve him in
his kingdom.” This furnishes an answer to the objection, by which some
endeavor to set aside this exposition, for as the sentence of
excommunication is directed rather against the soul than against the
outward man, they inquire how it can be called *the destruction of the
flesh* My answer, then, is, (as I have already in part stated,) that the
*destruction of the flesh* is opposed to *the salvation of the spirit*,
simply because the former is temporal and the latter is eternal. In this
sense the Apostle in <span id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>[Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p44.1"></span>,
uses the expression *the days of Christ*’*s flesh*, to mean the course
of his mortal life. Now the Church in chastising offenders with
severity, spares them not in this world, in order that God may spare
them.  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) Should any one wish to
have anything farther in reference to the rite of excommunication, its
causes, necessity, purposes, and limitation, let him consult my
Institutes.  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Your glorying *is* not good. Know ye
not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Non est bona gloriatio vestra: an
nescitis, quod exiguum fermentum totam massam fermentat?

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Expurgate ergo vetus fermentum, ut
sitis nova conspersio, sicut estis azymi: nam Pascha nostrum pro nobis
immolatum est, Christus.  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Therefore let us keep the feast, not
with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but
with the unleavened *bread* of sincerity and truth.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** Proinde epulemur non in fermento
veteri, neque in fermento malitiae et pravitatis, sed in azymis
sinceritatis veritatis.  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *Your glorying is not good*. He
condemns their glorying, not simply because they extolled themselves
beyond what is lawful for man, but because they delighted themselves in
their faults. He had previously stripped mankind of all glory; for he
had shown that, as they have nothing of their own, whatever excellence
they may have, they owe the entire praise of it to God alone. (<span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>[1Co 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>.) What he treats of here, however, is not
that, God is defrauded of his right, when mortals arrogate to themselves
the praise of their excellences, but that the Corinthians are guilty of
arrant folly in extolling themselves without any just ground. For they
proudly gloried as if everything had been in a golden style among them,
while in the meantime there was so much among them that was wicked and
disgraceful.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>*Know ye not* That they might not think
that it was a matter of little or no importance that they gave
encouragement to so great an evil, he shows the destructive tendency of
indulgence and dissimulation in such a case. He makes use of a
proverbial saying, by which he intimates that a whole multitude is
infected by the contagion of a single individual. For this proverb has
in this passage  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) the same
meaning as in those expressions of Juvenal: “A whole herd of swine falls
down in the fields through disease in one of their number, and one
discolored grape infects another.”  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) I have said *in this passage*, because
Paul, as we shall see, makes use of it elsewhere (<span
id="xii.ii-p16.5"></span>[Ga 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009)<span
id="xii.ii-p16.5"></span>) in another sense.

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span><span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>**7.** *Purge out therefore* Having
borrowed a similitude from *leaven*, he pursues it farther, though he
makes a transition from a particular point to a general doctrine. For he
is no longer speaking of the case of incest, but exhorts them generally
to purity of life, on the ground that we cannot remain in Christ if we
are not cleansed. He is accustomed to do this not infrequently. When he
has made a particular statement, he takes occasion to pass on to general
exhortations. He had made mention of *leaven* on another account, as we
have seen. As this same metaphor suited the general doctrine which he
now subjoins, he extends it farther.

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>*Our Passover*  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) Before coming to the subject-matter, I
shall say a few words in reference to the words. *Old leaven* receives
that name on the same principle as the *old man*, (<span
id="xii.ii-p20.3"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="xii.ii-p20.3"></span>,) for the corruption of nature takes the
precedence in us, previously to our being renewed in Christ. *That*,
therefore, is said to be *old* which we bring with us from the womb, and
must perish when we are renewed by the grace of the Spirit.  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) The verb <span
id="xii.ii-p21.4"></span>ἐτύθη, which occurs between the name *Christ*
and the term which denotes a sacrifice,  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) may refer to either. I have taken it
as referring to the sacrifice, though this is of no great importance, as
the meaning is not affected. The verb <span
id="xii.ii-p22.2"></span>ἑορτάζωμεν, which Erasmus rendered “Let us
celebrate the feast,” signifies also to partake of the solemn feast
which was observed after the sacrifice had been offered up. This
interpretation appeared to suit better with the passage before us. I
have, accordingly, followed the Vulgate in preference to Erasmus, as
this rendering is more in accordance with the mystery of which Paul
treats.

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>We come now to the subject-matter. Paul,
having it in view to exhort the Corinthians to holiness, shows that what
was of old figuratively represented in the passover, ought to be at this
day accomplished in us, and explains the correspondence which exists
between the figure and the reality. In the first place, as the passover
consisted of two parts — a sacrifice and a sacred feast — he makes
mention of both. For although some do not reckon the paschal lamb to
have been a sacrifice, yet reason shows that it was properly a
sacrifice, for in that rite the people were reconciled to God by the
sprinkling of blood. Now there is no reconciliation without a sacrifice;
and, besides, the Apostle now expressly confirms if, for he makes use of
the word <span id="xii.ii-p23.1"></span>θύεσθαι, which is applicable to
sacrifices, and in other respects, too, the context would not
correspond. The lamb, then, was sacrificed yearly; then followed a
feast, the celebration of which lasted for seven successive days.
*Christ*, says Paul, *is our Passover*  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) He was sacrificed once, and on this
condition, that the efficacy of that one oblation should be everlasting.
What remains now is, that we eat,  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) not once a-year, but continually.

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span><span id="xii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span>**8.** Now, in the solemnity of this sacred
feast we must abstain from *leaven*, as God commanded the fathers to
abstain. But from what leaven? As the outward passover was to them a
figure of the true *passover*, so its appendages were figures of the
reality which we at this day possess. If, therefore, we would wish to
feed on Christ’s flesh and blood, let us bring to this feast *sincerity
and truth* Let these be our loaves of *unleavened* *bread* Away with all
*malice and wickedness*, for it is unlawful to mix up *leaven* with the
*passover* In fine, he declares that we shall be members of Christ only
when we shall have renounced *malice* and deceit. In the meantime we
must carefully observe this passage, as showing that the ancient
passover was not merely <span id="xii.ii-p27.2"></span>μνημοσυνον,
 <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) a memorial of a past benefit,
but also a sacrament, representing Christ who was to come, from whom we
have this privilege, that we pass from death to life. Otherwise, it
would not hold good, that in *Christ* is the *body* of the legal
shadows. (<span id="xii.ii-p28.4"></span>[Col
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span id="xii.ii-p28.4"></span>.)
This passage will also be of service for setting aside the sacrilege of
the Papal mass. For Paul does not teach that Christ is offered daily,
but that the sacrifice having been offered up once for all, it remains
that the spiritual feast be celebrated during our whole life.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 5:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)<span
id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** I wrote unto you in an epistle not
to company with fornicators:

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Scripsi vobis in Epistola, Ne
commisceamini scortatoribus:

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>**10.** Yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or
with idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the world.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**10.** Neque in universum scortatoribus
mundi hujus, vel avaris, vel rapacibus, vel idololatris: quandoquidem
debuissetis ex hoc mundo exire.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** But now I have written unto you not
to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner;
with such an one no not to eat.

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Nunc autem scripsi vobis, Ne
commisceamini: si is qui frater nominatur, vel scortator sit, vel
avarus, vel idololatra, vel maledicus, vel ebriosus, vel rapax: cum tali
ne cibum quidem sumatis.

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>**12.** For what have I to do to judge them
also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within?

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>**12.** Quid enim mea refert extraneos
iudicare? an non eos qui intus sunt iudicatis?

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>**13.** But them that are without God
judgeth. Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>**13.** Extraneos vero Deus iudicat:
eiicite scelestum ex vobis ipsis.

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span><span id="xii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>**9.** *I wrote to you in an epistle.* The
epistle of which he speaks is not at this day extant. Nor is there any
doubt that many others are lost. It is enough, however, that those have
been preserved to us which the Lord foresaw would suffice. But this
passage, in consequence of its obscurity, has been twisted to a variety
of interpretations, which I do not think it necessary for me to take up
time in setting aside, but will simply bring forward what appears to me
to be its true meaning. He reminds the Corinthians of what he had
already enjoined upon them — that they should refrain from intercourse
with the wicked. For the word rendered *to keep company with*, means to
be on terms of familiarity with any one, and to be in habits of close
intimacy with him.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) Now, his
reminding them of this tends to expose their remissness, inasmuch as
they had been admonished, and yet had remained inactive.

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>He adds an exception, that they may the
better understand that this refers particularly to those that belong to
the Church, as they did not require to be admonished  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) to avoid the society of the world. In
short, then, he prohibits the Corinthians from holding intercourse with
those who, while professing to be believers, do, nevertheless, live
wickedly and to the dishonor of God. “Let all that wish to be reckoned
brethren, either live holily and becomingly, or be excommunicated from
the society of the pious, and let all the good refrain from intercourse
and familiarity with them. It were superfluous to speak as to the openly
wicked, for you ought of your own accord to shun them, without any
admonition from me.” This exception, however, increases the criminality
of remissness, inasmuch as they cherished in the bosom of the Church an
openly wicked person; for it is more disgraceful to neglect those of
your own household than to neglect strangers.

<span id="xii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p19"></span>**10.** *Since you would have required.*
It is as to this clause especially that interpreters are not agreed. For
some say, “You must sooner quit Greece.” Ambrose, on the other hand,
says, “You must rather die.” Erasmus turns it into the optative, as if
Paul said, “Would that it were allowable for you to leave the world
altogether;  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) but as you cannot
do this, you must at least quit the society of those who falsely assume
the name of Christians, and in the meantime exhibit in their lives the
worst example.” Chrysostom’s exposition has more appearance of truth.
According to him, the meaning is this: “When I command you to shun
fornicators, I do not mean all such; otherwise you would require to go
in quest of another world; for we must live among thorns so long as we
sojourn on earth. This only do I require, that you do not keep company
with fornicators, who wish to be regarded as brethren, lest you should
seem by your sufferance to approve of their wickedness.” Thus the term
*world* here, must be taken to mean the present life, as in <span
id="xii.iii-p20.2"></span>[Joh
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015)<span id="xii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p21"></span>I pray not, Father, that thou shouldest
take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest deliver them from
the evil.

<span id="xii.iii-p22"></span>Against this exposition a question might
be proposed by way of objection: “As Paul said this at a time when
Christians were as yet mingled with heathens, and dispersed among them,
what ought to be done now, when all have given themselves to Christ in
name? For even in the present day we must go out of the world, if we
would avoid the society of the wicked; and there are none that are
strangers, when all take upon themselves Christ’s name, and are
consecrated to him by baptism.” Should any one feel inclined to follow
Chrysostom, he will find no difficulty in replying, to this effect: that
Paul here took for granted what was true — that, where there is the
power of excommunication, there is an easy remedy for effecting a
separation between the good and the bad, if Churches do their duty. As
to strangers, the Christians at Corinth had no jurisdiction, and they
could not restrain their dissolute manner of life. Hence they must of
necessity have quitted the world, if they wished to avoid the society of
the wicked, whose vices they could not cure.

<span id="xii.iii-p23"></span>For my own part, as I do not willingly
adopt interpretations which cannot be made to suit the words, otherwise
than by twisting the words so as to suit them, I prefer one that is
different from all these, taking the word rendered *to go out* as
meaning *to be separated*, and the term *world* as meaning *the
pollutions of the world* “What need have you of an injunction as to *the
children of this world*, (<span id="xii.iii-p23.1"></span>[Lu
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008)<span id="xii.iii-p23.1"></span>,)
for having once for all renounced the world, it becomes you to stand
aloof from their society; for *the whole world lieth in the wicked
one*.”  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) (<span
id="xii.iii-p24.2"></span>[1Jo
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span id="xii.iii-p24.2"></span>.)
If any one is not satisfied with this interpretation, here is still
another that is probable: “I do not write to you in general terms, that
you should shun the society of *the fornicators of this world*, though
*that* you ought to do, without any admonition from me.” I prefer,
however, the former; and I am not the first contriver of it, but, while
it has been brought forward previously by others, I have adapted it more
fully, if I mistake not, to Paul’s thread of discourse. There is, then,
 <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) a sort of intentional omission,
when he says that he makes no mention of those that are *without*,
inasmuch as the Corinthians ought to be already separated from them,
that they may know that even at home  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) they required to maintain this
discipline of avoiding the wicked.

<span id="xii.iii-p27"></span><span id="xii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p28"></span>**11.** *If he who is called a brother* In
the Greek there is a participle  <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299)
without a verb.  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) Those that view
this as referring to what follows, bring out here a forced meaning, and
at variance with Paul’s intention. I confess, indeed, that that is a
just sentiment,  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) and worthy of
being particularly noticed — that no one can be punished by the decision
of the Church, but one whose sin has become matter of notoriety; but
these words of Paul cannot be made to bear that meaning. What he means,
then, is this: “If any one is reckoned a brother among you, and at the
same time leads a wicked life, and such as is unbecoming a Christian,
keep aloof from his society.” In short, being *called* a brother, means
here a false profession, which has no corresponding reality. Farther, he
does not make a complete enumeration of crimes, but merely mentions five
or six by way of example, and then afterwards, under the expression
*such an one*, he sums up the whole; and he does not mention any but
what fall under the knowledge of men. For inward impiety, and anything
that is secret, does not fall within the judgment of the Church.

<span id="xii.iii-p32"></span>It is uncertain, however, what he means by
an *idolater* For how can he be devoted to idolatry who has made a
profession of Christ? Some are of opinion that there were among the
Corinthians at that time some who received Christ but in half, and in
the mean time were involved, nevertheless, in corrupt superstition, as
the Israelites of old, and afterwards the Samaritans maintained a kind
of worship of God, but at the same time polluted it with wicked
superstitions. For my part, I rather understand it of those who, while
they held idols in contempt, gave, nevertheless, a pretended homage to
the idols, with the view of gratifying the wicked. Paul declares that
such persons ought not to be tolerated in the society of Christians; and
not without good reason, inasmuch as they made so little account of
trampling God’s glory under foot. We must, however, observe the
circumstances of the case — that, while they had a Church there, in
which they might worship God in purity, and have the lawful use of the
sacraments, they came into the Church in such a way as not to renounce
the profane fellowship of the wicked. I make this observation, in order
that no one may think that we ought to employ equally severe measures
against those who, while at this day dispersed under the tyranny of the
Pope, pollute themselves with many corrupt rites. These indeed, I
maintain, sin generally in this respect, and they ought, I acknowledge,
to be sharply dealt with, and diligently urged,  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) that they may learn at length to
consecrate themselves wholly to Christ; but I dare not go so far as to
reckon them worthy of excommunication, for their case is different.
 <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)

<span id="xii.iii-p35"></span>*With such an one not even to take food.*
In the first place, we must ascertain whether he addresses here the
whole Church, or merely individuals. I answer, that this is said,
indeed, to individuals, but, at the same time, it is connected with
their discipline in common; for the power of excommunicating is not
allowed to any individual member, but to the entire body. When,
therefore, the Church has excommunicated any one, no believer ought to
receive him into terms of intimacy with him; otherwise the authority of
the Church would be brought into contempt, if each individual were at
liberty to admit to his table those who have been excluded from the
table of the Lord. By *partaking of food* here, is meant either living
together, or familiar association in meals. For if, on going into an
inn, I see one who has been excommunicated sitting at table, there is
nothing to hinder me from dining with him; for I have not authority to
exclude him. What Paul means is, that, in so far as it is in our power,
we are to shun the society of those whom the Church has cut off from her
communion.

<span id="xii.iii-p36"></span>The Roman antichrist, not content with
this severity, has burst forth into interdicts, prohibiting any one from
helping one that has been excommunicated to food, or fuel, or drink, or
any other of the supports of life.  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) Now, *that* is not strictness of
discipline, but tyrannical and barbarous cruelty, that is altogether at
variance with Paul’s intention. For he means not that he should be
*counted as an enemy*, *but as a brother*, (<span
id="xii.iii-p37.2"></span>[2Th
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)<span id="xii.iii-p37.2"></span>;)
for in putting this public mark of disgrace upon him, the intention is,
that he may be filled with shame, and brought to repentance. And with
this dreadful cruelty, if God is pleased to permit, do they rage even
against the innocent.  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) Now,
granting that there are sometimes those who are not undeserving of this
punishment, I affirm, on the other hand, that this kind of interdict
 <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) is altogether unsuitable to an
ecclesiastical court.

<span id="xii.iii-p40"></span><span id="xii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p41"></span>**12.** *For what have I to do to judge
them that are without*? There is nothing to hinder us from judging these
also — nay more, even devils themselves are not exempt from the judgment
of the word which is committed to us. But Paul is speaking here of the
jurisdiction that belongs peculiarly to the Church. “The Lord has
furnished us with this power, that we may exercise it upon those who
belong to his household. For this chastisement is a part of discipline
which is confined to the Church, and does not extend to strangers. We do
not therefore pronounce upon them their condemnation, because the Lord
has not subjected them to our cognizance and jurisdiction, in so far as
that chastisement and censure are concerned. We are, therefore,
constrained to leave them to the judgment of God.” It is in this sense
that Paul says, that *God will judge them*, because he allows them to
wander about  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) unbridled like
wild beasts, because there is no one that can restrain their wantonness.

<span id="xii.iii-p43"></span><span id="xii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p44"></span>**13.** *Put away that wicked person.*
This is commonly explained as referring to the person who was guilty of
an illicit connection with his mother-in-law. For as to those who
understand the expression to mean — “Put away *evil* or *wickedness*,”
they are refuted by the Greek words made use of by Paul, the article
(<span id="xii.iii-p44.1"></span>τὸν) being in the masculine gender, But
what if you should view it as referring to the devil, who, undoubtedly
in the person of a wicked and unprincipled man,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) is encouraged to establish his throne
among us? For <span id="xii.iii-p45.2"></span>ὁ πονηρος (the wicked one)
taken simply and without any addition, denotes the prince of all crimes,
 <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) rather than some wicked man. If
this meaning is approved of, Paul shows how important it is  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) not to tolerate wicked persons, as by
this means Satan is expelled from his kingdom which he keeps up among
us, when indulgence is given to the wicked.  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) If any one, however, prefers to
understand it as referring to a *man*, I do not oppose it. Chrysostom
compares the rigor of the law with the mildness of the gospel, inasmuch
as Paul was satisfied with excommunication in case of an offense for
which the law required the punishment of death, but for this there is no
just ground. For Paul is not here addressing judges that are armed with
the sword, but an unarmed multitude  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) that was allowed merely to make use of
brotherly correction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc39011.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span> Calvin probably had in his eye, among other
instances, the Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc39011.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p20.1"></span>Et ne
profitera pas;” — “And will do no good.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc39011.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p22.1"></span>Et
authorite;” — “And authority.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc39011.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p23.1"></span>Offensent
Dieu;” — “Offend God.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc39011.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p26.1"></span>Vous
dissimulez;” — “You connive.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc39011.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p29.1"></span>Qu’on
appeloit le Presbytere;” — “What they called a Presbytery.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc39011.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p30.1"></span>Puis apres
la chose estoit renuoyee au peuple par eux, avec un advertissement
touteffois de ce qui leur en sembloit;” — “The matter was afterwards
brought by them before the people, with an intimation, however, of their
views respecting it.” See Calvin’s *Institutes*, volume 3, pp. 233-5. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc39011.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p32.1"></span>Le nom de
Dieu;” — “The name of God.”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc39011.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p38.1"></span>Contempteurs
de Dieu;” — “Despisers of God.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc39011.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p39.1"></span>En quelle
crainte et obeissance: — “With what fear and obedience.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc39011.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xii.i-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>L’a
tres-bien note;” — “Has very well remarked.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc39011.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span> “The reader will find the same sentiment
quoted in the *Institutes*, volume 3. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc39011.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p45.1"></span>Mais c’est
afin que Dieu leur espargne;” — “But it is in order that God may spare
them.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc39011.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xii.i-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span> See *Institutes*, volume 3.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc39011.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>Nostre
Pasque, assavoir Christ;” — “Our passover, namely, Christ.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc39011.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>Avec pains
sans leuain, c’est a dire, de syncerite et de verite;” — “With
unleavened bread, that is to say, of sincerity and truth.”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc39011.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>Ha en ce
passage un mesme sens comme ce qu’on dit communeement, Qu’ilne faut
qu’vne brebis rongneuse pour gaster tout le troupeau;” — “Has in this
passage the same meaning as what is commonly said: — There needs but one
diseased sheep to infect a whole flock.”

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc39011.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span> —

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span><span id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>grex totus
in agris  
Unius scabie cadit, et porrigine porci:  
Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva  
Juv. II. 79-81.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc39011.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span> “Would any one,” asks *Hervey*, (in his
*Theroa and Aspasio*, volume 1,) “venture to say — ‘Paul our passover is
sacrificed for us?’ Yet this, I think, may be, or rather is in effect
said, by the account which some persons give of Christ’s satisfaction.
The very thought of such a blasphemous absurdity is too painful and
offensive for the serious Christian to dwell upon. I would therefore
direct his attention to a more pleasing object. Let him observe the
exquisite skill which here and everywhere conducts the zeal of our
inspired writer. The odes of Pindar are celebrated for their fine
transitions, which, though bold and surprising, are perfectly natural.
We have in this place,” (<span id="xii.ii-p20.1"></span>[1Co
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="xii.ii-p20.1"></span>) “a
very masterly stroke of the same beautiful kind. The Apostle, speaking
of the incestuous criminal, passes, by a most artful digression, to his
daring topic — a crucified Savior. Who would have expected it on such an
occasion? Yet, when thus admitted, who does not see and admire both the
propriety of the subject and the delicacy of its introduction?” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc39011.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xii.ii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span> Our Author gives a similar definition of
the expression *the old man*, when commenting on <span
id="xii.ii-p21.2"></span>[Romans
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="xii.ii-p21.2"></span>.
“<span id="xii.ii-p21.3"></span>Totam antem naturam significat, quam
afterlinus ex utero, quae adeo regni Dei capax non est, ut interire
eatenus oporteat, quatenus in veram vitam instauramur;” — “It denotes
the whole of that nature which we bring with us from the womb, and is so
far from being fit for the kingdom of God, that it must perish, in so
far as we are renewed to a true life.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc39011.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xii.ii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p22.1"></span>Assauoir,
*Pasque*;” — “Namely, *passover*.”

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc39011.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span> *Charnock* makes the following pointed
observations on the form of expression here employed: — “*Christ the
Passover* — *i* *e* the paschal lamb. The lamb was called the passover.
The sign for the thing signified by it. <span
id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>[2Ch
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#011)<span id="xii.ii-p24.1"></span>.
And they killed the passover, *i* *e* the lamb; for the passover was
properly the angel’s passing over *Israel*, when he was sent as an
executioner of God’s wrath upon the *Egyptians* So <span
id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Mt
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017)<span id="xii.ii-p24.2"></span>.
Where shall we prepare for thee to eat the passover? *i* *e* the paschal
lamb. *Our passover*, *i* *e* our paschal lamb. He is called God’s lamb,
<span id="xii.ii-p24.3"></span>[Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="xii.ii-p24.3"></span>
*God*’*s* in regard of the *author*, *ours* in regard of the *end*:
*God*’*s* lamb in regard of *designation*, *ours* in regard of
*acceptation* *Our passover*, *i* *e* not only of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles. *That* was restrained to the Israelitish nation, *this*
extends, in the offers of it, to all, and belongs to all that are under
the new administration of the covenant of grace. *For us*, (<span
id="xii.ii-p24.4"></span>ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν,) *i* *e* not only for our good, but
*in our stead*, to free us from eternal death — to purchase for us
eternal life.” — *Charnock*’*s* Works, volume 2. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc39011.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xii.ii-p24.5"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p25.1"></span>I1 ne
reste plus sinon que nous en soyons nourris;” — “Nothing remains, but
that we be nourished by it.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc39011.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xii.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span> Our author most probably alludes to <span
id="xii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ex
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)<span id="xii.ii-p28.1"></span>,
“And this day shall be unto you for a *memorial*,” etc. The term used in
the Septuagint is <span id="xii.ii-p28.2"></span>μνημοσυνον, answering
to the Hebrew term <span id="xii.ii-p28.3"></span>זכרון. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc39011.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span> The original word, <span
id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>συναναμίγνυσθαι, literally means *to be mixed
up together with* It is the rendering of the Septuagint for the Hebrew
word <span id="xii.iii-p15.2"></span>יתבולל, in <span
id="xii.iii-p15.3"></span>[Ho 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#008)<span
id="xii.iii-p15.3"></span> *Ephraim hath mixed himself among the
people*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc39011.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p17.1"></span>Ce
seroit vne chose superflue de les admonester,” etc.; — “It were a
superfluous thing to admonish them,” etc.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc39011.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p20"></span> “The rendering of Erasmus is as follows:
“<span id="xii.iii-p20.1"></span>Alioqui utinam videlicet e mundo
exissetis;” — “Otherwise I would, truly, that you had departed out of
the world.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc39011.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p24.1"></span>Car tout
le monde est mis a mal;” — “For the whole world is addicted to evil.”

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc39011.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xii.iii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p25.1"></span>En ceste
sentence;” — “In this sentence.”

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc39011.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p26.1"></span>C’est a
dire, entr’eux;” — “That is to say, among themselves.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc39011.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p29.1"></span>Au texte
Grec il y a de mot a mot, Si aucun frere nomme,” etc.; — “In the Greek
text it literally, If any one, called a brother,” etc.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc39011.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p30"></span> It is so according to the common reading,
which is as follows: — <span id="xii.iii-p30.1"></span>ἐάν τις, ἀδελφὸς
ὀνομαζόμενος, ἣ πόρνος, ἣ πλεονέκτης, κ. τ. λ..” If any one, called a
brother — either a fornicator, or covetous,” etc.; but, as stated by
Bloomfield, “seven MSS., and many versions, and Fathers, the Ed. Princ.,
and those of Beza, Schmid., and Beng., have <span
id="xii.iii-p30.2"></span>ᾖ, (before <span
id="xii.iii-p30.3"></span>πόρνος,) which is approved by Wets., and
Matth., and edited by Griesb., Knapp., Vat., and Tittm.;” and, in
Bloomfield’s opinion, “rightly.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc39011.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xii.iii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p31"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p31.1"></span>Qu’ils
en tirent;” — “Which they draw from it.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc39011.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p33.1"></span>Il les
faut redarguer auec seuerite, et les soliciter continuellement par
admonitions;” — “They ought to be reproved with severity, and plied
perseveringly with admonitions.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc39011.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p34.1"></span>Car leur
condition n’est pas telle comme estoit celle des Corinthiens;” — “For
their condition is not like that of the Corinthians.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc39011.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p37.1"></span>Est venu
furieusement jusques aux defenses et menaces, Que nul ne fust si hardi
de donner a boire ou a manger, ou de feu a celuy qui seroit excommunier,
ou de luy aider aucunement des choses necessaires a la vie presente;” —
“Has in his fury gone so far as to issue forth prohibitions and
threatenings — ‘Let no one be so daring as to give meat, or drink, or
fuel, to the man who has been excommunicated, or to help him in any way
with the things necessary for the present life.’”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc39011.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xii.iii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p38"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p38.1"></span>Et ces
bourreaux encore exercent ceste cruaute extreme, mesme contre les
innocens;” — “And these hangmen do, besides, exercise this extreme
cruelty even against the innocent.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc39011.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p39"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p39.1"></span>Telle
facon d’excommunier;” — “Such a method of excommunication.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc39011.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p42"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p42.2"></span>Et
courir a trauers champs;” — “And run across the fields.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc39011.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xii.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p45"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p45.1"></span>Quand on
supporte un homme meschant et mal-vivant;” — “When a wicked and
unprincipled man is allowed to continue.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc39011.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xii.iii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p46"></span> It is well observed by Witsius in his
Dissertations on the Lord’s Prayer, (Biblical Cabinet, No. 24,) that the
appellation of *the evil One* is properly applied to Satan, “because he
does nothing but what is evil — because all the evil that exists in the
universe originated with him — because in doing evil, and in persuading
others to do evil, he finds his only delight, the wicked and malignant
solace of his desperate misery.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc39011.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p47"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p47.1"></span>Combien
il est utile et necessaire;” — “How useful it is and necessary.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc39011.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p48"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p48.1"></span>Quand il
y a vne license de malfaire, et les meschans sont soufferts;” — “When
there is a license to do evil, and the wicked are tolerated.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc39011.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p49"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p49.1"></span>Desnuee
de puissance externe;” — “Destitute of external power.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc39012)
