[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39015)  [Next](cc39017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Moreover, brethren, I would not that
ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea;

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Nolo autem vos ignorare, fratres,
quod partes nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt, et omnes mare transierunt.

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And were all baptized unto Moses in
the cloud and in the sea;

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et omnes in Mose uterunt baptizati in
nube et in mari,

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And did all eat the same spiritual
meat;

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et omnes eandem escam spiritualem
manducarunt,

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And did all drink the same spiritual
drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and
that Rock was Christ.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et omnes eundem biberunt spiritualem
potum: bibebant autem e spirituali, quae eos censequebatur, petra.
Petra, autem, erat Christus.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** But with many of them God was not
well pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Verum complures corum grati non
fuerant Deo: prostrati enim fuerunt in deserto.

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span><span id="xvii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>What he had previously taught by two
similitudes, he now confirms by examples. The Corinthians grew wanton,
and gloried, as if they had served out their time,  <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) or at least had finished their course,
when they had scarcely left the starting-point. This vain exultation and
confidence he represses in this manner — “As I see that you are quietly
taking your ease at the very outset of your course, *I would not have
you ignorant* of what befell the people of Israel in consequence of
this, that their example may arouse you.” As, however, on examples being
adduced, any point of difference destroys the force of the comparison,
Paul premises, that there is no such dissimilarity between us and the
Israelites, as to make our condition different from theirs. Having it,
therefore, in view to threaten the Corinthians with the same vengeance
as had overtaken them, he begins in this manner — “Beware of glorying in
any peculiar privilege, as if you were in higher esteem than they were
in the sight of God.” For they were favored with the same benefits as we
at this day enjoy; there was a Church of God among them, as there is at
this day among us; they had the same sacraments, to be tokens to them of
the grace of God;  <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) but, on their
abusing their privileges, they did not escape the judgment of God.
 <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) Be afraid, therefore; for the
same thing is impending over *you*. Jude makes use of the same argument
in his Epistle. (<span id="xvii.i-p17.2"></span>[Jude
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005)<span id="xvii.i-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>1. *All were under the cloud.* The
Apostle’s object is to show, that the Israelites were no less the people
of God than we are, that we may know, that we will not escape with
impunity the hand of God, which punished them  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) with so much severity. For the sum is
this — “If God spared not them, neither will he spare you, for your
condition is similar.” That similarity he proves from this — that they
had been honored with the same tokens of God’s grace, for the sacraments
are badges by which the Church of God is distinguished. He treats first
of baptism, and teaches that the cloud, which protected the Israelites
in the desert from the heat of the sun, and directed their course, and
also their passage through the sea, was to them as a baptism; he says,
also, that in the manna, and the water flowing from the rock, there was
a sacrament which corresponded with the sacred Supper.

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>They were, says he, *baptized in Moses*,
that is, under the ministry or guidance of Moses. For I take the
particle <span id="xvii.i-p20.1"></span>εἰς to be used here instead of
<span id="xvii.i-p20.2"></span>ἐν, agreeably to the common usage of
Scripture, because we are assuredly baptized in the name of Christ, and
not of any mere man, as he has stated in <span
id="xvii.i-p20.3"></span>[1Co
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="xvii.i-p20.3"></span>,
and that for two reasons. These are, *first*, because we are by baptism
initiated  <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) into the doctrine of
Christ alone; and, *secondly*, because his name alone is invoked,
inasmuch as baptism is founded on his influence alone. They were,
therefore, *baptized in Moses*, that is, under his guidance or ministry,
as has been already stated. How? *In the cloud and in the sea.* “They
were, then, baptized twice,” some one will say. I answer, that there are
*two* signs made mention of, making, however, but *one* baptism,
corresponding to ours.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span>Here, however, a more difficult question
presents itself. For it is certain, that the advantage of those gifts,
which Paul makes mention of, was temporal.  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) The *cloud* protected them from the
heat of the sun, and showed them the way: these are outward advantages
of the present life. In like manner, their passage through the *sea* was
attended with this effect, that they got clear off from Pharaoh’s
cruelty, and escaped from imminent hazard of death. The advantage of
*our* baptism, on the other hand, is spiritual. Why then does Paul turn
earthly benefits into sacraments, and seek to find some spiritual
mystery  <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) in them? I answer, that
it was not without good reason that Paul sought in miracles of this
nature something more than the mere outward advantage of the flesh. For,
though God designed to promote his people’s advantage in respect of the
present life, what he had mainly in view was, to declare and manifest
himself to be their God, and under *that*, eternal salvation is
comprehended.

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span>The *cloud*, in various instances,  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) is called the symbol of his presence.
As, therefore, he declared by means of it, that he was present with
them, as his peculiar and chosen people, there can be no doubt that, in
addition to an earthly advantage, they had in it, besides, a token of
spiritual life. Thus its use was twofold, as was also that of the
passage through the sea, for a way was opened up for them through the
midst of the sea, that they might escape from the hand of Pharaoh; but
to what was this owing, but to the circumstance, that the Lord, having
taken them under his guardianship and protection, determined by every
means to defend them? Hence, they concluded from this, that they were
the objects of God’s care, and that he had their salvation in charge.
Hence, too, the Passover, which was instituted to celebrate the
remembrance of their deliverance, was nevertheless, at the same time, a
sacrament of Christ. How so? Because God had, under a temporal benefit,
manifested himself as a Savior. Any one that will attentively consider
these things, will find that there is no absurdity in Paul’s words. Nay
more, he will perceive both in the spiritual substance and in the
visible sign a most striking correspondence between the baptism of the
Jews, and ours.

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span>It is however objected again, that we do
not find a word of all this.  <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527)
This I admit, but there is no doubt, that God by his Spirit supplied the
want of outward preaching, as we may see in the instance of the brazen
serpent, which was, as Christ himself testifies, a spiritual sacrament,
(<span id="xvii.i-p28.2"></span>[Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span id="xvii.i-p28.2"></span>,)
and yet not a word has come down to us as to this thing,  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) but the Lord revealed to believers of
that age, in the manner he thought fit, the secret, which would
otherwise have remained hid.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span><span id="xvii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span>**3.** *The same spiritual meat* He now
makes mention of the other sacrament, which corresponds to the Holy
Supper of the Lord. “The manna,” says he, “and the water that flowed
forth from the rock, served not merely for the food of the body, but
also for the spiritual nourishment of souls.” It is true, that both were
means of sustenance for the body, but this does not hinder their serving
also another purpose. While, therefore, the Lord relieved the
necessities of the body, he, at the same time, provided for the
everlasting welfare of souls. These two things would be easily
reconciled, were there not a difficulty presented in Christ’s words,
(<span id="xvii.i-p31.1"></span>[Joh
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031)<span id="xvii.i-p31.1"></span>,)
where he makes the manna the corruptible food of the belly, which he
contrasts with the true food of the soul. That statement appears to
differ widely from what Paul says here. This knot, too, is easily
solved. It is the manner of scripture, when treating of the sacraments,
or other things, to speak in some cases according to the capacity of the
hearers, and in that case it has respect not to the nature of the thing,
but to the mistaken idea of the hearers. Thus, Paul does not always
speak of circumcision in the same way, for when he has a view to the
appointment of God in it, he says, that it was *a seal of the
righteousness of the faith*, (<span id="xvii.i-p31.2"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p31.2"></span>,)
but when he is disputing with those who gloried in an outward and bare
sign, and reposed in it a mistaken confidence of salvation, he says,
that it is a token of condemnation, because men bind themselves by it
*to keep the whole law* (<span id="xvii.i-p31.3"></span>[Gal.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)<span id="xvii.i-p31.3"></span>.)
For he takes merely the opinion that the false apostles had of it,
because he contends, not against the pure institution of God, but
against their mistaken view. In this way, as the carnal multitude
preferred Moses to Christ, because he had fed the people in the desert
for forty years, and looked to nothing in the manna but the food of the
belly, (as indeed they sought nothing else,) Christ in his reply does
not explain what was meant by the manna, but, passing over everything
else, suits his discourse to the idea entertained by his hearers. “Moses
is held by you in the highest esteem, and even in admiration, as a most
eminent Prophet, because he filled the bellies of your fathers in the
desert. For this one thing you object against me: I am accounted nothing
by you, because I do not supply you with food for the belly. But if you
reckon corruptible food of so much importance, what ought you to think
of the life-giving bread, with which souls are nourished up unto eternal
life?.” We see then that the Lord speaks there — not according to the
nature of the thing, but rather according to the apprehension of his
hearers.  <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) Paul, on the other
hand, looks here — not to the ordinance of God, but to the abuse of it
by the wicked.

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span>Farther, when he says that the fathers ate
*the same spiritual meat,* he shows, *first*, what is the virtue and
efficacy of the Sacraments, and, *secondly*, he declares, that the
ancient Sacraments of the Law had the same virtue as ours have at this
day. For, if the manna was spiritual food, it follows, that it is not
bare emblems that are presented to us in the Sacraments, but that the
thing represented is at the same time truly imparted, for God is not a
deceiver to feed us with empty fancies.  <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) A sign, it is true, *is* a sign, and
retains its essence, but, as Papists act a ridiculous part, who dream of
transformations, (I know not of what sort,) so it is not for us to
separate between the reality and the emblem which God has conjoined.
Papists confound the reality and the sign: profane men, as, for example,
Suenckfeldius, and the like, separate the signs from the realities. Let
us maintain a middle course,  <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531)
or, in other words, let us observe the connection appointed by the Lord,
but still keep them distinct, that we may not mistakingly transfer to
the one what belongs to the other.

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>It remains that we speak of the *second*
point — the resemblance between the ancient signs and ours. It is a
well-known dogma of the schoolmen — that the Sacraments of the ancient
law were emblems of grace, but ours confer it. This passage is admirably
suited for refuting that error, for it shows that the reality of the
Sacrament was presented to the ancient people of God no less than to us.
It is therefore a base fancy of the Sorbonists, that the holy fathers
under the law had the signs without the reality. I grant, indeed, that
the efficacy of the signs is furnished to us at once more clearly and
more abundantly from the time of Christ’s manifestation in the flesh
than it was possessed by the fathers. Thus there is a difference between
us and them only in degree, or, (as they commonly say,) of “more and
less,” for we receive more fully what they received in a smaller
measure. It is not as if they had had bare emblems, while we enjoy the
reality.  <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532)

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span>Some explain it to mean, that they  <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) *ate the same meat* together among
themselves, and do not wish us to understand that there is a comparison
between us and them; but these do not consider Paul’s object. For what
does he mean to say here, but that the ancient people of God were
honored with the same benefits with us, and were partakers of the same
sacraments, that we might not, from confiding in any peculiar privilege,
imagine that we would be exempted from the punishment which they
endured? At the same time, I should not be prepared to contest the point
with any one; I merely state my own opinion. In the meantime, I am well
aware, what show of reason is advanced by those who adopt the opposite
interpretation — that it suits best with the similitude made use of
immediately before — that all the Israelites had the same race-ground
marked out for them, and all started from the same point: all entered
upon the same course: all were partakers of the same hope, but many were
shut out from the reward. When, however, I take everything attentively
into consideration, I am not induced by these considerations to give up
my opinion; for it is not without good reason that the Apostle makes
mention of two sacraments merely, and, more particularly, baptism. For
what purpose was this, but to contrast them with us? Unquestionably, if
he had restricted his comparison to the body of that people, he would
rather have brought forward circumcision, and other sacraments that were
better known and more distinguished, but, instead of this, he chose
rather those that were more obscure, because they served more as a
contrast between us and them. Nor would the application that he subjoins
be otherwise so suitable — “All things that happened to them are
examples to us, inasmuch as we there see the judgments of God that are
impending over us, if we involve ourselves in the same crimes.”

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span><span id="xvii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span>**4.** *That rock was Christ* Some absurdly
pervert these words of Paul, as if he had said, that Christ was the
spiritual rock, and as if he were not speaking of that rock which was a
visible sign, for we see that he is expressly treating of outward signs.
The objection that they make — that the rock is spoken of as
*spiritual*, is a frivolous one, inasmuch as that epithet is applied to
it simply that we may know that it was a token of a spiritual mystery.
In the mean time, there is no doubt, that he compares our sacraments
with the ancient ones. Their *second* objection is more foolish and more
childish — “How could a rock,” say they, “that stood firm in its place,
*follow* the Israelites?” — as if it were not abundantly manifest, that
by the word *rock* is meant the stream of water, which never ceased to
accompany the people. For Paul extols  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) the grace of God, on this account,
that he commanded the water that was drawn out from the rock to flow
forth wherever the people journeyed, as if the rock itself had followed
them. Now if Paul’s meaning were, that Christ is the spiritual
foundation of the Church, what occasion were there for his using the
past tense?  <span id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) It is abundantly
manifest, that something is here expressed that was peculiar to the
fathers. Away, then, with that foolish fancy by which contentious men
choose rather to show their impudence, than admit that they are
sacramental forms of expression!  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536)

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span>I have, however, already stated, that the
reality of the things signified was exhibited in connection with the
ancient sacraments. As, therefore, they were emblems of Christ, it
follows, that Christ was connected with them, not locally, nor by a
natural or substantial union, but sacramentally. On this principle the
Apostle says, that *the rock was Christ*, for nothing is more common
than metonymy in speaking of sacraments. The name of the thing,
therefore, is transferred here to the sign — not as if it were strictly
applicable, but figuratively, on the ground of that connection which I
have mentioned. I touch upon this, however, the more slightly, because
it will be more largely treated of when we come to the 11th Chapter.

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span>There remains another question. “Seeing
that we now in the Supper eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood,
how could the Jews be partakers of *the same spiritual meat and drink,*
when there was as yet no flesh of Christ that they could eat?” I answer,
that though his flesh did not as yet exist, it was, nevertheless, food
for them. Nor is this an empty or sophistical subtilty, for their
salvation depended on the benefit of his death and resurrection. Hence,
they required to receive the flesh and the blood of Christ, that they
might participate in the benefit of redemption. This reception of it was
the secret work of the Holy Spirit, who wrought in them in such a
manner, that Christ’s flesh, though not yet created, was made
efficacious in them. He means, however, that they ate in their own way,
which was different from ours,  <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537)
and this is what I have previously stated, that Christ is now presented
to us more fully, according to the measure of the revelation. For, in
the present day, the eating is substantial, which it could not have been
then — that is, Christ feeds us with his flesh, which has been
sacrificed for us, and appointed as our food, and from this we derive
life.

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span><span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span>**5.** *But many of them.* We have now the
reason why the Apostle has premised these things — that we might not
claim for ourselves any dignity or excellence above them, but might walk
in humility and fear, for thus only shall we secure, that we have not
been favored in vain with the light of truth, and with such an abundance
of gracious benefits. “God,” says he, “had chosen them all as his
people, but many of them fell from grace. Let us, therefore, take heed,
lest the same thing should happen to us, being admonished by so many
examples, for God will not suffer *that* to go unpunished in *us*, which
he punished so severely in *them*.”

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span>Here again it is objected: “If it is true,
that hypocrites and wicked persons in that age ate spiritual meat, do
unbelievers in the present day partake of the reality in the
sacraments?” Some, afraid lest the unbelief of men should seem to
detract from the truth of God, teach that the reality is received by the
wicked along with the sign. This fear, however, is needless, for the
Lord offers, it is true, to the worthy and to the unworthy what he
represents, but all are not capable of receiving it. In the meantime,
the sacrament does not change its nature, nor does it lose anything of
its efficacy. Hence the manna, in relation to God, was spiritual meat
even to unbelievers, but because the mouth of unbelievers was but
carnal, they did not eat what was given them. The fuller discussion,
however, of this question I reserve for the 11th Chapter.

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span>For they were overthrown. Proof is here
furnished, by adducing a token, that they did not please God — inasmuch
as he exercised his wrath upon them with severity,  <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) and took vengeance on their
ingratitude. Some understand this as referring to the whole of the
people that died in the desert, with the exception of only two — Caleb
and Joshua. (<span id="xvii.i-p52.2"></span>[Nu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#029)<span id="xvii.i-p52.2"></span>.)
I understand him, however, as referring merely to those, whom he
immediately afterwards makes mention of in different classes.

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 10:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006)<span
id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Now these things were our examples,
to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Haec autem typi nobis fuerunt, ne
simus concupiscentes malorum, sicut illi concupiverunt.

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Neither be ye idolaters, as *were*
some of them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play.

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Neque idololatrae sitis, quemadmodum
quidam eorum: sicut scriptum est. (<span id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ex
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>.)
Sedit populus ad edendum et bibendum, et surrexerunt ad ludendum.

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** Neither let us commit fornication,
as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty
thousand.

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Neque scortemur, quemadmodum et
quidam eorum scortati sunt, et ceciderunt uno die viginti tria millia.

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Neither let us tempt Christ, as some
of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Neque tentemus Christum, quemadmodum
et quidam eorum tentarunt, et exstincti sunt a serpentibus.

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span>**10.** Neither murmur ye, as some of them
also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Neque murmuretis, quemadmodum et
quidam eorum murmurarant, et perditi ruerunt a vastatore.

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span>**11.** Now all these things happened unto
them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come.

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span>**11.** Haec autem omnia typi contigerunt
illis: scripta autem sunt ad nostri admonitionem, in quos fines
saeculorum inciderunt.

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span>**12.** Wherefore let him that thinketh he
standeth take heed lest he fall.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span>**12.** Proinde qui se putat stare, videat
ne cadat.

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p17"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p18"></span>**6.** *Now these things were types to
us.* He warns us in still more explicit terms, that we have to do with
the punishment that was inflicted upon them, so that they are a lesson
to us, that we may not provoke the anger of God as they did. “God,” says
he, “in punishing them has set before us, as in a picture, his severity,
that, instructed by their example, we may learn to fear.” Of the term
*type* I shall speak presently. Only for the present I should wish my
readers to know, that it is not without consideration that I have given
a different rendering from that of the old translation,  <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) and of Erasmus. For they obscure
Paul’s meaning, or at least they do not bring out with sufficient
clearness this idea — that God has in that people presented a picture
for our instruction.

<span id="xvii.ii-p20"></span>*That we might not lust after evil
things.* He now enumerates particular instances, or certain examples,
that he may take occasion from this to reprove some vices, as to which
it was proper that the Corinthians should be admonished. I am of
opinion, that the history that is here referred to is what is recorded
in <span id="xvii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Nu
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004)<span id="xvii.ii-p20.1"></span>,
etc., though others refer it to what is recorded in <span
id="xvii.ii-p20.2"></span>[Nu
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#064)<span id="xvii.ii-p20.2"></span>.
The people, after having been for some time fed with manna, at length
took a dislike to it, and began to desire other kinds of food, which
they had been accustomed to partake of in Egypt. Now they sinned in two
ways, for they despised the peculiar gift of God, and they eagerly
longed after a variety of meats and delicacies, contrary to the will of
God. The Lord, provoked by this lawless appetite, inflicted upon the
people a grievous blow. Hence the place was called the

<span id="xvii.ii-p21"></span>graves of lust,  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) because there they buried those whom  
the Lord had smitten. (<span id="xvii.ii-p22.2"></span>[Nu
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034)<span
id="xvii.ii-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.ii-p23"></span>The Lord by this example testified how
much he hates those lusts that arise from dislike of his gifts, and from
our lawless appetite, for whatever goes beyond the measure that God has
prescribed is justly reckoned evil and unlawful.

<span id="xvii.ii-p24"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p25"></span>**7.** *Neither be ye idolaters* He
touches upon the history that is recorded in <span
id="xvii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Ex
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)<span id="xvii.ii-p25.1"></span>,
etc. For when Moses made a longer stay upon the mountain than the
unseemly fickleness of the people could endure, Aaron was constrained to
make a calf, and set it up as an object of worship. Not that the people
wished to change their God, but rather to have some visible token of
God’s presence, in accordance with their carnal apprehension. God, in
punishing at that time this idolatry with the greatest severity, showed
by that example how much he abhors idolatry.

<span id="xvii.ii-p26"></span>*As it is written, The people sat down*
This passage is rightly interpreted by few, for they understand
intemperance among the people to have been the occasion of wantonness,
 <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) in accordance with the common
proverb, “Dancing comes after a full diet.”  <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) But Moses speaks of a sacred feast, or
in other words, what they celebrated in honor of the idol. Hence
*feasting* and *play* were two appendages of idolatry. For it was
customary, both among the people of Israel and among the rotaries of
superstition, to have a feast in connection with a sacrifice, as a part
of divine worship, at which no profane or unclean persons were allowed
to be present. The Gentiles, in addition to this, appointed sacred games
in honor of their idols, in conformity with which the Israelites
doubtless on that occasion worshipped their calf,  <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) for such is the presumption of the
human mind, that it ascribes to God whatever pleases itself. Hence the
Gentiles have fallen into such a depth of infatuation as to believe,
that their gods are delighted with the basest spectacles, immodest
dances, impurity of speech, and every kind of obscenity. Hence in
imitation of them the Israelitish people, having observed their sacred
banquet, rose up to celebrate the games, that nothing might be wanting
in honor of the idol. This is the true and simple meaning.

<span id="xvii.ii-p30"></span>But here it is asked, why the Apostle
makes mention of the feast and the games, rather than of adoration, for
this is the chief thing in idolatry, while the other two things were
merely appendages. The reason is, that he has selected what best suited
the case of the Corinthians. For it is not likely, that they frequented
the assemblies of the wicked, for the purpose of prostrating themselves
before the idols, but partook of their feasts, held in honor of their
deities, and did not keep at a distance from those base ceremonies,
which were tokens of idolatry. It is not therefore without good reason
that the Apostle declares, that their particular form of offense is
expressly condemned by God. He intimates, in short, that no part of
idolatry  <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) can be touched without
contracting pollution, and that those will not escape punishment from
the hand of God, who defile themselves with the outward tokens of
idolatry.

<span id="xvii.ii-p32"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p33"></span>**8.** *Neither let us commit fornication*
Now he speaks of *fornication*, in respect of which, as appears from
historical accounts, great licentiousness prevailed among the
Corinthians, and we may readily infer from what goes before, that those
who had professed themselves to be Christ’s were not yet altogether free
from this vice. The punishment of this vice, also, ought to alarm us,
and lead us to bear in mind, how loathsome impure lusts are to God, for
there perished in one day twenty-three thousand, or as Moses says,
twenty-four. Though they differ as to number, it is easy to reconcile
them, as it is no unusual thing, when it is not intended to number
exactly and minutely each head,  <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545)
to put down a number that comes near it, as among the Romans there were
those that received the name of <span
id="xvii.ii-p34.2"></span>*Centumviri*,  <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) (The *Hundred*,) while in reality
there were two above the hundred. As there were, therefore, about
twenty-four thousand that were overthrown by the Lord’s hand — that is,
above twenty-three, Moses has set down the number *above* the mark, and
Paul, the number *below* it, and in this way there is in reality no
difference. This history is recorded in <span
id="xvii.ii-p35.3"></span>[Nu
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p36"></span>There remains, however, one difficulty
here — why it is that Paul attributes this punishment to fornication,
while Moses relates that the anger of God was aroused against the people
on this account — that they had initiated themselves in the sacred rites
of Baalpeor.  <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) But as the
defection began with fornication, and the children of Israel fell into
that impiety, not so much from being influenced by religious
considerations,  <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) as from being
allured by the enticements of harlots, everything evil that followed
from it ought to be attributed to fornication. For Balaam had given this
counsel, that the Midianites should prostitute their daughters to the
Israelites, with the view of estranging them from the true worship of
God. Nay more, their excessive blindness, in allowing themselves to be
drawn into impiety  <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) by the
enticements of harlots, was the punishment of lust. Let us learn,
accordingly, that fornication is no light offense, which was punished on
that occasion by God so severely and indeed in a variety of ways.

<span id="xvii.ii-p40"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p41"></span>**9.** *Neither let us tempt Christ* This
part of the exhortation refers to the history that is recorded in <span
id="xvii.ii-p41.1"></span>[Nu
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii-p41.1"></span>.
For the people, having become weary of the length of time, began to
complain of their condition, and to expostulate with God — “Why has God
deceived us,” etc. This murmuring of the people Paul speaks of as a
*tempting*; and not without good reason, for *tempting* is opposed to
patience. What reason was there at that time why the people should rise
up against God, except this — that, under the influence of base desire,
 <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) they could not wait in patience
the arrival of the time appointed by the Lord? Let us, therefore, take
notice, that the fountain of that evil against which Paul here warns us
is impatience, when we wish to go before God, and do not give ourselves
up to be ruled by Him, but rather wish to bind him to our inclination
and laws. This evil God severely punished in the Israelitish people. Now
he remains always like himself — a just Judge. Let us therefore not
*tempt* him, if we would not have experience of the same punishment.

<span id="xvii.ii-p43"></span>This is a remarkable passage in proof of
the eternity of Christ; for the cavil of Erasmus has no force — “Let us
not tempt Christ, as some of them tempted *God*;” for to supply the word
*God* is extremely forced.  <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) Nor
is it to be wondered that Christ is called the Leader of the Israelitish
people. For as God was never propitious to his people except through
that Mediator, so he conferred no benefit except through his hand.
Farther, the angel who appeared at first to Moses, and was always
present with the people during their journeying, is frequently called
<span id="xvii.ii-p44.1"></span>יהוה, Jehovah.  <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) Let us then regard it as a settled
point, that that angel was the Son of God, and was even then the guide
of the Church of which he was the Head. As to the term *Christ*, from
its having a signification that corresponds with his human nature, it
was not as yet applicable to the Son of God, but it is assigned to him
by the communication of properties, as we read elsewhere, that

<span id="xvii.ii-p46"></span>the Son of Man came down from heaven.
(<span id="xvii.ii-p46.1"></span>[Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="xvii.ii-p46.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.ii-p47"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p48"></span>**10.** *Neither murmur ye* Others
understand this to be the murmuring that arose, when the twelve, who had
been sent to spy out the land, disheartened, on their return, the minds
of the people. But as that murmuring was not punished suddenly by any
special chastisement from the Lord, but was simply followed by the
infliction of this punishment — that all were excluded from the
possession of the land, it is necessary to explain this passage
otherwise. It was a most severe punishment, it is true, to be shut out
from entering the land,  <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553) but the
words of Paul, when he says that they were *destroyed* by the
*destroyer*, express another kind of chastisement. I refer it,
accordingly, to the history, which is recorded in the sixteenth chapter
of Numbers. \[<span id="xvii.ii-p49.2"></span>[Nu
16:1-50](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)<span
id="xvii.ii-p49.2"></span>\]. For when God had punished the pride of
Korah and Abiram, the people raised a tumult against Moses and Aaron, as
if they had been to blame for the punishment which the Lord had
inflicted. This madness of the people God punished by sending down fire
from heaven, which swallowed up many of them — upwards of fourteen
thousand. It is, therefore, a striking and memorable token of God’s
wrath against rebels and seditious persons, that murmur against him.

<span id="xvii.ii-p50"></span>Those persons, it is true, *murmured*
against Moses; but as they had no ground for insulting him, and had no
occasion for being incensed against him, unless it was that he had
faithfully discharged the duty which had been enjoined upon him by God,
God himself was assailed by that murmuring. Let us, accordingly, bear in
mind that we have to do with God, and not with men, if we rise up
against the faithful ministers of God, and let us know that this
audacity  <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) will not go
unpunished.

<span id="xvii.ii-p52"></span>By the *destroyer* you may understand the
Angel, who executed the judgment of God. Now he sometimes employs the
ministry of bad angels, sometimes of good, in punishing men, as appears
from various passages of Scripture. As Paul here does not make a
distinction between the one and the other, you may understand it of
either.

<span id="xvii.ii-p53"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p54"></span>**11.** *Now all these things happened as
types.* He again repeats it — that all these things happened to the
Israelites, that they might be types to us — that is, examples, in which
God places his judgments before our *eyes* I am well aware, that others
philosophize on these words with great refinement, but I think that I
have fully expressed the Apostle’s meaning, when I say, that by these
examples, like so many pictures, we are instructed what judgments of God
are impending over idolaters, fornicators, and other contemners of God.
For they are lively pictures, representing God as angry on account of
such sins. This exposition, besides being simple and accurate, has this
additional advantage, that it blocks up the path of certain madmen,
 <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) who wrest this passage for the
purpose of proving, that among that ancient people there was nothing
done but what was shadowy. First of all, they assume that that people is
a figure of the Church. From this they infer, that everything that God
promised to them, or accomplished for them — all benefits, all
punishments,  <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) only prefigured
what required to be accomplished in reality after Christ’s advent. This
is a most pestilential frenzy, which does great injury to the holy
fathers, and much greater still to God. For that people was a figure of
the Christian Church, in such a manner as to be at the same time a true
Church. Their condition represented ours in such a manner that there was
at the same time, even then, a proper condition of a Church. The
promises given to them shadowed forth the gospel in such a way, that
they had it included in them. Their sacraments served to prefigure ours
in such a way, that they were nevertheless, even for that period, true
sacraments, having a present efficacy. In fine, those who at that time
made a right use, both of doctrine, and of signs, were endowed with the
same spirit of faith as we are. These madmen, therefore, derive no
support from these words of Paul, which do not mean that the things that
were done in that age were types, in such a way as to have at that time
no reality, but a mere empty show. Nay more, they expressly teach us,
(as we have explained,) that those things which may be of use *for our
admonition*, are there set forth before us, as in a picture.

<span id="xvii.ii-p57"></span>*They are written for our admonition* This
second clause is explanatory of the former; for it was of no importance
to the Israelites, but to us exclusively, that these things should be
committed to record.  <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) It does
not, however, follow from this, that these inflictions were not true
chastisements from God, suited for their correction at that time, but as
God then inflicted his judgments, so he designed that they should be
kept everlastingly in remembrance for our instruction. For of what
advantage were the history of them to the dead; and as to the living,
how would it be of advantage to them, unless they repented, admonished
by the examples of others? Now he takes for granted the principle, as to
which all pious persons ought to be agreed — that there is nothing
revealed in the Scriptures, that is not profitable to be known.

<span id="xvii.ii-p59"></span>*Upon whom the ends of the world are come*
The word <span id="xvii.ii-p59.1"></span>τέλη (ends) sometimes means
*mysteries*;  <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) and that
signification would not suit in with this passage. I follow, however,
the common rendering, as being more simple. He says then, that the ends
of all ages are come upon us, inasmuch as the fullness of all things is
suitable to this age, because it is now the last times. For the kingdom
of Christ is the main object of the Law and of all the Prophets. But
this statement of Paul is at variance with the common opinion — that
God, while more severe under the Old Testament, and always ready and
armed for the punishment of crimes, has now begun to be exorable, and
more ready to forgive. They explain, also, our being under the law of
grace, in this sense — that we have God more placable than the ancients
had. But what says Paul? If God inflicted punishment upon them, he will
not the more spare you. Away, then, with the error, that God is now more
remiss in exacting the punishment of crimes! It must, indeed, be
acknowledged, that, by the advent of Christ, God’s goodness has been
more openly and more abundantly poured forth towards men; but what has
this to do with impunity for the abandoned, who abuse his grace?  <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559)

<span id="xvii.ii-p62"></span>This one thing only must be noticed, that
in the present day the mode of punishment is different; for as God of
old was more prepared to reward the pious with outward tokens of his
blessing, that he might testify to them his fatherly love, so he showed
his wrath more by corporal punishments. *Now*, on the other hand, in
that fuller revelation which we enjoy, he does not so frequently inflict
visible punishments, and does not so frequently inflict corporal
punishment even upon the wicked. You will find more on this subject in
my Institutes.  <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560)

<span id="xvii.ii-p64"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p65"></span>**12.** *Wherefore let him that thinketh
he standeth* The Apostle concludes from what goes before, that we must
not glory in our beginnings or progress, so as to resign ourselves to
carelessness and inactivity.  <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561)
For the Corinthians gloried in their condition in such a way, that,
forgetting their weakness, they fell into many crimes. This was a false
confidence of such a kind as the Prophets frequently reprove in the
Israelitish people. As, however, Papists wrest this passage for the
purpose of maintaining their impious doctrine respecting faith, as
having constantly doubt connected with it,  <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) let us observe that there are two
kinds of assurance.

<span id="xvii.ii-p68"></span>The *one* is that which rests on the
promises of God, because a pious conscience feels assured that God will
never be wanting to it; and, relying on this unconquerable persuasion,
triumphs boldly and intrepidly over Satan and sin, and yet,
nevertheless, keeping in mind its own infirmity, casts itself  <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) upon God, and with carefulness and
anxiety commits itself to him. This kind of assurance is sacred, and is
inseparable from faith, as appears from many passages of Scripture, and
especially <span id="xvii.ii-p69.2"></span>[Ro
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)<span id="xvii.ii-p69.2"></span>.

<span id="xvii.ii-p70"></span>The *other* arises from negligence, when
men, puffed up with the gifts that they have, give themselves no
concern, as if they were beyond the reach of danger, but rest satisfied
with their condition. Hence it is that they are exposed to all the
assaults of Satan. This is the kind of assurance which Paul would have
the Corinthians to abandon, because he saw that they were satisfied with
themselves under the influence of a silly conceit. He does not, however,
exhort them to be always anxiously in doubt as to the will of God, or to
tremble from uncertainty as to their salvation, as Papists dream.  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) In short, let us bear in mind, that
Paul is here addressing persons who were puffed up with a base
confidence in the flesh, and represses that assurance which is grounded
upon men — not upon God. For after commending the Colossians for the
solidity or *steadfastness of their faith*, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p71.2"></span>[Col
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii-p71.2"></span>,)
he exhorts them to be

<span id="xvii.ii-p72"></span>rooted in Christ, to remain firm, and to
be built up and  
confirmed in the faith. (<span id="xvii.ii-p72.2"></span>[Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007)<span id="xvii.ii-p72.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 10:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>**13.** There hath no temptation taken you
but such as is common to man: but God *is* faithful, who will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear *it*

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span>**13.** Tentatio vos non apprehendit nisi
humana. Fidelis autem Deus, qui non sinet vos tentari supra quam
potestis: sed dabit una cum tentatione etiam exitum, ut possitis
sustinere.

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span>**14.** Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee
from idolatry.

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span>**14.** Quapropter, dilecti mei, fu gite
ab idololatria.

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span>**15.** I speak as to wise men; judge ye
what I say.

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span>**15.** Tanquam prudentibus loquor:
iudicate ipsi quod dico.

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span>**16.** The cup of blessing, which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

<span id="xvii.iii-p9"></span>**16.** Calix benedictionis, cui bene
dicimus, nonne communicatio est sanguinis Christi? panis, quem fran
gimus, nonne communicatio est cor ports Christi?

<span id="xvii.iii-p10"></span>**17.** For we *being* many are one
bread, *and* one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.

<span id="xvii.iii-p11"></span>**17.** Quoniam unus panis, unum corpus
multi sumus: omnes enim de uno pane participamus.

<span id="xvii.iii-p12"></span>**18.** Behold Israel after the flesh:
are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?

<span id="xvii.iii-p13"></span>**18.** Videte Israel secundum car nem:
nonne qui edunt hostias, altari communicant?

<span id="xvii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iii-p15"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p16"></span>**13.** *No temptation has taken you.*
 <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) Let others take their own way
of interpreting this. For my part, I am of opinion that it was intended
for their consolation, lest on hearing of such appalling instances of
the wrath of God, as he had previously related, they should feel
discouraged, being overpowered with alarm. Hence, in order that his
exhortation might be of advantage, he adds, that there is room for
repentance. “There is no reason why you should despond; for I have not
had it in view to give you occasion for despair, nor has anything
happened to you but what is common to men.” Others are of opinion that
he rather chides their cowardice in giving way, on being so slightly
tried;  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) and unquestionably the
word rendered *human* is sometimes taken to mean moderate.  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) The meaning, then, according to them
would be this: “Did it become you thus to give way under a slight
trial?” But as it agrees better with the context, if we consider it as
consolation, I am on this account rather inclined to that view.

<span id="xvii.iii-p20"></span>*But God is faithful* As he exhorted them
to be of good courage as to the past, in order that he might stir them
up to repentance, so he also comforts them as to the future with a sure
hope, on the ground that *God would not suffer them to be tempted beyond
their strength.* He exhorts them, however, to look to the Lord, because
a temptation, however slight it may be, will straightway overcome us,
and all will be over with us, if we rely upon our own strength. He
speaks of the Lord, as *faithful*, not merely as being true to his
promises, but as though he had said. The Lord is the sure guardian of
his people, under whose protection you are safe, for he never leaves his
people destitute. Accordingly, when he has received you under his
protection, you have no cause to fear, provided you depend entirely upon
him. For certainly this were a species of deception, if he were to
withdraw his aid in the time of need, or if he were, on seeing us weak
and ready to sink under the load, to lengthen out our trials still
farther.  <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568)

<span id="xvii.iii-p22"></span>Now God helps us in two ways, that we may
not be overcome by the temptation; for he supplies us with strength, and
he sets limits to the temptation. It is of the *second* of these ways
that the Apostle here chiefly speaks. At the same time, he does not
exclude the former — that God alleviates temptations, that they may not
overpower us by their weight. For he knows the measure of our power,
which he has himself conferred. According to that, he regulates our
temptations. The term *temptation* I take here as denoting, in a general
way, everything that allures us.

<span id="xvii.iii-p23"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p24"></span>**14.** *Wherefore, my beloved, flee,
etc.* The Apostle now returns to the particular question, from which he
had for a little digressed, for, lest bare doctrine should have little
effect among them, he has introduced those general exhortations that we
have read, but now he pursues the discussion on which he had entered —
that it is not allowable for a Christian man to connect himself with the
superstitions of the wicked, so as to take part in them. *Flee*, says
he, *from idolatry* In the first place, let us observe what meaning he
attaches to the term *Idolatry* He certainly did not suspect the
Corinthians of such a degree of ignorance or carelessness  <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) as to think, that they worshipped
idols in their heart. But as they made no scruple of frequenting the
assemblies of the wicked, and observing along with them certain rites
instituted in honor of idols, he condemns this liberty taken by them, as
being a very bad example. It is certain, then, that when he here makes
mention of *idolatry*, he, speaks of what is outward, or, if you prefer
it, of the profession  <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) of
idolatry. For as God is said to be worshipped by the bending of the
knee, and other tokens of reverence, while the principal and genuine
worship of him is inward, so is it also as to idols, for the case holds
the same in things opposite. It is to no purpose that very many in the
present day endeavor to excuse outward actions  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) on this pretext, that the heart is not
in them, while Paul convicts of idolatry those very acts, and assuredly
with good reason. For, as we owe to God not merely the secret affection
of the heart, but also outward adoration, the man who offers to an idol
an appearance of adoration takes away so much of the honor due to God.
Let him allege as he may that his heart is quite away from it. The
action itself is to be seen, in which the honor that is due to God is
transferred to an idol.

<span id="xvii.iii-p28"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p29"></span>**15.** *I speak as to wise men.* As he
was about to take his argument from the mystery of the Supper, he
arouses them by this little preface, that they may consider more
attentively the magnitude of the thing.  <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) “I do not address mere novices. You
understand the efficacy of the sacred Supper in it we are ingrafted into
the Lord’s body. How unseemly a thing is it then, that you should enter
into fellowship with the wicked, so as to be united in one body. At the
same time, he tacitly reproves their want of consideration in this
respect, that, while accurately instructed in the school of Christ, they
allowed themselves in gross vice, as to which there was no difficulty in
forming an opinion.

<span id="xvii.iii-p31"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p32"></span>**16.** *The cup of blessing* While the
sacred Supper of Christ has two elements — bread and wine — he begins
with the second. He calls it, *the cup of blessing*, as having been set
apart for a mystical benediction.  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) For I do not agree with those who
understand *blessing to* mean *thanksgiving*, and interpret the verb *to
bless*, as meaning to *give thanks* I acknowledge, indeed, that it is
sometimes employed in this sense, but never in the construction that
Paul has here made use of, for the idea of Erasmus, as to supplying a
preposition,  <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) is exceedingly
forced. On the other hand, the meaning that I adopt is easy, and has
nothing of intricacy.

<span id="xvii.iii-p35"></span>To *bless the cup,* then, is to set it
apart for this purpose, that it may be to us an emblem of the blood of
Christ. This is done by the word of promise, when believers meet
together according to Christ’s appointment to celebrate the remembrance
of his death in this Sacrament. The consecration, however, which the
Papists make use of, is a kind of sorcery derived from heathens,  <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) which has nothing in common with the
pure rite observed by Christians. Everything, it is true, that we eat
*is sanctified by the word of God*, as Paul himself elsewhere bears
witness, (<span id="xvii.iii-p36.2"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="xvii.iii-p36.2"></span>;)
but that *blessing* is for a different purpose — that our use of the
gifts of God may be pure, and may tend to the glory of their Author, and
to our advantage. On the other hand, the design of the mystical
*blessing* in the Supper is, that the wine may be no longer a common
beverage, but set apart for the spiritual nourishment of the soul, while
it is an emblem of the blood of Christ.

<span id="xvii.iii-p37"></span>Paul says, that the *cup* which has been
in this manner *blessed* is <span id="xvii.iii-p37.1"></span>κοινωνίαν —
the *comnunion* of the blood of the Lord. It is asked, in what sense?
Let contention be avoided, and there will be nothing of obscurity. It is
true, that believers are united together by Christ’s blood, so as to
become one body. It is also true, that a unity of this kind is with
propriety termed <span id="xvii.iii-p37.2"></span>κοινωνία
(*communion*.) I make the same acknowledgment as to *the bread* Farther,
I observe what Paul immediately adds, as it were, by way of explanation
— that we *all become one body, because we are together partakers of the
same bread* But whence, I pray you, comes that <span
id="xvii.iii-p37.3"></span>κοινωνία (*communion*) between us, but from
this, that we are united to Christ in such a way, that

<span id="xvii.iii-p38"></span>we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones?  
(<span id="xvii.iii-p38.2"></span>[Eph
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030)<span
id="xvii.iii-p38.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.iii-p39"></span>For we must first of all be incorporated
(so to speak) into Christ, that we may be united to each other. In
addition to this, Paul is not disputing at present merely in reference
to a mutual fellowship among men, but as to the spiritual union between
Christ and believers, with the view of drawing from this, that it is an
intolerable sacrilege for them to be polluted by fellowship with idols.
From the connection of the passage, therefore, we may conclude, that
(<span id="xvii.iii-p39.1"></span>κοινωνίαν) the *communion of the
blood* is that connection which we have with the blood of Christ, when
he engrafts all of us together into his body, that he may live in us,
and we in him.

<span id="xvii.iii-p40"></span>Now, when the cup is called a
*participation*, the expression, I acknowledge, is figurative, provided
that the truth held forth in the figure is not taken away, or, in other
words, provided that the reality itself is also present, and that the
soul has as truly *communion in the blood*, as we drink wine with the
mouth. But Papists could not say this, that *the cup of blessing is a
participation in the blood of Christ*, for the Supper that they observe
is mutilated and torn: if indeed we can give the name of the Supper to
that strange ceremony which is a patchwork of various human
contrivances, and scarcely retains the slightest vestige of the
institution of our Lord. But, supposing that everything else were as it
ought to be, this one thing is at variance with the right use of the
Supper — the keeping back of the whole of the people from partaking of
the cup, which is the half of the Sacrament.

<span id="xvii.iii-p41"></span>*The bread which we break* From this it
appears, that it was the custom of the ancient Church to break one loaf,
and distribute to every one his own morsel, in order that there might be
presented more clearly to the view of all believers their union to the
one body of Christ. And that this custom was long kept up appears from
the testimony of those who flourished in the three centuries that
succeeded the age of the Apostles. Hence arose the superstition, that no
one dared to touch the bread with his hand, but each one had it put into
his mouth by the priest.

<span id="xvii.iii-p42"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p43"></span>**17.** *For we are one bread.* I have
already stated above, that it was not Paul’s particular design here to
exhort us to love, but he mentions this by the way, that the Corinthians
may understand that we must, even by external profession, maintain that
unity which subsists between us and Christ, inasmuch as we all assemble
together to receive the symbol of that sacred unity. In this second part
of the statement, he makes mention only of the one part of the
Sacrament, and it is the manner of Scripture to describe by Synecdoche
 <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) the entire Supper by *the
breaking of bread* It is necessary to warn my readers, in passing, as to
this, lest any less experienced person should be put off his guard by
the foolish cavil that is brought forward by certain sycophants — as if
Paul, by mentioning merely the bread, had it in view to deprive the
people of the one half of the Sacrament.

<span id="xvii.iii-p45"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p46"></span>**18.** *Behold Israel after the flesh*
He establishes it by another example, that such is the nature of all
sacred observances, that they bind us in a kind of fellowship with God.
For the law of Moses admits no one to a feast upon a sacrifice, but the
man who has duly prepared himself. I speak not of priests merely, but of
those among the common people who eat of the remains of the sacrifice.
Hence it follows, that all who eat of the flesh of the sacrificed
victim, are *partakers with the altar*, that is, of the sanctification,
with which God has set apart his Temple, and the sacred rites that are
performed in it.

<span id="xvii.iii-p47"></span>This expression *after the flesh*, may
seem to be added in order that the Corinthians, on comparing the two,
might set a higher value on the efficacy of our Supper. “If there was so
much virtue in the ancient figures and in those rudiments of youthful
education, how much more must we reckon that there is in our mysteries,
in which God shines forth much more fully upon us!” At the same time, it
is more simple, in my opinion, to say that Paul intended merely by this
mark to distinguish the Jews that were still under the law from those
that had been converted to Christ. Now there was a contrast that
remained to be made — that if the sacred rites appointed by God sanctify
those who observe them, pollution, on the other hand, is contracted from
the sacred rites rendered to idols.  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) For it is God alone that sanctifies,
and hence all strange gods pollute.  <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) Again, if mysteries  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) unite and connect believers with God,
it follows, that the wicked are in like manner introduced by their
superstitious rites into fellowship  <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) with idols. But the Apostle, before
proceeding to this, answers by an <span
id="xvii.iii-p51.2"></span>*anthypophora*  <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) (anticipation) a question that might
be proposed by way of objection.

<span id="xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 10:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#019)<span
id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p2"></span>**19.** What say I then? that the idol is
any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?

<span id="xvii.iv-p3"></span>**19.** Quid ergo dieo? idolum, aliquid
esse? aut idolo immolatum, aliquid esse?

<span id="xvii.iv-p4"></span>**20.** But I *say*, that the things which
the Gentiles saerifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I
would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.

<span id="xvii.iv-p5"></span>**20.** Sed quae immolant Gentes, daemoniis
immolant, non Deo: nolo autem vos participes fieri daemoniorum.

<span id="xvii.iv-p6"></span>**21.** Ye cannot drink the cup of the
Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table,
and of the table of devils.

<span id="xvii.iv-p7"></span>**21.** Non potestis calicem Domini bibere,
et calicem daemoniorum: non potestis mensae Domini communicare, et
mensae daemoniorum.

<span id="xvii.iv-p8"></span>**22.** Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy?
are we stronger than he?

<span id="xvii.iv-p9"></span>**22.** An provocamus Dominum? numquid
fortiores illo sumus?

<span id="xvii.iv-p10"></span>**23.** All things are lawful for me, but
all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all
things edify not.

<span id="xvii.iv-p11"></span>**23.** Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia
conducunt: omnia mihi licent, at non omnia aedificant.

<span id="xvii.iv-p12"></span>**24.** Let no man seek his own, but every
man another’s *wealth*

<span id="xvii.iv-p13"></span>**24.** Nemo quod suum est quaerat, sed
quisque quod alterius est.

<span id="xvii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p16"></span>**19.** *What do I say then?* It might
seem at first view as if the Apostle either argued inconclusively, or
ascribed to idols something of existence and of power. Now it might
readily be objected — “What comparison is there between the living God
and idols? God connects us with himself by the sacraments. Be it so. How
comes it that idols, which are *nothing*, (<span
id="xvii.iv-p16.1"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="xvii.iv-p16.1"></span>,)
have so much power, as to be able to do the like? Do you think that
*idols are anything*, or can do anything?” He answers, that he does not
look to the idols themselves;  <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582)
but rather has in view the intention of those who sacrifice to idols.
For that was the source of the pollution that he had indirectly pointed
out. He confesses, therefore, that an idol is nothing. He confesses that
it is a mere delusion when the Gentiles take it upon them to go through
solemn rites of dedication,  <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) and
that the creatures of God are not polluted by such fooleries. But as the
design of them is superstitious and condemnable, and as the work is
base, he infers, that all who connect themselves with them as
associates, are involved in pollution.

<span id="xvii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p20"></span>**20.** *But the things*  <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) *that the Gentiles sacrifice.* To
complete the answer, a negative must be understood in this way: “I do
not say that *an idol is anything*, nor do I imagine it to be endued
with any virtue, but I say that *the Gentiles sacrifice to the devil and
not to gods* those things which they do sacrifice, and hence I estimate
the work by their wicked and impious superstition. For we must always
look to the intention with which a thing is done. He, then, who connects
himself with them, declares that he has fellowship with them in the same
impiety.” He proceeds accordingly with what he had commenced: “If we had
to do with God only, those things would be nothing, but, in relation to
men, they become faulty; because no one sits down to an idol feast, who
does not declare himself to be a worshipper of the idol.”

<span id="xvii.iv-p22"></span>Some, however, understand the term
*demons* here as meaning the imaginary deities of the Gentiles,
agreeably to their common way of speaking of them; for when they speak
of *demons* they meant inferior deities, as, for example, heroes,  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) and thus the term was taken in a good
sense. Plato, in a variety of instances, employs the term to denote
*genii*, or angels.  <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) That
meaning, however, would be quite foreign to Paul’s design, for his
object is to show that it is no light offense to have to do with actions
that have any appearance of putting honor upon idols. Hence it suited
his purpose, not to extenuate, but rather to magnify the impiety that is
involved in it. How absurd, then, it would have been to select an
honorable term to denote the most heinous wickedness! It is certain from
the Prophet Baruch, (<span id="xvii.iv-p24.4"></span>[Bar
4:7](../../../bib/apo/bar004.htm#007)<span id="xvii.iv-p24.4"></span>,)
that *those things that are sacrificed to idols are sacrificed to
devils* (<span id="xvii.iv-p24.5"></span>[De
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)<span id="xvii.iv-p24.5"></span>;
<span id="xvii.iv-p24.6"></span>[Ps
96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="xvii.iv-p24.6"></span>.)
In that passage in the writings of the Prophet, the Greek translation,
which was at that time in common use, has <span
id="xvii.iv-p24.7"></span>δαιμόνια — *demons*, and this is its common
use in Scripture. How much more likely is it then, that Paul borrowed
what he says from the Prophet, to express the enormity of the evil, than
that, speaking after the manner of the heathen, he extenuated what he
was desirous to hold up to utter execration!

<span id="xvii.iv-p25"></span>It may seem, however, as if these things
were somewhat at variance with what I stated a little ago — that Paul
had an eye to the intention of idolaters, for it is not their intention
to worship devils, but imaginary deities of their own framing. I answer,
that the two things are quite in harmony, for when men become so *vain
in their imaginations* (<span id="xvii.iv-p25.1"></span>[Ro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="xvii.iv-p25.1"></span>)
as to render divine honor to creatures, rather than to the one God, this
punishment is in readiness for them — that they serve Satan. For they do
not find that “middle place”  <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587)
that they are in search of, but Satan straightway presents himself to
them, as an object of adoration, whenever they have turned their back
upon the true God.

<span id="xvii.iv-p27"></span>*I would not that ye.* If the term *demon*
were used in an indifferent sense, how spiritless were Paul’s statement
here, while, instead of this, it has the greatest weight and severity
against idolaters! He subjoins the reason — because no one can have
fellowship at the same time with God and with idols. Now, in all sacred
observances, there is a profession of fellowship. Let us know,
therefore, that we are then, and then only, admitted by Christ to the
sacred feast of his body and blood, when we have first of all bid
farewell to every thing sacrilegious.  <span
id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) For the man who would enjoy the one,
must renounce the other. O thrice miserable the condition of those
 <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) who, from fear of displeasing
men, do not hesitate to pollute themselves with unlawful superstitions!
For, by acting in this way, they voluntarily renounce fellowship with
Christ, and obstruct their approach to his health-giving table.

<span id="xvii.iv-p30"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p31"></span>**22.** *Do we provoke the Lord*? Having
laid down the doctrine, he assumes a more vehement tone, from observing,
that what was a most atrocious offense against God was regarded as
nothing, or, at least, was looked upon as a very trivial error. The
Corinthians wished the liberty that they took to be reckoned excusable,
as there is not one of us that willingly allows himself to be found
fault with, but, on the contrary, we seek one subterfuge after another,
under which to shelter ourselves. Now Paul says, and not without reason,
that in this way we wage war against God; for nothing does God more
require from us than this — that we adhere strictly to everything that
he declares in his word. Do not those, then, who use subterfuges,  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) in order that they may be at liberty
to transgress the commandment of God, arm themselves openly against God?
Hence that curse which the Prophet denounces against all those who call
*evil*, *good*, and *darkness*, *light* (<span
id="xvii.iv-p32.2"></span>[Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="xvii.iv-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.iv-p33"></span>*Are we stronger*? He warns them how
dangerous a thing it is to *provoke God* — because no one can do this
but to his own ruin.  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) Among men
the chance of war, as they speak, is doubtful, but to contend with God
is nothing short of voluntarily courting destruction. Accordingly, if we
fear to have God as an enemy, let us shudder at the thought of framing
excuses for manifest sins, that is, whatever stand opposed to his word.
Let us, also, shudder at the thought of calling in question those things
that he has himself pronounced upon — for this is nothing less than to
rise up against heaven after the manner of the giants.  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) (<span id="xvii.iv-p35.3"></span>[Ge
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004)<span id="xvii.iv-p35.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.iv-p36"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p37"></span>**23.** *All things are lawful for me*
Again he returns to the right of Christian liberty, by which the
Corinthians defended themselves, and sets aside their objection by
giving the same explanation as before. “To eat of meats that were
sacrificed, and be present at the banquet, was an outward thing, and
therefore was in itself lawful.” Paul declares that he does not by any
means call this in question, but he replies, that we must have a regard
to edification. *All things are lawful for me*, says he, *but all things
are not profitable*, that is, for our neighbors, for no one, as he
immediately adds, ought to seek his own advantage exclusively, and if
anything is not profitable to the brethren, it must be abstained from.
He, in the next place, expresses the kind of advantage — when it
*edifies*, for we must not have respect merely to the advantage of the
flesh. “What then?  <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) Does a thing
that is in other respects permitted by God, come on this account to be
unlawful — if it is not expedient for our neighbor. Then in that *case*
our liberty would be placed under subjection to men.” Consider
attentively Paul’s words, and you will perceive that liberty,
nevertheless, remains unimpaired, when you accommodate yourself to your
neighbors, and that it is only the use of it that is restricted, for he
acknowledges that it is *lawful*, but says that it ought not to be made
use of, if it does not *edify*

<span id="xvii.iv-p39"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p40"></span>**24.** *Let no one seek his own.* He
handles the same subject in the 14th Chapter of the Romans. *Let no one
please himself*, *but endeavor to please his brethren for their
edification* This is a precept that is very necessary, for we are so
corrupted by nature, that every one consults his own interests,
regardless of those of his brethren. Now, as the law of love calls upon
us to *love our neighbors as ourselves*, (<span
id="xvii.iv-p40.1"></span>[Mt
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039)<span
id="xvii.iv-p40.1"></span>,) so it requires us to consult their welfare.
The Apostle, however, does not expressly forbid individuals to consult
their own advantage, but he requires that they should not be so devoted
to their own interests, as not to be prepared to forego part of their
right, as often as the welfare of their brethren requires this.

<span id="xvii.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
10:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025)<span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p2"></span>**25.** Whatsoever is sold in the shambles,
*that* eat, asking no question for conscience sake:

<span id="xvii.v-p3"></span>**25.** Quicquid in macello venditur, edite,
nihil disceptantes propter conscientiam.

<span id="xvii.v-p4"></span>**26.** For the earth *is* the Lord’s, and
the fulness thereof.

<span id="xvii.v-p5"></span>**26.** Domini enim est terra, et plenitudo
eius. (<span id="xvii.v-p5.1"></span>[Ps
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span id="xvii.v-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.v-p6"></span>**27.** If any of them that believe not bid
you *to a feast*, and ye be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before
you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.

<span id="xvii.v-p7"></span>**27.** Si quis autem infidelium vos vocat,
et vultis ire, quicquid vobis apponitur edite, nihil disceptantes
propter conscientiam.

<span id="xvii.v-p8"></span>**28.** But if any man say unto you, This is
offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it,
and for conscience sake: for the earth *is* the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof:

<span id="xvii.v-p9"></span>**28.** Quodsi quis vobis dixerit, Hoc est
idolo immolatum: ne edatis propter eum qui indicavit, et propter
conscientiam.

<span id="xvii.v-p10"></span>**29.** Conscience, I say, not thine own,
but of the other: for why is my liberty judged of another *man*’*s*
conscience?

<span id="xvii.v-p11"></span>**29.** Conscientiam autem dico, non tuam,
sed alterius: utquid enim libertas mea indicatur ab alia conscientia?

<span id="xvii.v-p12"></span>**30.** For if I by grace be a partaker,
why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?

<span id="xvii.v-p13"></span>**30.** Si ergo per gratiam sum particeps,
quid in eo blasphemor, in quo gratias ago?

<span id="xvii.v-p14"></span>**31.** Whether therefore ye eat, or drink,
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

<span id="xvii.v-p15"></span>**31.** Sive ergo editis, sive bibitis,
sive quid aliud facitis, omnia in gloriam Dei facite.

<span id="xvii.v-p16"></span>**32.** Give none offence, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the church of God:

<span id="xvii.v-p17"></span>**32.** Nullis satis offendiculo, sive
Iudaeis, sive Graecis, et Ecclesiae Dei:

<span id="xvii.v-p18"></span>**33.** Even as I please all *men* in all
*things*, not seeking mine own profit, but the *profit* of many, that
they may be saved.

<span id="xvii.v-p19"></span>**33.** Quemadmodum ego quoque per omnia
omnibus placeo, non quaerens quod mihi est utile, sed quod multis, ut
salvi fiant.

<span id="xvii.v-p20"></span> 

<span id="xvii.v-p21"></span><span id="xvii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p22"></span>**25.** *Whatsoever is sold in the
shambles* He has spoken above of dissembling in connection with
idolatry, or, at least, as to those actions which the Corinthians could
not engage in, without professing themselves to be the associates of the
wicked in their superstitions. He now requires them, not merely to
abstain from all professions of idolatry, but also to avoid carefully
all occasions of offense, which are wont to arise from the
indiscriminate use of things indifferent. For, although there was but
one kind of offense on the part of the Corinthians,  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) there were, at the same time different
degrees of it. Now, as to the eating of food, he makes, in the *first*
place, this general statement — that it is lawful to eat, with a safe
*conscience*, any kind of food, because the Lord permits it. In the
*second* place, he restricts this liberty as to the use of it — lest
weak consciences should be injured. Thus this conclusion is divided into
two parts the *first* relates to liberty and power as to things
indifferent: the *second* to a limitation of it — that the use of it may
be regulated in accordance with the rule of love.

<span id="xvii.v-p24"></span>*Debating nothing*  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) <span
id="xvii.v-p25.2"></span>᾿Ανακρίνεσθαι, the word that Paul makes use of,
means to reason on both sides,  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596)
in such a way, that the person’s mind vacillates, inclining now to this
side, and then to that.  <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597)
Accordingly, in so far as concerns a distinction of meats, he frees our
consciences from all scruple and hesitation; because it is proper that,
when we are certain from the word of the Lord that he approves of what
we do, we should have ease and tranquillity in our minds.

<span id="xvii.v-p28"></span>*For conscience sake* — that is to say,
Before the judgment-seat of God — “In so far as you have to do with God,
there is no occasion for your disputing with yourself, whether it be
lawful or not. For I allow you to eat freely of all kinds of meat,
because the Lord allows you everything without exception.”

<span id="xvii.v-p29"></span><span id="xvii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p30"></span>**26.** *The earth is the Lord’s* He
establishes, from the testimony of David, the liberty which he had
allowed. (<span id="xvii.v-p30.1"></span>[Ps
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span id="xvii.v-p30.1"></span>,
and <span id="xvii.v-p30.2"></span>[Ps
50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012)<span id="xvii.v-p30.2"></span>.)
But it will be asked by some one, “What has this to do with the point?”
I answer, If *the fullness of the earth*  <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) *is the Lord’s*, there is nothing in
the world that is not sacred and pure. We must always keep in view, what
the question is of which the Apostle treats. It might be doubted,
whether the creatures of God were polluted by the sacrifices of the
wicked. Paul says they are not, inasmuch as the rule and possession of
the whole earth remain always in the hands of God. Now, what things the
Lord has in his hands, he preserves by his power, and consequently
sanctifies them. The sons of God, therefore, have the pure use of
everything, because they receive them no otherwise than from the hand of
God.

<span id="xvii.v-p32"></span>The *fullness of the earth*,  <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) is an expression which is made use of
by the Prophet to denote the abundance of blessings, with which the
earth is furnished and adorned by the Lord. For if the earth were
stripped of trees, herbs, animals, and other things, it would be like a
house devoid of furniture and every kind of utensil: nay more, it would
be mutilated and disfigured. Should any one object, that the earth is
cursed on account of sin, the answer is easy — that he has an eye to its
pure and perfect nature, because Paul is speaking of believers, to whom
all things are sanctified through Christ.

<span id="xvii.v-p34"></span><span id="xvii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p35"></span>**27.** *If any one of them that believe
not invites you.* Here follows an exception, to this effect, that if a
believer has been warned, that what is set before him has been offered
to an idol, and sees that there is a danger of offense being given, he
sins against the brethren if he does not abstain. He shows then, in
short, that care must be taken not to hurt weak consciences.

<span id="xvii.v-p36"></span>When he says — *and you are willing to go*,
he intimates indirectly, that he does not altogether approve of it, and
that it would be better if they declined, but as it is a thing
indifferent, he does not choose to forbid it absolutely. And, certainly,
there could be nothing better than to keep at a distance from such
snares — not that those are expressly to be condemned, who accommodate
themselves to men only in so far as conscience permits,  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) but because it becomes us to proceed
with caution,  <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) where we see that
we are in danger of falling.

<span id="xvii.v-p39"></span><span id="xvii.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p40"></span>**29.** *Conscience, I say, not thine own*
He always carefully takes heed not to diminish liberty, or to appear to
take from it in any degree. “Thou oughtest to bear with the weak
conscience of thy brother, that thou mayest not abuse thy right, so as
to give occasion of offense to him; but in the meantime thy conscience
remains, nevertheless, free, because it is exempted from that
subjection. Let not, therefore, the restraint which I impose upon thee
as to outward use, become by any means a snare to entangle thy
conscience.”

<span id="xvii.v-p41"></span>It must be observed here, that the term
*conscience* is taken here in its strict acceptation; for in <span
id="xvii.v-p41.1"></span>[Ro 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span
id="xvii.v-p41.1"></span>, and <span id="xvii.v-p41.2"></span>[1Ti
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="xvii.v-p41.2"></span>, it
is taken in a larger sense. “We ought, says Paul, to obey princes, *not
merely for the sake of wrath*, *but also for that of conscience*” — that
is, not merely from fear of punishment, but because the Lord orders it
so, and it is our duty. Is it not reasonable, too, that we should for
the same reason accommodate ourselves to weak brethren — that is,
because we are to this extent subject to them in the sight of God?
Farther, *the end of the commandment is love out of a good conscience*
Is not the affection of *love* included in a *good conscience?* Hence
its meaning here is, as I have already stated, more restricted, inasmuch
as the soul of a pious man looks exclusively to the tribunal of God, has
no regard to men, is satisfied with the blessing of liberty procured for
it by Christ, and is bound to no individuals, and to no circumstances of
time or place.

<span id="xvii.v-p42"></span>Some manuscripts repeat the statement —
*The earth is the Lord’s.* But the probability is, that some reader
having put it on the margin, it had crept into the text.  <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) It is not, however, a matter of great
importance.

<span id="xvii.v-p44"></span>*For why is my liberty* It is doubtful,
whether Paul speaks in this way of himself, or whether he makes this
objection in the name of the Corinthians. If we take it as spoken in his
own name, it will be a confirmation of the preceding statement. “In
restricting yourself, for the sake of another man’s conscience, your
liberty is not thereby made subject to him.” If in the name of the
Corinthians, the meaning will be this: “You impose upon us an unjust
law, in requiring that our liberty should stand or fall at the caprice
of others.” I am of opinion, that Paul says this of himself, but
explains it in another way, for hitherto I have been stating the views
of others. To be *judged*, then, I explain here as meaning — to be
*condemned*, agreeably to the common acceptation of the word in
Scripture. Paul warns us of the danger that must ensue, if we make use
of our liberty unreservedly, so as to give occasion of offense to our
neighbors — that they will *condemn* it. Thus, through our fault, and
our unreasonableness, the consequence will be, that this special benefit
from God will be *condemned* If we do not guard against this danger, we
corrupt our liberty by our abuse of it. This consideration, then, tends
very much to confirm Paul’s exhortation.

<span id="xvii.v-p45"></span><span id="xvii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p46"></span>**30.** *If therefore by grace.* This
argument is similar to the preceding one, or nearly so. “As it is owing
to the kindness of God that *all things are lawful for me,* why should I
act in such a manner, that it should be reckoned to my account as a
vice?” We cannot, it is true, prevent the wicked from reviling us, nor
even the weak from being sometimes displeased with us; but Paul here
reproves the forwardness of those, who of their own accord give occasion
of offense, and hurt weak consciences, when neither necessity or
expediency calls for it. He would have us, then, make a good use of our
benefits,  <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) that the weak may not
have occasion of reviling from our inconsiderate use of liberty.

<span id="xvii.v-p48"></span><span id="xvii.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p49"></span>**31.** *Whether, therefore, ye eat, or
drink* Lest they should think, that in so small a matter they should not
be so careful to avoid blame, he teaches that there is no part of our
life, and no action so minute,  <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604)
that it ought not to be directed to the glory of God, and that we must
take care that, even in eating and drinking, we may aim at the
advancement of it. This statement is connected with what goes before;
for if we are eagerly desirous of the glory of God, as it becomes us to
be, we will never allow, so far as we can prevent it, his benefits to
lie under reproach. It was well expressed anciently in a common proverb,
that we must not *live to eat*; but *eat to live*  <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) Provided the end of living be at the
same time kept in view, the consequence will thus be, that our food will
be in a manner sacred to God, inasmuch as it will be set apart for his
service.

<span id="xvii.v-p52"></span><span id="xvii.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p53"></span>**32.** *Be not occasions of stumbling to
any* This is the *second* point, which it becomes us to have an eye to —
the rule of love. A desire, then, for the glory of God, holds the
*first* place; a regard to our neighbor holds the *second* He makes
mention of *Jews and Gentiles*, not merely because the Church of God
consisted of those two classes, but to teach us that we are debtors to
all, even to strangers, that we may, if possible, *gain* them. (<span
id="xvii.v-p53.1"></span>[1 Cor. 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="xvii.v-p53.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.v-p54"></span><span id="xvii.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p55"></span>**33.** *Even as I please all men in all
this* As he speaks in a general way, and without exception, some extend
it by mistake to things that are unlawful, and at variance with the word
of the Lord — as if it were allowable, for the sake of our neighbor, to
venture farther than the Lord permits us. It is, however, more than
certain, that Paul accommodated himself to men only in things
indifferent, and in things lawful in themselves. Farther, the end must
be carefully observed — *that they may be saved* Hence what is opposed
to their salvation ought not to be conceded to them,  <span
id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) but we must use prudence, and that of
a spiritual kind.  <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc39016.htm#fr_519) <span
id="xvii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p15.1"></span>Comme
feroyent des gendarmes, qui ont desia fidelement serui si long temps,
que pour leur faire honneur on les enuoye se reposer le reste de leur
vie;” — “After the manner of soldiers, who have already served with
fidelity for so long a time, that with the view of putting honor upon
them, they were discharged, so as to be exempted from labor during the
remainder of their life.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc39016.htm#fr_520) <span
id="xvii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p16.1"></span>Aussi bien
qu’a nous;” — “As well as to us.”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc39016.htm#fr_521) <span
id="xvii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p17.1"></span>Ils ont
senti le jugement de Dieu, et ne l’ont peu euiter;” — “They have felt
the judgment of God, and have not been able to escape it.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc39016.htm#fr_522) <span
id="xvii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p19.1"></span>Eux, qui
estoyent son peuple;” — “Those who were his people.”

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc39016.htm#fr_523) <span
id="xvii.i-p20.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p21.1"></span>Nous nous
assuietissons et bisons serment;” — “We submit ourselves, and make
oath.”

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc39016.htm#fr_524) <span
id="xvii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p23.1"></span>Et
terrien;” — “And earthly.”

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc39016.htm#fr_525) <span
id="xvii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p24.1"></span>Mystere et
secret;” — “Mystery and secret.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc39016.htm#fr_526) <span
id="xvii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p26.1"></span>Par toute
l’Escriture;” — “Throughout the whole of Scripture.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](cc39016.htm#fr_527) <span
id="xvii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p28.1"></span>Es
Escritures;” — “In the Scriptures.”

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](cc39016.htm#fr_528) <span
id="xvii.i-p28.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p29.1"></span>Nous n’en
auons maintenant pas un seul mot en’toute l’Escriture;” — “We have not a
single word of it in the whole of Scripture.”

<span id="fn_529"></span>[530](cc39016.htm#fr_529) <span
id="xvii.i-p31.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span> See Calvin on John, vol. 1, p. 247. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[531](cc39016.htm#fr_530) <span
id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p34.1"></span>Choses qui
ayent apparence sans efibt;” — “Things that have an appearance, without
reality.”

<span id="fn_531"></span>[532](cc39016.htm#fr_531) <span
id="xvii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p35.1"></span>Entre ees
deux extremitez;” — “Between these two extremes.”

<span id="fn_532"></span>[533](cc39016.htm#fr_532) <span
id="xvii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span> Our author, having occasion to refer to
the same “Scholastic dogma” as to the Sacraments of the Old and New
Testaments, (when commenting on <span id="xvii.i-p37.2"></span>[Romans
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012)<span id="xvii.i-p37.2"></span>,)
says, “<span id="xvii.i-p37.3"></span>Illis enim vim justificandi
adimunt, his attribuunt:” — “They deny to the former the power of
justifying, while they assign it to the latter.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[534](cc39016.htm#fr_533) <span
id="xvii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p39.1"></span>Les
Israelites;” — “The Israelites.”

<span id="fn_534"></span>[535](cc39016.htm#fr_534) <span
id="xvii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p42.1"></span>Celebre et
magnifie;” — “Celebrates and extols.”

<span id="fn_535"></span>[536](cc39016.htm#fr_535) <span
id="xvii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p43.1"></span>Estoit;” —
“Was.”

<span id="fn_536"></span>[537](cc39016.htm#fr_536) <span
id="xvii.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p44.1"></span>C’est a
dire, lesquelles il ne faut pendre cruement, et a la lettre, comme on
dit;” — “That is to say — which must not be taken strictly or according
to the letter, as they say.” The reader will find this subject handled
at some length in the *Harmony*, vol. 3, pp. 207,208. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](cc39016.htm#fr_537) <span
id="xvii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p47.1"></span>D’vnc
autre facon et mesure que nous ne faisons pas;” — “In another way and
measure than we do.”

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](cc39016.htm#fr_538) <span
id="xvii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p52.1"></span>Il a fait
une horrible vengence sur eux;” — “He inflicted dreadful vengeance upon
them.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[540](cc39016.htm#fr_539) <span
id="xvii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p19"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate *is* — <span
id="xvii.ii-p19.1"></span>*in figura* — (*in figure*.) Wiclif (1380)
reads the clause thus: “But these thingis ben don in figure of us.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[541](cc39016.htm#fr_540) <span
id="xvii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p22"></span> Our Author gives here the literal meaning
*of Kibroth-hatta-avah*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[542](cc39016.htm#fr_541) <span
id="xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p27.1"></span>Et
esgayement desborde;” — “And unbridled excess.”

<span id="fn_542"></span>[543](cc39016.htm#fr_542) <span
id="xvii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p28.1"></span>Apres la
panse vient la danse;” — “After dinner comes the dance.”

<span id="fn_543"></span>[544](cc39016.htm#fr_543) <span
id="xvii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p29.1"></span>Et ne
faut point douter que les Israelites n’ayent pour lots adore leur veau
auec telle ceremonie et obseruation que les Gentils faisoyent leurs
idoles;” — “And we cannot doubt, that the Israelites on that occasion
adored their calf with the same ceremony and care as the Gentiles did
their idols.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[545](cc39016.htm#fr_544) <span
id="xvii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p31.1"></span>Tant
petite soit elle;” — “Be it ever so little.”

<span id="fn_545"></span>[546](cc39016.htm#fr_545) <span
id="xvii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p34"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p34.1"></span>De faire
vn denombrement entier des personnes par testes, comme on dit;” — “To
make a complete enumeration of persons by heads, as they say.”

<span id="fn_546"></span>[547](cc39016.htm#fr_546) <span
id="xvii.ii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p35.2"></span>Les
juges qui estoyent deputez pour cognoistre des matieres ciuiles,
estoyent nommez les cent, et toutes lois il yen auoit deux par dessus;”
— “The judges who were deputed to take cognizance of civil matters were
called The Hundred, and yet there were two above the hundred.” As the
Centumviri were chosen out of the thirty-five tribes, into which the
Roman people were divided, three from each tribe, they consisted
properly of 105 persons. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[548](cc39016.htm#fr_547) <span
id="xvii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p37.1"></span>Auoit
sacrifie a Baalpheor;” — “Had sacrificed to Baalpeor.”

<span id="fn_548"></span>[549](cc39016.htm#fr_548) <span
id="xvii.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p38.1"></span>Non pas
tant pour affection qu’ils eussent a la fausse religion;” — “Not so much
from any attachment that they had to a false religion.”

<span id="fn_549"></span>[550](cc39016.htm#fr_549) <span
id="xvii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p39"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p39.1"></span>Vne
impiete si vileine;” — “An impiety so base.”

<span id="fn_550"></span>[551](cc39016.htm#fr_550) <span
id="xvii.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p42"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p42.1"></span>Vn desir
importun et desordonne;” — “An importunate and inordinate desire.”

<span id="fn_551"></span>[552](cc39016.htm#fr_551) <span
id="xvii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p44"></span> Billroth, in his’Commentary on the
Epistles to the Corinthians, alleges, that the view that is here taken
by Calvin “could have been suggested only by reasons of a dogmarital
character.” The objection thus brought forward, however, is
satisfactorily set aside in a valuable note by Dr. Alexander, in his
translation of Billroth. See Biblical Cabinet, No. 21, pp. 246, 247. See
also *Henderson* on Inspiration, pp. 553, 554. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](cc39016.htm#fr_552) <span
id="xvii.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p45"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p45.1"></span>C’est a
dire, l’Eternel;” — “That is to say, the Eternal.”

<span id="fn_553"></span>[554](cc39016.htm#fr_553) <span
id="xvii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p49"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p49.1"></span>De
n’entrer point en la iouissance de la terre promise;” — “Not to enter on
the enjoyment of the promised land.”

<span id="fn_554"></span>[555](cc39016.htm#fr_554) <span
id="xvii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p51"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p51.1"></span>Ceste
temerite outrecuidee;” — “This presumptuous rashness.”

<span id="fn_555"></span>[556](cc39016.htm#fr_555) <span
id="xvii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p55"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p55.1"></span>Elle
ferme la bouche a vn tas d’enragez;” — “It shuts the mouth of a troop of
madmen.”

<span id="fn_556"></span>[557](cc39016.htm#fr_556) <span
id="xvii.ii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p56"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p56.1"></span>Qui leur
sont aduenues;” — “Which happened to them.”

<span id="fn_557"></span>[558](cc39016.htm#fr_557) <span
id="xvii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p58"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p58.1"></span>Car
quant aux Israelites qui viuoyent lors, il n’estoit point requis que ces
choses firssent enregistrees et mises par escrit, mais seulement pour
nous;” — For in so far as concerned the Israelites who lived at that
time, it was not requisite that these things should be recorded and
committed to writing, but solely on our account.”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[559](cc39016.htm#fr_558) <span
id="xvii.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p60"></span> The term is applied in this sense, more
especially to the Eleusinian mysteries, which were called <span
id="xvii.ii-p60.1"></span>τὰ μεγάλα τέλη — *the great mysteries* Plat.
Rep. 560 E. See also Eurip. Med. 1379. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_559"></span>[560](cc39016.htm#fr_559) <span
id="xvii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p61"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p61.1"></span>Dequoy
sert cela pour prouuer que les meschans, et ceux qui abusent de la grace
de Dieu demeureront impunis?” — “Of what use is this for proving that
the wicked, and those that abuse the grace of God, will go unpunished?”

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](cc39016.htm#fr_560) <span
id="xvii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p63"></span> Our Author probably refers more
particularly to that part of the *Institutes* in which he states the
points of difference between the Old and the New Testaments. See
*Institutes*, volume 1, pp. 525-529. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc39016.htm#fr_561) <span
id="xvii.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p66"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p66.1"></span>Que
nous-nous endormions comme gens asseurez, et sans grand soin;” — “That
we should resign ourselves to sleep, as persons who are confident, and
without much care.”

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc39016.htm#fr_562) <span
id="xvii.ii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p67"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p67.1"></span>Par
laquelle ils disent qu’il nous faut tousiours douter de la foy;” — “By
which they say that we must always doubt as to faith.”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc39016.htm#fr_563) <span
id="xvii.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p69"></span> *“*<span id="xvii.ii-p69.1"></span>Se
Remet du tout;” — “Commits itself wholly.”

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc39016.htm#fr_564) <span
id="xvii.ii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p71"></span> The reader will observe that our Author
has already touched upon this subject at some length, when commenting on
chapter 2:12. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc39016.htm#fr_565) <span
id="xvii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iii-p17.1"></span>Tentation ne vous a point *saisis*, ou
*surprins*;” — “No temptation has *taken*, or *overtaken* you.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc39016.htm#fr_566) <span
id="xvii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p18.1"></span>Pour
si petites et legeres tentations;” — “On so small and light trials.”

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc39016.htm#fr_567) <span
id="xvii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p19"></span> The word <span
id="xvii.iii-p19.1"></span>ανθρώπινος (*human*) may be understood here
to *mean* — *proportioned to man’s strength*, or *suited to*, *man’s
weakness* It is rendered in Tyndale’s version, and also in Cranmer’s:
“Soche as followeth the nature of man.” Most interpreters understand in
a similar sense an expression which occurs in <span
id="xvii.iii-p19.2"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="xvii.iii-p19.2"></span>
— *the rod of men*, *and stripes of the children of men*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc39016.htm#fr_568) <span
id="xvii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p21"></span> Mr. Fuller of Kettering, when comparing
<span id="xvii.iii-p21.1"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="xvii.iii-p21.1"></span>, with <span id="xvii.iii-p21.2"></span>[2Co
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008)<span id="xvii.iii-p21.2"></span>,
justly observes: “The *ability* in the former of these passages, and the
*strength* in the latter, are far from being the same. The one is
expressive of that divine support which the Lord has promised to give to
his servants under all their trials: the other, of the power which we
possess naturally as creatures. We may be tried beyond this, as all the
martyrs have been, and yet not beyond the other. The outward man may
perish, while the inward man is renewed day by day.” — Fuller’s Works,
volume 3, p. 609. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc39016.htm#fr_569) <span
id="xvii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p25.1"></span>Tant
despourueus de sens et cognoissance de Dieu;” — “So devoid of judgment
and knowledge of God.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc39016.htm#fr_570) <span
id="xvii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p26.1"></span>La
profession et demonstrance;” — “The profession and display.”

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc39016.htm#fr_571) <span
id="xvii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p27.1"></span>Les
actes ou gestes externes d’idolatrie;” — “The outward acts or gestures
of idolatry.’

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc39016.htm#fr_572) <span
id="xvii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p30"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iii-p30.1"></span>L’excellence de ce mystere;” — “The
excellence of this mystery.”

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc39016.htm#fr_573) <span
id="xvii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p33.1"></span>A la
consecration mystique“ — “For a mystical consecration.”

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc39016.htm#fr_574) <span
id="xvii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p34.1"></span>Qu’on
supplee *Pour*;” — “That *for* should be supplied.” The original words
<span id="xvii.iii-p34.2"></span>ὅ εὐλογοῦμεν, are supposed by many
eminent interpreters to be instead of <span
id="xvii.iii-p34.3"></span>καθ ᾿ ὅ εὐλογοῦμεν τὸν Θεὸν — *for which we
give thanks to God*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc39016.htm#fr_575) <span
id="xvii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p36"></span> The reader will find this subject more
largely dwelt upon in the *H*arm*ony*, vol. 3, p. 206. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc39016.htm#fr_576) <span
id="xvii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p44"></span> A figure of speech in which a part is
put for the whole. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc39016.htm#fr_577) <span
id="xvii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p48"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p48.1"></span>Des
saerifiees et autres eeremonies des idoles;” — “Sacrifices and other
ceremonies rendered to idols.”

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc39016.htm#fr_578) <span
id="xvii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p49"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iii-p49.1"></span>Rendent profanes ceux qui les seruent;” —
“Render profane those who serve them.”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc39016.htm#fr_579) <span
id="xvii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p50"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p50.1"></span>Les
sacremens;” — “The sacraments.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc39016.htm#fr_580) <span
id="xvii.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p51"></span> “<span id="xvii.iii-p51.1"></span>Vne
conionetion et union auec leurs idoles;” — “A connection and union with
their idols.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc39016.htm#fr_581) <span
id="xvii.iii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p52"></span> Anthypophora (<span
id="xvii.iii-p52.1"></span>ἀνθυποφορα) is a figure of speech, by which a
speaker *anticipates* the objections of his opponent, and answers them.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc39016.htm#fr_582) <span
id="xvii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p17"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iv-p17.1"></span>Simplement, et en soy;” — “Simply, and in
themselves.”

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc39016.htm#fr_583) <span
id="xvii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p18.1"></span>Les
ceremonies des dedicaces et consecrations solemlelles desquelles les
Gentils vsent, ne sont que vent, et n’emportent rien;” — “The ceremonies
of solemn dedications and consecrations, which the Gentiles make use of,
are mere wind, and signify nothing.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc39016.htm#fr_584) <span
id="xvii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p21.1"></span>Mais ie
di, que les choses;” — “But I say, that the things.”

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc39016.htm#fr_585) <span
id="xvii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p23.1"></span>Ils
entcndoyent ceux qui estans hornroes de grand renom, auoyent este faits
dieux;” — “They meant those, who, being men of great renown, had been
made gods.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc39016.htm#fr_586) <span
id="xvii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p24"></span> The following instances may be adduced
from Plato (in Sympos.): — <span id="xvii.iv-p24.1"></span>Παν το
δαιμονιον μεταξυ εστι θεου τε και θνητου — Every *demon* holds a middle
place between God and mortal man; <span id="xvii.iv-p24.2"></span>Θεος
ανθρωπῳ ου μιγνυται, αλλα δια δαιμονιων πασα εστιν ἡ ὁμιλια και ἡ
διαλεκτος θεοις προς ανθρωπους — God does not hold direct converse with
man, but all intercourse and communication is carried on between gods
and men by means of *demons*; <span id="xvii.iv-p24.3"></span>Το
Δαιμονιον εστιν ερμηνευον και διαπορθμενον θειος τα παρ ανθρωπων, και
ανθρωποις τα παρα θεων, των μεν τας δεησεις και θυσιας, των δε τας
επιταξεις και αμοιβας των θυσιων — a *demon* is an interpreter and
reporter from men to the gods, and from the gods to men — of the prayers
and the sacrifices of the one, and the injunctions and rewards of
devotion on the part of the other. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc39016.htm#fr_587) <span
id="xvii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p26"></span> Calvin has very probably in his eye here
the sentiment of Plato already quoted — that “every *demon* holds a
*middle place* between God and mortal man.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc39016.htm#fr_588) <span
id="xvii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p28.1"></span>Quand
auant que nous y presenter, nous auons renonce a tous sacrileges, c’est
a dire a toute impiete et idolatrie;” — “When, before approaching it, we
have renounced everything sacrilegious, that is to say, all impiety and
idolatry.”

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc39016.htm#fr_589) <span
id="xvii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p29.1"></span>O plus
que miserable la condition de ceux;” — “O more than miserable the
condition of those.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc39016.htm#fr_590) <span
id="xvii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p32"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p32.1"></span>Qui ne
veulent point venir au poinet;” — “Who are not willing to come to the
point.”

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc39016.htm#fr_591) <span
id="xvii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p34.1"></span>Ruine et
condemnation;” — “Ruin and condemnation.”

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc39016.htm#fr_592) <span
id="xvii.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p35"></span> The reader will find the same incident in
Sacred History referred to by our Author, and dwelt upon at considerable
length, in the *Harmony*, vol. 1, p. 58. See also Calvin on Genesis,
vol. 1, p. 328. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc39016.htm#fr_593) <span
id="xvii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p38"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p38.1"></span>Dira
quelqu’ vn;” — “Some one will say.”

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc39016.htm#fr_594) <span
id="xvii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p23.1"></span>Car
combien que les Corinthiens faissent en cela plusieurs fautes qui
estoyent toutes comprises sous vne generalite;” — “For although the
Corinthians in this case committed many faults which were all
comprehended under one general description.”

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc39016.htm#fr_595) <span
id="xvii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p25.1"></span>Sans en
enquerir rien;” — “Without asking any question as to it.”

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc39016.htm#fr_596) <span
id="xvii.v-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p26.1"></span>Debatre en
son entendement *pour et contre*, comme on dit;” — “To debate in one’s
mind *for* and *against*, as they say.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc39016.htm#fr_597) <span
id="xvii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p27"></span> <span id="xvii.v-p27.1"></span>᾿Ανακρίνω,
properly means to *examine narrowly* It is stated by *Bloomfield*, that
“the best recent Commentators consider the expression <span
id="xvii.v-p27.2"></span>μηδὲν ἀνακρίνοντες, as put for <span
id="xvii.v-p27.3"></span>μηδὲν κρέας (that is, <span
id="xvii.v-p27.4"></span>κρέατος γένος) <span
id="xvii.v-p27.5"></span>ἀνακρίνοντες, examining no kind of meat, to see
whether it be idol-meat or not.” This interpretation is natural, and
agrees particularly well with the expression, as repeated in the 27th
verse. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc39016.htm#fr_598) <span
id="xvii.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p31"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p31.1"></span>C’est ‘a
dire, le contenu d’icelle;” — “That is to say, what it contains.”

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc39016.htm#fr_599) <span
id="xvii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p33"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p33.1"></span>Lequel mot
nous auons traduit, Le contenu de la terre;” — “Which expression we have
rendered — What the earth contains.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](cc39016.htm#fr_600) <span
id="xvii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p37"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p37.1"></span>Seulement
autant que faire se pent sans offenser Dieu;” — “Only so far as they can
do so without offending God.”

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](cc39016.htm#fr_601) <span
id="xvii.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p38"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p38.1"></span>Auec grand
auis et prudence;” — “With great care and prudence.”

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc39016.htm#fr_602) <span
id="xvii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p43"></span> It is omitted in the Alex., Clermont, and
in all of the more ancient MSS.; and in the Syriac, Arabic, and Vulgate
versions. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc39016.htm#fr_603) <span
id="xvii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p47"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p47.1"></span>C’est a
dire, de nestre liberte;” — “That is to say, of our liberty.”

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc39016.htm#fr_604) <span
id="xvii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p50"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p50.1"></span>Qu’il n’y
a rien en toute nostre vie, tant petit soit-il;” — “That there is
nothing in our whole life, be it ever so small.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc39016.htm#fr_605) <span
id="xvii.v-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p51"></span> The proverbial expression referred to
occurs in Auctor. ad Herenn. 4. 28: — “<span
id="xvii.v-p51.1"></span>*Esse* oportet ut *vivas*, non *vivere* ut
*edas*;” — “You should *eat to live* — not *live* to *eat*.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc39016.htm#fr_606) <span
id="xvii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p56"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p56.1"></span>I1 ne leur
faut pas accorder, et s’accommoder a eux en cela;” — “It is not proper
to concede to them, and to accommodate ourselves to them in that.”

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc39016.htm#fr_607) <span
id="xvii.v-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p57"></span> The view here given by Calvin of the
spirit by which Paul was actuated in this part of his conduct, is most
successfully brought out, at greater length, by the Reverend Andrew
Fuller, when comparing <span id="xvii.v-p57.1"></span>[1Co
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="xvii.v-p57.1"></span>,
with <span id="xvii.v-p57.2"></span>[Ga
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span id="xvii.v-p57.2"></span>. —
“Though both these kinds of action are expressed by one term — to
*please* — *yet* they are exceedingly diverse; no less so than a conduct
which has the glory of God and the good of mankind for its object, and
one that originates and terminates in self. The former of these passages
should be read in connection with what precedes and follows it, (<span
id="xvii.v-p57.3"></span>[1Co
10:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span
id="xvii.v-p57.3"></span>.) Hence it appears plain, that the *things* in
which the Apostle *pleased all*, *men*, require to be restricted to such
things as tend to their ‘profit, that they may be sav*ed*.’ Whereas the
things in which, according to the latter passage, he could *not* please
men, and yet be the servant of Christ, were of a contrary tendency. Such
were the objects pursued by the false teachers whom he opposed, and who
desired to ‘make a fair show in the flesh, lest they should suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ.’ (<span
id="xvii.v-p57.4"></span>[1Co
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)<span id="xvii.v-p57.4"></span>.)
The *former* is that sweet inoffensiveness of spirit which teaches us to
lay aside all selfwill and self-importance, that charity which ‘seeketh
not her own,’ and ‘is not easily provoked;’ it is that spirit, in short,
which the same writer elsewhere recommends from the example of Christ
himself: ‘We, then, who are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his
neighbor, for his good to edification: for even Christ pleased not
himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached
thee fell on me.’ But the *l*a*tter* spirit referred to is that sordid
compliance with the corruptions of human nature, of which flatterers and
deceivers have always availed themselves, not for the glory of God or
the good of men, but for the promotion of their own selfish designs.” —
*Fullers* *Works*, volume 3. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc39017)
