[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39005)  [Next](cc39007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="vii-p2"></span>ON THE

<span id="vii-p3"></span>FIRST EPISTLE TO THE

<span id="vii-p4"></span>CORINTHIANS

<span id="vii-p5"></span>The advantages of this Epistle are various and
manifold; for it contains many special topics,  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) the handling of which successively in
their order, will show how necessary they are to be known. Nay, it will
appear in part from the argument itself, in the recital of which I shall
study to be brief, yet in such a way as to take in the whole, without
omitting any of the leading points.

<span id="vii-p7"></span>Corinth, as every one knows, was a wealthy and
celebrated city of Achaia. While it was destroyed by L. Mummius for no
other reason than that the advantageousness of its situation excited his
suspicions, posterity afterwards rebuilt it for the same reason that
Mummius had for destroying it.  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) The
convenience of the situation, too, occasioned its being restored again
in a short time. For as it had the Aegean Sea contiguous on the one
side, and the Ionian on the other, and as it was a thoroughfare between
Attica and the Peloponnesus, it was very conveniently situated for
imports and exports. Paul, after teaching there for a year and a half,
as Luke mentions in the Acts, constrained at length by the wickedness of
the Jews, sailed thence into Syria (<span id="vii-p8.2"></span>[Acts
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)<span id="vii-p8.2"></span>.)
During Paul’s absence false apostles had crept in, not, in my opinion,
to disturb the Church openly with wicked doctrines, or designedly to
undermine sound doctrine; but, priding themselves in the splendor and
magnificence of their address, or rather, being puffed up with an empty
loftiness of speech, they looked upon Paul’s simplicity, and even the
Gospel itself, with contempt. They afterwards, by their ambition, gave
occasion for the Church being split into various parties; and, last of
all, reckless as to every thing, provided only they were themselves held
in estimation, made it their aim to promote their own honor, rather than
Christ’s kingdom and the people’s welfare.

<span id="vii-p9"></span>On the other hand, as those vices prevailed at
Corinth with which mercantile cities are wont to be particularly
infested, — luxury, pride, vanity, effeminacy, insatiable covetousness,
and ambition; so they had found their way even into the Church itself,
so that discipline was greatly relaxed. Nay more, purity of doctrine had
already begun to decline, so that the main article of religion — the
resurrection of the dead — was called in question. Yet amidst this great
corruption in every department, they were satisfied with themselves,
equally as though every thing had been on the best possible footing.
Such are Satan’s usual artifices. If he cannot prevent the progress of
doctrine, he creeps forward secretly to make an attack upon it: if he
cannot by direct falsehoods suppress it, so as to prevent it from coming
forth to light, he digs secret mines for its overthrow; and in fine, if
he cannot alienate men’s minds from it, he leads them by little and
little to deviate from it.

<span id="vii-p10"></span>As to those worthless persons, however, who
had disturbed the Corinthian Church, it is not without good ground that
I conclude that they were not open enemies of the truth. We see that
Paul nowhere else spares false doctrines. The Epistles to the Galatians,
to the Colossians, to the Philippians, and to Timothy, are short; yet in
all of them he does not merely censure the false apostles, but also
points out at the same time in what respects they injured the Church.
Nor is it without good reason; for believers must not merely be
admonished as to the persons whom they ought to shun, they must also be
shown the evil against which they should be on their guard. I cannot
therefore believe that, in this comparatively long Epistle, he was
prepared to pass over in silence what he carefully insists upon in
others that are much shorter. In addition to this, he makes mention of
many faults of the Corinthians, and even some that are apparently
trivial, so that he appears to have had no intention of passing over any
thing in them that was deserving of reproof. Besides, he must, in any
other view, be regarded as wasting many words in disputing against those
absurd teachers and prating orators.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) He censures their ambition; he reproves
them for transforming the gospel into human philosophy; he shows that
they are destitute of the efficacy of the Spirit, inasmuch as they are
taken up with mere ornaments of speech, and seek after a mere dead
letter; but not a word is there as to a single false doctrine. Hence I
conclude that they were persons who did not openly take away any thing
from the substance of the gospel, but, as they burned with a misdirected
eagerness for distinction, I am of opinion that, with the view of making
themselves admired, they contrived a new method of teaching, at variance
with the simplicity of Christ. This must necessarily be the case with
all that have not as yet thrown off self, that they may engage
unreservedly in the Lord’s work. The first step towards serving Christ
is to lose sight of ourselves, and think only of the Lord’s glory and
the salvation of men. Farther, no one will ever be qualified for
teaching that has not first himself tasted the influence of the gospel,
so as to speak not so much with the mouth, as with the dispositions of
the heart. Hence, those that are not regenerated by the Spirit of God —
not having felt inwardly the influence of the gospel, and know not what
is meant when it is said that we must become new creatures, (<span
id="vii-p11.2"></span>[Joh 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#007)<span
id="vii-p11.2"></span>) have a dead preaching, whereas it ought to be
lively and efficacious; and, with the view of playing off their part,
they disfigure the gospel by painting it over, so as to make it a sort
of worldly philosophy.

<span id="vii-p12"></span>Nor was it difficult for those of whom we are
now speaking to accomplish this at Corinth. For merchants are usually
led away with outward disguises, and they do not merely allow themselves
to be imposed upon by the empty show with which they deceive others, but
in a manner take delight in this. Besides, as they have delicate ears,
so that they cannot bear to be rudely taken to task, so if they meet
with teachers of the milder sort, that will handle them gently, they
give them, as it were, a reward in turn by caressing them.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) It is so, I grant, everywhere; but it is
more especially common in wealthy and mercantile cities. Paul, who was
in other respects a god-like man, and distinguished by admirable
virtues, was, nevertheless, not adorned with outward elegance, and was
not puffed up with show, with the view of setting himself off to
advantage. In fine, as he was inwardly replenished with the genuine
excellence of the Spirit, so he had nothing of outward show. He knew not
to flatter, and was not concerned to please men. (<span
id="vii-p13.2"></span>[Ga 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)<span
id="vii-p13.2"></span>.) The one object that he had in view was, that
Christ might reign, himself and all others being brought under
subjection to him. As the Corinthians were desirous of doctrine that was
ingenious, rather than useful, the gospel had no relish for them. As
they were eager for new things, Christ had now become stale. Or if they
had not as yet fallen into these vices, they were, nevertheless, already
of their own accord predisposed to corruptions of that nature. Such were
the facilities afforded to the false apostles for adulterating the
doctrine of Christ among them; for *adulterated* it is, when its native
simplicity is stained, and in a manner painted over, so as to differ
nothing from worldly philosophy. Hence, to suit the taste of the
Corinthians, they seasoned their preaching in such a way that the true
savor of the gospel was destroyed. We are now in possession of the
design that Paul had in view in writing this Epistle. I shall now take
in the sum of the argument, by noting down briefly the particular heads
of discourse.

<span id="vii-p14"></span>He begins with an ascription of praise,  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) that is in effect an exhortation, that
they should go on as they have begun, and in this way he soothes them
beforehand, that he may make them the more docile. Immediately
afterwards, however, he proceeds to chide them, making mention of the
dissensions with which their Church was infested. Being desirous to cure
this evil, he calls upon them to exchange haughtiness for humility. For
he overthrows all the wisdom of the world, that the preaching of the
Cross may alone be exalted. He also at the same time abases them as
individuals, in exhorting them to look around and see what class of
persons chiefly the Lord has adopted as members of his flock.

<span id="vii-p16"></span>In the *second chapter* he brings forward, by
way of example, his own preaching, which, in the account of men, was
base and contemptible, but had nevertheless been signalized by the
influence of the Spirit. And in the meantime he unfolds at greater
length the sentiment, that there is a heavenly and secret wisdom that is
contained in the gospel, which cannot be apprehended by any acuteness or
perspicacity of intellect, or by any perception of sense, and is not
influenced by human reasonings, and needs no meretricious ornament of
words or embellishment, but simply by the revelation of the Spirit comes
to be known by the understandings of men, and is sealed upon their
hearts. He at length comes to this conclusion, that the preaching of the
gospel does not merely differ widely from the wisdom of the flesh, and
consists in the abasement of the Cross, but cannot be estimated as to
its true nature by the judgment of the flesh; and this he does, with the
view of drawing them off from a mistaken confidence in their own
judgment, by which they measured every thing amiss.

<span id="vii-p17"></span>The beginning of the *third chapter* contains
the application of this last department of the subject to their case.
For Paul complains, that, being carnal, they were scarcely capable of
learning the first rudiments of the gospel. He intimates in this way,
that the distaste which they had contracted for the word, arose from no
fault in the word itself, but from their ignorance; and at the same time
he indirectly admonishes them, that they need to have their minds
renewed, before they will begin to judge aright. He afterwards shows in
what estimation the ministers of the gospel ought to be held — that it
ought to be in such a way, that the honor given to them does not in any
degree detract from the glory that is due to God — as there is one Lord,
and all are his servants: all are mere instruments; he alone imparts
efficacy, and from him proceeds the entire result. He shows them, at the
same time, what they ought to have as their aim — to build up the
Church. He takes occasion from this to point out the true and proper
method of building aright. It is to have Christ alone as the foundation,
and the entire structure harmonizing with the foundation. And here,
having stated in passing that he is a wise master-builder, he admonishes
those that come after him to make the end  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) correspond with the beginning. He exhorts
also the Corinthians not to allow their souls to be desecrated by
corrupt doctrines, inasmuch as they are temples of God. Here he again
brings to naught proud fleshly wisdom, that the knowledge of Christ may
alone be in estimation among believers.

<span id="vii-p19"></span>In the beginning of the *fourth chapter* he
points out what is the office of a true apostle. And as it was their
corrupt judgment that prevented them from recognizing him as such,
putting it aside, he appeals to the day of the Lord. Farther, as he was
contemptible in their view from an appearance of abasement, he teaches
them that this ought to be regarded as an honor to him rather than a
disgrace. He afterwards brings forward tokens, from which it might in
reality appear that he had not consulted his own glory, or his own belly
(<span id="vii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span id="vii-p19.1"></span>),
but had with faithfulness devoted himself exclusively to Christ’s work.
He comes at length to infer what honor is due to him from the
Corinthians. In the close of the chapter he recommends Timothy to them,
until he shall come to them himself; and at the same time he forewarns
them that, on his coming, he will openly discover how little account he
makes of those empty boastings by which the false apostles endeavored to
recommend themselves.

<span id="vii-p20"></span>In the *fifth chapter* he takes them to task,
for silently tolerating an incestuous connection between a son-in-law
and a mother-in-law, and instructs them that in connection with a crime
of such enormity, there was good reason why they should be covered with
shame, instead of being elated with pride. From this he passes on to lay
down a general doctrine to this effect, that crimes of that nature ought
to be punished with excommunication, that indulgence in sin may be
repressed, and that the infection may not spread from one individual to
the others.

<span id="vii-p21"></span>The *sixth chapter* consists chiefly of two
parts. In the *first* he inveighs against law-suits, with which they
harassed one another, before unbelievers, to the great dishonor of the
gospel. In the *second* he reproves indulgence in fornication, which had
come to such a pitch, that it was almost looked upon as a lawful thing.
He sets out with a heavy threatening, and afterwards enforces that
threatening with arguments.

<span id="vii-p22"></span>The *seventh chapter* contains a discussion in
reference to virginity, marriage, and celibacy. So far as we may
conjecture from Paul’s words, a superstitious notion had become
prevalent among the Corinthians of this nature — that virginity was a
distinguished, and in a manner angelic virtue, so that marriage was held
by them in contempt, as though it had been a profane thing. With the
view of removing this error, he teaches that every one must consider
what his gift is, and not strive in this matter beyond his ability,
inasmuch as all have not the same calling. Accordingly he shows who they
are that may abstain from marriage, and what ought to be the design of
abstaining from it; and on the other hand, who they are that ought to
enter into the married state, and what is the true principle of
Christian marriage.

<span id="vii-p23"></span>In the *eighth chapter* he prohibits them from
having fellowship with idolaters in their impure sacrifices, or giving
countenance to anything of such a nature as might injure weak
consciences. And as they excused themselves on this pretext, that they
did not by any means connect themselves with idolaters in any corrupt
sentiment, inasmuch as they acknowledged in their heart *one* God, and
regarded idols as empty contrivances, he sets aside this excuse, on this
principle that every one ought to have a regard to his brethren, and
that there are many weak persons whose faith might be staggered by such
dissimulation.

<span id="vii-p24"></span>In the *ninth chapter* he shows that he
requires from them nothing more than he himself practiced, that he may
not be reckoned so unreasonable as to impose upon others a law that he
did not himself observe. For he puts them in mind how he had voluntarily
refrained from availing himself of the liberty granted him by the Lord,
lest he should give occasion of offense to any one, and how he had, in
things indifferent, put on as it were various appearances, with the view
of accommodating himself to all, that they may learn from his example
that no one should be so devoted to self as not to endeavor to
accommodate himself to his brethren for their edification.

<span id="vii-p25"></span>Now as the Corinthians were highly satisfied
with themselves, as we said in the outset, in the beginning of the
*tenth chapter* he admonishes them, from the example of the Jews, not to
deceive themselves by a mistaken confidence; for if they are puffed up
on account of outward things and gifts of God, he shows that the Jews
were not without similar ground of glorying, and yet all this availed
them nothing, because they abused their privileges. After alarming them
by this threatening he returns immediately to the subject on which he
had previously entered, and shows how unseemly it is for those who
partake of the Lord’s Supper to be participants in the “table of
devils,” that being a shameful and insufferable pollution. He at length
draws this conclusion, that all our actions should be regulated in such
a manner as not to be an occasion of offense to any one.

<span id="vii-p26"></span>In the *eleventh chapter* he clears the public
assemblies from certain corrupt observances, which were at variance with
Christian decorum and propriety, and shows what gravity and modesty
ought to be exercised when we stand in the view of God and angels. He
takes them to task, however, chiefly for their corrupt administration of
the Supper. He subjoins the method of correcting the abuse that had
crept in, which is by calling them back to our Lord’s original
institution, as the only sure rule and permanent law of right acting.

<span id="vii-p27"></span>As, however, many abused spiritual gifts for
purposes of ambition, he enters into a discussion, in the *twelfth
chapter*, as to the purpose for which they are conferred by God, and
also as to what is the proper and genuine use of them, which is, that by
contributing mutually to each other’s advantage, we may be united
together in one body, that of Christ. This doctrine he illustrates by
drawing a similitude from the human body, in which, although there are
different members and various faculties, there is nevertheless such a
symmetry and fellow-feeling, that what has been conferred on the members
severally contributes to the advantage of the whole body — and hence
love is the best directress in this matter.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="vii-p29"></span>The subject he follows out at greater length,
and illustrates it more fully in the *thirteenth chapter*. The sum is
this — that all things must be viewed in relation to love. He takes
occasion from this to make a digression for the purpose of commending
that virtue, that he may the more strongly recommend the pursuit of it,
and may encourage the Corinthians the more to cultivate it.

<span id="vii-p30"></span>In the *fourteenth chapter* he begins to point
out more particularly in what respect the Corinthians had erred in the
use of spiritual gifts; and as mere show bulked so much in their
estimation, he teaches them that in all things edification alone should
be looked to. For this reason he prefers prophecy to all other gifts, as
being more useful, while the Corinthians set a higher value on tongues,
purely from empty show. In addition to this, he lays down the right
order of procedure, and at the same time reproves the fault of sounding
forth in unknown tongues without any advantage, while in the meantime
the doctrine and exhortations, which ought ever to hold the foremost
place, were left in the background. He afterwards forbids women to teach
publicly, as being a thing unseemly.

<span id="vii-p31"></span>In the *fifteenth chapter* he inveighs against
a very pernicious error, which, although we can scarcely suppose it to
have spread generally among the Corinthians, had nevertheless taken
possession of the minds of some of them to such a degree, that it was
necessary that a remedy should be openly administered. He appears,
however, to have intentionally delayed mentioning this matter until the
close of the Epistle, for this reason — that if he had set out with
this, or had entered upon it immediately after commencing, they might
have thought that they were all reckoned to be in fault. The hope of a
resurrection, accordingly, he shows to be so necessary, that, if it is
taken away, the whole gospel falls to pieces. Having established the
doctrine itself by powerful arguments, he subjoins also the principle
and manner of it. In fine, he carefully draws out a full discussion of
this point.

<span id="vii-p32"></span>The *sixteenth chapter* consists of two parts.
In the first of these he exhorts them to relieve the necessity of the
brethren at Jerusalem. They were at that time pinched with famine, and
they were cruelly treated by the wicked. The apostles had assigned to
Paul the charge of stirring up the Churches of the Gentiles to afford
them help. He accordingly exhorts them to lay up in store whatever they
were inclined to contribute, that it might be transmitted to Jerusalem
without delay. He at length concludes the Epistle with a friendly
exhortation and congratulations.

<span id="vii-p33"></span>Hence we may gather, as I stated in the
outset, that the Epistle is replete with most profitable doctrine,
containing, as it does, a variety of discussions on many important
topics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc39006.htm#fr_27) <span
id="vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p6"></span> “<span id="vii-p6.1"></span>Bonnes matieres,
et points de doctrine;” — “Good subjects and points of doctrines.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc39006.htm#fr_28) <span
id="vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii-p8"></span> Strabo describes Mummius as “<span
id="vii-p8.1"></span>μεγαλαφρων μαλλον ἠ φιλοτεχνος,” — “a man of
magnanimity rather than a lover of the arts.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc39006.htm#fr_29) <span
id="vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p11"></span> “<span id="vii-p11.1"></span>Ces habiles
docteurs, et plaisans harangueurs;” — “Those expert teachers and
pleasant orators.”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc39006.htm#fr_30) <span
id="vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p13"></span> “<span id="vii-p13.1"></span>En flattant et
mignardant ces bons maistres;” — “By flattering and caressing these good
master.”

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc39006.htm#fr_31) <span
id="vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p15"></span> “<span id="vii-p15.1"></span>En s’esiouissant
de leur avancement en l’Evangile;” — “While exulting in their profiency
in the gospel.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc39006.htm#fr_32) <span
id="vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p18"></span> “<span id="vii-p18.1"></span>De leur
besongne;” — “Of their work.”

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc39006.htm#fr_33) <span
id="vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p28"></span> “<span id="vii-p28.1"></span>Ainsi, il
conclud, que charite nous seruira d’vne bonne regle pour nous bien
gouuerner en cest endroit;” — “Thus, he concludes, that charity will
furnish us with a good rule for directing us aright in this matter.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc39007)
