[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc00)  [Next](cc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# To the Public

It is to you, O thoughtful and considerate public, that I dedicate this
book. May it, under the providence of God, do good to this generation
and posterity!

I earnestly hope my meaning, in the writing thereof, may not be
misapprehended.

It must not be thought, because I am constrained to describe the
overthrow of civilization, that I desire it. The prophet is not
responsible for the event he foretells. He may contemplate it with
profoundest sorrow. Christ wept over the doom of Jerusalem.

Neither am I an anarchist: for I paint a dreadful picture of the
world-wreck which successful anarchism would produce.

I seek to preach into the ears of the able and rich and powerful the
great truth that neglect of the sufferings of their fellows,
indifference to the great bond of brotherhood which lies at the base of
Christianity, and blind, brutal and degrading worship of mere wealth,
must--given time and pressure enough--eventuate in the overthrow of
society and the destruction of civilization.

I come to the churches with my heart filled with the profoundest respect
for the essentials of religion; I seek to show them why they have lost
their hold upon the poor,--upon that vast multitude, the best-beloved of
God's kingdom,--and I point out to them how they may regain it. I tell
them that if Religion is to reassume her ancient station, as crowned
mistress of the souls of men, she must stand, in shining armor bright,
with the serpent beneath her feet, the champion and defender of mankind
against all its oppressors.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

The world, to-day, clamors for deeds, not creeds; for bread, not dogma;
for charity, not ceremony; for love, not intellect.

Some will say the events herein described are absurdly impossible.

Who is it that is satisfied with the present unhappy condition of
society? It is conceded that life is a dark and wretched failure for the
great mass of mankind. The many are plundered to enrich the few. Vast
combinations depress the price of labor and increase the cost of the
necessaries of existence. The rich, as a rule, despise the poor; and the
poor are coming to hate the rich. The face of labor grows sullen; the
old tender Christian love is gone; standing armies are formed on one
side, and great communistic organizations on the other; society divides
itself into two hostile camps; no white flags pass from the one to the
other. They wait only for the drum-beat and the trumpet to summon them
to armed conflict.

These conditions have come about in less than a century; most of them in
a quarter of a century. Multiply them by the years of another century,
and who shall say that the events I depict are impossible? There is an
acceleration of movement in human affairs even as there is in the
operations of gravity. The dead missile out of space at last blazes, and
the very air takes fire. The masses grow more intelligent as they grow
more wretched; and more capable of cooperation as they become more
desperate. The labor organizations of to-day would have been impossible
fifty years ago. And what is to arrest the flow of effect from cause?
What is to prevent the coming of the night if the earth continues to
revolve on its axis? The fool may cry out: "There shall be no night!"
But the feet of the hours march unrelentingly toward the darkness.

Some may think that, even if all this be true, "Cæsar's Column" should
not have been published. Will it arrest the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

moving evil to ignore its presence? What would be thought of the surgeon
who, seeing upon his patient's lip the first nodule of the cancer, tells
him there is no danger, and laughs him into security while the roots of
the monster eat their way toward the great arteries? If my message be
true it should be spoken; and the world should hear it. The cancer
should be cut out while there is yet time. Any other course

"Will but skin and film the ulcerous place, While rank corruption,
mining all beneath, infects unseen."

Believing, as I do, that I read the future aright, it would be criminal
in me to remain silent. I plead for higher and nobler thoughts in the
souls of men; for wider love and ampler charity in their hearts; for a
renewal of the bond of brotherhood between the classes; for a reign of
justice on earth that shall obliterate the cruel hates and passions
which now divide the world.

If God notices anything so insignificant as this poor book, I pray that
he may use it as an instrumentality of good for mankind; for he knows I
love his human creatures, and would help them if I had the power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Great City](cc02)
