[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc01)  [Next](cc03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# CHAPTER I

### THE GREAT CITY

\[This book is a series of letters, from Gabriel Weltstein, in New York,
to his brother, Heinrich Weltstein, in the State of Uganda, Africa.\]

NEW YORK, Sept. 10, 1988

My Dear Brother:

Here I am, at last, in the great city. My eyes are weary with gazing,
and my mouth speechless with admiration; but in my brain rings
perpetually the thought: Wonderful!--wonderful!--most wonderful!

What an infinite thing is man, as revealed in the tremendous
civilization he has built up! These swarming, laborious, all-capable
ants seem great enough to attack heaven itself, if they could but find a
resting-place for their ladders. Who can fix a limit to the intelligence
or the achievements of our species?

But our admiration may be here, and our hearts elsewhere. And so from
all this glory and splendor I turn back to the old homestead, amid the
high mountain valleys of Africa; to the primitive, simple shepherd-life;
to my beloved mother, to you and to all our dear ones. This gorgeous,
gilded room fades away, and I see the leaning hills, the trickling
streams, the deep gorges where our woolly thousands graze; and I hear
once more the echoing Swiss horns of our herdsmen reverberating from the
snow-tipped mountains.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

But my dream is gone. The roar of the mighty city rises around me like
the bellow of many cataracts.

New York contains now ten million inhabitants; it is the largest city
that is, or ever has been, in the world. It is difficult to say where it
begins or ends: for the villas extend, in almost unbroken succession,
clear to Philadelphia; while east, west and north noble habitations
spread out mile after mile, far beyond the municipal limits.

But the wonderful city! Let me tell you of it.

As we approached it in our air-ship, coming from the east, we could see,
a hundred miles before we reached the continent, the radiance of its
millions of magnetic lights, reflected on the sky, like the glare of a
great conflagration. These lights are not fed, as in the old time, from
electric dynamos, but the magnetism of the planet itself is harnessed
for the use of man. That marvelous earth-force which the Indians called
"the dance of the spirits," and civilized man designated "the aurora
borealis," is now used to illuminate this great metropolis, with a
clear, soft, white light, like that of the full moon, but many times
brighter. And the force is so cunningly conserved that it is returned to
the earth, without any loss of magnetic power to the planet. Man has
simply made a temporary loan from nature for which he pays no interest.

Night and day are all one, for the magnetic light increases
automatically as the day-light wanes; and the business parts of the city
swarm as much at midnight as at high noon. In the old times, I am told,
part of the streets was reserved for foot-paths for men and women, while
the middle was given up to horses and wheeled vehicles; and one could
not pass from side to side without danger of being trampled to death by
the horses. But as the city grew it was found that the pavements would
not hold the mighty, surging multitudes; they were crowded into the
streets, and many accidents occurred. The authorities were at length
compelled to exclude all

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

horses from the streets, in the business parts of the city, and raise
the central parts to a level with the sidewalks, and give them up to the
exclusive use of the pedestrians, erecting stone pillars here and there
to divide the multitude moving in one direction from those flowing in
another. These streets are covered with roofs of glass, which exclude
the rain and snow, but not the air. And then the wonder and glory of the
shops! They surpass all description. Below all the business streets are
subterranean streets, where vast trains are drawn, by smokeless and
noiseless electric motors, some carrying passengers, others freight. At
every street corner there are electric elevators, by which passengers
can ascend or descend to the trains. And high above the house-tops,
built on steel pillars, there are other railroads, not like the
unsightly elevated trains we saw pictures of in our school books, but
crossing diagonally over the city, at a great height, so as to best
economize time and distance.

The whole territory between Broadway and the Bowery and Broome Street
and Houston Street is occupied by the depot grounds of the great
inter-continental air-lines; and it is an astonishing sight to see the
ships ascending and descending, like monstrous birds, black with
swarming masses of passengers, to or from England, Europe, South
America, the Pacific Coast, Australia, China, India and Japan.

These air-lines are of two kinds: the anchored and the independent. The
former are hung, by revolving wheels, upon great wires suspended in the
air; the wires held in place by metallic balloons, fish-shaped, made of
[aluminum](errata.htm#0.md), and constructed to turn with the wind so as to
present always the least surface to the air-currents. These balloons,
where the lines cross the oceans, are secured to huge floating islands
of timber, which are in turn anchored to the bottom of the sea by four
immense metallic cables, extending north, south, east and west, and
powerful enough to resist any storms. These artificial islands contain
dwellings, in which men reside,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

who keep up the supply of gas necessary for the balloons. The
independent air-lines are huge cigar-shaped balloons, unattached to the
earth, moving by electric power, with such tremendous speed and force as
to be as little affected by the winds as a cannon ball. In fact, unless
the wind is directly ahead the sails of the craft are so set as to take
advantage of it like the sails of a ship; and the balloon rises or
falls, as the birds do, by the angle at which it is placed to the wind,
the stream of air forcing it up, or pressing it down, as the case may
be. And just as the old-fashioned steam-ships were provided with boats,
in which the passengers were expected to take refuge, if the ship was
about to sink, so the upper decks of these air-vessels are supplied with
parachutes, from which are suspended boats; and in case of accident two
sailors and ten passengers are assigned to each parachute; and long
practice has taught the bold craftsmen to descend gently and alight in
the sea, even in stormy weather, with as much adroitness as a sea-gull.
In fact, a whole population of air-sailors has grown up to manage these
ships, never dreamed of by our ancestors. The speed of these aerial
vessels is, as you know, very great--thirty-six hours suffices to pass
from New York to London, in ordinary weather. The loss of life has been
less than on the old-fashioned steamships; for, as those which go east
move at a greater elevation than those going west, there is no danger of
collisions; and they usually fly above the fogs which add so much to the
dangers of sea-travel. In case of hurricanes they rise at once to the
higher levels, above the storm; and, with our increased scientific
knowledge, the coming of a cyclone is known for many days in advance;
and even the stratum of air in which it will move can be foretold.

I could spend hours, my dear brother, telling you of the splendor of
this hotel, called *The Darwin*, in honor of the great English
philosopher of the last century. It occupies an entire block from Fifth
Avenue to Madison Avenue, and

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

from Forty-sixth Street to Forty-seventh. The whole structure consists
of an infinite series of cunning adjustments, for the delight and
gratification of the human creature. One object seems to be to relieve
the guests from all necessity for muscular exertion. The ancient
elevator, or "lift," as they called it in England, has expanded until
now whole rooms, filled with ladies and gentlemen, are bodily carried up
from the first story to the roof; a professional musician playing the
while on the piano--not the old-fashioned thing our grandmothers used,
but a huge instrument capable of giving forth all sounds of harmony from
the trill of a nightingale to the thunders of an orchestra. And when you
reach the roof of the hotel you find yourself in a glass-covered
tropical forest, filled with the perfume of many flowers, and bright
with the scintillating plumage of darting birds; all sounds of sweetness
fill the air, and many glorious, star-eyed maidens, guests of the hotel,
wander half seen amid the foliage, like the houris in the Mohammedan's
heaven.

But as I found myself growing hungry I descended to the dining-room. It
is three hundred feet long: a vast multitude were there eating in
perfect silence. It is considered bad form to interrupt digestion with
speech, as such a practice tends to draw the vital powers, it is said,
away from the stomach to the head. Our forefathers were expected to
shine in conversation, and be wise and witty while gulping their food
between brilliant passages. I sat down at a table to which I was
marshaled by a grave and reverend seignior in an imposing uniform. As I
took my seat my weight set some machinery in motion. A few feet in front
of me suddenly rose out of the table a large upright mirror, or such I
took it to be; but instantly there appeared on its surface a grand bill
of fare, each article being numbered. The whole world had been ransacked
to produce the viands named in it; neither the frozen recesses of the
north nor the sweltering regions of the south had been spared: every
form of food,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

animal and vegetable, bird, beast, reptile, fish; the foot of an
elephant, the hump of a buffalo, the edible bird-nests of China; snails,
spiders, shell-fish, the strange and luscious creatures lately found in
the extreme depths of the ocean and fished for with dynamite; in fact,
every form of food pleasant to the palate of man was there. For, as you
know, there are men who make fortunes now by preserving and breeding the
game animals, like the deer, the moose, the elk, the buffalo, the
antelope, the mountain sheep and goat, and many others, which but for
their care would long since have become extinct. They select barren
regions in mild climates, not fit for agriculture, and enclosing large
tracts with wire fences, they raise great quantities of these valuable
game animals, which they sell to the wealthy gourmands of the great
cities, at very high prices.

I was perplexed, and, turning to the great man who stood near me, I
began to name a few of the articles I wanted. He smiled complacently at
my country ignorance, and called my attention to the fact that the table
immediately before me contained hundreds of little knobs or buttons,
each one numbered; and he told me that these were connected by electric
wires with the kitchen of the hotel, and if I would observe the numbers
attached to any articles in the bill of fare which I desired, and would
touch the corresponding numbers of the knobs before me, my dinner would
be ordered on a similar mirror in the kitchen, and speedily served. I
did as he directed. In a little while an electric bell near me rang; the
bill of fare disappeared from the mirror; there was a slight clicking
sound; the table parted in front of me, the electric knobs moving aside;
and up through the opening rose my dinner carefully arranged, as upon a
table, which exactly filled the gap caused by the recession of that part
of the original table which contained the electric buttons. I need not
say I was astonished. I commenced to eat, and immediately the same bell,
which had announced the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

disappearance of the bill of fare, rang again. I looked up, and the
mirror now contained the name of every state in the Republic, from
Hudson's Bay to the Isthmus of Darien; and the names of all the nations
of the world; each name being numbered. My attendant, perceiving my
perplexity, called my attention to the fact that the sides of the table
which had brought up my dinner contained another set of electric
buttons, corresponding with the numbers on the mirror; and he explained
to me that if I would select any state or country and touch the
corresponding button the news of the day, from that state or country,
would appear in the mirror. He called my attention to, the fact that
every guest in the room had in front of him a similar mirror, and many
of them were reading the news of the day as they ate. I touched the knob
corresponding with the name of the new state of Uganda, in Africa, and
immediately there appeared in the mirror all the doings of the people of
that state--its crimes, its accidents, its business, the output of its
mines, the markets, the sayings and doings of its prominent men; in
fact, the whole life of the community was unrolled before me like a
panorama. I then touched the button for another African state, Nyanza;
and at once I began to read of new lines of railroad; new steam-ship
fleets upon the great lake; of large colonies of white men, settling new
States, upon the higher lands of the interior; of their colleges, books,
newspapers; and particularly of a dissertation upon the genius of
Chaucer, written by a Zulu professor, which had created considerable
interest among the learned societies of the Transvaal. I touched the
button for China and read the important news that the Republican
Congress of that great and highly civilized nation had decreed that
English, the universal language of the rest of the globe, should be
hereafter used in the courts of justice and taught in all the schools.
Then came the news that a Manchurian professor, an iconoclast, had
written a learned work, in English, to prove that George Washington's
genius

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

and moral greatness had been much over-rated by the partiality of his
countrymen. He was answered by a learned doctor of Japan who argued that
the greatness of all great men consisted simply in opportunity, and that
for every illustrious name that shone in the pages of history,
associated with important events, a hundred abler men had lived and died
unknown. The battle was raging hotly, and all China and Japan were
dividing into contending factions upon this great issue.

Our poor ignorant ancestors of a hundred years ago drank alcohol in
various forms, in quantities which the system could not consume or
assimilate, and it destroyed their organs and shortened their lives.
Great agitations arose until the manufacture and sale of alcoholic
beverages was prohibited over nearly all the world. At length the
scientists observed that the craving was based on a natural want of the
system; that alcohol was found in small quantities in nearly every
article of food; and that the true course was to so increase the amount
of alcohol in the food, without gratifying the palate, as to meet the
real necessities of the system, and prevent a decrease of the vital
powers.

It is laughable to read of those days when men were drugged with pills,
boluses and powders. Now our physic is in our food; and the doctor
prescribes a series of articles to be eaten or avoided, as the case may
be. One can see at once by consulting his "vital-watch," which shows
every change in the magnetic and electric forces of the body, just how
his physical strength wanes or increases; and he can modify his diet
accordingly; he can select, for instance, a dish highly charged with
quinine or iron, and yet perfectly palatable; hence, among the wealthier
classes, a man of one hundred is as common now-a-days as a man of
seventy was a century ago;

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and many go far beyond that point, in full possession of all their
faculties.

I glanced around the great dining-room and inspected my neighbors. They
all carried the appearance of wealth; they were quiet, decorous and
courteous. But I could not help noticing that the women, young and old,
were much alike in some particulars, as if some general causes had
molded them into the same form. Their brows were all fine--broad,
square, and deep from the ear forward; and their jaws also were firmly
developed, square like a soldier's; while the profiles were classic in
their regularity, and marked by great firmness. The most peculiar
feature was their eyes. They had none of that soft, gentle, benevolent
look which so adorns the expression of my dear mother and other good
women whom we know. On the contrary, their looks were bold, penetrating,
immodest, if I may so express it, almost to fierceness: they challenged
you; they invited you; they held intercourse with your soul.

The chief features in the expression of the men were incredulity,
unbelief, cunning, observation, heartlessness. I did not see a good face
in the whole room: powerful faces there were, I grant you; high noses,
resolute mouths, fine brows; all the marks of shrewdness and energy; a
forcible and capable race; but that was all. I did not see one, my dear
brother of whom I could say, "That man would sacrifice himself for
another; that man loves his fellow man."

I could not but think how universal and irresistible must have been the
influences of the age that could mold all these Men and women into the
same soulless likeness. I pitied them. I pitied mankind, caught in the
grip of such wide-spreading tendencies. I said to myself: "Where is it
all to end? What are we to expect of a race without heart or honor? What
may we look for when the powers of the highest civilization

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

supplement the instincts of tigers and wolves? Can the brain of man
flourish when the heart is dead?"

I rose and left the room.

I had observed that the air of the hotel was sweeter, purer and cooler
than that of the streets outside. I asked one of the attendants for an
explanation. He took me out to where we could command a view of the
whole building, and showed me that a great canvas pipe rose high above
the hotel, and, tracing it upwards, far as the eye could reach, he
pointed out a balloon, anchored by cables, so high up as to be dwarfed
to a mere speck against the face of the blue sky. He told me that the
great pipe was double; that through one division rose the hot, exhausted
air of the hotel, and that the powerful draft so created operated
machinery which pumped down the pure, sweet air from a higher region,
several miles above the earth; and, the current once established, the
weight of the colder atmosphere kept up the movement, and the air was
then distributed by pipes to every part of the hotel. He told me also
that the hospitals of the city were supplied in the same manner; and the
result had been, be said, to diminish the mortality of the sick
one-half; for the air so brought to them was perfectly free from
bacteria and full of all life-giving properties. A company had been
organized to supply the houses of the rich with his cold, pure air for
so much a thousand feet, as long ago illuminating gas was furnished.

I could not help but think that there was need that some man should open
connection with the upper regions of God's charity, and bring down the
pure beneficent spirit of brotherly love to this afflicted earth, that
it might spread through all the tainted hospitals of corruption for the
healing of the hearts and souls of the people.

This attendant, a sort of upper-servant, I suppose, was quite courteous
and polite, and, seeing that I was a stranger, he proceeded to tell me
that the whole city was warmed with

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

hot water, drawn from the profound depths of the earth, and distributed
as drinking water was distributed a century ago, in pipes, to all the
houses, for a fixed and very reasonable charge. This heat-supply is so
uniform and so cheap that it has quite driven out all the old forms of
fuel--wood, coal, natural gas, etc.

And then he told me something which shocked me greatly. You know that
according to our old-fashioned ideas it is unjustifiable for any person
to take his own life, and thus rush into the presence of his Maker
before he is called. We are of the opinion of Hamlet that God has "fixed
his canon 'gainst self-slaughter." Would you believe it, my dear
brother, in this city they actually facilitate suicide! A race of
philosophers has arisen in the last fifty years who argue that, as man
was not consulted about his coming into the world, he has a perfect
right to leave it whenever it becomes uncomfortable. These strange
arguments were supplemented by the economists, always a powerful body in
this utilitarian land, and they urged that, as men could not be
prevented from destroying themselves, if they had made up their minds to
do so, they might just as well shuffle off the mortal coil in the way
that would give least trouble to their surviving fellow-citizens. That,
as it was, they polluted the rivers, and even the reservoirs of
drinking-water, with their dead bodies, and put the city to great
expense and trouble to recover and identify them. Then came the
humanitarians, who said that many persons, intent on suicide, but
knowing nothing of the best means of effecting their object, tore
themselves to pieces with cruel pistol shots or knife wounds, or took
corrosive poisons, which subjected them to agonizing tortures for hours
before death came to their relief; and they argued that if a man had
determined to leave the world it was a matter of humanity to help him
out of it by the pleasantest means possible. These views at length
prevailed, and now in all the public squares or parks they have erected
hand

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

some houses, beautifully furnished, with baths and bedrooms. If a man
has decided to die, he goes there. He is first photographed; then his
name, if he sees fit to give it, is recorded, with his residence; and
his directions are taken as to the disposition of his body. There are
tables at which he can write his farewell letters to his friends. A
doctor explains to him the nature and effect of the different poisons,
and he selects the kind he prefers. He is expected to bring with him the
clothes in which he intends to be cremated. He swallows a little pill,
lies down upon a bed, or, if he prefers it, in his coffin; pleasant
music is played for him; he goes to sleep, and wakes up on the other
side of the great line. Every day hundreds of people, men and women,
perish in this way; and they are borne off to the great furnaces for the
dead, and consumed. The authorities assert that it is a marked
improvement over the old-fashioned methods; but to my mind it is a
shocking combination of impiety and mock-philanthropy. The truth is,
that, in this vast, over-crowded city, man is a drug,--a
superfluity,--and I think many men and women end their lives out of an
overwhelming sense of their own insignificance;--in other words, from a
mere weariness of feeling that they are nothing, they become nothing.

I must bring this letter to an end, but before retiring I shall make a
visit to the grand parlors of the hotel. You suppose I will walk there.
Not at all, my dear brother. I shall sit down in a chair; there is an
electric magazine in the seat of it. I touch a spring, and away it goes.
I guide it with my feet. I drive into one of the great elevators. I
descend to the drawing-room floor. I touch the spring again, and in a
few moments I am moving around the grand salon, steering myself clear of
hundreds of similar chairs, occupied by fine-looking men or the
beautiful, keen-eyed, unsympathetic women I have described. The race has
grown in power and loveliness--I fear it has lost in lovableness.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Good-by. With love to all, I remain your affectionate brotherly

Gabriel Weltstein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. My Adventure](cc03.md)
