[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc04)  [Next](cc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### THE UNDER-WORLD

My Dear Heinrich:

Since I wrote you last night I have been through dreadful scenes. I have
traversed death in life. I have looked with my very eyes on Hell. I am
sick at heart. My soul sorrows for humanity.

Max (for so I have come to call my new-found friend) woke me very early,
and we breakfasted by lamp-light.

Yesterday he had himself dyed my fair locks of a dark brown, almost
black hue, and had cut off some of my hair's superfluous length. Then he
sent for a tailor, who soon arrayed me in garments of the latest fashion
and most perfect fit. Instead of the singular-looking mountaineer of the
day before, for whom the police were diligently searching, and on whose
head a reward of one thousand dollars had been placed (never before had
my head been valued so highly), there was nothing in my appearance to
distinguish me from the thousands of other gallant young gentlemen of
this great city.

A carriage waited for us at the door. We chatted together as we drove
along through the quiet streets.

I asked him:

"Are the degraded, and even the vicious, members of your Brotherhood?"

"No; not the criminal class," he replied, "for there is nothing in their
wretched natures on which you can build confidence or trust. Only those
who have fiber enough to persist in labor, under conditions which so
strongly tend to drive them into crime, can be members of our
Brotherhood."

"May I ask the number of your membership?"

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

"In the whole world they amount to more than one hundred millions."

I started with astonishment.

"But amid such numbers," I said, "there must certainly be some
traitors?"

"True, but the great multitude have nothing to tell. They are the limbs
and members, as it were, of the organization; the directing intelligence
dwells elsewhere. The multitude are like the soldiers of an army; they
will obey when the time comes; but they are not taken into the councils
of war."

A half hour's ride brought us into the domain of the poor.

An endless procession of men and women with pails and
baskets--small-sized pails and smaller baskets--streamed along the
streets on their way to work. It was not yet six o'clock. I observed
that both men and women were undersized, and that they all very much
resembled each other; as if similar circumstances had squeezed them into
the same likeness. There was no spring to their steps and no laughter in
their eyes; all were spare of frame and stolid or hungry-looking. The
faces of the middle-aged men were haggard and wore a hopeless
expression. Many of them scowled at us, with a look of hatred, as we
passed by them in our carriage. A more joyless, sullen crowd I never
beheld. Street after street they unrolled before us; there seemed to be
millions of them. They were all poorly clad, and many of them in rags.
The women, with the last surviving instinct of the female heart, had
tried to decorate themselves; and here and there I could observe a bit
of bright color on bonnet or apron; but the bonnets represented the
fashions of ten years past, and the aprons were too often frayed and
darned, and relics of some former, more opulent owners. There were
multitudes of children, but they were without the gambols which
characterize the young of all animals; and there was not even the chirp
of a winter bird about them; their faces were prematurely aged and
hardened, and their bold eyes

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

revealed that sin had no surprises for them. And every one of these
showed that intense look which marks the awful struggle for food and
life upon which they had just entered. The multitude seemed, so far as I
could judge, to be of all nations commingled--the French, German, Irish,
English--Hungarians, Italians, Russians, Jews, Christians, and even
Chinese and Japanese; for the slant eyes of many, and their imperfect,
Tartar-like features, reminded me that the laws made by the Republic, in
the elder and better days, against the invasion of the Mongolian hordes,
had long since become a dead letter.

What struck me most was their incalculable multitude and their silence.
It seemed to me that I was witnessing the resurrection of the dead; and
that these vast, streaming, endless swarms were the condemned, marching
noiselessly as shades to unavoidable and everlasting misery. They seemed
to me merely automata, in the hands of some ruthless and unrelenting
destiny. They lived and moved, but they were without heart or hope. The
illusions of the imagination, which beckon all of us forward, even over
the roughest paths and through the darkest valleys and shadows of life,
had departed from the scope of their vision. They knew that to-morrow
could bring them nothing better than today--the same shameful, pitiable,
contemptible, sordid struggle for a mere existence. If they produced
children it was reluctantly or unmeaningly; for they knew the wretches
must tread in their footsteps, and enter, like them, that narrow,
gloomy, high-walled pathway, out of which they could never climb; which
began almost in infancy and ended in a pauper's grave--nay, I am wrong,
not even in a pauper's grave; for they might have claimed, perhaps, some
sort of ownership over the earth which enfolded them, which touched them
and mingled with their dust. But public safety and the demands of
science had long ago decreed that they should be whisked off, as soon as
dead, a score or two at a

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

time, and swept on iron tram-cars into furnaces heated to such intense
white heat that they dissolved, crackling, even as they entered the
chamber, and rose in nameless gases through the high chimney. That
towering structure was the sole memorial monument of millions of them.
Their graveyard was the air. Nature reclaimed her own with such velocity
that she seemed to grudge them the very dust she had lent them during
their wretched pilgrimage. The busy, toiling, rushing, roaring, groaning
universe, big with young, appeared to cry out: "Away with them! Away
with them! They have had their hour! They have performed their task.
Here are a billion spirits waiting for the substance we loaned them. The
spirits are boundless in number; matter is scarce. Away with them!"

I need not tell you, my dear brother, of all the shops and factories we
visited. It was the same story everywhere. Here we saw exemplified, in
its full perfection, that "iron law of wages" which the old economists
spoke of; that is to say, the reduction, by competition, of the wages of
the worker to the least sum that will maintain life and muscular
strength enough to do the work required, with such little surplus of
vitality as might be necessary to perpetuate the wretched race; so that
the world's work should not end with the death of one starved
generation. I do not know if there is a hell in the spiritual universe,
but if there is not, one should certainly be created for the souls of
the men who originated, or justified, or enforced that damnable creed.
It is enough, if nothing else, to make one a Christian, when he
remembers how diametrically opposite to the teaching of the grand
doctrine of brotherly love, enunciated by the gentle Nazarene, is this
devil's creed of cruelty and murder, with all its steadily increasing
world-horrors, before which to-day the universe stands appalled.

Oh! the pitiable scenes, my brother, that I have witnessed! Room after
room; the endless succession of the stooped, silent

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

toilers; old, young; men, women, children. And most pitiable of all, the
leering, shameless looks of invitation cast upon us by the women, as
they saw two well-dressed men pass by them. It was not love, nor
license, nor even lust; it was degradation,--willing to exchange
everything for a little more bread. And such rooms--garrets,
sheds--dark, foul, gloomy; overcrowded; with such a stench in the thick
air as made us gasp when entering it; an atmosphere full of life,
hostile to the life of man. Think, my brother, as you sit upon your
mountain side; your gentle sheep feeding around you; breathing the
exquisite air of those elevated regions; and looking off over the
mysterious, ancient world, and the great river valleys leading down to
the marvelous Nile-land afar,--land of temples, ruins, pyramids,--cradle
of civilization, grave of buried empires,--think, I say, of these
millions condemned to live their brief, hopeless span of existence under
such awful conditions! See them as they eat their mid-day meal. No
delightful pause from pleasant labor; no brightly arrayed table; no
laughing and loving faces around a plenteous board, with delicacies from
all parts of the world; no agreeable interchange of wisdom and wit and
courtesy and merriment. No; none of these. Without stopping in their
work, under the eyes of sullen task-masters, they snatch bites out of
their hard, dark bread, like wild animals, and devour it
ravenously. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

Toil, toil, toil, from early morn until late at night; then home they
swarm; tumble into their wretched beds; snatch a few hours of disturbed
sleep, battling with vermin, in a polluted atmosphere; and then up again
and to work; and so on, and on, in endless, mirthless, hopeless round;
until, in a few years, consumed with disease, mere rotten masses of
painful wretchedness, they die, and are wheeled off to the great

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

furnaces, and their bodies are eaten up by the flames, even as their
lives have been eaten up by society.

I asked one of the foremen what wages these men and women received. He
told me. It seemed impossible that human life could be maintained upon
such a pittance. I then asked whether they ever ate meat. "No," he said,
"except when they had a rat or mouse" "A rat or mouse!" I exclaimed. "Oh
yes," he replied, "the rats and mice were important articles of
diet,--just as they had been for centuries in China. The little
children, not yet able to work, fished for them in the sewers, with hook
and line, precisely as they had done a century ago in Paris, during the
great German siege. A dog," he added, "was a great treat. When the
authorities killed the vagrant hounds there was a big scramble among the
poor for the bodies."

I was shocked at these statements; and then I remembered that some
philosopher had argued that cannibalism had survived almost to our own
times, in the islands of the Pacific Ocean, because they had contained
no animals of large size with which the inhabitants could satisfy the
dreadful craving of the system for flesh-food; and hence they devoured
their captives.

"Do these people ever marry?" I inquired.

"Marry!" he exclaimed, with a laugh; "why, they could not afford to pay
the fee required by law. And why should they marry? There is no virtue
among them. No," he said, "they had almost gotten down to the condition
of the Australian savages, who, if not prevented by the police, would
consummate their animal-like nuptials in the public streets."

Maximilian told me that this man was one of the Brotherhood. I did not
wonder at it.

From the shops and mills of honest industry, Maximilian led me--it was
still broad daylight--into the criminal quarters. We saw the wild beasts
in their lairs; in the iron

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

cages of circumstance which civilization has built around them, from
which they too readily break out to desolate their fellow-creatures. But
here, too, were the fruits of misgovernment. If it were possible we
might trace back from yonder robber and murderer--a human hyena--the
long ancestral line of brutality, until we see it starting from some
poor peasant of the Middle Ages, trampled into crime under the feet of
feudalism. The little seed of weakness or wickedness has been carefully
nursed by society, generation after generation, until it has blossomed
at last in this destructive monster. Civilization has formulated a new
variety of the genus *homo*--and it must inevitably perpetuate its kind.

The few prey on the many; and in turn a few of the many prey upon all.
These are the brutal violators of justice, who go to prison, or to the
scaffold, for breaking through a code of laws under which peaceful but
universal injustice is wrought. If there were enough of these outlaws
they might establish a system of jurisprudence for the world under which
it would be lawful to rob and murder by the rule of the strong right
hand, but criminal to reduce millions to wretchedness by subtle and
cunning arts; and, hoity-toity, the prisons would change their tenants,
and the brutal plunderers of the few would give place to the cultured
spoilers of the many.

And when you come to look at it, my brother, how shall we compare the
conditions of the well-to-do-man, who has been merely robbed of his
watch and purse, even at the cost of a broken head, which will heal in a
few days, with the awful doom of the poor multitude, who from the cradle
to the grave work without joy and live without hope? Who is there that
would take back his watch and purse at the cost of changing places with
one of these wretches?

And who is there that, if the choice were presented to him, would not
prefer instant death, which is but a change of conditions, a flight from
world to world, or at worst annihilation,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

rather than to be hurled into the living tomb which I have depicted,
there to grovel and writhe, pressed down by the sordid mass around him,
until death comes to his relief?

And so it seems to me that, in the final analysis of reason, the great
criminals of the world are not these wild beasts, who break through all
laws, whose selfishness takes the form of the bloody knife, the
firebrand, or the bludgeon; but those who, equally selfish, corrupt the
foundations of government and create laws and conditions by which
millions suffer, and out of which these murderers and robbers naturally
and unavoidably arise.

But I must bring this long letter to a conclusion, and subscribe myself,
with love to all,

Your affectionate brother,           
Gabriel

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[40:1](cc05.htm#fr_0) The testimony taken before
the Parliamentary Commission in 1888 shows that the workers in the
"sweating" shops of London worked in this way, even at that time, for
fifteen and sixteen hours a day, and ate their meals in the manner
described in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Estella Washington](cc06)
