[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc06)  [Next](cc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### THE INTERVIEW

Mounting to one of the electrical railroads, we were soon at the house
of the Prince. Passing around to the servants' entrance of the palace,
Maximilian sent in his card to the Master of the Servants, who soon
appeared, bowing deferentially to my friend. We were ushered into his
private room. Maximilian first locked the door; he then examined the
room carefully, to see if there was any one hidden behind the tapestry
or furniture; for the room, like every part of the palace, was furnished
in the most lavish and extravagant style. Satisfied with his search, he
turned to Rudolph, as the Master of the Servants was called, and handed
him the message he had received, which gave the history of Estella.

"Read it," he said.

Rudolph read it with a troubled countenance.

"Yes," he said, "I am familiar with most of the facts here stated, and
believe them all to be true. What would you have me do?"

"First," said Maximilian, "we desire to know if Estella is still in
ignorance of the purpose for which she was brought here."

"Yes," he replied; "Frederika is jealous of her, as I can see, and has
contrived to keep her out of the Prince's sight. She has no desire to be
supplanted by a younger and fairer woman."

"God be praised for that jealousy," exclaimed Maximilian. "We must see
Estella; can you manage it for us?"

"Yes," he said, "I will bring her here. I know she is in the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

palace. I saw her but a few moments since. Wait for Me." "Stop," said
Maximilian, "have you the receipt for the $5,000 signed by Mrs.
Plunkett?"

"No; but I can get it."

"Do so, pray; and when you bring her here introduce me to her as Mr.
Martin, and my friend here as Mr. Henry. She may refuse our assistance,
and we must provide against the revenge of the Prince."

"I will do as you command," replied Rudolph, who acted throughout as if
he felt himself in the presence of a superior officer.

As we sat waiting his return I was in a state of considerable
excitement. Delight, to know that she was still the pure angel I had
worshiped in my dreams, contended with trepidation as I felt I must soon
stand in her presence.

The door opened and Rudolph entered; behind him came the tall form of
the beautiful girl I had seen in the carriage: she seemed to me fairer
than ever. Her eyes first fell upon me; she started and blushed. It was
evident she recognized me; and I fancied the recognition was not
unpleasant to her. She then turned to Maximilian and then to Rudolph,
who introduced us as we had requested. I offered her a chair. She sat
down, evidently astonished at such an interview, and yet entirely
mistress of herself. After a moment's pause,--for Maximilian, as he told
me afterwards, was too bewildered with her splendid beauty to
speak,--she said, in a sweet and gentle voice:

"Mr. Rudolph tells me that you desire to speak to me on matters of
importance."

At a sign from Maximilian Rudolph closed and locked the door. She
started, and it seemed to me that her eyes turned to me with more
confidence than to either of the others.

"Miss Washington," said Maximilian, "it is true we desire to speak with
you on matters of the greatest moment to yourself.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But we shall say things so surprising to you, so
harsh and cruel, so utterly in conflict with your present opinions, that
I scarce know how to begin."

She had grown paler during this speech, and I then said:

"Be assured that nothing but the profound respect we feel for you, and
the greatest desire to serve you, and save you from ruin, could have
induced us to intrude upon you."

Her face showed her increasing alarm; she placed her hand on her heart,
as if to still its beatings, and then, with constrained dignity,
replied:

"I do not understand you, gentlemen. I do not know what the dangers are
to which you allude. Can you not speak plainly?"

"My friend here, Mr. Henry," said Maximilian, looking at me, "you have,
I perceive, already recognized."

"Yes," she said, with another blush, "if I am not mistaken, he is the
gentleman who saved the life of a poor beggar, some days since, and
punished, as he deserved, our insolent driver. Miss Frederika, the
Prince's niece, has, at my request, refused since that time to permit
him to drive us when we go out together, as we often do. I am glad to
thank you again," she said, with a charmingly ingenuous air, "for your
noble act in saving that poor man's life."

"It was nothing," I said, "but if the service was of any value it has
been a thousand times repaid by your kind words."

"You can easily imagine," said Maximilian, "that my friend here, after
that interview, was naturally curious to find out something about you."

She blushed and cast down her eyes; and the thought flashed across my
mind that perhaps she had been likewise curious to find out something
about me.

"I am a member," said Maximilian, "of a secret society. We have a
'Bureau of Inquiry' whose business it is to collect information, for the
use of the society, concerning every

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

person of any note. This information is carefully tabulated and
preserved, and added to from day to day; so that at any moment it is
subject to the call of our officers. When my friend desired to know
something about you" (here the blue, wondering eyes were cast down
again), "I sent a message to our Bureau of Inquiry, and received a reply
which I have here. I fear to show it to you. The shock will be too great
to learn in a moment the utter baseness of one in whom you have trusted.
I fear you have not the courage to endure such a blow; and at the same
time I know of no better way to communicate to your purity and innocence
the shocking facts which it is my duty to disclose."

Estella smiled, and reached forth her hand for the paper with the
dignity of conscious courage and high blood.

"Let me read it," she said; "I do not think it can tell me anything I
cannot endure."

Maximilian delivered the paper into her hand. I watched her face as she
read it. At first there was a look of wonder at the minuteness of the
knowledge of her family which the paper revealed; then the interest
became more intense; then the eyebrows began to rise and the blue eyes
to dilate with horror; then an expression of scorn swept over her face;
and as she read the last word she flung the paper from her as if it had
been a serpent, and rising up, yes, towering, a splendid image of wrath,
she turned upon us and cried out:

"This is a base falsehood! A cowardly trick to wound me! A shameful
attempt to injure my dear aunt."

And, wheeling around on Rudolph, her eyes blazing, she said:

"Unlock that door! I shall reveal at once to the Prince this attack on
his good name and Miss Frederika. How dare you bring these men here with
such falsehoods?"

Rudolph, alarmed for himself, hung his head in silence. He was trembling
violently.

"Rudolph," said Maximilian, solemnly, "I call upon you,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

by the oath you have taken, to say to this lady whether or not the
contents of that paper are true."

"I believe them to be true," responded Rudolph, in a low tone.

It was wonderful to see the fine indignation, the keen penetration that
shone in Estella's eyes, as she looked first at Rudolph and then at
Maximilian.

"Rudolph," said Maximilian, "by the oath you have taken, tell Miss
Washington whether or not you paid $5,000 to her aunt, Maria Plunkett,
for the purchase of her body, as set forth in that paper."

"It is true," replied Rudolph, in the same low tone.

"It is false!" cried Estella,--and yet I thought there was that in her
tone which indicated that the hideous doubt had begun to enter her soul.

"Rudolph," said Maximilian, "tell this lady whether you took a receipt
from her aunt for the money you paid for her."

"I did," replied Rudolph.

"Miss Washington," said Maximilian, like a lawyer who has reached his
crucial question, for he was a trained attorney, "would you recognize
your aunt's signature if you saw it?"

"Certainly."

"You have often seen her write?"

"Yes; hundreds of times."

"Have you any reason to distrust this good man, Rudolph? Do you not know
that in testifying to the truth he runs the risk of his own
destruction?"

"Yes, yes," she said, and there was a wild and worried look in her eyes.

"Read the receipt, Rudolph," said Maximilian.

Rudolph read, in the same low and almost trembling tones, the following:

NEW YORK, August 5th, 1988.--Received of Matthew Rudolph,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

for the Prince of Cabano, the sum of five thousand dollars, in
consideration of which I have delivered to the said Prince of Cabano the
body of my niece, Estella Washington; and I hereby agree, as the
custodian of the said Estella Washington, never to demand any further
payment, from the said Prince of Cabano, on account of my said niece,
and never to reclaim her; and I also pledge myself never to reveal to
any of the relatives of the said Estella Washington her place of
residence.

(Signed)                Maria Plunkett.

As he finished reading Estella seized the receipt quickly out of his
hands, and fixed her eyes eagerly upon the signature. In a moment she
became deadly pale, and would have fallen on the floor, but that I
caught her in my arms--(oh, precious burden!)--and bore her to a sofa.
Rudolph brought some water and bathed her face. In a few minutes she
recovered consciousness. She looked at us curiously at first, and then,
as memory returned to her, an agonized and distraught look passed over
her features, and I feared she would faint again. I held some water to
her lips. She looked at me with an intense look as I knelt at her side.
Then hey eyes passed to Maximilian and Rudolph, who stood respectfully a
little distance from her. The tears flowed down her face. Then a new
thought seemed to strike her, and she rose to a sitting posture.

"It cannot be true. My aunt could not do it. You are strangers to me. It
is a conspiracy. I will ask Frederika."

"No! no!" said Rudolph; "not Frederika; it would not be to her interest
to tell you the truth. But is there any one of the servants in whom you
have more confidence than all the others?"

"Yes," she said, "there is Mary Callaghan, an honest girl, if there is
one anywhere. I think she loves me; and I do not believe she would
deceive me."

"Then," said Rudolph, "you shall send for her to come here. None of us
shall speak to her lest you might think we

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

did so to prompt her. We will hide behind the tapestry. Dry your tears;
ring for a servant, and request Mary to come to you, and then ask her
such questions as you choose."

This was done, and in a few moments Mary appeared--an honest, stout,
rosy-cheeked Irish girl, with the frank blue eyes and kindly smile of
her people.

"Mary," said Estella, "you have always been kind to me. Do you love me
sufficiently to tell me the truth if I ask you some questions?"

"Sure, and you may do so, my dear," said Mary.

"Then, Mary, tell me, is Frederika the Prince of Cabano's niece?"

"Niver a drop's blood to him," replied Mary.

"What is she doing in his house, then?" asked Estella.

"Sure, it would be as much as my place is worth, ma'am, to answer that
question; and hard enough it is for an honest girl to get a place
now-a-days. If it hadn't been for Barney McGuiggan, who married my
brother's sister-in-law, and who is own cousin to Mr. Flaherty, the
butler's second assistant, I couldn't have got the place I have at all,
at all. And if I said a word against Miss Frederika, out I would go, and
where would I find another place?"

"But, Mary, if you speak the truth no harm shall follow to you. I shall
never repeat what you say. I do not ask out of idle curiosity, but much
depends on your answer."

"Indeed, ma'am," replied Mary, "if you weren't as innocent as ye're
purty, you would have found out the answer to your own question long
ago. Faith, an' don't everybody in the house know she's"--here she
approached, and whispered solemnly in her ear--"she's the Prince's
favorite mistress?"

Estella recoiled. After a pause she said:

"And, Mary, who are the other young ladies we call the Prince's
cousins--Miss Lucy, Miss Julia and the rest?"

"Ivery one of them's the same. It's just as I told Hannah,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the cook's scullion; I didn't belave ye knew a word of what was going on
in this house. And didn't I tell her that Miss Frederika was contriving
to kape you out of the Prince's sight.; and that was the rason she took
you out riding for hours ivery day, and made you sleep in a remote part
of the palace; for if the Prince ever clapped his two ougly eyes upon
you it would be all up wid Madame Frederika."

I could see from where I was hidden that Estella grasped the back of a
chair for support, and she said in a low voice:

"You may go, Mary; I am much obliged to you for your friendship and
honesty."

We found her sitting in the chair, with her hands over her face, sobbing
convulsively. At last she looked around upon us and cried out:

"Oh my God! What shall I do? I am sold--sold--a helpless slave. Oh, it
is horrible!"

"You will never be without friends while we live," I said, advancing to
her side.

"But I must fly," she cried out, "and how--where?"

"My dear Miss Washington," said Maximilian, in his kindest tones, "I
have a dear mother, who will be glad to welcome you as her own child;
and in our quiet home you can remain, safe from the power of the Prince,
until you have time to think out your future course of life; and if you
conclude to remain with us forever you will be only the more welcome.
Here is Rudolph, who will vouch for me that I am an honorable man, and
that you can trust yourself to me with safety."

"Yes," said Rudolph; "Maximilian Petion is the soul of honor. His simple
word is more than the oath of another."

"Then let us fly at once," said Estella.

"No," replied Rudolph, "that would not do; this house is guarded and
full of spies. You would be followed and reclaimed."

"What, then, do you advise?" asked Maximilian.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

"Let me see," replied the old man, thinking; "this is Thursday. On
Monday night next the members of 'the government' have their meeting
here. There will be a number of visitors present, and more or less
confusion; more guards will be necessary also, and I can contrive to
have one of the Brotherhood act as sentinel at the door which opens into
a hall which connects with this room; for you see here is a special
entrance which leads to a stairway and to the door I speak of. I will
procure a gentleman's dress for Miss Estella; she is tall and will
readily pass in the dark for a man. I will secure for you a permit for a
carriage to enter the grounds. You will bring a close carriage and wait
with the rest of the equipages, near at hand. But I must have some one
who will accompany Miss Estella from this room to the carriage, for I
must not show myself."

I stepped forward and said, "I will be here."

"But there is some danger in the task," said Rudolph, looking at me
critically. "If detected, your life would pay the forfeit."

"I would the danger were ten times as great," I replied. Estella blushed
and gave me a glance of gratitude.

"There is one difficulty I perceive," said Maximilian.

"What is that?" asked Rudolph.

"I hesitate about leaving Miss Washington exposed to the danger of
remaining four days longer in this horrible house."

"I will look after that," replied Rudolph. "She had better pretend ill
health, and keep her room during that time. It is on an upper floor, and
if she remains there the danger will be very slight that the Prince will
see her."

"Miss Washington," I said, handing her the dagger which Max had given
me, "take this weapon. It is poisoned with the most deadly virus known
to the art of man. A scratch from it is certain death. Use it to defend
yourself if assailed."

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

"I know how I shall use it in the last extremity," she said, meaningly.

"Better," I replied, "purity in death than degradation in life."

She thanked me with her eyes, and took the dagger and hid it in her
bosom.

"There is one other matter," said Rudolph to Max; "the meeting next
Monday night is to be a very important one, I think, from certain
indications. It is called to prepare for an expected outbreak of the
people. It would be well that some reliable person should be present, as
heretofore, who can report to you all that occurs. If you can send me a
discreet man I can hide him where I have before hidden our brethren."

"Why could I not serve the purpose?" I said. "I will be here anyhow; and
as I would have to remain until the gathering broke up, I might just as
well witness the proceedings."

"He is not one of us," said Rudolph, doubtfully.

"No," replied Max; "but I will vouch for his fidelity with my life."

"Then be it so," said Rudolph. "Let Miss Washington withdraw by the
farther door; and after a reasonable delay we will pass through into a
communicating series of rooms, and I will then show your friend where he
is to be concealed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Hiding-Place](cc08.md)
