[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc08)  [Next](cc10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

### THE BROTHERHOOD

I cannot give you, my dear brother, a detailed account of every day's
occurrences, although I know that your love for me would make every
incident of interest to you. I shall, however, jot down my reflections
on sheets, and send them to you as occasion serves.

The more I have seen, and the more I have conversed with Maximilian, the
more clearly I perceive that the civilized world is in a desperate
extremity. This Brotherhood of Destruction, with its terrible purposes
and its vast numbers, is a reality. If the ruling class had to deal only
with a brutalized peasantry, they might, as they did in other ages,
trample them into animal-like inability to organize and defend
themselves. But the public school system, which, with the other forms of
the Republic, is still kept up, has made, if not all, at least a very
large percentage of the unhappy laboring classes intelligent. In fact,
they are wonderfully intelligent; their organizations have been to them
clubs, debating societies and legislatures. And you know that all the
greatest minds of the earth have come out of the masses, if not
directly, at least after one or two removes. The higher aristocracy have
contributed but very few to the honored catalogue of men of pre-eminent
genius. And therefore you will not be surprised to hear that in these
great organizations there have arisen, from among the very laborers,
splendid orators, capable organizers, profound students of politics and
political economy, statesmen and masterly politicians. Nature, which
knows no limit to her capacity for the creation of new varieties, and,
dealing with hundreds of millions, has in

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

numerable elements to mingle in her combinations, has turned out some
marvelous leaders among these poor men. Their hard fortunes have driven
out of their minds all illusions, all imagination, all poetry; and in
solemn fashion they have bent themselves to the grim and silent struggle
with their environment. Without imagination, I say, for this seems to me
to be a world without a song.

And it is to the credit of these great masses that they are keen enough
to recognize the men of ability that rise up. among them, and even out
of their poor, hard-earned resources to relieve them of the necessity
for daily toil, that they may devote themselves to the improvement of
their minds, and the execution of the great tasks assigned them. There
is no doubt that if the ruling classes had been willing to recognize
these natural leaders as men of the same race, blood, tongue and
capacity as themselves, and had reached down to them a helping and
kindly hand, there might have been long since a coming together of the
two great divisions of society; and such a readjustment of the values of
labor as would, while it insured happiness to those below, have not
materially lessened the enjoyments of those above. But the events which
preceded the great war against the aristocracy in 1640, in England; the
great revolution of 1789, in France; and the greater civil war of 1861,
in America, all show how impossible it is, by any process of reasoning,
to induce a privileged class to peacefully yield up a single tittle of
its advantages. There is no bigotry so blind or intense as that of
caste; and long established wrongs are only to be rooted out by fire and
sword. And hence the future looks so black to me. The upper classes
might reform the world, but they will not; the lower classes would, but
they cannot; and for a generation or more these latter have settled down
into a sullen and unanimous conviction that the only remedy is
world-wide destruction. We can say, as one said at the opening of the
Cromwellian struggle, "God help the land where

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

ruin must reform!" But the proletariat are desperate. They are ready,
like the blind Samson, to pull down the pillars of the temple, even
though they themselves fall, crushed to death amid the ruins; for

"The grave is brighter than their hearths and homes."

I learn from Maximilian that their organization is most perfect. Every
one of their hundred millions is now armed with one of the newest
improved magazine rifles. The use of the white powder reduces very much
the size of the cartridges; the bullets are also much smaller than they
were formerly, but they are each charged with a most deadly and powerful
explosive, which tears the body of the victim it strikes to pieces.
These small cartridges are stored in the steel stock and barrel of the
rifles, which will hold about one hundred of them; and every soldier
therefore carries in his hand a weapon almost equal to the old-time
Gatling or Armstrong gun.

The mode in which these guns were procured shows the marvelous nature of
the organization and its resources. Finding that the cost of the guns
was greatly increased by the profits of the manufacturer and the
middleman, and that it was, in fact, very doubtful whether the
government would permit them to purchase them in any large quantities,
they resolved to make them for themselves. In the depths of abandoned
coal mines, in the wildest and most mountainous part of Tennessee, they
established, years ago, their armories and foundries. Here, under
pretense of coal-mining and iron-working, they brought members of their
Brotherhood, workmen from the national gun-works; and these, teaching
hundreds of others the craft, and working day and night, in double
gangs, have toiled until every able-bodied man in the whole vast
Brotherhood, in America and Europe, has been supplied with his weapon
and a full accompaniment of ammunition. The cost of all this was reduced
to a minimum,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and has been paid by each member of the Brotherhood setting aside each
week a small percentage of his earnings. But, lest they should break out
[prematurely](errata.htm#1.md), before the leaders gave the word, these
guns have not been delivered directly to their owners, but to the
"commanders of tens," as they are called; for the Brotherhood is divided
into groups of ten each; and it is the duty of these commanders to bury
the weapons and ammunition in the earth in rubber sacks, furnished for
the purpose, and only to deliver them when the signal comes to strike.
In the meantime the men are trained. with sticks in all the evolutions
of soldiers. You can see how cunning is all this system. A traitor
cannot betray more than nine of his fellows, and his own death is
certain to follow. If the commander of a squad goes over to the enemy,
he can but deliver up nine men and ten guns, and perhaps reveal the
supposed name of the one man who, in a disguise, has communicated with
him from the parent society. But when the signal is given a hundred
million trained soldiers will stand side by side, armed with the most
efficient weapons the cunning of man is able to produce, and directed by
a central authority of extraordinary ability. Above all this dreadful
preparation the merry world goes on, singing and dancing, marrying and
giving in marriage, as thoughtless of the impending catastrophe as were
the people of Pompeii in those pleasant August days in 79, just before
the city was buried in ashes;--and yet the terrible volcano had stood
there, in the immediate presence of themselves and their ancestors, for
generations, and more than once the rocking earth had given signal
tokens of its awful Possibilities.

If I believed that this wonderful Brotherhood was capable of anything
beyond destruction, I should not look with such terror as I do upon the
prospect. But after destruction there must come construction--the
erection of law and civilization upon the ruins of the present order of
things. Who can believe that these poor brutalized men will be capable,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

armed to the teeth with deadly weapons, and full of passions, hates and
revenges, to recreate the slaughtered society? In civilized life the
many must work; and who among these liberated slaves will be ready to
lay down their weapons and take up their tasks? When the negroes of San
Domingo broke out, in that world-famous and bloody insurrection, they
found themselves, when they had triumphed, in a tropical land, where the
plentiful bounties of nature hung abundant supplies of food upon every
tree and shrub. But in the temperate regions of America and Europe these
vast populations can only live by great toil, and if none will toil all
must starve; but before they starve they will slay each other, and that
means universal conflict, savagery, barbarism, chaos.

I tremble, my brother, I tremble with horror when I think of what is
crawling toward us, with noiseless steps; couchant, silent, treacherous,
pardlike; scarce rustling the dry leaves as it moves, and yet with
bloodshot, glaring eyes and tense-drawn limbs of steel, ready for the
fatal spring. When comes it? To-night? To-morrow? A week hence? Who can
say?

And the thought forever presses on me, Can I do nothing to avert this
catastrophe? Is there no hope? For mankind is in itself so noble, so
beautiful, so full of all graces and capacities; with aspirations fitted
to sing among the angels; with comprehension fitted to embrace the
universe! Consider the exquisite, lithe-limbed figures of the first man
and woman, as they stood forth against the red light of their first
sunset--fresh from the hand of the Mighty One--His graceful, perfected,
magnificent thoughts! What love shines out of their great eyes; what
goodness, like dawn-awakened flowers, is blooming in their singing
hearts! And all to come to this. To this! A hell of injustice, ending in
a holocaust of slaughter.

God is not at fault. Nature is not to blame. Civilization,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

signifying increased human power, is not responsible. But human
greed,--blind, insatiable human greed,--shallow cunning; the basest,
stuff-grabbing, nut-gathering, selfish instincts, these have done this
work! The rats know too much to gnaw through the sides of the ship that
carries them; but these so-called wise men of the world have eaten away
the walls of society in a thousand places, to the thinness of
tissue-paper, and the great ocean is about to pour in at every aperture.
And still they hoot and laugh their insolent laugh of safety and triumph
above the roar of the greedy and boundless waters, just ready to
overwhelm them forever.

Full of these thoughts, which will not permit me to sleep at night, and
which haunt my waking hours, I have gone about, for some days,
accompanied by Maximilian, and have attended meetings of the workingmen
in all parts of the city. The ruling class long since denied them the
privilege of free speech, under the pretense that the safety of society
required it. In doing so they have screwed down the safety-valve, while
the steam continues to generate. Hence the men meet to discuss their
wrongs and their remedies in underground cellars, under old ruined
breweries and warehouses; and there, in large, low-roofed apartments,
lighted by tallow candles, flaring against the dark, damp, smoky walls,
the swarming masses assemble, to inflame each other mutually against
their oppressors, and to look forward, with many a secret hint and
innuendo, to that great day of wrath and revenge which they know to be
near at hand--

"And with pale lips men say,  
To-morrow, perchance to-day,  
Enceladus may arise!"

But as any member is permitted to bring in a friend--for these are not
meetings of the Brotherhood itself, but simply

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

voluntary gatherings of workmen,--and as any man may prove a traitor,
their utterances are guarded and enigmatical.

More than once I have spoken to them in these dim halls; and while full
of sympathy for their sufferings, and indignant as they themselves can
be against their oppressors, I have pleaded with them to stay their
hands, to seek not to destroy, but to reform. I preach to them of the
glories of civilization; I trace its history backward through a dozen
eras and many nations; I show them how slowly it grew, and by what small
and gradual accretions; I tell them how radiantly it has burst forth in
these latter centuries, with such magnificent effulgence, until today
man has all nature at his feet, shackled and gyved, his patient logman.
I tell them that a ruffian, with one blow of his club, can destroy the
life of a man; and that all the doctors and scientists and philosophers
of the world, working together for ages, could not restore that which he
has so rudely extinguished. And so, I say to them, the civilization
which it has taken ten thousand years to create may be swept away in an
hour; and there shall be no power in the wit or wisdom of man to
reestablish it.

Most of them have listened respectfully; a few have tried to answer me;
some have mocked me. But it is as if one came where grouped convicts
stood, long imprisoned, who heard--with knives in their hands--the
thunderous blows of their friends as they battered down the doors of
their prison-house, and he should beg them not to go forth, lest they
should do harm to society! They will out, though the heavens and the
earth came together! One might as well whisper to Niagara to cease
falling, or counsel the resistless cyclone, in its gyrating and terrible
advance, to have a care of the rose-bushes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Poisoned Knife](cc10.md)
