[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc11)  [Next](cc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# CHAPTER XI.

### HOW THE WORLD CAME TO BE RUINED

We were uneasy, restless, longing for the night to come. To while away
the time we conversed upon subjects that were near our hearts.

I said to Maximilian while he paced the room:

"How did this dreadful state of affairs, in which the world now finds
itself, arise? Were there no warnings uttered by any intelligent men?
Did the world drift blindly and unconsciously into this condition?"

"No," said Maximilian, going to his library; "no; even a hundred years
ago the air was full of prophecies. Here," he said, laying his hand upon
a book, is *The Century Magazine*, of February, 1889; and on page 622 we
read:

For my own part, I must confess my fears that, unless some important
change is made in the constitution of our voting population, *the
breaking strain upon our political system will come within half a
century*. Is it not evident that our present tendencies are in the wrong
direction? The rapidly increasing use of money in elections, for the
undisguised purchase of votes, and the growing disposition to tamper
with the ballot and the tally-sheet, are some of the symptoms. . . . Do
you think that you will convince the average election officer that it is
a great crime to cheat in the return of votes, when he knows that a good
share of those votes have been purchased with money? No; the machinery
of the election will not be kept free from fraud while the atmosphere
about the polls reeks with bribery. *The system will all go down
together*. In a constituency which can be bribed all the forms of law
tend swiftly to decay.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

"And here," he said, picking up another volume, "is a reprint of the
choicest gems of *The North American Review*. In the number for March,
1889, Gen. L. S. Bryce, a member of Congress, said:

We live in a commercial age--not in a military age; and the shadow that
is stealing over the American landscape partakes of a commercial
character. In short, *the shadow is of an unbridled plutocracy*, caused,
created and cemented in no slight degree by legislative, aldermanic and
congressional action; *a plutocracy that is far more wealthy than any
aristocracy that has ever crossed the horizon of the world's history,
and one that has been produced in a shorter consecutive period*; the
names of whose members are emblazoned, not on the pages of their
nation's glory, but of its peculations; who represent no struggle for
their country's liberties, but for its boodle; no contests for Magna
[Carta](errata.htm#2), but railroad charters; and whose octopus-grip is
extending over every branch of industry; a plutocracy which controls the
price of the bread that we eat, the price of the sugar that sweetens our
cup, the price of the oil that lights us on our way, the price of the
very coffins in which we are finally buried; a plutocracy which
encourages no kindly relation between landlord and tenant, which has so
little sense of its political duties as even to abstain from voting, and
which, in short, by its effrontery, is already causing the unthinking
masses to seek relief in communism, in single-taxism, and in every other
ism, which, if ever enforced, would infallibly make their second state
worse than the first.

"And here are hundreds of warnings of the same kind. Even the President
of the United States, in that same year, 1889, uttered this significant
language:

Those who use unlawful methods, if moved by no higher motive than the
selfishness that prompted them, may well stop and inquire, What is to be
the end of this?

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"Bishop Potter, of New York, in the national ceremonies, held April 30,
1889, which marked the centennial anniversary of the first inauguration
of George Washington, spoke of the plutocracy, which had already reached
alarming proportions, and expressed his doubts whether the Republic
would ever celebrate another centennial. Afterwards, in explaining his
remarks, he said:

When I speak of this as the era of the plutocrats, nobody can
misunderstand me. Everybody has recognized the rise of the money power.
Its growth not merely stifles the independence of the people, but the
blind believers in this omnipotent power of money assert that its
liberal use condones every offense. The pulpit does not speak out as it
should. These plutocrats are the enemies of religion, as they are of the
state. And, not to mince matters, I will say that, while I had the
politicians in mind prominently, there "are others." I tell you I have
heard the corrupt use of money in elections and the sale of the sacred
right of the ballot openly defended by ministers of the gospel. I may
find it necessary to put such men of the sacred office in the public
pillory.

"And Bishop Spalding, of Peoria, Illinois, about the same time, said:

Mark my words, the saloon in America has become a public nuisance. The
liquor trade, by meddling with politics and corrupting politics, has
become a menace and a danger. Those who think and those who love America
and those who love liberty are going to bring this moral question into
politics more and more; also this question of bribery, this question of
lobbying, this question of getting measures through state and national
legislatures by corrupt means. They are going to be taken hold of. Our
press, which has done so much to enlighten our people, which represents
so much that is good in our civilization, must also be reformed. It must
cease to pander to such an extent to the low and sensual

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

appetites of man. My God, man is animal enough! You don't want to pander
to his pruriency! You don't want to pander to the beast that is in him.
. . . Our rich men--and they are numerous, and their wealth is
great--their number and their wealth will increase--but our rich men
*must do their duty or perish*. I tell you, in America, we will not
tolerate vast wealth in the hands of men who do nothing for the people.

"And here is a still more remarkable article, by Dr. William Barry, in
*The Forum* for April, 1889. He speaks of--

The concrete system of capitalism; which in its present shape is not
much more than a century old, and goes back to Arkwright's introduction
of the spinning-jenny in 1776--that notable year--as to its hegira or
divine epoch of creation.

"And again he says:

This it is that justifies Von Hartmann's description of the nineteenth
century as "the most irreligious that has ever been seen;" this and not
the assault upon dogma or the decline of the churches. There is a depth
below atheism, below anti-religion, and into that the age has fallen. It
is the callous indifference to everything which does not make for
wealth. . . . What is eloquently described as "the progress of
civilization," as "material prosperity," and "unexampled wealth," or,
more modestly, as "the rise of the industrial middle class," becomes,
when we look into it with eyes purged from economic delusions, the
creation of a "lower and lowest" class, without land of their own,
without homes, tools or property beyond the strength of their hands;
whose lot is more helplessly wretched than any poet of the Inferno has
yet imagined. Sunk in the mire of ignorance, want and immorality, they
seem to have for their only gospel the emphatic words attributed to Mr.
Ruskin: "If there is a next world they *will* be damned; and if there is
none, they are damned already." .--- Have all these things come to pass
that the keeper of a whisky-shop in California may grow rich on the
spoils of drunken miners,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and great financiers dictate peace and war to venerable European
monarchies? The most degraded superstition that ever called itself
religion has not preached such a dogma as this. It falls below
fetichism. The worship of the almighty dollar, incarnate in the
self-made capitalist, is a deification at which Vespasian himself, with
his "*Ut puto, deus fio*," would stare and gasp.

"And this remarkable article concludes with these words of prophecy:

The agrarian difficulties of Russia, France, Italy, Ireland, and of
wealthy England, show us that ere long the urban and the rural
populations will be standing in the same camp. They will be demanding
the abolition of that great and scandalous paradox whereby, though
production has increased three or four times as much as the mouths it
should fill, those mouths are empty. The backs it should clothe are
naked; the heads it should shelter, homeless; the brains it should feed,
dull or criminal, and the souls it should help to save, brutish. Surely
it is time that science, morality and religion should speak out. A great
change is coming. It is even now at our doors. Ought not men of good
will to consider how they shall receive it, so that its coming may be
peaceable?

"And here," Max added, "is the great work of Prof. Scheligan, in which
he quotes from *The Forum*, of December, 1889, p. 464, a terrible story
of the robberies practiced on the farmers by railroad companies and
money-lenders. The railroads in 1882 took, he tells us, one-half of the
entire wheat crop of Kansas to carry the other half to market! In the
thirty-eight years following 1850 the railroad interest of the United
States increased 1580 per cent.; the banking interest 918 per cent., and
the farming interest only 252 per

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

cent. A man named Thomas G. Shearman showed, in 1889, that 100,000
persons in the United States would, in thirty years, at the rate at
which wealth was being concentrated in the hands of the few, own
*three-fifths of all the property of the entire country*. The *American
Economist* asserted, in 1889, that in twenty-five years the number of
people in the United States who owned their own homes had fallen from
five-eighths to three-eighths. A paper called *The Progress*, of Boston,
in 1889, gave the following significant and prophetic figures:

The eloquent Patrick Henry said: "We can only judge the future by the
past."

Look at the past:

When Egypt went down 2 per cent. of her population owned 97 per cent. of
her wealth. The people were starved to death.

When Babylon went down 2 per cent. of her population owned all the
wealth. The people were starved to death.

When Persia went down 1 per cent. of her population owned the land.

When Rome went down 1,800 men owned all the known world.

There are about 40,000,000 people in England, Ireland and Wales, and
100,000 people own all the land in the United Kingdom.

For the past twenty years the United States has rapidly followed in the
steps of these old nations. Here are the figures:

In 1850 capitalists owned 37½ per cent. of the nation's wealth.

In 1870 they owned 63 percent.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"In 1889, out of 1,500,000 people living in New York City, 1,100,000
dwelt in tenement-houses.

"At the same time farm-lands, east and west, had fallen, in twenty-five
years, to one-third or one-half their cost. State Assessor Wood, of New
York, declared, in 1889, that, in his opinion, 'in a few decades *there
will be none but tenant farmers in this State*.'

"In 1889 the farm mortgages in the Western States amounted to three
billion four hundred and twenty-two million dollars."

"Did these wonderful utterances and most significant statistics," I
asked, "produce no effect on that age?"

"None at all," he replied. "'Wisdom cries in the streets, and no man
regards her.' The small voice of Philosophy was unheard amid the blare
of the trumpets that heralded successful knavery; the rabble ran
headlong to the devil after gauds and tinsel."

"Have there been," I asked, "no later notes of warning of the coming
catastrophe?"

"Oh, yes," he replied; "ten thousand. All through the past century the
best and noblest of each generation, wherever and whenever they could
find newspapers or magazines that dared to publish their utterances,
poured forth, in the same earnest tones, similar prophecies and appeals.
But in vain. Each generation found the condition of things more
desperate and hopeless: every year multiplied the calamities of the
world. The fools could not see that a great cause must continue to
operate until checked by some higher power. And here there was no higher
power that desired to check it. As the domination and arrogance of the
ruling class increased, the capacity of the lower classes to resist,
within the limits of law and constitution, decreased. Every avenue, in
fact, was

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

blocked by corruption. juries, courts, legislatures, congresses, they
were as if they were not. The people were walled in by impassable
barriers. Nothing was left them but the primal, brute instincts of the
animal man, and upon these they fell back, and the Brotherhood of
Destruction arose. But no words can tell the sufferings that have been
endured by the good men, here and there, who, during the past century,
tried to save mankind. Some were simply ostracised from social
intercourse with their caste; others were deprived of their means of
living and forced down into the ranks of the wretched; and still
others"--and here, I observed, his face grew ashy pale, and the muscles
about his mouth twitched nervously--"still others had their liberty
sworn away by purchased perjury, and were consigned to prisons, where
they still languish, dressed in the hideous garb of ignominy, and
performing the vile tasks of felons." After a pause, for I saw he was
strangely disturbed, I said to him:

"How comes it that the people have so long submitted to these great
wrongs? Did they not resist?"

"They did," he replied; "but the fruit of the tree of evil was not yet
ripe. At the close of the nineteenth century, in all the great cities of
America, there was a terrible outbreak of the workingmen; they destroyed
much property and many lives, and held possession of the cities for
several days. But the national government called for volunteers, and
hundreds of thousands of warlike young men, sons of farmers, sprang to
arms: and, after several terrible battles, they suppressed the
revolution, with the slaughter of tens of thousands of those who took
part in it; while afterwards the revengeful Oligarchy sent thousands of
others to the gallows. And since then, in Europe and America, there have
been other outbreaks, but all of them terminated in the same way. The
condition of the world has, however, steadily grown worse and worse; the
laboring classes have become more and more desperate. The farmers' sons
could, for generations, be counted upon

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

to fight the workmen; but the fruit has been steadily ripening. Now the
yeomanry have lost possession of their lands; their farms have been sold
under their feet; cunning laws transferred the fruit of their industry
into the pockets of great combinations, who loaned it back to them
again, secured by mortgages; and, as the pressure of the same robbery
still continued, they at last lost their homes by means of the very
wealth they had themselves produced. Now a single nabob owns a whole
county; and a state is divided between a few great loan associations;
and the men who once tilled the fields, as their owners, are driven to
the cities to swell the cohorts of the miserable, or remain on the land
a wretched peasantry, to contend for the means of life with vile hordes
of Mongolian coolies. And all this in sight of the ruins of the handsome
homes their ancestors once occupied! Hence the materials for armies have
disappeared. Human greed has eaten away the very foundations on which it
stood. And of the farmers who still remain nearly all are now members of
our Brotherhood. When the Great Day comes, and the nation sends forth
its call for volunteers, as in the past, that cry will echo in desolate
places; or it will ring through the triumphant hearts of savage and
desperate men who are hastening to the banquet of blood and destruction.
And the wretched, yellow, under-fed coolies, with women's garments over
their effeminate limbs, will not have the courage or the desire or the
capacity to make soldiers and defend their oppressors."

"But have not the Oligarchy standing armies?" I asked.

"Yes. In Europe, however, they have been constrained, by inability to
wring more taxes from the impoverished people, to gradually diminish
their numbers. There, you know, the real government is now a coterie of
bankers, mostly Israelites; and the kings and queens, and so-called
presidents, are mere toys and puppets in their hands. All idea of
national glory, all chivalry, all pride, all battles for territory or
supremacy

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

have long since ceased. Europe is a banking association conducted
exclusively for the benefit of the bankers. Bonds take the place of
national aspirations. To squeeze the wretched is the great end of
government; to toil and submit, the destiny of the peoples.

"The task which Hannibal attempted, so disastrously, to subject the
Latin and mixed-Gothic races of Europe to the domination of the Semitic
blood, as represented in the merchant-city of Carthage, has been
successfully accomplished in these latter days by the cousins of the
Phœnicians, the Israelites. The nomadic children of Abraham have fought
and schemed their way, through infinite depths of persecution, from
their tents on the plains of Palestine, to a power higher than the
thrones of Europe. The world is to-day Semitized. The children of Japhet
lie prostrate slaves at the feet of the children of Shem; and the sons
of Ham bow humbly before their august dominion.

"The standing armies of Europe are now simply armed police; for, as all
the nations are owned by one power--the money power--there is no longer
any danger of their assaulting each other. But in the greed of the
sordid commercial spirit which dominates the continent they have
reduced, not only the numbers, but the pay of the soldiers, until it is
little better than the compensation earned by the wretched peasantry and
the mechanics; while years of peace and plunder have made the rulers
careless and secure. Hence our powerful association has spread among
these people like wild-fire: the very armies are honeycombed with our
ideas, and many of the soldiers belong to the Brotherhood.

"Here, in America, they have been wise enough to pay the soldiers of
their standing army better salaries; and hence they do not so readily
sympathize with our purposes. But we outnumber them ten to one, and do
not fear them. There is, however, one great obstacle which we have not
yet seen the way to overcome. More than a century ago, you know,
dirigible

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

air-ships were invented. The Oligarchy have a large force of several
thousands of these, sheathed with that light but strong metal,
[aluminum](errata.htm#3); in popular speech they are known as *The
Demons*. Sailing over a hostile force, they drop into its midst great
bombs, loaded with the most deadly explosives, mixed with bullets; and,
where one of these strikes the ground, it looks like the crater of an
extinct volcano; while leveled rows of dead are strewed in every
direction around it. But this is not all. Some years since a French
chemist discovered a dreadful preparation, a subtle poison, which,
falling upon the ground, being heavier than the air and yet expansive,
rolls, 'like a slow blot that spreads,' steadily over the earth in all
directions, bringing sudden death to those that breathe it. The
Frenchman sold the secret of its preparation to the Oligarchy for a
large sum; but he did not long enjoy his ill-gotten wealth. He was found
dead in his bed the next day, poisoned by the air from a few drops of
his own invention; killed, it is supposed, by the governments, so that
they would possess forever the exclusive monopoly of this terrible
instrument of slaughter. It is upon this that they principally rely for
defense from the uprisings of the oppressed people. These air-ships,
'the Demons,' are furnished with bombs, loaded with this powerful
poison; and, when an outbreak occurs, they sail, like great, foul birds,
dark-winged and terrible, over the insurgents; they let fall a single
bomb, which inspires such terror in the multitude that those not
instantaneously killed by the poison fly with the utmost speed; and the
contest is at an end. We have long labored to bring the men who arm
these air-ships, and who manufacture this poison, into our organization,
but so far without success. The Oligarchy knows their value, and pays
them well. We have, however, bribed one or two of their men, not
themselves in the secret, but who have inspired the others to make
demand after demand upon the government for increased pay, knowing that
they held everything in their power. The

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Oligarchy has been constrained to yield to these
demands, which have only led, under our inspiration, to still greater
claims; and it is our hope that before long the rulers will refuse to go
farther in that direction; and then, in the discontent that will
inevitably follow, the men will yield to our approaches. It will be the
old story over again--the army that was called in to defend effete Rome
at last took possession of the empire and elected the emperors. This is
the fate that cruelty and injustice ultimately bring upon their own
heads--they are devoured by their instruments. As Manfred says:

"'The spirits I have raised abandon me;  
The spells that I had recked of torture me.'"

"You are right," I replied; "there is nothing that will insure permanent
peace but universal justice: that is the only soil that grows no
poisons. Universal justice means equal opportunities for all men and a
repression by law of those gigantic abnormal selfishnesses which ruin
millions for the benefit of thousands. In the old days selfishness took
the form of conquest, and the people were reduced to serfs. Then, in a
later age, it assumed the shape of individual robbery and murder. Laws
were made against these crimes. Then it broke forth in the shape of
subtle combinations, 'rings,' or 'trusts,' as they called them,
corporations, and all the other cunning devices of the day, some of
which scarcely manifested themselves on the surface, but which
transferred the substance of one man into the pockets of another, and
reduced the people to slavery as completely and inevitably as ever the
robber barons of old did the original owners of the soil of Europe."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Gabriel's Utopia](cc13)
