[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc13)  [Next](cc15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

# CHAPTER XIII.

### THE COUNCIL OF THE OLIGARCHY

Precisely as Rudolph had forecast, things came to pass. I arrived at the
palace of the Prince at half past six; at half past seven, my ordinary
suit was covered with a braided livery, and I accompanied Rudolph to the
council-chamber. We placed the table, chairs, pens, ink, paper, etc., in
order. Watching our opportunity, we drew aside a heavy box in which grew
a noble specimen of the *cactus grandiflorus* in full bloom, the
gorgeous flowers just opening with the sunset, and filling the chamber
with their delicious perfume. I crawled through the opening; took off my
liveried suit; handed it back to Rudolph; he pushed the box into its
place again; I inserted the hooks in their staples, and the barricade
was complete. With many whispered injunctions and directions he left me.
I heard him go out and lock the door--not the door by which we had
entered--and all was silence.

There was room, by doubling up my limbs, Turk-fashion, to sit down in
the inclosure. I waited. I thought of Estella. Rudolph had assured me
that she had not been disturbed. They were waiting for hunger to compel
her to eat the drugged food. Then I wondered whether we would escape in
safety. Then my thoughts dwelt on the words she had spoken of me, and I
remembered the pleased look upon her face when we met in Rudolph's room,
and my visions became very pleasant. Even the dead silence and
oppressive solitude of the two great rooms could not still the rapid
beatings of my heart. I forgot my mission and thought only of Estella
and the future.

I was recalled to earth and its duties by the unlocking of

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

the farther door. I heard Rudolph say, as if in answer to a question:

"Yes, my lord, I have personally examined the rooms and made sure that
there are no spies concealed anywhere."

"Let me see," said the Prince; "lift up the tapestry."

I could hear them moving about the council-chamber, apparently going
around the walls. Then I heard them advancing into the conservatory. I
shrank down still lower; they moved here and there among the flowers,
and even paused for a few moments before the mass of flowering cacti.

"That *flagelliformis*," said the Prince, "looks sickly. The soil is
perhaps too rich. Tell the gardener to change the earth about it."

"I shall do so, my lord," said Rudolph; and to my great relief they
moved off. In a few minutes I heard them in the council-chamber. With
great caution I rose slowly. A screen of flowers had been cunningly
placed by Rudolph between the cacti and that apartment. At last,
half-stooping, I found an aperture in the rich mass of blossoms. The
Prince was talking to Rudolph. I had a good view of his person. He was
dressed in an evening suit. He was a large man, somewhat corpulent; or,
as Rudolph had said, bloated. He had a Hebraic cast of countenance; his
face seemed to be all angles. The brow was square and prominent,
projecting at the corners; the nose was quite high and aquiline; the
hair had the look of being dyed; a long, thick black mustache covered
his upper lip, but it could not quite conceal the hard, cynical and
sneering expression of his mouth; great bags of flesh hung beneath the
small, furtive eyes. Altogether the face reminded me of the portraits of
Napoleon the Third, who was thought by many to have had little of
Napoleon in him except the name.

There was about Prince Cabano that air of confidence and command which
usually accompanies great wealth or success of any kind. Extraordinary
power produces always the same

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

type of countenance. You see it in the high-nosed mummied kings of
ancient Egypt. There is about them an aristocratic *hauteur* which even
the shrinking of the dry skin for four thousand years has not been able
to quite subdue. We feel like taking off our hats even to their parched
hides. You see it in the cross-legged monuments of the old crusaders, in
the venerable churches of Europe; a splendid breed of ferocious
barbarians they were, who struck ten blows for conquest and plunder
where they struck one for Christ. And you can see the same type of
countenance in the present rulers of the world--the great bankers, the
railroad presidents, the gigantic speculators, the uncrowned monarchs of
commerce, whose golden chariots drive recklessly over the prostrate
bodies of the people.

And then there is another class who are everywhere the aides and
ministers of these oppressors. You can tell them at a glance--large,
coarse, corpulent men; red-faced, brutal; decorated with vulgar taste;
loud-voiced, selfish, self-assertive; cringing sycophants to all above
them, slave-drivers of all below them. They are determined to live on
the best the world can afford, and they care nothing if the miserable
perish in clusters around their feet. The howls of starvation will not
lessen one iota their appetite or their self-satisfaction. These
constitute the great man's world. He mistakes their cringings,
posturings and compliments for the approval of mankind. He does not
perceive how shallow and temporary and worse than useless is the life he
leads; and he cannot see, beyond these well-fed, corpulent scamps, the
great hungry, unhappy millions who are suffering from his misdeeds or
his indifference.

While I was indulging in these reflections the members of the government
were arriving. They were accompanied by servants, black and white, who,
with many bows and flexures, relieved them of their wraps and withdrew.
The door was closed and locked. Rudolph stood without on guard.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

I could now rise to my feet with safety, for the council-chamber was in
a blaze of electric light, while the conservatory was but partially
illuminated.

The men were mostly middle-aged, or advanced in years. They were
generally large men, with finely developed brows--natural selection had
brought the great heads to the top of affairs. Some were cleancut in
feature, looking merely like successful business men; others, like the
Prince, showed signs of sensuality and dissipation, in the baggy,
haggard features. They were unquestionably an able assembly. There were
no orators among them; they possessed none of the arts of the rostrum or
the platform. They spoke sitting, in an awkward, hesitating manner; but
what they said was shrewd and always to the point. They had no
secretaries or reporters. They could trust no one with their secrets.
Their conclusions were conveyed by the president--Prince Cabano--to one
man, who at once communicated what was needful to their greater agents,
and these in turn to the lesser agents; and so the streams of authority
flowed, with lightninglike speed, to the remotest parts of the so-called
Republic; and many a man was struck down, ruined, crushed, destroyed,
who had little suspicion that the soundless bolt which slew him came
from that faraway chamber.

The Prince welcomed each newcomer pleasantly, and assigned him to his
place. When all were seated he spoke:

"I have called you together, gentlemen," he said "because we have very
important business to transact. The evidences multiply that we are
probably on the eve of another outbreak of the restless *canaille*; it
may be upon a larger scale than any we have yet encountered. The filthy
wretches seem to grow more desperate every year; otherwise they would
not rush upon certain death, as they seem disposed to do.

"I have two men in this house whom I thought it better that you should
see and hear face to face. The first is General Jacob Quincy, commander
of the forces which man our

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

ten thousand air-ships, or *Demons*, as they are popularly called. I
think it is understood by all of us that, in these men, and the deadly
bombs of poisonous gas with which their vessels are equipped, we must
find our chief dependence for safety and continued power. We must not
forget that we are outnumbered a thousand to one, and the world grows
very restive under our domination. If it were not for the *Demons* and
the poison-bombs, I should fear the results of the coming contest--with
these, victory is certain.

"Quincy, on behalf of his men, demands another increase of pay. We have
already several times yielded to similar applications. We are somewhat
in the condition of ancient Rome, when the prætorians murdered the
emperor Pertinax, and sold the imperial crown to Didius Julianus. These
men hold the control of the continent in their hands. Fortunately for
us, they are not yet fully aware of their own power, and are content to
merely demand an increase of pay. We cannot quarrel with them at this
time, with a great insurrection pending. A refusal might drive them over
to the enemy. I mention these facts so that, whatever demands General
Quincy may make, however extravagant they may be, you will express no
dissatisfaction. When he is gone we can talk over our plans for the
future, and decide what course we will take as to these troublesome men
when the outbreak is over. I shall have something to propose after he
leaves us."

There was a general expression of approval around the table.

"There is another party here to-night," continued the Prince. "He is a
very shrewd and cunning spy; a member of our secret police service. He
goes by the name of Stephen Andrews in his intercourse with me. What his
real name may be I know not.

"You are aware we have had great trouble to ascertain anything
definitely about this new organization, and have succeeded but
indifferently. Their plans seem to be so well

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

taken, and their cunning so great, that all our attempts have come to
naught. Many of our spies have disappeared; the police cannot learn what
becomes of them; they are certainly dead, but none of their bodies are
ever found. It is supposed that they have been murdered, loaded with
weights and sunk in the river. This man Andrews has so far escaped. He
works as a mechanic--in fact, he really is such--in one of the shops;
and he is apparently the most violent and bitter of our enemies. He will
hold intercourse with no one but me, for he suspects all the city
police, and he comes here but seldom--not more than once in two or three
months--when I pay him liberally and assign him to new work. The last
task I gave him was to discover who are the leaders of the miserable
creatures in this new conspiracy. He has found it very difficult to
obtain any positive information upon this point. The organization is
very cunningly contrived. The Brotherhood is made up in groups of ten.
No one of the rank and file knows more than nine other members
associated with him. The leaders of these groups of ten are selected by
a higher power. These leaders are again organized in groups of ten,
under a leader again selected by a higher power; but in this second
group of ten no man knows his fellow's name or face; they meet always
masked. And so the scale rises. The highest body of all is a group of
one hundred, selected out of the whole force by an executive committee.
Andrews has at length, after years of patient waiting and working, been
selected as one of this upper hundred. He is to be initiated to-morrow
night. He came to me for more money; for he feels he is placing himself
in great danger in going into the den of the chief conspirators. I told
him that I thought you would like to question him, and so he has
returned again to-night, disguised in the dress of a woman, and he is
now in the library awaiting your pleasure. I think we had better see him
before we hear what Quincy has to say. Shall I send for him?"

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

General assent being given, lie stepped to the door and told Rudolph to
bring up the woman he would find in the library. In a few moments the
door opened and a tall personage, dressed like a woman, with a heavy
veil over her face, entered. The Prince said:

"Lock the door and come forward."

The figure did so, advanced to the table and removed the bonnet and
veil, disclosing the dark, bronzed face of a workman--a keen, shrewd,
observant, watchful, strong face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Spy's Story](cc15.md)
