[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc18)  [Next](cc20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

# CHAPTER XVIII.

### THE EXECUTION

"Now, Gabriel," said Max, "I will have to blindfold you--not that I
mistrust you, but that I have to satisfy the laws of our society and the
scruples of others."

This was said just before we opened the door. He folded a silk
handkerchief over my face, and led me down the steps and seated me in a
carriage. He gave some whispered directions to the driver, and away we
rolled. It was a long drive. At last I observed that peculiar salty and
limy smell in the air, which told me we were approaching the river. The
place was very still and solitary. There were no sounds of vehicles or
foot-passengers. The carriage slowed up, and we stopped.

"This way," said Max, opening the door of the carriage, and leading me
by the hand. We walked a few steps; we paused; there were low
whisperings. Then we descended a long flight of steps; the air had a
heavy and subterranean smell; we hurried forward through a large
chamber. I imagined it to be the cellar of some abandoned warehouse; the
light came faintly through the bandage over my face, and I inferred that
a guide was carrying a lantern before us. Again we stopped. There was
more whispering and the rattle of paper, as if the guards were examining
some document. The whispering was renewed; then we entered and descended
again a flight of steps, and again went forward for a short distance.
The air was very damp and the smell earthy. Again I heard the whispering
and the rattling of paper. There was delay. Some one within was sent for
and came out. Then the door was flung open, and we entered a room in
which the air appeared to be drier than in those we had passed through,
and it seemed to be lighted up. There were

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

little movements and stirrings of the atmosphere which indicated that
there were a number of persons in the room. I stood still.

Then a stern, loud voice said:

"Gabriel Weltstein, hold up your right hand."

I did so. The voice continued:

"You do solemnly swear, in the presence of Almighty God, that the
statements you are about to make are just and true; that you are incited
to make them neither by corruption, nor hate, nor any other unworthy
motive; and that you will tell the truth and all the truth; and to this
you call all the terrors of the unknown world to witness; and you
willingly accept death if you utter anything that is false."

I bowed my head.

"What brother vouches for this stranger?" asked the same stern voice.

Then I heard Maximilian. He spoke as if he was standing near my side. He
said:

"I do. If I had not been willing to vouch for him with my life, I should
not have asked to bring him--not a member of our Brotherhood--into this
presence. He saved my life; he is a noble, just and honorable man--one
who loves his kind, and would bless and help them if he could. He has a
story to tell which concerns us all."

"Enough," said the voice. "Were you present in the council-chamber of
the Prince of Cabano last night? If so, tell us what you saw and heard?"

Just then there was a slight noise, as if some one was moving quietly
toward the door behind me, by which I had just entered. Then came
another voice, which I had not before heard--a thin, shrill, strident,
imperious voice--a voice that it seemed to me I should recognize again
among a million. It cried out:

"Back to your seat! Richard, tell the guards to permit no one to leave
this chamber until the end of our meeting."

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

There was a shuffling of feet, and whispering, and then again profound
silence.

"Proceed," said the stern voice that had first spoken.

Concealing all reference to Estella, and omitting to name Rudolph, whom
I referred to simply as one of their Brotherhood known to Maximilian, I
told, in the midst of a grave-like silence, how I had been hidden in the
room next to the council-chamber; and then I went on to give a concise
history of what I had witnessed and heard.

"Uncover his eyes!" exclaimed the stern voice.

Maximilian untied the handkerchief. For a moment or two I was blinded by
the sudden glare of light. Then, as my eyes recovered their function, I
could see that I stood, as I had supposed, in the middle of a large
vault or cellar. Around the room, on rude benches, sat perhaps one
hundred men. At the end, on a sort of dais, or raised platform, was a
man of gigantic stature, masked and shrouded. Below him, upon a smaller
elevation, sat another, whose head, I noticed even then, was crooked to
one side. Still below him, on a level with the floor, at a table, were
two men who seemed to be secretaries. Every man present wore a black
mask and a long cloak of dark material. Near me stood one similarly
shrouded, who, I thought, from the size and figure, must be Maximilian.

It was a solemn, silent, gloomy assemblage, and the sight of it thrilled
through my very flesh and bones. I was not frightened, but appalled, as
I saw all those eyes, out of those expressionless dark faces, fixed upon
me. I felt as if they were phantoms, or dead men, in whom only the eyes
lived.

The large man stood up. He was indeed a giant. He seemed to uncoil
himself from his throne as he rose.

"Unmask," he said.

There was a rustle, and the next moment the masks were gone and the
cloaks had fallen down.

It was an extraordinary assemblage that greeted my eyes;

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

a long array of stern faces, dark and toil-hardened, with great, broad
brows and solemn or sinister eyes.

Last night I had beheld the council of the Plutocracy. Here was the
council of the Proletariat. The large heads at one end of the line were
matched by the large heads at the other. A great injustice, or series of
wrongs, working through many generations, had wrought out results that
in some sense duplicated each other. Brutality above had produced
brutality below; cunning there was answered by cunning here; cruelty in
the aristocrat was mirrored by cruelty in the workman. High and low were
alike victims--unconscious victims--of a system. The crime was not
theirs; it lay at the door of the shallow, indifferent, silly
generations of the past.

My eyes sought the officers. I noticed that Maximilian was
disguised--out of an excess of caution, as I supposed--with eye-glasses
and a large dark mustache. His face, I knew, was really beardless.

I turned to the president. Such a man I had never seen before. He was, I
should think, not less than six feet six inches high, and broad in
proportion. His great arms hung down until the monstrous hands almost
touched the knees. His skin was quite dark, almost negroid; and a thick,
close mat of curly black hair covered his huge head like a thatch. His
face was muscular, ligamentous; with great bars, ridges and whelks of
flesh, especially about the jaws and on the forehead. But the eyes
fascinated me. They were the eyes of a wild beast, deep-set, sullen and
glaring; they seemed to shine like those of the cat-tribe, with a
luminosity of their own. This, then--I said to myself--must be Cæsar,
the commander of the dreaded Brotherhood.

A movement attracted me to the man who sat below him; he had spoken to
the president.

He was in singular contrast with his superior. He was old and withered.
One hand seemed to be shrunken, and his head was permanently crooked to
one side. The face was

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

mean and sinister; two fangs alone remained in his mouth; his nose was
hooked; the eyes were small, sharp, penetrating and restless; but the
expanse of brow above them was grand and noble. It was one of those
heads that look as if they had been packed full, and not an inch of
space wasted. His person was unclean, however, and the hands and the
long finger-nails were black with dirt. I should have picked him out
anywhere as a very able and a very dangerous man. He was evidently the
vice-president of whom the spy had spoken--the nameless Russian Jew who
was accounted "the brains of the Brotherhood."

"Gabriel Weltstein," said the giant, in the same stern, loud voice,
"each person in this room will now pass before you,--the officers last;
and,--under the solemn oath you have taken,--I call upon you to say
whether the spy you saw last night in the council-chamber of the Prince
of Cabano is among them. But first, let me ask, did you see him clearly,
and do you think you will be able to identify him?"

"Yes," I replied; "he faced me for nearly thirty minutes, and I should
certainly know him if I saw him again."

"Brothers," said the president, "you will now------"

But here there was a rush behind me. I turned toward the door. Two men
were scuffling with a third, who seemed to be trying to break out. There
were the sounds of a struggle; then muttered curses; then the quick,
sharp report of a pistol. There was an exclamation of pain and more
oaths; knives flashed in the air; others rushed pell-mell into the
melee; and then the force of numbers seemed to triumph, and the crowd
came, dragging a man forward to where I stood. His face was pale as
death; the blood, streamed from a flesh wound on his forehead; an
expression of dreadful terror glared out of his eyes; he gasped and
looked from right to left. The giant had descended from his dais. He
strode forward. The wretch was laid at my feet.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

"Speak," said Cæsar, "is that the man?"

"It is," I replied.

The giant took another step, and he towered over the prostrate wretch.

"Brothers," he asked, "what is your judgment upon the spy?"

"Death!" rang the cry from a hundred throats.

The giant put his hand in his bosom; there was a light in his terrible
face as if he had long waited for such an hour.

"Lift him up," he said.

Two strong men held the spy by his arms; they lifted him to his feet; he
writhed and struggled and shrieked, but the hands that held him were of
iron.

"Stop!" said the thin, strident voice I had heard before, and the
cripple advanced into the circle. He addressed the prisoner:

"Were you followed to this place?"

"Yes, yes," eagerly cried the spy. "Spare me, spare me, and I will tell
you everything. Three members of the police force were appointed to
follow, in a carriage, the vehicle that brought me here. They were to
wait about until the meeting broke up and then shadow the tallest man
and a crook-necked man to their lodgings and identify them. They are now
waiting in the dark shadows of the warehouse."

"Did you have any signal agreed upon with them?" asked the cripple.

"Yes," the wretch replied, conscious that he was giving up his
associates to certain death, but willing to sacrifice the whole world if
he might save his own life. "Spare me, spare me, and I win tell you
all."

"Proceed," said the cripple.

"I would not trust myself to be known by them. I agreed with Prince
Cabano upon a signal between us. I am to come

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

to them, if I need their help, and say: 'Good evening, what time is it?'
The reply is, 'It is thieves' time.' Then I am to say, 'The more the
better;' and they are to follow me."

"Richard," said the cripple, "did you hear that?"

"Yes."

"Take six men with you; leave them in the brew-house cellar; lead the
police thither; throw the bodies in the river."

The man called Richard withdrew, with his men, to his work of murder.

The prisoner rolled his eyes appealingly around that dreadful circle.

"Spare me!" he cried. "I know the secrets of the banks. I can lead you
into the Prince of Cabano's house. Do not kill me.

"Is that all?" asked the giant.

"Yes," replied the cripple.

In an instant the huge man, like some beast that had been long held back
from its prey, gave a leap forward, his face revealing terrible
ferocity; it was a tiger that glares, plunges and devours. I saw
something shining, brilliant and instantaneous as an electric flash;
then there was the sound of a heavy blow. The spy sprang clean out of
the hands that were holding him, high up in the air; and fell, close to
me, stone dead. He had been dead, indeed, when he made that fearful
leap. His heart was split in twain. His spring was not the act of the
man; it was the protest of the body against the rush of the departing
spirit; it was the clay striving to hold on to the soul.

The giant stooped and wiped his bloody knife upon the clothes of the
dead man. The cripple laughed a crackling, hideous laugh. I hope God
will never permit me to hear such a laugh again. Others took it up--it
echoed all around the room. I could think of nothing but the
cachinnations of the fiends as the black gates burst open and new hordes
of souls are flung, startled and shrieking, into hell.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

"Thus die all the enemies of the Brotherhood!" cried the thin voice of
the cripple.

And long and loud they shouted.

"Remove the body through the back door," said the giant, "and throw it
into the river."

"Search his clothes first," said the cripple.

They did so, and found the money which the Prince had ordered to be
given him--it was the price of his life--and also a bundle of papers.
The former was handed over to the treasurer of the Brotherhood; the
latter were taken possession of by the vice-president.

Then, resuming his seat, the giant said:

"Gabriel Weltstein, the Brotherhood thank you for the great service you
have rendered them. We regret that your scruples will not permit you to
become one of us; but we regard you as a friend and we honor you as a
man; and if at any time the Brotherhood can serve you, be assured its
full powers shall be put forth in your behalf."

I was too much shocked by the awful scene I had just witnessed to do
more than bow my head.

"There is one thing more," he continued, "we shall ask of you; and that
is that you will repeat your story once again to another man, who will
soon be brought here. We knew from Maximilian what you were about to
tell, and we made our arrangements accordingly. Do not start," he said,
"or look alarmed--there will be no more executions."

Turning to the men, he said: "Resume your masks." He covered his own
face, and all the rest did likewise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Mamelukes of the Air](cc20.md)
