[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc19)  [Next](cc21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

# CHAPTER XIX.

### THE MAMELUKES OF THE AIR

The vice-president of the Brotherhood leaned forward and whispered to
one of the secretaries, who, taking two men with him, left the room. A
seat was given me. There was a pause of perhaps ten minutes. Not a
whisper broke the silence. Then there came a rap at the door. The other
secretary went to it. There was whispering and consultation; then the
door opened and the secretary and his two companions entered, leading a
large man, blindfolded. He wore a military uniform. They stopped in the
middle of the room.

"General Jacob Quincy," said the stern voice of the president, "before
we remove the bandage from your eyes I ask you to repeat, in this
presence, the pledge you made to the representative of the Brotherhood,
who called upon you today."

The man said:

"I was informed by your messenger that you had a communication to make
to me which involved the welfare, and perhaps the lives, of the officers
and men commanding and manning the air-vessels, or war-ships, called by
the people 'The Demons.' You invited me here under a pledge of safe
conduct; you left your messenger with my men, as hostage for my return;
and I promised never to reveal to mortal ear anything that I might see
or hear, except so far as it might be necessary, with your consent, to
do so to warn my command of those dangers which you assure me threaten
them. This promise I here renew, and swear by the Almighty God to keep
it forever inviolate."

"Remove his bandage," said the president.

They did so, and there stood before me the handsome

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

and intelligent officer whom I had seen last night in the Prince of
Cabano's council-chamber.

The president nodded to the cripple, as if by some pre-arrangement, and
said, "Proceed."

"General Jacob Quincy," said the thin, penetrating voice of the
vice-president of the Order, "you visited a certain house last night, on
a matter of business, connected with your command. How many men knew of
your visit?"

"Three," said the general, with a surprised look. "I am to communicate
the results to a meeting of my command tomorrow night; but I thought it
better to keep the matter pretty much to myself until that time."

"May I ask who were the men to whom you spoke of the matter?"

"I might object to your question," he said, "but that I suppose
something important lies behind it. The men were my brother, Col.
Quincy; my adjutant-general, Captain Underwood, and my friend Major
Hartwright."

"Do you think any of these men would tell your story to any one else?"

"Certainly not. I would venture my life upon their prudence and secrecy,
inasmuch as I asked them to keep the matter to themselves. But why do
you ask such questions?"

"Because," said the wily cripple, "I have a witness here who is about to
reveal to you everything you said and did in that council-chamber last
night, even to the minutest detail. If you had told your story to many,
or to untrustworthy persons, there might be a possibility that this
witness had gleaned the facts from others; and that he had not been
present, as he claims; and therefore that you could not depend upon what
he says as to other matters of importance. Do you recognize the justice
of my reasoning?"

"Certainly," said the general. "If you produce here a man who can tell
me just where I was last night, what I said, and what was said to me, I
shall believe that he was certainly

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

present; for I well know he did not get it from me or my friends; and I
know, equally well, that none of those with whom I had communication
would tell what took place to you or any friend of yours."

"Be kind enough to stand up," said the cripple to me. I did so.

"Did you ever see that man before?" he asked the general.

The general looked at me intently.

"Never," he replied.

"Have you ever seen this man before?" he asked me.

"Yes," I replied.

"When and where?"

"Last night; at the palace of Prince Cabano--in his council-chamber."

"Proceed, and tell the whole story."

I did so. The general listened closely, never relaxing his scrutiny of
my face. When I had finished my account of the interview, the cripple
asked the general whether it was a faithful narration of what had taken
place. He said it was--wonderfully accurate in every particular.

"You believe him, then, to be a truthful witness," asked the cripple,
"and that he was present at your interview, with the Council of the
Plutocracy?"

'I do," said General Quincy.

"Now proceed," he said to me, "to tell what took place after this
gentleman left the room."

I did so. The face of the general darkened into a scowl as I proceeded,
and he flushed with rage when I had concluded my story.

"Do you desire to ask the witness any questions?" said the cripple.

"None at all," he replied.

He stood for several minutes lost in deep thought. I felt that the
destiny of the world hung tremblingly in the balance. At last he spoke,
in a low voice.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

"Who represents your organization?" he asked.

"The Executive Committee," replied the president.

"Who are they?" he inquired.

"Myself,--the vice-president"--pointing to the cripple--"and yonder
gentleman"--designating the cowled and masked figure of Maximilian, who
stood near me.

"Could I have a private conference with you?" he asked.

"Yes," replied the president, somewhat eagerly; "come this way."

All four moved to a side door, which seemed to lead into another
subterranean chamber;--the cripple carried a torch.

"Wait here for me," said Maximilian, as he passed me.

I sat down. The cowled figures remained seated around the walls. Not a
sound broke the profound silence. I could see that all eyes were fixed
upon the door by which the Executive Committee had left us, and my own
were riveted there also.

We all felt the gravity of the occasion. Five minutes--ten
minutes--fifteen minutes--twenty minutes passed. The door opened. We
thought the conference was over. No; it was only the cripple; his face
was uncovered and flushed with excitement. He walked quickly to the
secretary's table; took up pen, ink and paper, and returned to the other
cellar, closing the door after him. There was a movement among the
cowled figures--whispers--excitement; they augured that things were
going well--the agreement was to be reduced to writing! Five minutes
more passed--then ten--then fifteen. The door opened, and they came
out:--the gigantic Cæsar ahead. All the faces were uncovered, and I
thought there was a look of suppressed triumph upon the countenances of
the Executive Committee. The commander of the Demons looked sedate and
thoughtful, like a man who had taken a very grave and serious step.

The president resumed the chair. He spoke to the secretary.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

"You will cover the eyes of General Quincy," he said. "Take two men with
you; accompany him to his carriage, then go with him to his residence,
and bring back our hostage.--General," he said, "good night," and then
added meaningly, "*Au revoir!*"

"*Au revoir*," said the general, as the handkerchief was adjusted over
his face.

The commander of the Demons and his escort withdrew. The president sat
consulting his watch, and when he was sure that they were beyond
hearing, he sprang to his feet, his eyes glowing and his whole frame
dilated with excitement.

"Brothers," he cried out, "we have got the world in our hands at last.
The day is near we have so long toiled and waited for! The Demons are
with us!"

The wildest demonstrations of joy followed--cheer after cheer broke
forth; the men embraced each other.

"The world's slavery is at an end," cried one.

"Death to the tyrants!" shouted another.

"Down with the Oligarchy!" roared a third.

"Come," said Maximilian, taking me by the arm, "it is time to go."

He replaced the bandage over my eyes and led me out. For some time after
I left the room, and while in the next cellar, I could hear the hoarse
shouts of the triumphant conspirators. Victory was now assured. My heart
sank within me. The monstrous chorus was chanting the requiem of a
world.

In the carriage Maximilian was trembling with excitement. One thought
seemed to be uppermost in his mind. "He will be free! He will be free!"
he continually cried. When at last he grew more calm, he embraced me,
and called me the preserver of himself; and all his family; and all his
friends; and all his work,--the savior of his father! Then he became
incoherent again. He cursed the baseness

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

of mankind. "It was noble," he said, "to crush a rotten world for
revenge, or for justice' sake; but to sell out a trust, for fifty
millions of the first plunder, was execrable--it was damnable. It was a
shame to have to use such instruments. But the whole world was corrupt
to the very core; there was not enough consistency in it to make it hang
together. Yet there was one consolation--the end was coming! Glory be to
God! The end was coming!"

And he clapped his hands and shouted, like a madman.

When he grew quieter I asked him what day the blow was to be struck. Not
for some time, he said. In the morning the vice-president would take an
air-ship to Europe, with a cipher letter from General Quincy to the
commandant of the Demons in England--to be delivered in case it was
thought safe to do so. The cripple was subtle and cunning beyond all
men. He was to arrange for the purchase of the officers commanding the
Demons all over Europe; and he was to hold a council of the leaders of
the Brotherhood, and arrange for a simultaneous outbreak on both sides
of the Atlantic, so that one continent should not come to the help of
the other. If, however, this could not be effected, he was to return
home, and the Brotherhood would precipitate the revolution all over
America at the same hour, and take the chances of holding their own
against the banker-government of Europe.

That night I lay awake a long time, cogitating; and the subject of my
thoughts was--Estella.

It had been my intention to return to Africa before the great outbreak
took place. I could not remain and witness the ruin of mankind. But
neither could I leave Estella behind me. Maximilian might be killed. I
knew his bold and desperate nature; he seemed to me to have been driven
almost, if not quite, to insanity, by the wrongs of his father. Revenge
had become a mania with him. If he perished in the battle what would
become of Estella, in a world torn to pieces?

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She had neither father, nor mother, nor home.
But she loved me and I must protect her!

On the other hand, she was powerless and dependent on the kindness of
strangers. Her speech in that moment of terror might have expressed more
than she felt. Should I presume upon it? Should I take advantage of her
distress to impose my love upon her? But, if the Brotherhood failed,
might not the Prince recover her, and bear her back to his hateful
palace and his loathsome embraces? Dangers environed her in every
direction. I loved her; and if she would not accompany me to my home as
my wife, she must go as my sister. She could not stay where she was. I
must again save her.

I fell asleep and dreamed that Estella and I were flying into space on
the back of a dragon, that looked very much like Prince Cabano.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Workingmen's Meeting](cc21)
