[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc28)  [Next](cc30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

# CHAPTER XXVIII.

### MAX'S STORY CONCLUDED--THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS

"I used to run out every other day, and I was as welcome as if I had
been really a member of the family. The day before yesterday I found the
whole household in a state of joyous excitement. Christina had been
enjoined to put the baby to sleep; and while rocking it in its cradle
she had, all unconsciously, begun to sing a little nursery song.
Suddenly she sprang to her feet, and, running to her mother, cried out:

"'Oh, mother! I can sing! Listen.'

"She found, however, that the voice was still quite weak, and that if
she tried to touch any of the higher notes there was a pain in her
throat.

"I advised her to forbear singing for some time, and permit the organs
of the voice to resume their natural condition. It might be that the
doctor was wrong in his prognosis of her case; or it might be that the
injured nerve, as he had said was possible, had resumed its function,
through the curative power of nature. But it was a great delight to us
all, and especially to the poor girl herself, to think that her grand
voice might yet be restored to her.

"To-day I went out again.

"I thought that Mr. Jansen met me with a constrained manner; and when
Mrs. Jansen saw me, instead of welcoming me with a cordial smile, as was
usual with her, she retreated into the house. And when I went into the
parlor, Christina's manner was still more embarrassing. She blushed as
she extended her hand to me, and seemed very much confused;

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

and yet her manner was not unkind or unfriendly. I could not understand
it.

"'What is the matter, Christina?' I asked.

"The little woman was incapable of double-dealing, and so she said:

"'You know it came into my head lately, very often, that Mrs.
Brederhagan had been exceedingly, I might say extraordinarily, kind to
me. It is true her son had done me a great injury, and might have killed
me; and I refused to testify against him. But she had not only given me
that deed of gift you brought me, but she had also presented papa with
this charming home. And so I said to myself that she must think me very
rude and ungrateful, since I had never called upon her to thank her in
person. And so, knowing that Nathan had been sent to Europe, I made up
my mind, yesterday, that I would go into town, and call upon Mrs.
Brederhagan, and thank her for all her kindness.

"'I took a hack to her house from the station, and sent up my card. She
received me quite kindly. After a few inquiries and commonplaces I
thanked her as I had intended doing. She smiled and made light of it;
then I spoke of the house and the garden, and the blacksmith shop, and
how grateful we all were to her.

"'"Why," said she, "what on earth are you talking about? I never gave
you a house, or a garden, or a blacksmith shop."

"'You may imagine my surprise.

"'"Why," said I, "did you not give Mr. Frank Montgomery the money to
purchase it, and tell him to have the deed made out to my father?"

"'"My dear," said she, "you bewilder me; I never in all my life heard of
such a person as Mr. Frank Montgomery; and I certainly never gave him
any money to buy a house for anybody."

"'"Why," said I, "do you pretend you do not know Mr. Frank Montgomery,
who brought me your deed of gift?"

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

"That," she said, "was not Mr. Frank Montgomery, but Mr. Arthur
Phillips."

"'"No, no," I said, "you are mistaken; it was Frank Montgomery, a
printer by trade, who owns the house we used to live in, at 1252 Seward
Street. I am well acquainted with him."

"'"Well," said she, "this is certainly astonishing! Mr. Arthur Phillips,
whom I have known for years, a young gentleman of large fortune, a
lawyer by profession, comes to me and tells me, the very day you said my
son was not the man who assaulted you, that unless I settled fifty
dollars a week on you for life, by a deed of gift, he would have Nathan
rearrested for an attempt to murder you, and would prove his guilt by
your mother; and now you come and try to make me believe that Arthur
Phillips, the lawyer, is Frank Montgomery, the printer; that he lives in
a little house on Seward Street, and that I have been giving him money
to buy you houses and gardens and blacksmith shops in the country! I
hope, my dear, that the shock you received, on that dreadful night, has
not affected your mind. But I would advise you to go home to your
parents."

"'And therewithal she politely bowed me out.'

"'I was very much astonished and bewildered. I stood for some time on
the doorstep, not knowing what to do next. Then it occurred to me that I
would go to your house and ask you what it all meant; for I had no doubt
Mrs. Brederhagan was wrong, and that you were, indeed, Frank Montgomery,
the printer. I found the house locked up and empty. A bill on the door
showed that it was to rent, and referred inquiries to the corner
grocery. They remembered me very well there. I asked them where you
were. They did not know. Then I asked whether they were not agents for
you to rent the house. Oh, no; you did not own the house. But had you
not lived in it for years? No; you rented it the very morning of the
same day we moved in. I was astounded, and more

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

perplexed than ever. What did it all mean? If you did not own the house
and had not been born in it, or lived there all your life, as you said,
then the rest of your story was probably false also, and the name you
bore was assumed. And for what purpose? And why did you move into that
house the same day we rented it from you? It looked like a scheme to
entrap us; and yet you had always been so kind and good that I could not
think evil of you. Then it occurred to me that I would go and see Peter
Bingham, the proprietor of the theater. I desired, anyhow, to tell him
that I thought I would recover my voice, and that I might want another
engagement with him after awhile. When I met him I fancied there was a
shade of insolence in his manner. When I spoke of singing again he
laughed, and said he guessed I would never want to go on the boards
again. Why? I asked. Then he laughed again, and said "Mr. Phillips would
not let me;" and then he began to abuse you, and said you "had forced
him to give me fifty dollars a week for my singing when it wasn't worth
ten dollars; but he understood then what it all meant, and that now
every one understood it;--that you had lived in the same house with me
for months, and now you had purchased a cage for your bird in the
country." At first I could not understand what he meant; and when at
last I comprehended his meaning and burst into tears, he began to
apologize; but I would not listen to him, and hurried home and told
everything to papa and mamma.

"'Now,' she continued, looking me steadily in the face with her frank,
clear eyes, 'we have talked it all over for hours, and we have come to
several conclusions. First, you are not Francis Montgomery, but Arthur
Phillips; second, you are not a poor printer, but a rich young
gentleman; third, you have done me a great many kindnesses and
attributed them to others. You secured me a large salary from Bingham;
you made Mrs. Brederhagan settle an income upon me; you nursed me
through all my sickness, with the tenderness

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

of a brother, and you have bought this beautiful place and presented it
to papa. You have done us all nothing but good; and you claimed no
credit for it; and we shall all be grateful to you and honor you and
pray for you to the end of our lives. But,' and here she took my hand as
a sister might, 'but we cannot keep this place. You will yourself see
that we cannot. You a poor printer, we met on terms of equality. From a
rich young gentleman this noble gift would be universally considered as
the price of my honor and self-respect. It is so considered already. The
deed of gift from Mrs. Brederhagan I shall avail myself of until I am
able to resume my place on the stage; but here is a deed, signed by my
father and mother, for this place, and tomorrow we must leave it. We may
not meet again'- and here the large eyes began to swim in
tears--'but--but--I shall never forget your goodness to me.'

"'Christina,' I said, 'suppose I had really been Frank Montgomery, the
printer, would you have driven me away from you thus?'

"'Oh! no! no!' she cried; 'you are our dearest and best friend. And I do
not drive you away. I must leave you. The world can have only one
interpretation of the relation of two people so differently situated--a
very wealthy young gentleman and a poor little singer, the daughter of a
poor, foreign-born workman.'

"'Well, then,' said I, taking her in my arms, 'let the blabbing,
babbling old world know that that poor little singer sits higher in my
heart, yes, in my brain and judgment, than all the queens and princesses
of the world. I have found in her the one inestimable jewel of the
earth--a truly good and noble woman. If I deceived you it was because I
loved you; loved you with my whole heart and soul and all the depths of
my being. I wanted to dwell in the same house with you; to study you; to
see you always near me. I was happier when I was nursing you through
your sickness than I have ever been

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

before or since. I was sorry, to tell the truth, when you got well, and
were no longer dependent on me. And now, Christina, if you will say yes,
we will fix the day for the wedding.'

"I knew as soon as I began to speak that I had won my case. There was no
struggle to escape from my arms; and, as I went on, she relaxed even her
rigidity, and reposed on my breast with trusting confidence.

"'Frank,' she said, not looking up, and speaking in a low tone--'I shall
always call you Frank--I loved the poor printer from the very first; and
if the rich man can be content with the affection I gave the poor one,
my heart and life are yours. But stop,' she added, looking up with an
arch smile, 'you must not forget the promise you made me about New
Year's day!'

"'Ah, my dear,' I replied, 'that was part of poor Frank's character, and
I suppose that is what you loved him for; but if you will marry a rich
man you must be content to forego all those attractions of the poor,
foolish printer. I shall not stand up next New Year's day and make a vow
to drink no more; but I make a vow now to kiss the sweetest woman in the
world every day in the year.'

"And, lest I should forget so sacred an obligation, I began to put my
vow into execution right then and there.

"Afterward the old folks were called in, and I told them my whole story.
And I said to them, moreover, that there was storm and danger ahead;
that the great convulsion might come any day; and so it is agreed that
we are to be married, at Christina's home, the day after to-morrow. And
to-morrow I want my dear mother, and you, my dear friends, to go with me
to visit the truest and noblest little woman that ever promised to make
a man happy."

When Max had finished his long story, his mother kissed and cried over
him; and Estella and I shook hands with him; and we were a very happy
party; and no one would have thought, from our jests and laughter, that
the bloodhounds

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

of the aristocracy were hunting for three of us, and that we were
sitting under the dark presaging shadow of a storm that was ready to
vomit fire and blood at any moment.

Before we retired that night Estella and I had a private conference, and
I fear that at the end of it I made the same astonishing vow which Max
had made to Christina. And I came to another surprising conclusion--that
is, that no woman is worth worshiping unless she is worth wooing. But
what I said to Estella, and what she said to me, will never be revealed
to any one in this world;--the results, however, will appear hereafter,
in this veracious chronicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. Elysium](cc30.md)
