[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc30)  [Next](cc32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

# CHAPTER XXX.

### UPON THE HOUSE-TOP

A few days after our joint wedding Max came running in one day, and
said:

"It is to be to-morrow."

He gave each of us a red cross to sew upon our clothes. He was very much
excited, and hurried out again.

I had said to him, the morning of our marriage, that I desired to return
home before the outbreak came, for I was now responsible for Estella's
life and safety; and I feared that all communication of one part of the
world with another would be cut off by the threatened revolution. He had
begged me to remain. He said that at the interview with General Quincy
it had been made a condition of the contract that each of the executive
committee--Cæsar, the vice-president and himself--should have one of the
flying air-ships placed at his disposal, after the outbreak, well manned
and equipped with bombs and arms of all kinds. These "Demons" were to be
subject to their order at any time, and to be guarded by the troops at
their magazine in one of the suburbs until called for.

The committee had several reasons for making this arrangement: the
outbreak might fail and they would have to fly; or the outbreak might
succeed, but become ungovernable, and they would have to escape from the
tempest they had themselves invoked. Max had always had a dream that
after the Plutocracy was overthrown the insurgents would reconstruct a
purer and better state of society; but of late my conversations with
him, and his own observations, had begun to shake his faith in this
particular.

He said to me that if I remained he would guarantee the safety of myself
and wife, and after I had seen the outbreak

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

he would send me home in his air-ship; and moreover, if he became
satisfied that the revolution had passed beyond the control of himself
and friends, he would, after rescuing his father from the prison where
he was confined, accompany me with his whole family, and we would settle
down together in my distant mountain home. He had, accordingly, turned
all his large estate into gold and silver, which he had brought to the
house; and I had likewise filled one large room full of a great library
of books, which I had purchased to take with me--literature, science,
art, encyclopedias, histories, philosophies, in fact all the treasures
of the world's genius--together with type, printing presses, telescopes,
phonographs, photographic instruments, electrical apparatus, eclesions,
phemasticons, and all the other great inventions which the last hundred
years have given us. For, I said to myself, if civilization utterly
perishes in the rest of the world, there, in the mountains of Africa,
shut out from attack by rocks and ice-topped mountains, and the cordon
of tropical barbarians yet surrounding us, we will wait until exhausted
and prostrate mankind is ready to listen to us and will help us
reconstruct society upon a wise and just basis.

In the afternoon Max returned, bringing with him Carl Jansen and all his
family. A dozen men also came, bearing great boxes. They were old and
trusted servants of his father's family; and the boxes contained
magazine rifles and pistols and fixed ammunition, together with
hand-grenades. These were taken out, and we were all armed. Even the
women had pistols, and knives strapped to their girdles. The men went
out and again returned, bearing quantities of food, sufficient to last
us during a siege, and also during our flight to my home. Water was also
collected in kegs and barrels, for the supply might be cut of. Then Max
came, and under his orders, as soon as night fell, the lower windows,
the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

cellar openings and the front door were covered with sheathings of thick
oak plank, of three thicknesses, strongly nailed; then the second story
windows were similarly protected, loopholes being first bored, through
which our rifles could be thrust, if necessary. Then the upper windows
were also covered in the same way. The back door was left free for
ingress and egress through the yard and back street, but powerful bars
were arranged across it, and the oak plank left ready to board it up
when required. The hand-grenades--there were a pile of them--were
carried up to the flat roof. Then one of the men went out and painted
red crosses on the doors and windows.

We ate our supper in silence. A feeling of awe was upon all of us. Every
one was told to pack up his goods and valuables and be ready for instant
flight when the word was given; and to each one were assigned the
articles he or she was to carry.

About ten o'clock Max returned and told us all to come up to the roof.
The house stood, as I have already said, upon a corner; it was in the
older part of the city, and not far from where the first great battle
would be fought. Max whispered to me that the blow would be struck at
six o'clock in Europe and at twelve o'clock at night in America. The
fighting therefore had already begun in the Old World. He further
explained to me something of the plan of battle. The Brotherhood at
twelve would barricade a group of streets in which were the Sub-Treasury
of the United States, and all the principal banks, to wit: Cedar, Pine,
Wall, Nassau, William, Pearl and Water Streets. Two hundred thousand men
would be assembled to guard these barricades. They would then burst open
the great moneyed institutions and blow up the safes with giant powder
and Hecla powder. At daybreak one of Quincy's air-ships would come and
receive fifty millions of the spoils in gold, as their share of the
plunder, and the price of their support. As soon as this was delivered,
and carried to their armory, the whole fleet of air-vessels would come

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

up and attack the troops of the Oligarchy. If, however, General Quincy
should violate his agreement, and betray them, they had provided a large
number of great cannon, mounted on high wheels, so that they could be
fired vertically, and these were to be loaded with bombs of the most
powerful explosives known to science, and so constructed with
fulminating caps that, if they struck the air-ship at any point, they
would explode and either destroy it or so disarrange its machinery as to
render it useless. Thus they were provided, he thought, for every
emergency.

At eleven he came to me and whispered that if anything happened to him
he depended on me to take his wife and mother and his father, if
possible, with me to Africa. I grasped his hand and assured him of my
devotion. He then embraced Christina and his mother and left them,
weeping bitterly, in each other's arms.

There was a parapet around the roof. I went to the corner of it, and,
leaning over, looked down into the street. Estella came and stood beside
me. She was very calm and quiet. The magnetic lights yet burned, and the
streets below me were almost as bright as day. There were comparatively
few persons moving about. Here and there a carriage, or a man on
horseback, dashed furiously past, at full speed; and I thought to
myself, "The Oligarchy have heard of the tremendous outbreak in Europe,
and are making preparations for another here." It was a still, clear
night; and the great solemn stars moved over the face of heaven
unconscious or indifferent as to what was going forward on this clouded
little orb.

I thought it must be nearly twelve. I drew out my watch to look at the
time. It lacked one minute of that hour. Another instant, and the whole
city was wrapped in profound darkness. Some of the workmen about the
Magnetic Works were members of the Brotherhood, and, in pursuance of
their orders, they had cut the connections of the works and blotted out
the light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. ''Sheol''](cc32)
