[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc33)  [Next](cc35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIII.

### "THE OCEAN OVERPEERS ITS LIST"

And then all avenues were open. And like a huge flood, long damned up,
turbulent, turbid, muddy, loaded with wrecks and debris, the gigantic
mass broke loose, full of foam and terror, and flowed in every
direction. A foul and brutal and ravenous multitude it was, dark with
dust and sweat, armed with the weapons of civilization, but possessing
only the instincts of wild beasts.

At first they were under the control of some species of discipline and
moved toward the houses of the condemned, of whom printed catalogues had
been furnished the officers. The shouts, the yells, the delight were
appalling.

Now and then some poor wretch, whose sole offense was that he was
well-dressed, would take fright and start to run, and then, like hounds
after a rabbit, they would follow in full cry; and when he was caught a
hundred men would struggle to strike him, and he would disappear in a
vortex of arms, clubs and bayonets, literally torn to pieces.

A sullen roar filled the air as this human cyclone moved onward, leaving
only wrecks behind it. Now it pauses at a house. The captain consults
his catalogue. "This is it," he cries; and doors and windows give way
before the thunderous mob; and then the scenes are terrible. Men are
flung headlong, alive, out of the windows to the ravenous wretches
below; now a dead body comes whirling down; then the terrified
inhabitants fly to the roofs, and are pursued from house to house and
butchered in sight of the delighted spectators. But when the condemned
man--the head of the house--is at last found, hidden perhaps in some
coal-hole or cellar, and

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

is brought up, black with dust, and wild with terror, his clothes half
torn from his back; and he is thrust forth, out of door or window, into
the claws of the wild beasts, the very heavens ring with acclamations of
delight; and happy is the man who can reach over his fellows and know
that he has struck the victim.

Then up and away for another vengeance. Before them is solitude; shops
and stores and residences are closed and barricaded; in the distance
teams are seen flying and men scurrying to shelter; and through crevices
in shutters the horrified people peer at the mob, as at an invasion of
barbarians.

Behind them are dust, confusion, dead bodies, hammered and beaten out of
all semblance of humanity; and, worse than all, the criminal
classes--that wretched and inexplicable residuum, who have no grievance
against the world except their own existence--the base, the cowardly,
the cruel, the sneaking, the inhuman, the horrible! These flock like
jackals in the track of the lions. They rob the dead bodies; they break
into houses; they kill if they are resisted; they fill their pockets.
Their joy is unbounded. Elysium has descended upon earth for them this
day. Pickpockets, sneak-thieves, confidence-men, burglars, robbers,
assassins, the refuse and outpouring of grog-shops and brothels, all are
here. And women, too--or creatures that pass for such--having the bodies
of women and the habits of ruffians;--harpies--all claws and teeth and
greed--bold--desperate--shameless--incapable of good. They, too, are
here. They dart hither and thither; they swarm--they dance--they
howl--they chatter--they quarrel and battle, like carrion-vultures, over
the spoils.

Civilization is gone, and all the devils are loose! No more courts, nor
judges, nor constables, nor prisons! That which it took the world ten
thousand years to create has gone in an hour.

And still the thunderous cyclones move on through a hundred streets.
Occasionally a house is fired; but this is not

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

part of the programme, for they have decided to keep all these fine
residences for themselves! They will be rich. They will do no more work.
The rich man's daughters shall be their handmaidens; they will wear his
purple and fine linen.

But now and then the flames rise up--perhaps a thief kindles the
blaze--and it burns and burns; for who would leave the glorious work to
put it out? It burns until the streets stop it and the block is
consumed. Fortunately, or unfortunately, there is no wind to breed a
general conflagration. The storms to-day are all on earth; and the
powers of the air are looking down with hushed breath, horrified at the
exceeding wickedness of the little crawlers on the planet we call men.

They do not, as a rule, steal. Revenge--revenge--is all their thought.
And why should they steal? Is it not all their own? Now and then a too
audacious thief is caught and stuck full of bayonets; or he is flung out
of a window, and dies at the hands of the mob the death of the honest
man for whom he is mistaken; and thus, by a horrible travesty of fate,
he perishes for that which he never was nor could be.

Think of the disgust of a thief who finds himself being murdered for an
honest man, an aristocrat, and can get no one to believe his
asseverations that he is simply and truly a thief--and nothing more! It
is enough to make Death grin!

The rude and begrimed insurgents are raised by their terrible purposes
to a certain dignity. They are the avengers of time--the God-sent--the
righters of the world's wrongs--the punishers of the ineffably wicked.
They do not mean to destroy the world; they will reform it--redeem it.
They will make it a world where there shall be neither toil nor
oppression. But, poor fellows! their arms are more potent for evil than
their brains for good. They are omnipotent to destroy; they are
powerless to create.

But still the work of ruin and slaughter goes on. The

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

mighty city, with its ten million inhabitants, lies prostrate, chained,
helpless, at the mercy of the enraged *canaille*. The dogs have become
lions.

The people cannot comprehend it. They look around for their
defenders--the police, the soldiery. "Where are they? Will not this
dreadful nightmare pass away?" No; no; never--never. This is the
culmination--this is the climax--"the century's aloe flowers to-day."
These are "the grapes of wrath" which God has stored up for the day of
his vengeance; and now he is trampling them out, and this is the red
juice--look you!--that flows so thick and fast in the very gutters.

You were blind, you were callous, you were indifferent to the sorrows of
your kind. The cry of the poor did not touch you, and every pitiful
appeal wrung from human souls, every groan and sob and shriek of men and
women, and the little starving children--starving in body and starving
in brain--rose up and gathered like a great cloud around the throne of
God; and now, at last, in the fullness of time, it has burst and comes
down upon your wretched heads, a storm of thunderbolts and blood.

You had money, you had power, you had leisure, you had intelligence, you
possessed the earth; all things were possible unto you. Did you say to
one another: "These poor souls are our brethren. For them Christ died on
Calvary. What can we do to make their lives bright and happy?" No; no;
you cried out, "'On with the dance!' Let them go down into the
bottomless pit!"

And you smiled and said to one another, in the words of the first
murderer, when he lied to God: "Am I my brother's keeper?" Nay, you said
further to one another, "There is no God!" For you thought, if there was
one, surely He would not permit the injustice manifest in the world.
But, lo! He is here. Did you think to escape him? Did you think the
great Father of Cause and Effect--the All-knowing, the universe-building
God,--would pass you by?

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

As you sowed, so must you reap. Evil has but one child--Death! For
hundreds of years you have nursed and nurtured Evil. Do you complain if
her monstrous progeny is here now, with sword and torch? What else did
you expect? Did you think she would breed angels?

Your ancestors, more than two centuries ago, established and permitted
Slavery. What was the cry of the bondman to them? What the sobs of the
mother torn from her child--the wife from her husband--on the auction
block? Who among them cared for the lacerated bodies, the shameful and
hopeless lives? They were merry; they sang and they danced; and they
said, "Gods sleeps."

But a day came when there was a corpse at every fireside. And not the
corpse of the black stranger--the African--the slave;--but the corpses
of fair, bright-faced men; their cultured, their manly, their noble,
their best-loved. And, North and South, they sat, rocking themselves to
and fro, in the midst of the shards and ashes of desolation, crying
aloud for the lives that would come back to bless them never, nevermore.

God wipes out injustice with suffering; wrong with blood; sin with
death. You can no more get beyond the reach of His hand than you can
escape from the planet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. The Prince Gives His Last Bribe](cc35.md)
