[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge02) 
[Next](pge04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# A PROBLEM IN GREEK ETHICS.

### I.

FOR the student of sexual inversion, ancient Greece offers a wide field
for observation and reflection. Its importance has hitherto been
underrated by medical and legal writers on the subject, who do not seem
to be aware that here alone in history have we the example of a great
and highly-developed race not only tolerating homosexual passions, but
deeming them of spiritual value, and attempting to utilise them for the
benefit of society. Here, also, through the copious stores of literature
at our disposal, we can arrive at something definite regarding the
various forms assumed by these passions, when allowed free scope for
development in the midst of a refined and intellectual civilisation.
What the Greeks called paiderastia, or boy-love, was a phenomenon of one
of the most brilliant periods of human culture, in one of the most
highly organised and nobly active nations. It is the feature by which
Greek social life is most sharply distinguished from that of any other
people approaching the Hellenes in moral or mental distinction. To trace
the history of so remarkable a custom in their several communities, and
to ascertain, so far as this is possible, the ethical feeling of the
Greeks upon this subject, must be of service to the scientific
psychologist. It enables him to approach the subject from another point
of view than that usually adopted by modern jurists, psychiatrists,
writers on forensic medicine.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Homer had no knowledge of paiderastia--Achilles--Treatment of
Homer by the later Greeks](pge04)
