[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge03) 
[Next](pge05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II.

The first fact which the student has to notice is that in the Homeric
poems a modern reader finds no trace of this passion. It is true that
Achilles, the hero of the *Iliad*, is distinguished by his friendship
for Patroclus no less emphatically than Odysseus, the hero of the
*Odyssey*, by lifelong attachment to Penelope, and Hector by love for
Andromache. But in the delineation of the friendship of Achilles and
Patroclus there is nothing which

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

indicates the passionate relation of the lover and the beloved, as they
were afterwards recognised in Greek society. This is the more remarkable
because the love of Achilles for Patroclus added, in a later age of
Greek history, an almost religious sanction to the martial form of
paiderastia. In like manner the friendship of Idomeneus for Meriones,
and that of Achilles, after the death of Patroclus, for Antilochus, were
treated by the later Greeks as paiderastic. Yet, inasmuch as Homer gives
no warrant for this interpretation of the tales in question, we are
justified in concluding that homosexual relations were not prominent in
the so-called heroic age of Greece. Had it formed a distinct feature of
the society depicted in the Homeric poems, there is no reason to suppose
that their authors would have abstained from delineating it. We shall
see that Pindar, Æschylus and Sophocles, the poets of an age when
paiderastia was prevalent, spoke unreservedly upon the subject.

Impartial study of the *Iliad* leads us to the belief that the Greeks of
the historic period interpreted the friendship of Achilles and Patroclus
in accordance with subsequently developed customs. The Homeric poems
were the Bible of the Greeks, and formed the staple of their education;
nor did they scruple to wrest the sense of the original, reading, like
modern Bibliolaters, the sentiments and passions of a later age into the
text. Of this process a good example is afforded by Æschines in the
oration against Timarchus. While discussing this very question of the
love of Achilles, he says: "He, indeed, conceals their love, and does
not give its proper name to the affection between them, judging that the
extremity of their fondness would be intelligible to instructed men
among his audience." As an instance, the orator proceeds to quote the
passage in which Achilles laments that he will not be able to fulfil his
promise to Menœtius by bringing Patroclus home to Opus. He is here
clearly introducing the sentiments of an Athenian hoplite who had taken
the boy he loved to Syracuse and seen him slain there.

Homer stood in a double relation to the historical Greeks. On the one
hand, he determined their development by the influence of his ideal
characters. On the other, he underwent from them interpretations which
varied with the spirit of each successive century. He created the
national temperament, but received in turn the influx of new thoughts
and emotions occurring in the course of its expansion. It is, therefore,
highly important, on the threshold of this inquiry, to determine the
nature of that Achilleian friendship to which the panegyrists and
apologists of the custom make such frequent reference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Romance of Achilles and Patroclus](pge05)
