[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge01) 
[Next](pge03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# CONTENTS.

--------:o:--------

I. INTRODUCTION: Method of treating the subject.

II\. Homer had no knowledge of paiderastia--Achilles--Treatment of Homer
by the later Greeks.

III\. The Romance of Achilles and Patroclus.

IV\. The heroic ideal of masculine love.

V. Vulgar paiderastia--How introduced into Hellas--Crete--Laius--The
myth of Ganymede.

VI\. Discrimination of two loves, heroic and vulgar. The mixed sort is
the paiderastia defined as Greek love in this essay.

VII\. The intensity of paiderastia as an emotion, and its quality.

VIII\. Myths of paiderastia.

IX\. Semi-legendary tales of love--Harmodius and Aristogeiton.

X. Dorian Customs--Sparta and Crete--Conditions of Dorian life--Moral
quality of Dorian love--Its final degeneracy--Speculations on the early
Dorian *Ethos*--Bœotians' customs--The sacred band--Alexander the
Great--Customs of Elis and Megara--*Hybris*--Ionia.

XI\. Paiderastia in poetry of the lyric age. Theognis and
Kurnus--Solon--Ibycus, the male Sappho--Anacreon and Smerdies--Drinking
songs--Pindar and Theoxenos--Pindar's lofty conception of adolescent
beauty.

XII\. Paiderastia upon the Attic stage--*Myrmidones* of
Æschylus--*Achilles' lovers*, and *Niobe* of Sophocles--The *Chrysippus*
of Euripides--Stories about Sophocles--Illustrious Greek paiderasts.

XIII\. Recapitulation of points--Quotation from the speech of Pausanias
on love in Plato's *Symposium*--Observations on this speech. Position of
women at Athens--Attic notion of marriage as a duty--The institution of
*Paidagogi*--Life of a Greek boy--Aristophanes' *Clouds*--Lucian's
*Amores*--The Palæstra--The *Lysis*--The *Charmides*--Autolycus in
Xenophon's *Symposium*--Speech of Critobulus on beauty and
love--Importance of gymnasia in relation to paiderastia--Statues of
Erôs--Cicero's opinions--Laws concerning the gymnasia--Graffiti on
walls--Love-poems and panegyrics--Presents to boys--Shops and *mauvais
lieux*--Paiderastic *Hetaireia*--Brothels--Phædon and Agathocles. Street
brawls about boys--*Lysias in Simonem*.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

XIV\. Distinctions drawn by Attic law and custom--*Chrestoi
Pornoi*--Presents and money--Atimia of freemen who had sold their
bodies--The definition of *Misthosis*--*Eromenos*, *Hetairekos*,
*Peporneumenos*, distinguished--*Æschines against Timarchus*--General
conclusion as to Attic feeling about honourable paiderastia.

XV\. Platonic doctrine on Greek love--The asceticism of the
*Laws*--Socrates--His position defined by Maximus Tyrius--His science of
erotics--The theory of the *Phædrus*: erotic *Mania*--The mysticism of
the *Symposium*: love of beauty--Points of contact between Platonic
paiderastia and chivalrous love: *Mania* and Joie: Dante's *Vita
Nuova*--Platonist and Petrarchist--Gibbon on the "thin device" of the
Athenian philosophers--Testimony of Lucian, Plutarch, Cicero.

XVI\. Greek liberty and Greek love extinguished at Chæronea--The
Idyllists--Lucian's *Amores*--Greek poets never really gross--*Mousa
Paidiké*--Philostratus' *Epistolai Erotikai*--Greek Fathers on
paiderastia.

XVII\. The deep root struck by paiderastia in
Greece--Climate--Gymnastics--Syssitia--Military life-Position of Women:
inferior culture; absence from places of resort--Greek leisure.

XVIII\. Relation of paiderastia to the fine arts--Greek sculpture wholly
and healthily human--Ideals of female deities--Paiderastia did not
degrade the imagination of the race--Psychological analysis underlying
Greek mythology--The psychology of love--Greek mythology fixed before
Homer--Opportunities enjoyed by artists for studying women--Anecdotes
about artists--The æsthetic temperament of the Greeks, unbiassed by
morality and religion, encouraged paiderastia--*Hora*--Physical and
moral qualities admired, by a Greek--Greek ethics were
esthetic--*Sophrosyne*--Greek religion was æsthetic--No notion of
Jehovah--Zeus and Ganymede.

XIX\. Homosexuality among Greek women--Never attained to the same
dignity as paiderastia.

XX\. Greek love did not exist at Rome--Christianity--Chivalry--The
*modus vivendi* of the modern world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Introduction: Method of treating the subject](pge03)
