[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge11) 
[Next](pge13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X.

A considerable majority of the legends which have been related in the
preceding section are Dorian, and the Dorians gave the earliest and most
marked encouragement to Greek love. Nowhere else, indeed, except among
the Dorians, who were an essentially military race, living like an army
of occupation in the countries they had seized, herding together in
barracks and at public messes, and submitting to martial drill and
discipline, do we meet with paiderastia developed as an institution. In
Crete and Lacedæmon it became a potent instrument of education. What I
have to say, in the first instance on this matter is derived almost
entirely from C. O. Müller's *Dorians*, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) to which work I refer my readers for the
authorities cited in illustration of each detail. Plato says that the
law of Lycurgus in respect to love was *Poikiles*, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) by which he means that it allowed the
custom under certain restrictions. It would appear that the lover was
called Inspirer, at Sparta, while the youth he loved was named Hearer.
These local phrases sufficiently indicate the relation which subsisted
between the pair. The lover taught, the hearer learned; and so from man
to man was handed down the tradition of heroism, the peculiar tone and
temper of the state to which, in particular among the Greeks, the
Dorians clung with obstinate pertinacity. Xenophon distinctly states
that love was maintained among the Spartans with a view to education;
and when we consider the customs of the state, by which boys were
separated early from their homes and the influences of the family were
almost wholly wanting, it is not difficult to understand the importance
of the paiderastic institution. The Lacedæmonian lover might represent
his friend in the Assembly. He was answerable for his good conduct, and
stood before him as a pattern of manliness, courage, and prudence. Of
the nature of his teaching we may form some notion from the precepts
addressed by the Megarian Theognis to the youth Kurnus. In battle the
lovers fought side by side.,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

and it is worthy of notice that before entering into an engagement the
Spartans sacrificed to Erôs. It was reckoned a disgrace if a youth found
no man to be his lover. Consequently we find that the most illustrious
Spartans are mentioned by their biographers in connection with their
comrades. Agesilaus heard Lysander; Archidamus, his son loved Cleonymus;
Cleomenes III. was the hearer of Xenares and the inspirer of Panteus.
The affection of Pausanias, on the other hand, for the boy Argilus, who
betrayed him according to the account of Thucydides, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) must not be reckoned among these nobler
loves. In order to regulate the moral conduct of both parties, Lycurgus
made it felony, punishable with death or exile, for the lover to desire
the person of a boy in lust; and, on the other hand, it was accounted
exceedingly disgraceful for the younger to meet the advances of the
elder with a view to gain. Honest affection and manly self-respect were
exacted on both sides; the bond of union implied no more of sensuality
than subsists between a father and a son, a brother and a brother. At
the same time great license of intercourse was permitted. Cicero,
writing long after the great age of Greece, but relying probably upon
sources to which we have no access, asserts that "Lacedæmonii ipsi cum
omnia concedunt in amore juvenum *præter stuprum* tenui sane muro
dissæpiunt id quod excipiunt: *complexus enim concubitusque
permittunt*." <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) "The Lacedemonians,
while they permit all things except outrage in the love of youths,
certainly distinguish the forbidden by a thin wall of partition from the
sanctioned, for they allow embraces and a common couch to lovers."

In Crete the paiderastic institutions were even more elaborate than at
Sparta. The lover was called *Philetor*, and the beloved one *Kleinos*.
When a man wished to attach to himself a youth in the recognised bonds
of friendship, he took him away from his home, with a pretence of force,
but not without the connivance, in most cases, of his friends. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36) For two months the pair lived together
among the hills, hunting and fishing. Then the Philetor gave gifts to
the youth, and suffered him to return to his relatives, If the Kleinos
(illustrious or laudable) had received insult or ill-treatment during
the probationary weeks, he now could get redress at law. If he was
satisfied with the conduct of his would-be comrade, he changed his title
from *Kleinos* to *Parastates* (comrade and bystander in the ranks of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

battle and life), returned to the Philetor, and lived thenceforward in
close bonds of public intimacy with him.

The primitive simplicity and regularity of these customs make it appear
strange to modern minds; nor is it easy to understand how they should
ever have been wholly free from blame. Yet we must remember the
influences which prevalent opinion and ancient tradition both contribute
toward preserving a delicate sense of honour under circumstances of
apparent difficulty. The careful reading of one Life by Plutarch, that,
for instance, of Cleomenes or that of Agis, will have more effect in
presenting the realities of Dorian existence to our imagination than any
amount of speculative disquisition. Moreover, a Dorian was exposed to
almost absolute publicity. He had no chance of hiding from his
fellow-citizens the secrets of his private life. It was not, therefore,
till the social and political complexion of the whole nation became
corrupt that the institutions just described encouraged
profligacy. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) That the Spartans and
the Cretans degenerated from their primitive ideal is manifest from the
severe critiques of the philosophers. Plato, while passing a deliberate
censure on the Cretans for the introduction of paiderastia into
Greece, <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) remarks that *syssitia*, or
meals in common, and *gymnasia* are favourable to the perversion of the
passions. Aristotle, in a similar argument, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39) points out that the Dorian habits had a
direct tendency to check the population by encouraging the love of boys
and by separating women from the society of men. An obscure passage
quoted from Hagnon by Athenæus might also be cited to prove that the
Greeks at large had formed no high opinion of Spartan manners. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[4](#fn_40) But the most convincing testimony is to be
found in the Greek language: "to do like the Laconians, to have
connection in Laconian way, to do like the Cretans," tell their own
tale, especially when we compare these phrases with, "to do like the
Corinthians, the Lesbians, the Siphnians, the Phœnicians," and other
verbs formed to indicate the vices localised in separate districts.

Up to this point I have been content to follow the notices of Dorian
institutions which are scattered up and down the later Greek authors,
and which have been collected by C. O. Müller.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I have not attempted to draw definite
conclusions, or to speculate upon the influence which the Dorian section
of the Hellenic family may have exercised in developing paiderastia. To
do so now will be legitimate, always remembering that what we actually
know about the Dorians is confined to the historic period, and that the
tradition respecting their early customs is derived from second-hand
authorities.

It has frequently occurred to my mind that the mixed type of paiderastia
which I have named Greek Love took its origin in Doris. Homer, who knew
nothing about the passion as it afterwards existed, drew a striking
picture of masculine affection in Achilles. And Homer, I may add, was
not a native of northern Greece. Whoever he was, or whoever they were,
the poet, or the poets, we call Homer belonged to the south-east of the
Ægean. Homer, then, may have been ignorant of paiderastia. Yet
friendship occupies the first place in his hero's heart, while only the
second is reserved for sexual emotion. Now Achilles came from Phthia,
itself a portion of that mountain region to which Doris belonged. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) Is it unnatural to conjecture that the
Dorians, in their migration to Lacedæmon and Crete, the recognised
headquarters of the custom, carried a tradition of heroic paiderastia
along with them? Is it unreasonable to surmise that here, if anywhere in
Hellas, the custom existed from prehistoric times? If so, the
circumstances of their invasion would have fostered the transformation
of this tradition into a tribal institution. They went forth, a band of
warriors and pirates, to cross the sea in boats, and to fight their way
along the hills and plains of Southern Greece. The dominions they had
conquered with their swords they occupied like soldiers. The camp became
their country, and for a long period of time they literally lived upon
the bivouac. Instead of a city-state, with its manifold complexities of
social life, they were reduced to the narrow limits and the simple
conditions of a roving horde. Without sufficiency of women, without the
sanctities of established domestic life, inspired by the memory of
Achilles, and venerating their ancestor Herakles, the Dorian warriors
had special opportunity for elevating comradeship to the rank of an
enthusiasm. The incidents of emigration into a distant country-perils of
the sea, passages of rivers and mountains, assaults of fortresses and
cities, landings on a hostile shore, night-vigils by the side of blazing
beacons, foragings for food, picquet services in the front of watchful
foes-involved adventures

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

capable of shedding the lustre of romance on friendship. These
circumstances, by bringing the virtues of sympathy with the weak,
tenderness for the beautiful, protection for the young, together with
corresponding qualities of gratitude, self-devotion and admiring
attachment, into play, may have tended to cement unions between man and
man no less firm than that of marriage. On such connections a wise
captain would have relied for giving strength to his battalion, and for
keeping alive the flame of enterprise and daring. Fighting and foraging
in company, sharing the same wayside board and heath-strewn bed,
rallying to the comrade's voice in onset, relying on the comrade's
shield when fallen, these men learned the meanings of the words
*Philetor* and *Parastates*. To be loved was honourable, for it implied
being worthy to be died for. To love was glorious, since it pledged the
lover to self-sacrifice in case of need. In these conditions the
paiderastic passion may have well combined manly virtue with carnal
appetite, adding such romantic sentiment as some stern men reserve
within their hearts for women. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) A
motto might be chosen for a lover of this early Dorian type from the
Æolic poem ascribed to Theocritus: "And made me tender from the iron man
I used to be."

In course of time, when the Dorians had settled down upon their
conquered territories, and when the passions which had shown their more
heroic aspect during a period of warfare came, in a period of idleness,
to call for methods of restraint, then the discrimination between
honourable and base forms of love, to which Plato pointed as a feature
of the Dorian institutions, took place. It is also more than merely
probable that in Crete, where these institutions were the most precisely
regulated, the Dorian immigrants came into contact with Phœnician vices,
the repression of which required the adoption of a strict code. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) In this way paiderastia, considered as a
mixed custom, partly martial, partly luxurious, recognised by public
opinion and controlled by law, obtained among the Dorian Tribes, and
spread from them throughout the states of Hellas. Relics of numerous
semi-savage habits--thefts of food, ravishment as a prelude to marriage,
and so forth--indicate in like manner the survival among the Dorians of
primitive tribal institutions.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

It will be seen that the conclusion to which I have been drawn by the
foregoing considerations is that the mixed form of paiderastia called by
me in this essay Greek love owed its peculiar quality, what Plato called
its intricacy of "laws and customs," to two diverse strains of
circumstances harmonised in the Greek temperament. Its military and
enthusiastic elements were derived from the primitive conditions of the
Dorians during their immigration into Southern Greece. Its refinements
of sensuality and sanctified impurity are referable to contact with
Phoenician civilisation. The specific form it assumed among the Dorians
of the historic period, equally removed from military freedom and from
Oriental luxury, can be ascribed to the operation of that organising,
moulding and assimilating spirit which we recognise as Hellenic.

The position thus stated is, unfortunately, speculative rather than
demonstrable; and in order to establish the reasonableness of the
speculation, it would be natural at this point to introduce some account
of paiderastia as it exists in various savage tribes, if their customs
could be seen to illustrate the Doric phase of Greek love. This,
however, is not the case. Study of Mr. Herbert Spencer's Tables, and of
Bastian's *Der Mensch in der Geschichte* (vol. iii. pp. 304-323),
together with the facts collected by travellers among the North American
Indians, and the mass of curious information supplied by Rosenbaum in
his *Geschichte der Lust-seuche im Alterthume*, makes it clear to my
mind that the unisexual vices of barbarians follow, not the type of
Greek paiderastia, but that of the Scythian disease of effeminacy,
described by Herodotus and Hippocrates as something essentially foreign
and non-Hellenic. In all these cases, whether we regard the Scythian
impotent effeminates, the North American Bardashes, the Tsecats of
Madagascar, the Cordaches of the Canadian Indians, and similar classes
among Californian Indians, natives of Venezuela, and so forth--the
characteristic point is that effeminate males renounce their sex, assume
female clothes, and live either in promiscuous concubinage with the men
of the tribe or else in marriage with chosen persons. This abandonment
of the masculine attributes and habits, this assumption of feminine
duties and costume, would have been abhorrent to the Doric custom.
Precisely similar effeminacies were recognised as pathological by
Herodotus, to whom Greek paiderastia was familiar. The distinctive
feature of Dorian comradeship was that it remained on both sides
masculine, tolerating no sort of softness. For similar reasons, what we
know about the prevalence of sodomy among the primitive peoples of
Mexico, Peru and Yucatan, and

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

almost all half-savage nations, <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44)
throws little light upon the subject of the present inquiry. Nor do we
gain anything of importance from the semi-religious practices of
Japanese Bonzes or Egyptian priests. Such facts, taken in connection
with abundant modern. experience of what are called unnatural vices,
only prove the universality of unisexual indulgence in all parts of the
world and under all conditions of society. Considerable psychological
interest attaches to the study of these sexual aberrations. It is also
true that we detect in them the germ or raw material of a custom which
the Dorians moralised or developed after a specific fashion; but nowhere
do we find an analogue to their peculiar institutions. It was just that
effort to moralise and adapt to social use a practice which has
elsewhere been excluded in the course of civil growth, or has been
allowed to linger half-acknowledged as a remnant of more primitive
conditions, or has re-appeared in the corruption of society; it was just
this effort to elevate paiderastia according to the aesthetic standard
of Greek ethics which constituted its distinctive quality in Hellas. We
are obliged, in fact, to separate this, the true Hellenic manifestation
of the paiderastic passion, from the effeminacies, brutalities and gross
sensualities which can be noticed alike in imperfectly civilised and in
luxuriously corrupt communities.

Before leaving this part of the subject, I must repeat that what I have
suggested regarding the intervention of the Dorians in creating the type
of Greek love is a pure speculation. If it has any value, that is due to
the fixed and regulated forms which paiderastic institutions displayed
at a very early date in Crete and Sparta, and also to the remnants of
savage customs embedded in them. It depends to a certain extent also
upon the absence of paiderastia in Homer. But on this point something
still remains to be said. Our Attic authorities certainly regarded the
Homeric poems as canonical books, decisive for the culture of the first
stage of Hellenic history. Yet it is clear that Homer refined Greek
mythology, while many of the cruder elements of that mythology survived
from pre-Homeric times in local cults and popular religious observances.
We know, moreover, that a body of non-Homeric writings, commonly called
the cyclic poems, existed by the side of Homer, some of the material of
which is preserved to us by dramatists, lyrists, historians, antiquaries
and anecdotists. It is not impossible that

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

this so-called cyclical literature contained paiderastic elements, which
were eliminated, like the grosser forms of myth in the Homeric
poems. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) If this be conceded, we might
be led to conjecture that paiderastia was a remnant of ancient savage
habits, ignored by Homer, but preserved by tradition in the race. Given
the habit, the Greeks were certainly capable of carrying it on without
shame. We ought to resist the temptation to seek a high and noble origin
for all Greek institutions. But there remains the fact that, however
they acquired the habit, whether from North Dorian customs antecedent to
Homer or from conditions of experience subsequent tot the Homeric age,
the Greeks gave it a dignity and an emotional superiority which is
absent in the annals of barbarian institutions. Instead of abandoning it
as part of the obsolete lumber of their prehistoric origins, they chose
to elaborate it into the region of romance and ideality. And this; they
did in spite of Homer's ignorance of the passion or of his deliberate
reticence. Whatever view, therefore, we may take about Homer's silence,
and about the possibility of [paiderastia](errata.htm#0) occurring in
lost poems of the cyclic type, or, lastly, about its probable survival
in the people from an age of savagery, we are bound to regard its
systematical development among the Dorians as a fact of paramount
significance.

In that passage of the *Symposium* <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46)
where Plato notices the Spartan law of love as *Poikilos*, he speaks
with disapprobation of the Bœotians, who were not restrained by custom
and opinion within the same strict limits. Yet it should here be noted
that the military aspect of Greek love in the historic period was
nowhere more distinguished than at Thebes. Epaminsondas was a notable
boy-lover; and the names of his beloved Asopichus and Cephisodorus, are
mentioned by Plutarch. <span id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_47) They died,
and were buried with him at Mantinea. The paiderastic legend of Herakles
and Iolaus was localised in Bœotia; and the lovers, Diodes and
Philolaus, who gave laws to Thebes, directly encouraged those masculine
attachments, which had their origin in the Palæstra. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[4](#fn_48) The practical outcome of these national
institutions in the chief town of Bœotia was the formation of the
so-called Sacred Band, or Band of Lovers, upon whom Pelopidas relied in
his most perilous operations. Plutarch relates that they were enrolled,
in the first instance, by Gorgidas, the rank and file of the regiment
being composed of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

young men bound together by affection. Report goes that they were never
beaten till the battle of Chæronea. At the end of that day, fatal to the
liberties of Hellas, Philip of Macedon went forth to view the slain; and
when he "came to that place where the three hundred that fought his
phalanx lay dead together, he wondered, and understanding that it was
the band of lovers, he shed tears, and said, 'Perish any man who
suspects that these men either did or suffered anything that was
base.'" <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)As at all the other
turning-points of Greek history, so at this, too, there is something
dramatic and eventful: Thebes was the last stronghold of Greek freedom;
the Sacred Band contained the pith and flower of her army; these lovers
had fallen to a man, like the Spartans of Leonidas at Thermopylæ,
pierced by the lances of the Macedonian phalanx; then, when the day was
over and the dead were silent, Philip, the victor in that fight, shed
tears when he beheld their serried ranks, pronouncing himself therewith
the fittest epitaph which could have been inscribed upon their stelë by
a Hellene.

At Chæronea, Greek liberty, Greek heroism, and Greek love, properly so
called, expired. It is not unworthy of notice that the son of the
conqueror, young Alexander, endeavoured to revive the tradition of
Achilleian friendship. This lad, born in the decay of Greek liberty,
took conscious pleasure in enacting the part of a Homeric hero on the
altered stage of Hellas and of Asia, with somewhat tawdry histrionic
pomp. <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50) Homer was his invariable
companion upon his marches; in the Troad he paid special honour to the
tomb of Achilles, running naked races round the barrow in honour of the
hero, and expressing the envy which he felt for one who had so true a
friend and so renowned a poet to record his deeds. The historians of his
life relate that, while he was indifferent to women, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[3](#fn_51) he was madly given to the love of males.
This the story of his sorrow for Hephaistion sufficiently confirms. A
kind of spiritual atavism moved the Macedonian conqueror to assume on
the vast Bactrian plain the outward trappings of Achilles
Agonistes. <span id="fr_52"></span>[4](#fn_52)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Returning from this digression upon Alexander's almost hysterical
archaism, it should next be noticed that Plato includes the people of
Elis in the censure which he passes upon the Bœotians. He accuses the
Eleans of adopting customs which permitted youths to gratify their
lovers without further distinction of age, or quality, or opportunity.
In like manner Maximus Tyrius distinguishes between the customs of Crete
and Elis: "While I find the laws of the Cretans excellent, I must
condemn those of Elis for their license." <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) Elis, <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54)
like Megara, instituted a contest for beauty among youths; and it is
significant that the Megarians were not uncommonly accused of *Hybris*
or wanton lust, by Greek writers. Both the Eleans and the Megarians may
therefore reasonably be considered to have exceeded the Greek standard
of taste in the amount of sensual indulgence which they openly
acknowledged. In Ionia and other regions of Hellas exposed to Oriental
influences, Plato says that paiderastia was accounted a disgrace. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[3](#fn_55) At the same time he couples with
paiderastia in this place both addiction to gymnastic exercise and to
philosophical studies, pointing out that despotism was always hostile to
high thoughts and haughty customs. The meaning of the passage,
therefore, seems to be that the true type of Greek love had no chance of
unfolding itself freely on the shores of Asia Minor. Of paiderastic
*Malakia*, or effeminacy, there is here no question, else Plato would
probably have made Pausanias use other language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[13:1](pge11.htm#fr_31) See, for example,
*Æschines against Timarchus*, 59.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[13:2](pge12.htm#fr_32) Trans. by Sir G. C.
Lewis, vol. ii. pp. 306-313.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[13:3](pge12.htm#fr_33) *Symp*. 182 A.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[14:1](pge12.htm#fr_34) i. 132.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[14:2](pge12.htm#fr_35) *De Rep*., iv. 4.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[14:3](pge12.htm#fr_36) I need hardly point out
the parallel between this custom and the marriage customs of
half-civilised communities.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[15:1](pge12.htm#fr_37) The general opinion of
the Greeks with regard to the best type of Dorian love is well expressed
by Maximus Tyrius, *Dissert*., xxvi. 8. "It is esteemed a disgrace to a
Cretan youth to have no lover. It is a disgrace for a Cretan youth to
tamper with the boy he loves. O custom, beautifully blent of
self-restraint and passion! The man of Sparta loves the lad of
Lacedæmon, but loves him only as one loves a fair statue; and many love
one, and one loves many."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[15:2](pge12.htm#fr_38) *Laws*, i. 636.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[15:3](pge12.htm#fr_39) *Pol*, ii. 7, 4.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[15:4](pge12.htm#fr_40) Lib. 13,602, E.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[16:1](pge12.htm#fr_41) It is not unimportant to
note in this connection that paiderastia of no ignoble type still
prevails among the Albanian mountaineers.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[17:1](pge12.htm#fr_42) The foregoing attempt to
reconstruct a possible environment for the Dorian form of paiderastia
is, of course, wholly imaginative. Yet it receives certain support from
what we know about the manners of the Albanian Mountaineers and the
nomadic Tartar tribes. Aristotle remarks upon the Paiderastic customs of
the Kelts, who in his times were immigrant.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[17:2](pge12.htm#fr_43) See above, Section V.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[19:1](pge12.htm#fr_44) It appears from the
reports of travellers that this form of passion is not common among
those African tribes who have not been corrupted by Mussulmans or
Europeans.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[20:1](pge12.htm#fr_45) It may be plausibly
argued that Æschylus drew the subject of his *Myrmidones* from some such
non-Homeric epic. See below, Section XII.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[20:2](pge12.htm#fr_46) 182 A.. Cp. Laws, i.
636.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[20:3](pge12.htm#fr_47) Eroticus, xvii. p. 761,
34

<span id="fn_48"></span>[20:4](pge12.htm#fr_48) See Plutarch,
*Pelopidas*. Clough, vol. ii. p. 2 19.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[21:1](pge12.htm#fr_49) Clough, as quoted above,
p. 219.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[21:2](pge12.htm#fr_50) The connection of the
royal family of Macedon by descent with the Æacidæ, and the early
settlement of the Dorians in Macedonia, are noticeable.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[21:3](pge12.htm#fr_51) Cf. Athenæus, x. 435.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[21:4](pge12.htm#fr_52) Hadrian in Rome, at a
later period, revived the Greek tradition, with even more of caricature.
His military ardour, patronage of art, and for Antinous seem to hang
together.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[22:1](pge12.htm#fr_53) *Dissert*., xxvi. 8.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[22:2](pge12.htm#fr_54) See Athen., xiii. 609,
F. The prize was armour and the wreath of myrtle.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[22:3](pge12.htm#fr_55) *Symp*. 182, B. In the
*Laws*, however, he mentions the Barbarians as corrupting Greek morality
in this respect. We have here a further proof that it was the noble type
of love which the Barbarians discouraged. For *Malakia* they had no
dislike.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Paiderastia in poetry of the lyric age](pge13)
