[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge18) 
[Next](pge20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVII.

The transmutation of Hellas proper into part of the Roman Empire, and
the intrusion of Stoicism and Christianity into the sphere of Hellenic
thought and feeling, mark the end of the Greek age. It still remains,
however, to consider the relation of this passion to the character of
the race, and to determine its influence.

In the fifth section of this essay I asserted that it is now impossible
to ascertain whether the Greeks derived paiderastia from any of the
surrounding nations, and if so, from which. Homer's silence makes it
probable that the contact of Hellenic with Phoenician traders in the
post-heroic period led to the adoption by the Greek race of a custom
which they speedily assimilated and stamped with an Hellenic character.
At the same time I suggested in the tenth section that paiderastia, in
its more enthusiastic and martial form, may have been developed within
the very sanctuary of Greek national existence by the Dorians, matured
in the course of their migrations, and systematised after their
settlement in Crete and Sparta. That the Greeks themselves regarded
Crete as the classic ground of paiderastia favours either theory, and
suggests a fusion of them both; for the geographical position of this
island made it the meeting-place of Hellenes with the Asiatic races,
while it was also one of the earliest Dorian acquisitions.

When we come to ask why this passion struck roots so deep into the very
heart and brain of the Greek nation, we must reject the favourite
hypothesis of climate. Climate is, no doubt, powerful to a great extent
in determining the complexion of sexual morality; yet, as regards
paiderastia we have abundant proof that nations of the North and of the
South have, according to circumstances quite [independent](errata.htm#4)
of climatic conditions, been

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

both equally addicted and equally averse to this habit. The
Etruscan, <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) the Chinese, the ancient
Keltic tribes, the Tartar hordes of Timour Khan, the Persians under
Moslem rule--races sunk in the sloth of populous cities as well as the
nomadic children of the Asian steppes, have all acquired a notoriety at
least equal to that of the Greeks. The only difference between these
people and the Greeks in respect to paiderastia is that everything which
the Greek genius touched acquired a portion of its distinction, so that
what in semi-barbarous society may be ignored as vice, in Greece demands
attention as a phase of the spiritual life of a world-historic nation.

Like climate, ethnology must also be eliminated. It is only a
superficial philosophy of history which is satisfied with the
nomenclature of Semitic, Aryan, and so forth; which imagines that
something is gained for, the explanation of a complex psychological
problem when hereditary affinities have been demonstrated. The deeps of
national personality are far more abysmal than this. Granting that
climate and descent are elements of great importance, the religious and
moral principles, the æsthetic apprehensions, and the customs which
determine the character of a race leave always something still to be
analysed. In dealing with Greek paiderastia, we are far more likely to
reach a probable solution if we confine our attention to the specific
social conditions which fostered the growth of this passion in Greece,
and to the general habit of mind which permitted its evolution out of
the common stuff of humanity, than if we dilate at ease upon the climate
of the Ægean, or discuss the ethnical complexion of the Hellenic stock.
In others words, it was the Pagan view of human life and duty which gave
scope to paiderastia, while certain special Greek customs aided its
development.

The Greeks themselves, quoted more than once above, have put us on the
right track in this inquiry. However paiderastia began in Hellas, it was
encouraged by gymnastics and syssitia. Youths and boys engaged together
in athletic exercises, training their bodies to the highest point of
physical attainment, growing critical about the points and proportions
of the human form, lived of necessity in an atmosphere of mutual
attention. Young men could not be insensible to the grace of boys in
whom the bloom of beauty was unfolding. Boys could not fail to admire
the strength and goodliness of men displayed in the comeliness of
perfected development. Having exercised together in the
wrestling-ground, the same young men and boys

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

consorted at the common tables. Their talk fell naturally upon feats of
[strength](errata.htm#5) and training; nor was it unnatural, in the
absence of a powerful religious prohibition, that love should spring
from such discourse and intercourse.

The nakedness which Greek custom permitted in gymnastic games and some
religious rites no doubt contributed to the erotic force of masculine
passion; and the history of their feeling upon this point deserves
notice. Plato, in the *Republic* (452), observes that "not long ago the
Greeks were of the opinion, which is still generally received among the
barbarians, that the sight of a naked man was ridiculous and unseemly."
He goes on to mention the Cretans and the Lacedæmonians as the
institutors of naked games. To these conditions may he added dances in
public, the ritual of gods like Erôs, ceremonial processions, and
contests for the prize of beauty.

The famous passage in the first book of Thucydides (cap. vi.)
illustrates the same point. While describing the primitive culture of
the Hellenes he thinks it worth while to mention that the Spartans, who
first stripped themselves for running and wrestling, abandoned the
girdle which it was usual to wear around the loins. He sees in this
habit one of the strongest points of distinction between the Greeks and
barbarians. Herodotus insists upon the same point (book i. 10), which is
further confirmed by the verse of Ennius: Flagitii, &c.

The nakedness which Homer (Iliad, xxii. 66) and Tyrtæus (i. 21)
describes as shameful and unseemly is that of an old man. Both poets
seem to imply that a young man's naked body is beautiful even in death.

We have already seen that paiderastia as it existed in early Hellas was
a martial institution, and that it never wholly lost its virile
character. This suggests the consideration of another class of
circumstances which were in the highest degree conducive to its free
development. The Dorians, to begin with, lived like regiments of
soldiers in barracks. The duty of training the younger men was thrown
upon the elder; so that the close relations thus established in a race
which did not positively discountenance the love of male for male rather
tended actively to encourage it. Nor is it difficult to understand why
the romantic emotions in such a society were more naturally aroused by
male companions than by women. Matrimony was not a matter of elective
affinity between two persons seeking to spend their lives agreeably and
profitably in common, so much as an institution

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

used by the state for raising vigorous recruits for the national army.
All that is known about the Spartan marriage customs, taken together
with Plato's speculations about a community of wives, proves this
conclusively. It followed that the relation of the sexes to each other
was both more formal and more simple than it is with us; the natural and
the political purposes of cohabitation were less veiled by those
personal and emotional considerations which play so large a part in
modern life. There was less scope for the emergence of passionate
enthusiasm between men and women, while the full conditions of a
spiritual attachment, solely determined by reciprocal inclination, were
only to be found in comradeship. In the wrestling-ground, at the common
tables, in the ceremonies of religion, at the Pan-hellenic games, in the
camp, in the hunting-field, on the benches of the council chamber, and
beneath the porches of the Agora, men were all in all unto each other.
Women meanwhile kept the house at home, gave birth to babies, and reared
children till such time as the state thought fit to undertake their
training. It is, moreover, well known that the age at which boys were
[separated](errata.htm#6) from their mothers was tender. Thenceforth
they lived with persons of their own sex; their expanding feelings were
confined within the sphere of masculine experience until the age arrived
when marriage had to be considered in the light of a duty to the
commonwealth. How far this tended to influence the growth of sentiment
and to determine its quality may be imagined.

In the foregoing paragraph I have restricted my attention almost wholly
to the Dorians: but what has just been said about the circumstance of
their social life suggests a further consideration regarding paiderastia
at large among the Greeks, which takes rank with the weightiest of all.
The peculiar status of Greek women is a subject surrounded with
difficulty; yet no one can help feeling that the idealisation of
masculine love, which formed so prominent a feature of Greek life in the
historic period, was intimately connected with the failure of the race
to give their proper sphere in society to women. The Greeks themselves
were not directly conscious of this fact; nor can I remember any passage
in which a Greek has suggested that boy-love, flourished precisely upon
the special ground which had been wrested from the right domain of the
other sex. Far in advance of the barbarian tribes around them, they
could not well discern the defects of their own civilisation; nor was it
to be expected that they should have

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

anticipated that exaltation of the love of women into a semi-religious
cult which was the later product of chivalrous Christianity. We from the
standpoint of a more fully organised society, detect their errors and
pronounce that paiderastia was a necessary consequence of their unequal
social culture; nor do we fail to notice that just as paiderastia was a
post-Homeric intrusion into Greek life, so women, after the age of the
Homeric poems, suffered a corresponding depression in the social scale.
In the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, and in the tragedies which deal with
the heroic age, they play a part of importance for which the actual
conditions of historic Hellas offered no opportunities.

It was at Athens that the social disadvantages of women told with
greatest force; and this perhaps may help to explain the philosophic
idealisation of boy-love among the Athenians. To talk familiarly with
free women on the deepest subjects, to treat them as intellectual
companions, or to choose them as associates in undertakings of political
moment, seems never to have entered the mind of an Athenian. Women were
conspicuous by their absence from all places of resort--from the
palæstra, the theatre, the Agora, Pnyx, the law-court, the symposium;
and it was here, and here alone, that the spiritual energies of the men
expanded. Therefore, as the military ardour of the Dorians naturally
associated itself with paiderastia, so the characteristic passion of the
Athenians for culture took the same direction. The result in each case
was a highly wrought psychical condition, which, however alien to our
instincts, must be regarded as an exaltation of the race above its
common human needs--as a manifestation of fervid, highly pitched
emotional enthusiasm.

It does not follow from the facts which I have just discussed that,
either at Athens or at Sparta, women were excluded from an important
position in the home, or that the family in Greece was not the sphere of
female influence more active than the extant fragments of Greek
literature reveal to us. The women of Sophocles and Euripides, and the
noble ladies described by Plutarch, warn us to be cautious in our
conclusions on this topic. The fact, however, remains that in Greece, as
in mediæval Europe, the home was not regarded as the proper sphere for
enthusiastic passion: both paiderastia and chivalry ignored the family,
while the latter even set the matrimonial tie at nought. It is therefore
precisely at this point of the family, regarded as a comparatively
undeveloped factor in the higher spiritual life of Greeks, that the two

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

problems of paiderastia and the position of women in Greece intersect.

In reviewing the external circumstances which favoured paiderastia, it
may be added, as a minor cause, that the leisure in which the Greeks
lived, supported by a crowd of slaves, and attending chiefly to their
physical and mental culture, rendered them peculiarly liable to
pre-occupations of passion and pleasure-seeking. In the early periods,
when war was incessant, this abundance of spare time, bore less corrupt
fruit than during the stagnation into which the Greeks enslaved by
Macedonia and Rome declined.

So far, I have been occupied in the present section with the specific
conditions of Greek society which may be regarded as determining the
growth of paiderastia. With respect to the general habit of mind which
caused the Greeks, in contradistinction to the Jews and Christians, to
tolerate this form of feeling, it will be enough here to remark that
Paganism could have nothing logically to say against it. The further
consideration of this matter I shall reserve for the next division of my
essay, contenting myself for the moment with the observation that Greek
religion and the instincts of the Greek race offered no direct obstacle
to the expansion of a habit which was strongly encouraged by the
circumstances I have just enumerated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[60:1](pge18.htm#fr_181) See quotations in
Rosenbaum, 119-140.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[61:1](pge19.htm#fr_182) See Athen., xii. 5 17,
for an account of their grotesque sensuality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Relation of paiderastia to the fine arts](pge20)
