[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Classics](../../cla/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pge17) 
[Next](pge19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVI.

Philip of Macedon, when he pronounced the panegyric of the Sacred Band
at Chæronea, uttered the funeral oration of Greek love in its nobler
forms. With the decay of military spirit and the loss of freedom, there
was no sphere left for that type of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

comradeship which I attempted to describe in Section IV. The
philosophical ideal, to which some cultivated Attic thinkers had
aspired, remained unrealised, except, we may perhaps suppose, in
isolated instances. Meanwhile paiderastia as a vice did not diminish. It
only grew more wanton and voluptuous. Little, therefore, can be gained
by tracing its historical development further, although it is not
without interest to note the mode of feeling and the opinion of some
later poets and rhetoricians.

The idyllists are the only poets, if we except a few epigrammatists of
the *Anthology*, who preserve a portion of the old heroic sentiment. No
true student of Greek literature will have felt that he could strictly
censure the paiderastic passages of the *Thalysia*, *Aïtes*, *Hylas*,
*Paidika*. They have the ring of genuine and respectable emotion. This
may also be said about the two fragments of Bion which begin *Hespere
tas eratas* and *Olbioi oi phileontes*. The *Duserôs*, ascribed without
due warrant to Theocritus, is in many respects a beautiful composition,
but it lacks the fresh and manly touches of the master's style, and
bears the stamp of an unwholesome rhetoric. Why, indeed, should we pity
this suicide, and why should the statue of Love have fallen on the
object of his admiration? Maximus Tyrius showed more sense when he
contemptuously wrote about those men who killed themselves for love of a
beautiful lad in Locri: <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) "And in
good sooth they deserved to die."

The dialogue entitled *Erotes*, attributed to Lucian, deserves a
paragraph. More than any other composition of the rhetorical age of
Greek literature, it attempts a comprehensive treatment of erotic
passion, and sums up the teaching of the doctors and the predilections
of the vulgar in one treatise. <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_167)
Like many of Lucian's compositions, it has what may be termed a
retrospective and resumptive value. That is to say, it represents less
the actual feeling of the author and his age than the result of his
reading and reflection brought into harmony with his experience. The
scene is laid at Cnidus in the groves of Aphrodite. The temple and the
garden and the statue of Praxiteles are described with a luxury of
language which strikes the keynote of the dialogue. We have exchanged
the company of Plato, Xenophon, or Æschines for that of a Juvenalian
*Græculus*, a delicate æsthetic voluptuary. Every epithet smells of musk
and every phrase

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

is a provocative. The interlocutors are Callicratides the Athenian and
Charicles the Rhodian. Callicratides kept an establishment of *exoleti*;
when the down upon their chins had grown beyond the proper point--"when
the beard is just sprouting, when youth is in the prime of charm," they
were drafted off to farms and country villages. Charicles maintained a
harem of dancing-girls and flute-players. The one was "madly passionate
for lads;" the other no less "mad for women." Charicles undertook the
cause of women, Callicratides that of boys. Charicles began, The love of
women is sanctioned by antiquity; it is natural; it endures through
life; it alone provides pleasure for both sexes. Boys grow bearded,
rough, and past their prime. Women always excite passion. Then
Callicratides takes up his parable. Masculine love combines virtue with
pleasure. While the love of women is a physical necessity, the love of
boys is a product of high culture and an adjunct of philosophy.
Paiderastia may be either vulgar or celestial; the second will be sought
by men of liberal education and good manners. Then follow contrasted
pictures of the lazy woman and the manly youth. The one provokes to
sensuality, the other excites noble emulation in the ways of virile
living. Lucian, summing up the arguments of the two pleaders, decides
that Corinth must give way to Athens, adding, "Marriage is open to all
men, but the love of boys to philosophers only." This verdict is
referred to Theomnestus, a Don Juan of both sexes. He replies that both
boys and women are good for pleasure; the philosophical arguments of
Callicratides are cant.

This brief abstract of Lucian's dialogue on love indicates the cynicism
with which its author viewed the subject, using the whole literature and
all the experience of the Greeks to support a thesis of pure hedonism.
The sybarites of Cairo or Constantinople at the present moment might
employ the same arguments, except that they would omit the philosophic
cant of Callicratides.

There is nothing in extant Greek literature of a date anterior to the
Christian era which is foul in the same sense as that in which the works
of Roman poets (Catullus and Martial), Italian poets (Beccatelli and
Baffo), and French poets (Scarron and Voltaire) are foul. Only purblind
students will be unable to perceive the difference between the obscenity
of the Latin races and that of Aristophanes. The difference, indeed, is
wide and radical, and strongly marked.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It is the difference between a race naturally
gifted with a delicate, aesthetic sense of beauty, and one in whom that
sense was always subject to the perturbation of gross instincts. But
with the first century of the new age a change came over even the
imagination of the Greeks. Though they never lost their distinction of
style, that precious gift of lightness and good taste conferred upon
them with thew language, they borrowed something of their conquerors'
vein, This makes itself felt in the *Anthology*. Straton and Rufinus
suffered the contamination of the Roman genius, stronger in political
organisation than that of Hellas, but coarser and less spiritually
tempered in morals and in art. Straton was a native of Sardis who
flourished in the second century. He compiled a book of paiderastic
poems, consisting in a great measure of his own and Meleager's
compositions, which now forms the twelfth section of the *Palatine
Anthology*. This book he dedicated, not to the Muse, but to Zeus; for
Zeus was the boy-lover among deities; <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) he bade it carry forth his message to
fair youths throughout the world; <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169)
and he claimed a special inspiration from heaven for singing of one sole
subject, paiderastia. <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_170) It may be
said with truth that Straton understood the bent of his own genius. We
trace a blunt earnestness of intention in his epigrams, a certainty of
feeling and directness of artistic treatment, which show that he had
only one object in view. Meleager has far higher qualities as a poet,
and his feeling. as well as his style, is more exquisite. But he wavered
between the love of boys and women, seeking in both the satisfaction of
emotional yearnings which in the modern world would have marked him as a
sentimentalist. The so-called *Mousa Paidiké*, "Muse of Boyhood," is a
collection of two hundred and fifty-eight short poems, some of them of
great artistic merit, in praise of boys and boy-love. The common-places
of these epigrams are Ganymede and Erôs; <span
id="fr_171"></span>[4](#fn_171) we hear but little of Aphrodite-her
domain is the other section of the *Anthology*, called Erotika. A very
small percentage of these compositions can be described as
obscene; <span id="fr_172"></span>[5](#fn_172) none are nasty in the
style of Martial or Ausonius; some are exceedingly picturesque; <span
id="fr_173"></span>[6](#fn_173) a few are written in a strain of lofty
or of lovely music; <span id="fr_174"></span>[7](#fn_174) one or two are
delicate and subtle in their humour. <span
id="fr_175"></span>[8](#fn_175) The whole collection supplies good means

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of judging how the Greeks of the decadence felt about this form of love.
*Malakia* is the real condemnation of this poetry, rather than brutality
or coarseness. A favourite topic is the superiority of boys over girls.
This sometimes takes a gross form; <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176)
but once or twice the treatment of the subject touches a real
psychological distinction, as in the following epigram: <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177)--

"The love of women is not after my heart's desire; but the fires of male
desire have placed me under inextinguishable coals of burning. The heat
there is mightier; for the more powerful is male than female, the keener
is that desire."

\[paragraph continues\] These four lines give the key to much of the
Greek preference for paiderastia. The love of the male, when it has been
apprehended and entertained, is more exciting, they thought, more
absorbent of the whole nature, than the love of the female. It is, to
use another kind of phraseology, more of a mania and more of a disease.

With the *Anthology* we might compare the curious *Epistolai Erotikai*
of Philostratus. <span id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178) They were in all
probability rhetorical compositions, not intended for particular
persons; yet they indicate the kind of wooing to which youths were
subjected in later Hellas. <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_179) The
discrepancy between the triviality of their subject-matter and the
exquisiteness of their diction is striking. The second of these
qualities has made them a mine for poets. Ben Jonson, for example,
borrowed the loveliest of his lyrics from the following *concetto*:--"I
sent thee a crown of roses, not so much honouring thee, though this,
too, was my meaning, but wishing to do some kindness to the roses that
they might not wither." Take, again, the phrase, "Well, and love himself
is naked, and the graces and the stars;" or this, "O rose, that has a
voice to speak with!"--or this metaphor for the footsteps of the
beloved, "O rhythms of most beloved feet, O kisses pressed upon the
ground!"

While the paiderastia of the Greeks was sinking into grossness,
effeminacy, and aesthetic prettiness, the moral instincts of humanity
began to assert themselves in earnest. It became part of the higher
doctrine of the Roman Stoics to suppress this form of passion. <span
id="fr_180"></span>[5](#fn_180) The Christians, from St. Paul onwards,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

instituted an uncompromising crusade against it. Theirs was no mere
speculative warfare, like that of the philosophers at Athens. They
fought with all the forces of their manhood, with the sword of the Lord
and with the excommunications of the Church, to suppress what seemed to
them an unutterable scandal. Dio Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Athanasius, are our best authorities for the vices which prevailed in
Hellas during the Empire; <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](pge19.htm#fn_181)
the Roman law, moreover, proves that the civil governors aided the
Church in its attempt to moralise the people on this point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[55:1](pge17.htm#fr_160) Tusc., iv. 33; Decline
and Fall, cap. xliv. note 192.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[55:2](pge17.htm#fr_161) See Meier, cap. 15.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[55:3](pge17.htm#fr_162) Cap. 23.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[55:4](pge17.htm#fr_163) Cap. 54.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[55:5](pge17.htm#fr_164) Page 4.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[55:6](pge17.htm#fr_165) It is noticeable that
in all ages men of learning have been obnoxious to paiderastic passions.
Dante says (Inferno, xv. 106):--

"In somma sappi, che tutti fur cherci,  
E letterati grandi e di gran fama,  
D' un medesmo peccato al mondo lerci."

Compare Ariosto, *Satire*, vii.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[56:1](pge18.htm#fr_166) *Dissert*., xxvi. 9.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[56:2](pge18.htm#fr_167) I am aware that the
genuineness of the essay has been questioned.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[58:1](pge18.htm#fr_168) *Mousa Paidiké*, i.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[58:2](pge18.htm#fr_169) *Ibid*., 208.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[58:3](pge18.htm#fr_170) *Ibid*., 258, 2.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[58:4](pge18.htm#fr_171) *Ibid*., 70, 65, 69,
194, 220, 221, 67, 68, 78, and others.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[58:5](pge18.htm#fr_172) Perhaps ten are of
this sort.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[58:6](pge18.htm#fr_173) 8, 125, for example.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[58:7](pge18.htm#fr_174) 132, 256, 221.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[58:8](pge18.htm#fr_175) 219.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[59:1](pge18.htm#fr_176) 7.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[59:2](pge18.htm#fr_177) 17. Compare 86.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[59:3](pge18.htm#fr_178) Ed. Kayser, pp.
343-366.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[59:4](pge18.htm#fr_179) It is worth comparing
the letters of Philostratus with those of Alciphron, a contemporary of
Lucian. In the latter there is no hint of paiderastia. The life of
parasites, grisettes, lorettes, and young men about town at Athens is
set forth in imitation probably of the later comedy Athens is shown to
have been a Paris *à la Murger*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[59:5](pge18.htm#fr_180) See the introduction
by Marcus Aurelius to his *Meditations*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. The deep root struck by paiderastia in Greece--Position of
Women](pge19)
