[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIÄ' A\`NE'TSÂ UGÛ'<sup>n</sup>WA\`LÏ AMÂ'YÏ DITSÛ'<sup>n</sup>STA\`TÏ.

Sgë! Ha-nâgwa ä'stï une'ga aksâ'û<sup>n</sup>tanû'<sup>n</sup> usïnu'lï
a\`ne'tsâ, unatsâ'nû<sup>n</sup>tse'lahï akta'\`tï adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.

Iyu'stï utadâ'ta, iyu'stï tsunadâ'ita. Nû<sup>n</sup>nâ'hï anite'lahëhû'
ige'skï nige'sûnna. Dû'ksi-gwû' dedu'natsgû\`la'wate'gû.
Da'\`sû<sup>n</sup> unilâtsi'satû. Sa\`ka'ni unati'satû'.

Nû<sup>n</sup>nâ'hï dâ'tadu'nina'watï' a'yû-\`nû' digwatseli'ga
a\`ne'tsâ unatsâ'nû<sup>n</sup>tse'lahï. Tla'mehû Gigage'ï sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga. Igü'<sup>n</sup>yï galû'<sup>n</sup>lâ
ge'sû<sup>n</sup> i'yû<sup>n</sup> kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï
<sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâ'gï. Ta'line galû'<sup>n</sup>lâ ge'sû<sup>n</sup>
i'yû<sup>n</sup> kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï <sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâ'gï.
He'nilû danûtsgû'\`lani'ga. Tla'ma û<sup>n</sup>ni'ta a'nigwalu'gi
gû<sup>n</sup>tla'\`tisge'stï, ase'gwû nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

Du'talë a\`ne'tsâ unatsâ'nûntse'lahï saligu'gi-gwû
dedu'natsgû'\`lawïsti'tegû'. Elawi'nï da'\`sû<sup>n</sup> unilâtsi'satû.

Tsâ'ine digalû'<sup>n</sup>latiyû'<sup>n</sup> Sâ'niwä Gi'gageï sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, asë\`gâ'gï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï <sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâ'gï nû'\`gine
digalû'<sup>n</sup>latiyû'<sup>n</sup>. Gulï'sgulï' Sa\`ka'ni sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, asë\`gâ'gï

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

nig'esu<sup>n</sup>na. Kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï <sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâgï
hï'skine digalû'<sup>n</sup>latiyû'<sup>n</sup>. Tsütsü' Sa\`ka'ni
sâ'gwa danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, asë\`gâ'gï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

Du'talë a\`ne'tsâ utsâ'nû<sup>n</sup>tse'lahï. Tïne'gwa Sa\`ka'ni sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, ige'skï nige'sûn<sup>n</sup>a. Da'\`sû<sup>n</sup>
unilâtsi'satû. Kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï <sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâ'gï sutali'ne
digalû'<sup>n</sup>latiyû'<sup>n</sup>. A'nigâsta'ya sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, asë\`gâ'gï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï <sup>u</sup>wâhâ'hïstâ'gï kûl\`kwâgine
digalû'<sup>n</sup>latiyû'<sup>n</sup>. Wâtatû'ga Sa\`ka'ni sâ'gwa
danûtsgû'\`lani'ga, asë\`gâ'gï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

Du'talë a\`ne'tsâ unatsâ'nû<sup>n</sup>tse'lahï, Yâ'na
dedu'natsgû'\`lawïstani'ga, ige'skï nige'su<sup>n</sup>na.
Da\`sû<sup>n</sup> du'nilâtsi'satû. Kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï
de'tagaskalâ'û<sup>n</sup>tanû'<sup>n</sup>,
igû<sup>n</sup>'wûlstanûhi-gwûdi'na tsuye'listi gesû'<sup>n</sup>ï.
Akta'\`tï adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.

Sgë! Nâ'gwa t?skï'nâne'lï ta'tädü' iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta a'gwatseli'ga,
Wätatu'ga Tsûne'ga. Tsuye'listï gesû'<sup>n</sup>ï
skï'nâhû<sup>n</sup>sï' a'gwatseli'ga--kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï
a'gwatseli'ga. Nä'\`nâ utadâ'ta kanû'<sup>n</sup>lagï dedu'skalâ'asi'ga.

Dedû'ndagû'<sup>n</sup>yastani'ga, gû<sup>n</sup>wâ'hisâ'nûhï. Yû!

#### Translation.

### THIS CONCERNS THE BALL PLAY--TO TAKE THEM TO WATER WITH IT.

Listen! Ha! Now where the white thread has been let down, quickly we are
about to examine into (the fate of) the admirers of the ball play.

They are of--such a (iyu'stï) descent. They are called--so and so
(iyu'stï). They are shaking the road which shall never be joyful. The
miserable Terrapin has come and fastened himself upon them as they go
about. They have lost all strength. They have become entirely blue.

But now my admirers of the ball play have their roads lying along in
this direction. The Red Bat has come and made himself one of them. There
in the first heaven are the pleasing stakes. Therein the second heaven
are the pleasing stakes. The Pewee has come and joined them. The
immortal ball stick shall place itself upon the whoop, never to be
defeated.

As for the lovers of the ball play on the other side, the common Turtle
has come and fastened himself upon them as they go about. Under the
earth they have lost all strength.

The pleasing stakes are in the third heaven. The Red Tläniwä has come
and made himself one of them, that they may never be defeated. The
pleasing stakes are in the fourth heaven. The Blue Fly-catcher has made
himself one of them, that they may never be defeated. The pleasing
stakes are in the fifth heaven. The Blue Martin has made himself one of
them, that they may never be defeated.

The other lovers of the ball play, the Blue Mole has come and fastened
upon them, that they may never be joyous. They have lost all strength.

The pleasing stakes are there in the sixth heaven. The Chimney Swift has
made himself one of them, that they may never be defeated. The pleasing
stakes are in the seventh heaven. The Blue Dragon-fly has made himself
one of them, that they may never be defeated.

As for the other admirers of the ball play, the Bear has just come and
fastened him upon them, that they may never be happy. They have lost all
strength. He has let the stakes slip from his grasp and there shall be
nothing left for their share.

The examination is ended.

Listen! Now let me know that the twelve are mine, O White Dragon-fly.
Tell me that the share is to be mine--that the stakes are mine. As for
the player there on the other side, he has been forced to let go his
hold upon the stakes.

Now they are become exultant and happy. Yû!

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

#### Explanation.

This formula, from the A\`yûninï manuscript is one of those used by the
shaman in taking the ball players to water before the game. The ceremony
is performed in connection with red and black beads, as described in the
formula just given for destroying life. The formulistic name given to
the ball players signifies literally, "admirers of the ball play." The
Tlä'niwä (sä'niwä, in the Middle dialect) is the mythic great hawk, as
large and powerful as the roc of Arabian tales. The shaman begins by
declaring that it is his purpose to examine or inquire into the fate of
the ball players, and then gives his attention by turns to his friends
and their opponents, fixing his eyes upon the red bead while praying for
his clients, and upon the black bead while speaking of their rivals. His
friends he raises gradually to the seventh or highest
*galû'<sup>n</sup>lati*. This word literally signifies height, and is
the name given to the abode of the gods dwelling above the earth, and is
also used to mean heaven in the Cherokee bible translation. The opposing
players, on the other hand, are put down under the earth, and are made
to resemble animals slow and clumsy of movement, while on behalf of his
friends the shaman invokes the aid of swift-flying birds, which,
according to the Indian belief, never by any chance fail to secure their
prey. The birds invoked are the He'nilû or wood pewee (*Contopus
virens*), the Tläniwä or mythic hawk, the Gulï'sgulï' or great crested
flycatcher (*Myiarchus crinitus*), the Tsûtsû or martin (*Progne
subis*), and the A'nigâsta'ya or chimney swift (*Chœtura pelasgia*). In
the idiom of the formulas it is said that these "have just come and are
sticking to them" (the players), the same word (*danûtsgû'lani?ga*)
being used to express the devoted attention of a lover to his mistress.
The Watatuga, a small species of dragon-fly, is also invoked, together
with the bat, which, according to a Cherokee myth, once took sides with
the birds in a great ball contest with the four-footed animals, and won
the victory for the birds by reason of his superior skill in dodging.
This myth explains also why birds, and no quadrupeds, are invoked by the
shaman to the aid of his friends. In accordance with the regular color
symbolism the flycatcher, martin, and dragonfly, like the bat and the
tlä'niwä, should be red, the color of success, instead of blue,
evidently so written by mistake. The white thread is frequently
mentioned in the formulas, but in this instance the reference is not
clear. The twelve refers to the number of runs made in the game.
