[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc36)  [Next](sfoc38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TSUNDAYE'LIGAKTANÛ'HÏ ADANÛ'<sup>n</sup>WÂTÏ

Sgë! Hanâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>ganiga, galû'<sup>n</sup>latï
hetsadâ'histï, Kâ'lanû Û'<sup>n</sup>nage, gahu'stï
tsanu'lahû'<sup>n</sup>sgï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Ha-nâ'gwa
(hetsatsa'û<sup>n</sup>tani'ga.
Hanigû'<sup>n</sup>watû<sup>n</sup>nigwälâe'stigwû
tsalâsû'<sup>n</sup>ï. Asgin-u'danû higes'eï. Sanigala'gï
gesû'<sup>n</sup>ï hastigtû'\`lani'ga, duwâlu'wa'tû'tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na, nitûneli'ga. Ha-Usûhi'yï wititâ'hïstani'ga.
Dadu'satahû'<sup>n</sup>stï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na nitû'neli'ga.
Utsïnä'wa nu'tatanû'<sup>n</sup>ta.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Kâ'lanû Gïgage'ï, hidawëhi'yu.
Ha-gahu'stï tsanu'lahû'<sup>n</sup>sgï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na,
etsanetse'lûhï. Ha-galû<sup>n</sup>lati'tsa hetsatâ'histï. Nâ'gwa
hetsatsâ'û<sup>n</sup>tani'ga.
Nigû'<sup>n</sup>watû'<sup>n</sup>nigwalâe'sti-gwû

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

tsalâsû'<sup>n</sup>ï. Asgin-udanû'hi-gwû higese'ï. Ha-Sanigalâgï
gesû'<sup>n</sup> hâstigû'\`lani'ga ulsge'ta, ha-utsïnä'wa-gwû'
nigû'<sup>n</sup>tisge'stï. Usûhi'yï wïntûnë'dû. Usûhi'yï
wïtitâ'hïstani'ga. Utsïnä'wa adû'<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Kâ'lanû Sa'ka'ni; galû'latï
hetsadâ'histï, hida'wëhï. Gahu'stï tsanu'lahû<sup>n</sup>sgï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na, etsanetse'lûhï. Ha-nâ'gwa
hetsatsâ'û<sup>n</sup>tani'ga.
Nigû'<sup>n</sup>watû'<sup>n</sup>nigwalâe'sti-gwû
tsalâsû'<sup>n</sup>ï. Sanigalâ'gï gesû'<sup>n</sup> hastigû'\`lani'ga
ulsge'ta. Duwâlu'watû'tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na, nitû'neli'ga. Usûhi'yï
wïtitâ'hïstani'ga, dadu'satahû'<sup>n</sup>stï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na
nitû'neli'ga. Utsïnä'wa adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Wa'hïlï galû<sup>n</sup>lti'tsa
hetsadâ'histï, Kâ'lanû Tsûne'ga, hida'wëhï. Gahu'stï tsanul\`tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Hanâ'gwa hetsatsâ'û<sup>n</sup>tani'ga.
Nigû'<sup>n</sup>watû'<sup>n</sup>nigwalâe'sti-gwû
tsalâsû'<sup>n</sup>ï. Ha-nâ'gwa detal\`tani'ga. Sanigalâ'gï
gesû'<sup>n</sup>, hastig'û\`lani'ga ulsge'ta, duwâlu'watu'\`tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na nitû'neli'ga. Usûhi'yï wïtitâ'hïstani'ga.
Dadu'satahû'<sup>n</sup>stï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na nitû'neli'ga.
Utsïnä'wa adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga.

(Dega'sisisgû'<sup>n</sup>ï)--Hiä' agi\`li'ya
unitlû<sup>n</sup>gû'<sup>n</sup>ï adanû'wâtï. Askwanu'tsastï'. Tsâ'l(a)
Agayû'<sup>n</sup>lï unitsi'lû<sup>n</sup>nû'hï gû'<sup>n</sup>tatï,
anû'<sup>n</sup>sga\`lâ'-gwû; Kanasâ'la-\`nû unali'gâhû, ade'la'-\`nû
nû'\`gi-gwû ani'gage'ï dahâ'ï, Tsâliyu'stï-\`nû Usdi'ga. Gahu'sti-'\`nu
yuta'suyû'<sup>n</sup>na sâwatu'hi-gwû atï' dawâ'hila-gwû
iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta.

#### Translation.

### TO TREAT FOR ORDEAL DISEASES.

Listen! Ha! Now you have drawn near to hearken and are resting directly
overhead. O Black Raven, you never fail in anything. Ha! Now you are
brought down. Ha! There shall be left no more than a trace upon the
ground where you have been. It is an evolute ghost. You have now put it
into a crevice in Sanigalagi, that it may never find the way back. You
have put it to rest in the Darkening Land, so that it may never return.
Let relief come.

Listen! Ha! Now you have drawn near to hearken, O Red Raven, most
powerful ada'wehi. Ha! You never fail in anything, for so it was
ordained of you. Ha! You are resting directly overhead. Ha! Now you are
brought down. There shall remain but a trace upon the ground where you
have been. It is an evolute ghost. Ha! You have put the Intruder into a
crevice of Sanigalagi and now the relief shall come. It (the Intruder)
is sent to the Darkening Land. You have put it to rest in the Darkening
Land. Let the relief come.

Listen! Ha! Now you have drawn near to hearken, O Blue Raven; you are
resting directly overhead, ada'wehi. You never fail in anything, for so
it was ordained of you. Ha! Now you are brought down. There shall be
left but a trace upon the ground where you have been. You have put the
Intruder into a crevice in Sanigalagi, that it may never find the way
back. You have put it to rest in the Darkening Land, so that it may
never return. Let the relief come.

Listen! Ha! Now you have drawn near to hearken; you repose on high on
Wa'hïlï, O White Raven, ada'wehi. You never fail in anything. Ha! Now
you are brought down. There shall be left but a trace upon the ground
where you have been. Ha! Now you have taken it up. You have put the
Intruder into a crevice in Sanigalagi, that it may never find the way
back. You have put it to rest in the Darkening Land, never to return.
Let the relief come.

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

(Directions)--This is to treat them for a painful sickness. One must
suck. Use Tsâ'lagayû<sup>n</sup>'-li ("Old Tobacco"--Nicotiana rustica),
blossoms, and just have them in the mouth, and Kanasâ'la (Wild Parsnip),
goes with it, and four red beads also must lie there, and Tsâliyu'sti
Usdi'ga ("Little (plant) Like Tobacco"--Indian Tobacco--Lobelia
inflata.) And if there should be anything mixed with it (i. e., after
sucking the place), just put it about a hand's-length into the mud.

#### Explanation.

The Cherokee name for this disease gives no idea whatever of its serious
nature. The technical term, Tsundaye'liga'ktanû'hï, really refers to the
enthusiastic outburst of sociability that ensues when two old friends
meet. In this instance it might be rendered "an ordeal." The application
of such a name to what is considered a serious illness is in accordance
with the regular formulistic practice of making light of a dangerous
malady in order to convey to the disease spirit the impression that the
shaman is not afraid of him. A\`yû<sup>n</sup>inï, from whom the formula
was obtained, states also that the disease is sometimes sent to a man by
a friend or even by his parents, in order to test his endurance and
knowledge of counter spells.

As with most diseases, the name simply indicates the shaman's theory of
the occult cause of the trouble, and is no clue to the symptoms, which
may be those usually attendant upon fevers, indigestion, or almost any
other ailment.

In some cases the disease is caused by the conjurations of an enemy,
through which the patient becomes subject to an inordinate appetite,
causing him to eat until his abdomen is unnaturally distended. By the
same magic spells tobacco may be conveyed into the man's body, causing
him to be affected by faintness and languor. The enemy, if bitterly
revengeful, may even put into the body of his victim a worm or insect
(tsgâya), or a sharpened stick of black locust or "fat" pine, which will
result in death if not removed by a good doctor. Sometimes a weed stalk
is in some occult manner conveyed into the patient's stomach, where it
is transformed into a worm. As this disease is very common, owing to
constant quarrels and rival jealousies, there are a number of
specialists who devote their attention to it.

The prayer is addressed to the Black, Red, Blue, and White Ravens, their
location at the four cardinal points not being specified, excepting in
the case of the white raven of Wa'hilï, which, as already stated, is
said to be a mountain in the south, and hence is used figuratively to
mean the south. The ravens are each in turn declared to have put the
disease into a crevice in Sanigala'gi--the Cherokee name of Whiteside
Mountain, at the head of Tuckasegee River, in North Carolina, and used
figuratively for. any high precipitous mountain--and to have left no
more than a trace upon the ground where it has been. The adjective
translated "evolute" (udanûhï) is of frequent occurrence in the
formulas. but has no

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

exact equivalent in English. It signifies springing into being or life
from an embryonic condition. In this instance it would imply that
whatever object the enemy has put into the body of the sick man has
there developed into a ghost to trouble him.

The directions are expressed in a rather vague manner, as is the case
with most of A\`yû<sup>n</sup>ini's attempts at original composition.
The disease is here called by another name, agi\`li'ya
unitlû<sup>n</sup>gû'<sup>n</sup>ï, signifying "when they are painfully
sick." The treatment consists in sucking the part most affected, the
doctor having in his mouth during the operation the blossoms of
Tsâ'l-agayû'<sup>n</sup>lï (Nicotiana rustica), Kanasâ'la (wild
parsnip,) and Tsâliyusti Usdiga (Lobelia inflata.) The first and last of
these names signify "tobacco" and "tobacco-like," while the other seems
to contain the same word, tsâ'la, and the original idea may have been to
counteract the witchcraft by the use of the various species of
"tobacco," the herb commonly used to drive away a witch or wizard.
During the sticking process four red beads lie near upon a piece of
(white) cloth, which afterward becomes the perquisite of the doctor.
Though not explicitly stated, it is probable that the doctor holds in
his mouth a decoction of the blossoms named, rather than the blossoms
themselves. On withdrawing his mouth from the spot and ejecting the
liquid into a bowl, it is expected that there will be found "mixed" with
it a small stick, a pebble, an insect, or something of the kind, and
this the shaman then holds up to view as the cause of the disease. It is
afterward buried a "hand's length" (awâ'hilû)\[1\] deep in the mud. No
directions were given as to diet or tabu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Hunting](sfoc38)
