[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc24)  [Next](sfoc26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IMPORTANCE ATTACHED TO NAMES.

In many of the formulas, especially those relating to love and to
life-destroying, the shaman mentions the name and clan of his client, of
the intended victim, or of the girl whose affections it is desired to
win. The Indian regards his name, not as a mere label, but as a distinct
part of his personality, just as much as are his eyes or his teeth, and
believes that injury will result as surely from the malicious handling
of his name as from a wound inflicted on any part of his physical
organism. This belief was found among the various tribes from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, and has occasioned a number of curious
regulations in regard to the concealment and change of names. It may be
on this account that both Powhatan and Pocahontas are known in history
under assumed appellations, their true names having been concealed from
the whites until the pseudonyms were too firmly established to be
supplanted. Should his prayers have no apparent effect when treating a
patient for some serious illness, the shaman sometimes concludes that
the name is affected, and accordingly goes to water, with appropriate
ceremonies, and christens the patient with a new name, by which he is
henceforth to be known. He then begins afresh, repeating the formulas
with the new name selected for the patient, in the confident hope that
his efforts will be crowned with success.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Language of the Formulas](sfoc26.md)
