[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc05)  [Next](sfoc07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE GAHUNI MANUSCRIPT.

The next book procured was obtained from a woman named Ayâsta, "The
Spoiler," and had been written by her husband, Gahuni, who died about 30
years ago. The matter was not difficult to arrange, as she had already
been employed on several occasions, so that she understood the purpose
of the work, besides which her son had been regularly engaged to copy
and classify the manuscripts already procured. The book was claimed as
common property by

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

Ayâsta and her three sons, and negotiations had to be carried on with
each one, although in this instance the cash amount involved was only
half a dollar, in addition to another book into which to copy some
family records and personal memoranda. The book contains only eight
formulas, but these are of a character altogether unique, the directions
especially throwing a curious light on Indian beliefs. There had been
several other formulas of the class called Y'û'<sup>n</sup>nwëhï, to
cause hatred between man and wife, but these had been torn out and
destroyed by Ayâsta on the advice of an old shaman, in order that her
sons might never learn them. In referring to the matter she spoke in a
whisper, and it was evident enough that she had full faith in the deadly
power of these spells.

In addition to the formulas the book contains about twenty pages of
Scripture extracts in the same handwriting, for Gahuni, like several
others of their shamans, combined the professions of Indian conjurer and
Methodist preacher. After his death the book fell into the hands of the
younger members of the family, who filled it with miscellaneous writings
and scribblings. Among other things there are about seventy pages of
what was intended to be a Cherokee-English pronouncing dictionary,
probably written by the youngest son, already mentioned, who has
attended school, and who served for some time as copyist on the
formulas. This curious Indian production, of which only a few columns
are filled out, consists of a list of simple English words and phrases,
written in ordinary English script, followed by Cherokee characters
intended to give the approximate pronunciation, together with the
corresponding word in the Cherokee language and characters. As the
language lacks a number of sounds which are of frequent occurrence in
English, the attempts to indicate the pronunciation sometimes give
amusing results. Thus we find: Fox (English script); *kwâgisï'*
(Cherokee characters); *tsú\`lû'* (Cherokee characters). As the Cherokee
language lacks the labial *f* and has no compound sound equivalent to
our *x*, *kwâgisï'* is as near as the Cherokee speaker can come to
pronouncing our word fox. In the same way "bet" becomes *wëtï*, and
"sheep" is *síkwï*, while "if he has no dog" appears in the disguise of
*ikwï hâsï nâ dâ'ga*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Inâli Manuscript](sfoc07.md)
