[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc41)  [Next](sfoc43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIÄ' ATSÛ\`TI'YÏ TSUN'TANÛ.

Sgë! Nâ'gwa hitsatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga hitsiga'tugï'.
Titsila'wisû'<sup>n</sup>hï <sup>u</sup>wâgi'\`lï
tege'tsûts\`gû'\`lawïstï'. Tsuli'stana'lû ûlë' waktûï, agi'stï une'ka
itsû'<sup>n</sup>yatanilû'ïstani'ga. Gû<sup>n</sup>watu'hwïtû'
nû<sup>n</sup>na'hï degûndâltsi'dâhe'stï. <sup>u</sup>Wâ'hisâ'nahï
tigiwatsi'la. Tutsegû'\`lawistï'tege'stï. Û<sup>n</sup>talï'
degû'<sup>n</sup>watanûhï, uhisa'\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Tsuwatsi'la
dadâl\`tsi'ga. A\`yû A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>inï tigwadâ'ita. Yû!

#### Translation.

### THIS IS FOR CATCHING LARGE FISH.

Listen! Now you settlements have drawn near to hearken. Where you have
gathered in the foam you are moving about as one. You Blue Cat and the
others, I have come to offer you freely the white food. Let the paths
from every direction recognize each other. Our spittle shall be in
agreement. Let them (your and my spittle) be together as we go about.
They (the fish) have become a prey and there shall be no loneliness.
Your spittle has become agreeable. I am called Swimmer. Yû!

#### Explanation.

This formula, from A\`yû<sup>n</sup>ini's' book, is for the purpose of
catching large fish. According to his instructions, the fisherman must
first chew a small piece of Yugwilû' (Venus' Flytrap--Dionæa muscipula)
and spit it upon the bait and also upon the hook. Then, standing

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

facing the stream, he recites the formula and puts the bait upon the
hook. He will be able to pull out a fish at once, or if the fish are not
about at the moment they will come in a very short time.

The Yugwilû' is put upon the bait from the idea that it will enable the
hook to attract and hold the fish as the plant itself seizes and holds
insects in its cup. The root is much prized by the Cherokees for this
purpose, and those in the West, where the plant is not found, frequently
send requests for it to their friends in Carolina.

The prayer is addressed directly to the fish, who are represented as
living in settlements. The same expression as has already been mentioned
is sometimes used by the doctors in speaking of the *tsgâ'ya* or worms
which are supposed to cause sickness by getting under the skin of the
patient. The Blue Cat (*Amiurus, genus*) is addressed as the principal
fish and the bait is spoken of as the "white food," an expression used
also of the viands prepared at the feast of the green corn dance, to
indicate their wholesome character. "Let the paths from every direction
recognize each other," means let the fishes, which are supposed to have
regular trails through the water, assemble together at the place where
the speaker takes his station, as friends recognizing each other at a
distance approach to greet each other, <sup>u</sup>Wâhisâ'nahï
tigiwatsi'la, rendered "our spittle shall be in agreement," is a
peculiar archaic expression that can not be literally translated. It
implies that there shall be such close sympathy between the fisher and
the fish that their spittle shall be as the spittle of one individual.
As before stated, the spittle is believed to exert an important
influence upon the whole physical and mental being. The expression "your
spittle has become agreeable" is explained by A\`yû<sup>n</sup>inï as an
assertion or wish that the fish may prove palatable, while the words
rendered "there shall be no loneliness" imply that there shall be an
abundant catch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Living Humanity (Love)](sfoc43.md)
