[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc16)  [Next](sfoc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE SWEAT BATH-BLEEDING--RUBBING--BATHING.

In addition to their herb treatment the Cherokees frequently resort to
sweat baths, bleeding, rubbing, and cold baths in the running stream, to
say nothing of the beads and other conjuring paraphernalia generally
used in connection with the ceremony. The sweat bath was in common use
among almost all the tribes north of Mexico excepting the central and
eastern Eskimo, and was considered the great cure-all in sickness and
invigorant in health. Among many tribes it appears to have been regarded
as a ceremonial observance, but the Cherokees seem to have looked upon
it simply as a medical application, while the ceremonial part was
confined to the use of the plunge bath. The person wishing to make trial
of the virtues of the sweat bath entered the â'sï, a small earth-covered
log house only high enough to allow of sitting down. After divesting
himself of his clothing, some large bowlders, previously heated in a
fire, were placed near him, and over them was poured a decoction of the
beaten roots of the wild parsnip. The door was closed so that no air
could enter from the outside, and the patient sat in the sweltering
steam

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

until he was in a profuse perspiration and nearly choked by the pungent
fumes of the decoction. In accordance with general Indian practice it
may be that he plunged into the river before resuming his clothing; but
in modern times this part of the operation is omitted and the patient is
drenched with cold water instead. Since the âsï has gone out of general
use the sweating takes place in the ordinary dwelling, the steam being
confined under a blanket wrapped around the patient. During the
prevalence of the smallpox epidemic among the Cherokees at the close of
the late war the sweat bath was universally called into requisition to
stay the progress of the disease, and as the result about three hundred
of the band died, while many of the survivors will carry the marks of
the visitation to the grave. The sweat bath, with the accompanying cold
water application, being regarded as the great panacea, seems to have
been resorted to by the Indians in all parts of the country whenever
visited by smallpox--originally introduced by the whites--and in
consequence of this mistaken treatment they have died, in the language
of an old writer, "like rotten sheep" and at times whole tribes have
been almost swept away. Many of the Cherokees tried to ward off the
disease by eating the flesh of the buzzard, which they believe to enjoy
entire immunity from sickness, owing to its foul smell, which keeps the
disease spirits at a distance.

Bleeding is resorted to in a number of cases, especially in rheumatism
and in preparing for the ball play. There are two methods of performing
the operation, bleeding proper and scratching, the latter being
preparatory to rubbing on the medicine, which is thus brought into more
direct contact with the blood. The bleeding is performed with a small
cupping horn, to which suction is applied in the ordinary manner, after
scarification with a flint or piece of broken glass. In the blood thus
drawn out the shaman claims sometimes to find a minute pebble, a
sharpened stick or something of the kind, which he asserts to be the
cause of the trouble and to have been conveyed into the body of the
patient through the evil spells of an enemy. He frequently pretends to
suck out such an object by the application of the lips alone, without
any scarification whatever. Scratching is a painful process and is
performed with a brier, a flint arrowhead, a rattlesnake's tooth, or
even with a piece of glass, according to the nature of the ailment,
while in preparing the young men for the ball play the shaman uses an
instrument somewhat resembling a comb, having seven teeth made from the
sharpened splinters of the leg bone of a turkey. The scratching is
usually done according to a particular pattern, the regular method for
the ball play being to draw the scratcher four times down the upper part
of each arm, thus making twenty-eight scratches each about 6 inches in
length, repeating the operation on each arm below the elbow and on each
leg above and below the knee. Finally, the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

instrument is drawn across the breast from the two shoulders so as to
form a cross; another curving stroke is made to connect the two upper
ends of the cross, and the same pattern is repeated on the back, so that
the body is thus gashed in nearly three hundred places. Although very
painful for a while, as may well be supposed, the scratches do not
penetrate deep enough to result seriously, excepting in some cases where
erysipelas sets in. While the blood is still flowing freely the
medicine, which in this case is intended to toughen the muscles of the
player, is rubbed into the wounds after which the sufferer plunges into
the stream and washes off the blood. In order that the blood may flow
the longer without clotting it is frequently scraped off with a small
switch as it flows. In rheumatism and other local diseases the
scratching is confined to the part affected. The instrument used is
selected in accordance with the mythologic theory, excepting in the case
of the piece of glass, which is merely a modern makeshift for the flint
arrowhead.

Rubbing, used commonly for pains and swellings of the abdomen, is a very
simple operation performed with the tip of the finger or the palm of the
hand, and can not be dignified with the name of massage. In one of the
Gahuni formulas for treating snake bites (page 351) the operator is told
to rub in a direction contrary to that in which the snake coils itself,
because "this is just the same as uncoiling it." Blowing upon the part
affected, as well as upon the head, hands, and other parts of the body,
is also an important feature of the ceremonial performance. In one of
the formulas it is specified that the doctor must blow first upon the
right hand of the patient, then upon the left foot, then upon the left
hand, and finally upon the right foot, thus making an imaginary cross.

Bathing in the running stream, or "going to water," as it is called, is
one of their most frequent medico-religious ceremonies, and is performed
on a great variety of occasions, such as at each new moon, before eating
the new food at the green corn dance, before the medicine dance and
other ceremonial dances before and after the ball play, in connection
with the prayers for long life, to counteract the effects of bad dreams
or the evil spells of an enemy, and as a part of the regular treatment
in various diseases. The details of the ceremony are very elaborate and
vary according to the purpose for which it is performed, but in all
cases both shaman and client are fasting from the previous evening, the
ceremony being generally performed just at daybreak. The bather usually
dips completely under the water four or seven times, but in some cases
it is sufficient to pour the water from the hand upon the head and
breast. In the ball play the ball sticks are dipped into the water at
the same time. While the bather is in the water the shaman is going
through with his part of the performance on the bank and draws omens
from the motion of the beads between his thumb and

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

finger, or of the fishes in the water. Although the old customs are fast
dying out this ceremony is never neglected at the ball play, and is also
strictly observed by many families on occasion of eating the new corn,
at each new moon, and on other special occasions, even when it is
necessary to break the ice in the stream for the purpose, and to the
neglect of this rite the older people attribute many of the evils which
have come upon the tribe in later days. The latter part of autumn is
deemed the most suitable season of the year for this ceremony, as the
leaves which then cover the surface of the stream are supposed to impart
their medicinal virtues to the water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shamans and White Physicians](sfoc18)
