[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc46)  [Next](sfoc48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ADAYE'LIGA'GTA\`TÏ'.

Yû! Galû'<sup>n</sup>latï tsûl\`dâ'histï, Giya'giya' Sa'ka'ni, nâ'gwa
nû<sup>n</sup>talû<sup>n</sup> i'yû'<sup>n</sup>ta. Tsâ'la Sa\`ka'ni
tsûgistâ'\`tï adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga. Nâ'gwa
nidâtsu'l\`tanû'<sup>n</sup>ta, nû'<sup>n</sup>tâtagû' hisa'hasi'ga.
Tani'dâgû<sup>n'</sup> aye'\`lï dehidâ'siga. Unada'ndâ
dehiyâ'staneli'ga. Nidugale'ntanû'<sup>n</sup>ta
nidûhû<sup>n</sup>neli'ga.

Tsisga'ya agine'ga', nû<sup>n</sup>dâgû'<sup>n</sup>yï ditsidâ'\`stï.
Gû'nï âstû' uhisa'\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Agë'\`ya une'ga hi'ä
iyu'stï gûlstû'\`lï, iyu'sti tsûdâ'ita. Uda'ndâ usïnu'lï
dâdatinilû'gû<sup>n</sup>elï'. Nû<sup>n</sup>dâgû'<sup>n</sup>yitsû'
dâdatinilugûstanelï. Tsisga'ya agine'ga, ditsidûstû'<sup>n</sup>ï
nû\`nû' kana'tlani'ga. Tsûnkta' tegä\`la'watege'stï.
Tsiye'lû<sup>n</sup> gesû'<sup>n</sup>ï uhisa'\`tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

#### Translation.

### FOR SEPARATION (OF LOVERS).

Yû! On high you repose, O Blue Hawk, there at the far distant lake. The
blue tobacco has come to be your recompense. Now you have arisen at once
and come down. You have alighted midway between them where they two are
standing. You have spoiled their souls immediately. They have at once
become separated.

I am a white man; I stand at the sunrise. The good sperm shall never
allow any feeling of loneliness. This white woman is of the Paint
(iyustï) clan; she is

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

called (iyustï) Wâyï'. We shall instantly turn her soul over. We shall
turn it over as we go toward the Sun Land. I am a white man. Here where
I stand it (her soul) has attached itself to (literally, "come against")
mine. Let her eyes in their sockets be forever watching (for me). There
is no loneliness where my body is.

#### Explanation.

This formula, from A\`yûninï's book, is used to separate two lovers or
even a husband and wife, if the jealous rival so desires. In the latter
case the preceding formula, from the same source, would be used to
forestall this spell. No explanation of the ceremony is given, but the
reference to tobacco may indicate that tobacco is smoked or thrown into
the fire during the recitation. The particular hawk invoked (giya'giya')
is a large species found in the coast region but seldom met with in the
mountains. Blue indicates that it brings trouble with it, while white in
the second paragraph indicates that the man is happy and attractive in
manner.

In the first part of the formula the speaker calls upon the Blue Hawk to
separate the lovers and spoil their souls, *i. e.*, change their feeling
toward each other. In the second paragraph he endeavors to attract the
attention of the woman by eulogizing himself. The expression, "we shall
turn her soul over," seems here to refer to turning her affections, but
as generally used, to turn one's soul is equivalent to killing him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Fix the Affections](sfoc48)
