[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc49)  [Next](sfoc51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GAHU'STÏ A'GIYAHU'SA.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga Nû'<sup>n</sup>ya Wâtige'ï,
gahu'stï tsûtska'dï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Ha-nâ'gwa
dû'<sup>n</sup>gihya'lï. Agiyahu'sa sï'kwa, haga' tsû<sup>n</sup>-nû'
iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta dätsi'waktû'hï. Tla-\`ke' a'ya a'kwatseli'ga. O O
digwadâi'ta.

#### Translation.

### I HAVE LOST SOMETHING.

Listen! Ha! Now you have drawn near to hearken, O Brown Rock; you never
lie about anything. Ha! Now I am about to seek for it. I have lost a hog
and now tell me about where I shall find it. For is it not mine? My name
is ------------.

#### Explanation.

This formula, for finding anything lost, is so simple as to need but
little explanation. Brown in this instance has probably no mythologic
significance, but refers to the color of the stone used in the ceremony.
This is a small rounded water-worn pebble, in substance resembling
quartz and of a reddish-brown color. It is suspended by a string held
between the thumb and finger of the shaman, who is guided in his search
by the swinging of the pebble, which, according to their theory, will
swing farther in the direction of the lost article than in the contrary
direction! The shaman, who is always fasting, repeats the formula, while
closely watching the motions of the swinging pebble. He usually begins
early in the morning, making the first trial at the house of the owner
of the lost article. After noting the general direction toward which it
seems to lean he goes a considerable distance in that direction, perhaps
half a mile or more, and makes a second trial. This time the pebble may
swing off at an angle in another direction. He follows up in the
direction indicated for perhaps another half mile, when on a third trial
the stone may veer around toward the starting point, and a fourth
attempt may complete the circuit. Having thus arrived at the conclusion
that the missing article is somewhere within a certain circumscribed
area, he advances to the center of this space and marks out upon the
ground a small circle inclosing a cross with arms pointing toward the
four cardinal points. Holding the stone over the center of the cross he
again repeats the formula and notes the direction in which the pebble
swings. This is the final trial and he fiow goes slowly and carefully
over the whole surface in that direction, between the center of the
circle and the limit of the circumscribed area until in theory, at
least, the article is found. Should he fail, he is never at a loss for
excuses, but the specialists in this line are

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

generally very shrewd guessers well versed in the doctrine of
probabilities.

There are many formulas for this purpose, some of them being long and
elaborate. When there is reason to believe that the missing article has
been stolen, the specialist first determines the clan or settlement to
which the thief belongs and afterward the name of the individual.
Straws, bread balls, and stones of various kinds are used in the
different formulas, the ceremony differing according to .the medium
employed. The stones are generally pointed crystals or antique
arrowheads, and are suspended as already described, the point being
supposed to turn finally in the direction of the missing object. Several
of these stones have been obtained on the reservation and are now
deposited in the National Museum. It need excite no surprise to find the
hog mentioned in the formula, as this animal has been domesticated among
the Cherokees for more than a century, although most of them are
strongly prejudiced against it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is to Frighten a Storm](sfoc51)
