[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc38)  [Next](sfoc40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIÄ' TSI'SKWA GANÂHILIDASTI'YÏ.

Tsïgë'! Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>l-Une'ga, tsûltâ'histû'<sup>n</sup>
gûlitâ'hïstani'ga. Nâ'gwa tsûda'ntâ talehï'sani'ga. Sâ'gwa igûnsi'ya
ts?skwâlï' udû'nisate'stï, ts?su'ltï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Wane'(ï)
tigi'gage(ï) tali'kanëli'ga. <sup>U'n</sup>talï udanû'hï tsägista'\`tï.

Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>l-Une'ga, *anu'ya uwâtatâ'gï agi'stï
tätsiskâ'ltane'lûhï*. <sup>U'n</sup>talï u'danû' *te'tûlskew?si'ga*.

Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>l-Une'ga, nû<sup>n</sup>nâ'(hï) kana'tï
skwatetâ'stani'ga. Unigwalû'<sup>n</sup>gï te'gatû<sup>n</sup>tsi'ga.
Nû<sup>n</sup>nâ'(hï) kana'tï tati'kiyû'<sup>n</sup>gwita'watise'stï.
Unigwalû'<sup>n</sup>gï tigû'<sup>n</sup>watû'tsanû'hï.

Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>l-Une'ga, Kana'tï, sk?salatâ'titege'stï, sa\`ka'ni
ginu't?tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Sgë!

#### Translation.

### THIS IS FOR HUNTING BIRDS.

Listen! O Ancient White, where you dwell in peace I have come to rest.
Now let your spirit arise. Let it (the game brought down) be buried in
your stomach, and may your appetite never be satisfied. The red
hickories have tied themselves together. The clotted blood is your
recompense.

O Ancient White, \* \* \* Accept the clotted blood (?).

O Ancient White. put me in the successful hunting trail. Hang the
mangled things upon me. Let me come along the successful trail with them
doubled up (under my belt). It (the road) is clothed with the mangled
things.

O Ancient White, O Kanati, support me continually, that I may never
become blue. Listen!

#### Explanation.

This formula, from A\`yû<sup>n</sup>inï's manuscript, is recited by the
bird-hunter in the morning while standing over the fire at his hunting
camp before starting out for the day's hunt. A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>ini
stated that seven blowgun arrows are first prepared, including a small
one only a "hand-length" (awâ'hilû) long. On rising in the morning the
hunter, standing over the fire, addresses it as the "Ancient White,"
rubbing his hands together while repeating the prayer. He then sets out
for the hunting ground, where he expects to spend the day, and on
reaching it he shoots away the short arrow at random, without attempting
to trace its flight. There is of course some significance attached to
this action and perhaps an accompanying prayer, but no further
information upon this point was obtainable. Having shot away the magic
arrow, the hunter utters a peculiar hissing

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

sound, intended to call up the birds, and then goes to work with his
remaining arrows. On all hunting expeditions it is the regular practice,
religiously enforced, to abstain from food until sunset.

A favorite method with the bird-hunter during the summer season is to
climb a gum tree, which is much frequented by the smaller birds on
account of its berries, where, taking up a convenient position amid the
branches with his noiseless blowgun and arrows, he deliberately shoots
down one bird after another until his shafts are exhausted, when he
climbs down, draws out the arrows from the bodies of the birds killed,
and climbs up again to repeat the operation. As the light darts used
make no sound, the birds seldom take the alarm, and are too busily
engaged with the berries to notice their comrades dropping to the ground
from time to time, and pay but slight attention even to the movements of
the hunter.

The prayer is addressed to the Ancient White (the Fire), the spirit most
frequently invoked by the hunter, who, as before stated, rubs his hands
together over the fire while repeating the words. The expressions used
are obscure when taken alone, but are full of meaning when explained in
the light of the hunting customs. The "clotted blood" refers to the
bloodstained leaves upon which the fallen game has lain. The expression
occurs constantly in the hunting formulas. The hunter gathers up these
bloody leaves and casts them upon the fire, in order to draw omens for
the morrow from the manner in which they burn. A part of the tongue, or
some other portion of the animal, is usually cast upon the coals also
for the same purpose. This subject will be treated at length in a future
account of the hunting ceremonies.

"Let it be buried in your stomach" refers also to the offering made the
fire. By the red hickories are meant the strings of hickory bark which
the bird hunter twists about his waist for a belt. The dead birds are
carried by inserting their heads under this belt. Red is, of course,
symbolic of his success. "The mangled things" (unigwalû'<sup>n</sup>gï)
are the wounded birds. Kana'tï is here used to designate the fire, on
account of its connection with the hunting ceremonies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Shoot Dwellers in the Wilderness](sfoc40.md)
