[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc37)  [Next](sfoc39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HUNTING.

### GÛNÂ'HILÛ'<sup>n</sup>TA UGÛ'<sup>n</sup>WA\`LÏ.

Una'lelü' eskiska'l\`tasï'. Iskwa'lelü eskiska'l\`tasï'. Yû! Ela-Kana'tï
tsûldâ'hïstû'<sup>n</sup>, tsûwatsi'la astû'<sup>n</sup> detsatasi'ga.
Ts?skwâ'lï uda'nisä'\`testï, ugwala'ga udu'yaheti'dege'stï.
Sunûsi'ya-gwû udanisä'\`testï, ts\`su'lti-gwû nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>lï Gi'gage-gâgû', tsine'tsï gesû'<sup>n</sup>
aw\`stitege'stï. *Tsästû' utatiyi*, nâ'gwa *tsäs\`tû gasû'hisä\`ti
atisge'sti*. Ha-nâ'gwa nû<sup>n</sup>nâ tsusdi' tutana'wa-tegû'
*digana'watû'<sup>n</sup>ta* atisge'stï. Utalï' udaniû'hï ugwala'ga
gû<sup>n</sup>watuy'ahïti'tege'stï, hïlahiyû'<sup>n</sup>ta-gwû
<sup>w</sup>ustû'\`stï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. D?stiskwâ'lï
deudû'nisä\`te'stï. Yû!

#### Translation.

### CONCERNING HUNTING.

Give me the wind. Give me the breeze. Yû! O Great Terrestrial Hunter, I
come to the edge of your spittle where you repose. Let your stomach
cover itself; let it be covered with leaves. Let it cover itself at a
single bend, and may you never be satisfied.

\[1. This word, like the expression "seven days," frequently has a
figurative meaning. Thus the sun is said to be seven awâ'hilû above the
earth.

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

And you, O Ancient Red, may you hover above my breast while I sleep. Now
let good (dreams?) develop; let my experiences be propitious. Ha! Now
let my little trails be directed, as they lie down in various
directions(?). Let the leaves be covered with the clotted blood, and may
it never cease to be so. You two (the Water and the Fire) shall bury it
in your stomachs. Yû!

#### Explanation.

This is a hunting formula, addressed to the two great gods of the
hunter, Fire and Water. The evening before starting the hunter "goes to
water," as already explained, and recites the appropriate formula. In
the morning he sets out, while still fasting, and travels without eating
or drinking until nightfall. At sunset he again goes to water, reciting
this formula during the ceremony, after which he builds his camp fire,
eats his supper and lies down for the night, first rubbing his breast
with ashes from the fire. In the morning he starts out to look for game.

"Give me the wind," is a prayer that the wind may be in his favor, so
that the game may not scent him. The word rendered here "Great
Terrestrial Hunter," is in the original "Ela-Kana'tï." In this *e'la* is
the earth and *kana'tï* is a term applied to a successful hunter. The
great Kanatï, who, according to the myth, formerly kept all the game
shut up in his underground caverns, now dwells above the sky, and is
frequently invoked by hunters. The raven also is often addressed as
Kanatï in these hunting formulas. Ela-Kana'tï, the Great Terrestrial
Hunter--as distinguished from the other two--signifies the river, the
name referring to the way in which the tiny streams and rivulets search
out and bring down to the great river the leaves and débris of the
mountain forests. In formulas for medicine, love, the ball play, etc.,
the river is always addressed as the Long Person (Yû'<sup>n</sup>wï
Gûnahi'ta). The "spittle" referred to is the foam at the edge of the
water. "Let your stomach be covered with leaves" means, let the
blood-stained leaves where the stricken game shall fall be so numerous
as to cover the surface of the water. The hunter prays also that
sufficient game may be found in a single bend of the river to accomplish
this result without the necessity of searching through the whole forest,
and to that end he further prays that the river may never be satisfied,
but continually longing for more. The same idea is repeated in the
second paragraph, The hunter is supposed to feed the river with blood
washed from the game. In like manner he feeds the fire, addressed in the
second paragraph as the "Ancient Red," with a piece of meat cut from the
tongue of the deer. The prayer that the fire may hover above his breast
while he sleeps and brings him favorable dreams, refers to his rubbing
his breast with ashes from his camp fire before lying down to sleep, in
order that the fire may bring him dream omens of success for the morrow.
The Fire is addressed either as the Ancient White or the

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

Ancient Red, the allusion in the first case being to the light or the
ashes of the fire; in the other case, to the color of the burning coals.
"You two shall bury it in your stomachs" refers to the bloodstained
leaves and the piece of meat which are cast respectively into the river
and the fire. The formula was obtained from A\`yû<sup>n</sup>inï, who
explained it in detail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is for Hunting Birds](sfoc39)
