[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc20)  [Next](sfoc22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PAY OF THE SHAMAN.

The consideration which the doctor receives for his services is called
ugista'\`tï, a word of doubtful etymology, but probably derived from the
verb tsï'giû, "I take" or "I eat." In former times this was generally a
deer-skin or a pair of moccasins, but is now a certain quantity of
cloth, a garment, or a handkerchief. The shamans disclaim the idea that
the ugista'\`tï is pay, in our sense of the word, but assert that it is
one of the agencies in the removal and banishment of the disease spirit.
Their explanation is somewhat obscure, but

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

the cloth seems to be intended either as an offering to the disease
spirit, as a ransom to procure the release of his intended victim, or as
a covering to protect the hand of a shaman while engaged in pulling the
disease from the body of the patient. The first theory, which includes
also the idea of vicarious atonement, is common to many primitive
peoples. Whichever maybe the true explanation, the evil influence of the
disease is believed to enter into the cloth, which must therefore be
sold or given away by the doctor, as otherwise it will cause his death
when the pile thus accumulating reaches the height of his head. No evil
results seem to follow its transfer from the shaman to a third party.
The doctor can not bestow anything thus received upon a member of his
own family unless that individual gives him something in return. If the
consideration thus received, however, be anything eatable, the doctor
may partake along with the rest of the family. As a general rule the
doctor makes no charge for his services, and the consideration is
regarded as a free-will offering. This remark applies only to the
medical practice, as the shaman always demands and receives a fixed
remuneration for performing love charms, hunting ceremonials, and other
conjurations of a miscellaneous character. Moreover, whenever the beads
are used the patient must furnish a certain quantity of new cloth upon
which to place them, and at the close of the ceremony the doctor rolls
up the cloth, beads and all, and takes them away with him. The cloth
thus received by the doctor for working with the beads must not be used
by him, but must be sold. In one instance a doctor kept a handkerchief
which he received for his services, but instead sold a better one of his
own. Additional cloth is thus given each time the ceremony is repeated,
each time a second four days' course of treatment is begun, and as often
as the doctor sees fit to change his method of procedure. Thus, when he
begins to treat a sick man for a disease caused by rabbits, he expects
to receive a certain ugista'\`tï; but, should he decide after a time
that the terrapin or the red bird is responsible for the, trouble, he
adopts a different course of treatment, for which another ugista'\`tï is
necessary. Should the sickness not yield readily to his efforts, it is
because the disease animal requires a greater ugista'\`tï, and the
quantity of cloth must be doubled, so that on the whole the doctrine is
a very convenient one for the shaman. In many of the formulas explicit
directions are given as to the pay which the shaman is to receive for
performing the ceremony. In one of the Gatigwanasti formulas, after
specifying the amount of cloth to be paid, the writer of it makes the
additional proviso that it must be "pretty good cloth, too," asserting
as a clincher that "this is what the old folks said a long time ago."

The ugista'\`tï can not be paid by either one of a married couple to the
other, and, as it is considered a necessary accompaniment of the
application, it follows that a shaman can not treat his own wife in

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

sickness, and vice versa. Neither can the husband or wife of the sick
person send for the doctor, but the call must come from some one of the
blood relatives of the patient. In one instance within the writer's
knowledge a woman complained that her husband was very sick and needed a
doctor's attention, but his relatives were taking no steps in the matter
and it was not permissible for her to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ceremonies for Gathering Plants and Preparing Medicine](sfoc22.md)
