[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc08)  [Next](sfoc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE KANÂHETA ANI-TSALAGI ETI.

Among the papers thus obtained was a large number which for various
reasons it was found difficult to handle or file for preservation. Many
of them had been written so long ago that the ink had almost faded from
the paper; others were written with lead pencil, so that in handling
them the characters soon became blurred and almost illegible; a great
many were written on scraps of paper of all shapes and sizes; and others
again were full of omissions and doublets, due to the carelessness of
the writer, while many consisted simply of the prayer, with nothing in
the nature of a heading or prescription to show its purpose.

Under the circumstances it was deemed expedient to have a number of
these formulas copied in more enduring form. For this purpose it was
decided to engage the services of Ayâsta's youngest son, an intelligent
young man about nineteen years of age, who had attended school long
enough to obtain a fair acquaintance with English in addition to his
intimate knowledge of Cherokee. He was also gifted with a ready
comprehension, and from his mother and uncle Tsiskwa had acquired some
familiarity with many of the archaic expressions used in the sacred
formulas. He was commonly known as "Will West," but signed himself W. W.
Long, Long being the translation of his father's name, Gûnahi'ta. After
being instructed as to how the work should be done with reference to
paragraphing, heading, etc., he was furnished a blank book of two
hundred pages into which to copy such formulas as it seemed desirable to
duplicate. He readily grasped the idea and in the course of about a
month, working always under the writer's personal supervision, succeeded
in completely filling the book according to the plan outlined. In
addition to the duplicate formulas he wrote down a number of dance and
drinking songs, obtained originally from A\`yû<sup>n</sup>'inï, with
about thirty miscellaneous formulas obtained from various sources. The
book thus prepared is modeled on the plan of an ordinary book, with
headings, table of contents, and even with an illuminated title page
devised by the aid of the interpreter according to the regular Cherokee
idiomatic form, and is altogether a unique specimen of Indian literary
art. It contains in all two hundred and fifty-eight formulas and songs,
which of course are native aboriginal productions, although the
mechanical arrangement was performed under the direction of a white man.
This book also, under its Cherokee title, *Kanâhe'ta Ani-Tsa'lagï E'tï*
or "Ancient Cherokee Formulas," is now in the library of the Bureau.

There is still a considerable quantity of such manuscript in the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

hands of one or two shamans with whom there was no chance for
negotiating, but an effort will be made to obtain possession of these on
some future visit, should opportunity present. Those now in the Bureau
library comprised by far the greater portion of the whole quantity held
by the Indians, and as only a small portion of this was copied by the
owners it can not be duplicated by any future collector.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Character of the Formulas--The Cherokee Religion](sfoc10)
