[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc33)  [Next](sfoc35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### UNAWA STÎ EGWA (ADANÛ<sup>n</sup>WATÏ).

Sgë! Galû<sup>n</sup>latï' hinehi'(2) hinehi'yû(3) hinida'we(4),
utsinâ'wa(5) adû<sup>n</sup>niga(6)

                            1 2  1 2  2 2  3 4  3 3  5 6 6--Hayï'!

Sgë! U<sup>n</sup>wadâ'hi(1) hinehi'(2), hinehi'yû(3) hinida'we(4)
utsinâ'wa(5) adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga(6)

                            1 2  1 2  2 2  3 4  3 3  5 6 6--Hayï'!

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

Sgë! Nâtsihi'(1) hinehi'(2) hinehi'yû(3) hinida'we(4) utsinâ'wa(5)
adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga(6)

                            1 2  1 2  2 2  3 4  3 3  5 6 6--Hayï'!

Sgë! Amâyi'(1) hinehi'(2), hinehi'yû(3) hinida'we(4) utsinâ'wa(5)
adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga(6)

                            1 2  1 2  2 2  3 3  3 3  5 6 6--Hayï'!

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Agalu'ga Tsûsdi'ga, hida'wëhï,
â'tali tsusdiga'hï duda'w?satû'<sup>n</sup> ditsûldâ'histï. (Hida'wëhï,
gahu'stï tsanu'lû<sup>n</sup>hû<sup>n</sup>sgï' nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.)
Ha-nâ'gwa da'tûlehû<sup>n</sup>gû'. Usdi'gi(yu)
utiya'stanû<sup>n</sup>'(hï) (higese'i).
(Hû<sup>n</sup>)hiyala'gistani'ga igä'tï usdigâ'hï usa'hïlagï' Igâtu'ltï
nû<sup>n</sup>nâ'hï wïte'tsatänû<sup>n</sup>'û<sup>n</sup>sï'.
A\`ne'tsâge'ta *getsatûnëhï* nû<sup>n</sup>gûlstani'ga
igû<sup>n</sup>'wûlstanita'sti-gwû. Ati'gale'yata tsûtû'neli'ga.
Utsïnâ'wa (\[1\]) nigû<sup>n</sup>tisge'stï.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwa hû<sup>n</sup>hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Agalu'ga
Hegwahigwû'. Â'talï tsegwâ'hï duda'w?satû<sup>n</sup> iyû<sup>n</sup>ta
ditsûldâ'histï. Agalu'ga He'gwa, hausïnu'lï da'tûlehû<sup>n</sup>gû.
Usdi'giyu utiya'stanû'<sup>n</sup>hï. Hiyala'gistani'ga ulsge'ta
igâ't-egwâ'hï) usa'hïlagï'. (Igat-(egwâ'hï iyû<sup>n</sup>'ta
nû<sup>n</sup>-nâ'hï wïtetsatanû'<sup>n</sup>û<sup>n</sup>sï'.
A\`ne'tsâge'ta *getsatûne'litise'sti*
igû<sup>n</sup>'wûlstanita'sti-gwû. Utsïnâ'wa-gwû
nutatanû<sup>n</sup>ta. Nigagï' Yû!

(Degâsi'sisgû'<sup>n</sup>ï)--Unawa'stï e'gwa u'nitlû<sup>n</sup>gâ'ï.
Ta'ya gû'<sup>n</sup>tatï, ditsa'tista'\`ti. Tsâ'l-agayû'<sup>n</sup>lï
yä'hä ulû'<sup>n</sup>kwati-gwû nasgwû'.

#### Translation.

### TO TREAT THE GREAT CHILL.

Listen! On high you dwell, On high you dwell--you dwell, you dwell.
Forever you dwell, you anida'we, forever you dwell, forever you dwell.
Relief has come--has come. Hayï!

Listen! On Û<sup>n</sup>wadâ'hï you dwell, On Û<sup>n</sup>wadâ'hï you
dwell--you dwell, you dwell. Forever you dwell, you anida'we, forever
you dwell, forever you dwell. Relief has come--has come. Hayï!

Listen! In the pines you dwell, In the pines you dwell--you dwell, you
dwell. Forever you dwell, you anida'we, forever you dwell, forever you
dwell. Relief has come--has come. Hayï!

Listen! In the water you dwell, In the water you dwell, you dwell, you
dwell. Forever you dwell, you anida'we, forever you dwell, forever you
dwell. Relief has come--has come. Hayï!

Listen! O now you have drawn near to hearken, O Little Whirlwind, O
ada'wehi, in the leafy shelter of the lower mountain, there you repose.
O ada'wehi, you can never fail in anything. Ha! Now rise up. A very
small portion \[of the disease\] remains. You have come to sweep it away
into the small swamp on. the upland. You have laid down your paths near
the swamp. It is ordained that you shall scatter it as in play, so that
it shall utterly disappear. By you it must be scattered. So shall there
be relief.

Listen! O now again you have drawn near to hearken, O Whirlwind,
surpassingly great. In the leafy shelter of the great mountain there you
repose. O Great Whirlwind, arise quickly. A very small part \[of the
disease\] remains. You have come to sweep the intruder into the great
swamp on the upland. You have laid down your paths toward the great
swamp. You shall scatter it as in play so that it shall utterly
disappear. And now relief has come. All is done. Yû!

\[1. So written and pronounced by A\`yû<sup>n</sup>ini instead of
utsïnä'wa.\]

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

(Prescription.)--(This is to use) when they are sick with the great
chill. Take a decoction of wild cherry to blow upon them. If you have
Tsâ'l-agayû'<sup>n</sup>lï ("old tobacco"--*Nicotiana rustica*) it also
is very effective.

#### EXPLANATION.

Unawa'stï, "that which chills one," is a generic name for intermittent
fever, otherwise known as fever and ague. It is much dreaded by the
Indian doctors, who recognize several varieties of the disease, and have
various theories to account for them. The above formula was obtained
from A\`yû<sup>n</sup>ni (Swimmer), who described the symptoms of this
variety, the "Great Chill," as blackness in the face, with alternate
high fever and shaking chills. The disease generally appeared in spring
or summer, and might return year after year. In the first stages the
chill usually came on early in the morning, but came on later in the day
as the disease progressed. There might be more than one chill during the
day. There was no rule as to appetite, but the fever always produced an
excessive thirst. In one instance the patient fainted from the heat and
would even lie down in a stream to cool himself. The doctor believed the
disease was caused by malicious tsgâ'ya, a general name for all small
insects and worms, excepting intestinal worms. These tsgâ'ya--that is,
the disease tsgâ'ya, not the real insects and worms--are held
responsible for a large number of diseases, and in fact the tsgâ'ya
doctrine is to the Cherokee practitioner what the microbe theory is to
some modern scientists. The tsgâ'ya live in the earth, in the water, in
the air, in the foliage of trees, in decaying wood, or wherever else
insects lodge, and as they are constantly being crushed, burned or
otherwise destroyed through the unthinking carelessness of the human
race, they are continually actuated by a spirit of revenge. To
accomplish their vengeance, according to the doctors, they "establish
towns" under the skin of their victims, thus producing an irritation
which results in fevers, boils, scrofula and other diseases.

The formula begins with a song of four verses, in which the doctor
invokes in succession the spirits of the air, of the mountain, of the
forest, and of the water. Galû<sup>n</sup>latï, the word used in the
first verse, signifies, as has been already explained, "on high" or
"above everything," and has been used by translators to mean heaven.
Û<sup>n</sup>wadâ'hï in the second verse is the name of a bald mountain
east of Webster, North Carolina, and is used figuratively to denote any
mountains of bold outline. The Cherokees have a tradition to account for
the name, which is derived from Û<sup>n</sup>wadâ'lï, "provision house."
Nâ'tsihï' in the third verse signifies "pinery," from nâ'\`tsï, "pine,"
but is figuratively used to denote a forest of any kind.

In the recitation which follows the song, but is used only in serious
cases, the doctor prays to the whirlwind, which is considered to dwell,
among the trees on the mountain side, where the trembling of

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

the leaves always gives the first intimation of its presence. He
declares that a small portion of the disease still remains, the spirits
invoked in the song having already taken the rest, and calls upon the
whirlwind to lay down a path for it and sweep it away into the swamp on
the upland, referring to grassy marshes common in the small coves of the
higher mountains, which, being remote from the settlements, are
convenient places to which to banish the disease. Not satisfied with
this he goes on to direct the whirlwind to scatter the disease as it
scatters the leaves of the forest, so that it shall utterly disappear.
In the Cherokee formula the verb a\`ne'tsâge'ta, means literally "to
play," and is generally understood to refer to the ball play, a\`ne'tsâ,
so that to a Cherokee the expression conveys the idea of catching up the
disease and driving it onward as a player seizes the ball and sends it
spinning through the air from between his ball sticks. Niga'gï is a
solemn expression about equivalent to the Latin consummatum est.

The doctor beats up some bark from the trunk of the wild cherry and puts
it into water together with seven coals of fire, the latter being
intended to warm the decoction The leaves of Tsâl-agayû'<sup>n</sup>li
(Indian tobacco--Nicotiana rustica) are sometimes used in place of the
wild cherry bark. The patient is placed facing the sunrise, and the
doctor, taking the medicine in his mouth, blows it over the body of the
sick man. First, standing between the patient and the sunrise and
holding the medicine cup in his hand, he sings the first verse in a low
tone. Then, taking some of the liquid in his mouth, he advances and
blows it successively upon the top of the head, the right shoulder, left
shoulder, and breast or back of the patient, making four blowings in
all. He repeats the same ceremony with the second, third, and fourth
verse, returning each time to his original position. The ceremony takes
place in the morning, and if necessary is repeated in the evening. It is
sometimes necessary also to repeat the treatment for several--generally
four--consecutive days.

The recitation is not used excepting in the most serious cases, when,
according to the formula, "a very small portion" of the disease still
lingers. It is accompanied by blowing *of the breath alone*, without
medicine, probably in this case typical of the action of the whirlwind.
After repeating the whole ceremony accompanying the song, as above
described, the doctor returns to his position in front of the patient
and recites in a whisper the first paragraph to the Little Whirlwind,
after which he advances and blows his breath upon the patient four times
as he has already blown the medicine upon him. Then going around to the
north he recites the second paragraph to the Great Whirlwind, and at its
conclusion blows in the same manner. Then moving around to the
west--behind the patient--he again prays to the Little Whirlwind with
the same ceremonies, and finally moving around to the south side he
closes with the prayer to the

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

Great Whirlwind, blowing four times at its conclusion. The medicine must
be prepared anew by the doctor at the house of the patient at each
application morning or evening. Only as much as will be needed is made
at a time, and the patient always drinks what remains after the blowing.
Connected with the preparation and care of the medicine are a number of
ceremonies which need not be detailed here. The wild cherry bark must
always be procured fresh; but the Tsâl-agayû'<sup>n</sup>lï ("Old
Tobacco") leaves may be dry. When the latter plant is used four leaves
are taken and steeped in warm water with the fire coals, as above
described.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is to Make Children Jump Down](sfoc35.md)
