[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc25)  [Next](sfoc27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# LANGUAGE OF THE FORMULAS.

A few words remain to be said in regard to the language of the formulas.
They are full of archaic and figurative expressions, many of which are
unintelligible to the common people, and some of which even the shamans
themselves are now unable to. explain. These archaic forms, like the old
words used by our poets, lend a peculiar beauty which can hardly be
rendered in a translation. They frequently throw light on the dialectic
evolution of the language, as many words found now only in the nearly
extinct Lower Cherokee dialect occur in formulas which in other respects
are written in the Middle or Upper dialect. The R sound, the chief
distinguishing characteristic of the old Lower dialect, of course does
not occur, as there are no means of indicating it in the Cherokee
syllabary. Those who are accustomed to look to the Bible for all beauty
in sacred

\[1. For more in regard to color symbolism, see Mallery's Pictographs of
the North American Indians in Fourth Report of the Bureau of Ethnology,
pp. 53-57, Washington, 1886; Gatschet's Creek Migration Legend, vol. 2,
pp. 31-41, St. Louis, 1888; Brinton's Kiche Myths in Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society, vol. 19, pp. 646-647, Philadelphia,
1882.\]

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

expression will be surprised to find that these formulas abound in the
loftiest flights of poetic imagery. This is especially true of the
prayers used to win the love of a woman or to destroy the life of an
enemy, in which we find such expressions as--"Now your soul fades
away--your spirit shall grow less and dwindle away, never to reappear;"
"Let her be completely veiled in loneliness--O Black Spider, may you
hold her soul in your web, so that it may never get through the meshes;"
and the final declaration of the lover, "Your soul has come into the
very center of my soul, never to turn away."

In the translation it has been found advisable to retain as technical
terms a few words which could not well be rendered literally, such as
ada'wëhï and ugistâ'\`tï. These words will be found explained in the
proper place. Transliterations of the Cherokee text of the formulas are
given, but it must be distinctly understood that the translations are
intended only as free renderings of the spirit of the originals, exact
translations with grammatic and glossarial notes being deferred until a
more extended study of the language has been made, when it is hoped to
present with more exactness of detail the whole body of the formulas, of
which the specimens here given are but a small portion.

The facsimile formulas are copies from the manuscripts now in possession
of the Bureau of Ethnology, and the portraits are from photographs taken
by the author in the field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note on the Orthography and Translation](sfoc27)
