[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc47)  [Next](sfoc49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (ADALANÏ'STÄ\`TIYÏ II.)

Yû! Ha-nâ'gwa ada'ntï dätsâsi'ga, \* \* hïlû(stû'\`lï), (\* \*)
ditsa-(dâ'ita). A'yû O O tsila(stû'\`lï). Hiye'la tsïkï' tsïkû'. (Yû!).

Yû! Ha-nâ'gwa ada'ntï dätsâsi'ga, \* \* hïlû(stû'\`lï), (\* \*)
ditsa-(dâ'ita). A'yû O O tsûwi'ya tsïkï' tsïkû'. Yû!

Yû! Ha-nâ'gwa ada'ntï dätsâsi'ga, \* \* hïlû(stû'\`lï), (\* \*)
ditsa-(dâ'ita). A'yû O O tsûwatsi'la tsïkï' tsïkû'. Yû!

Yû! Ha-nâ'gwa ada'ntï dätsâsi'ga, \* \* hïlû(stû'\`lï), (\* \*)
ditsa-(dâ'ita). A'yû O O tsûnahü' tsïkï' tsïkû'. Yû!

Sgë! "Ha-nâ'gwa ada'ntï dutsase', tsugale'ntï nige'sû'<sup>n</sup>na,"
tsûdûneï, Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>lige galû'<sup>n</sup>latï. Kananë'skï
Û'<sup>n</sup>nage galû'nlatï (h)etsatsâ'û<sup>n</sup>tänile'ï.
Tsänilta'gï tsûksâ'û<sup>n</sup>tanile'ï. \* \* gûla(stû'\`lï), \* \*
ditsadâ'(ita). Dudantâ'gï uhani'latâ tïkwenû'<sup>n</sup>tani'ga.
Kûlkwâ'gï igûlsta'lagï iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta yû'<sup>n</sup>wï
adayû'<sup>n</sup>latawä' dudûne'lida'lû<sup>n</sup> uhisa'\`tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwatï uhisa'\`tï dutlû'<sup>n</sup>tani'ga. Tsû'nkta
daskâ'lû<sup>n</sup>tsi'ga. Sâ'gwahï di'kta de'gayelû<sup>n</sup>tsi'ga.
Ga'tsa igûnû'nugâ'ïstû uda'ntâ? Usû'hita nudanû'<sup>n</sup>na
ûltû<sup>n</sup>ge'ta, gû<sup>n</sup>wadûneli'dege'stï.
Igû<sup>n</sup>wûlsta'\`ti-gwû duwâlu'wa\`tû<sup>n</sup>tï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Kananë'skï Û<sup>n</sup>nage'ï tsanildew\`se'stï
ada'ntâ uktû<sup>n</sup>lesi'dastï nige'sûna. Gadâyu'stï tsûdâ'ita
ada'ntï tside'atsasi'ga. A'ya a'kwatseli'ga.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

Sgë! Ha-nâ'gwûlë' hû<sup>n</sup>hatû<sup>n</sup>ga'ga,
Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>lï Gi'gage. Tsetsûli'sï hiye'lastû<sup>n</sup>
a\`ta'hisi'ga. Ada'ntâ hasû'gû'\`lawï'stani'ga, tsa'skaláhistï
nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Hïkayû'<sup>n</sup>lige denätsegû\`la'wïstani'ga.
Agë'\`ya gï'nsû<sup>n</sup>gû\`lawïs'tani'ga uda'ntâ *uwahisï'sata*.
Dïgïnaskûlâ'hïstï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na. Yû!

Hi'ä nasgwû' u\`tlâ'yi-gwû dïgalû'<sup>n</sup>wistan'tï
snû<sup>n</sup>â'yï hani'\`lihûgûnasgi'stï. Gane'tsï aye'\`lï
asi'tadis'tï watsi'la, ganû<sup>n</sup>li'yetï aguwaye'nï andisgâ'ï.
Sâi'yï tsika'nâhe itsu'laha'gwû.

#### Translation.

### TO FIX THE AFFECTIONS.

Yû! Ha! Now the souls have come together. You are of the Deer (x x)
clan. Your name is (x x) Ayâsta, I am of the Wolf (o-o) clan. Your body,
I take it, I eat it. Yû! Ha! Now the souls have come together. You are
of the Deer clan. Your name is Ayâsta. I am of the Wolf clan. Your flesh
I take, I eat. Yû!

Yû! Ha! Now the souls have come together. You are of the Deer clan. Your
name is Ayâsta. I am of the Wolf clan. Your spittle I take, I eat. I!
Yû!

Yû! Ha! Now the souls have come together. You are of the Deer clan. Your
name is Ayâsta. I am of the Wolf clan. Your heart I take, I eat. Yû!

Listen! "Ha! Now the souls have met, never to part," you have said, O
Ancient One above. O Black Spider, you have been brought down from on
high. You have let down your web. She is of the Deer clan; her name is
Ayâsta. Her soul you, have wrapped up in (your) web. There where the
people of the seven clans are continually coming in sight and again
disappearing (i. e. moving about, coming; and going), there was never
any feeling of loneliness.

Listen! Ha! But now you have covered her over with loneliness. Her eyes
have faded. Her eyes have come to fasten themselves on one alone.
Whither can her soul escape? Let her be sorrowing as she goes along, and
not for one night alone. Let her become an aimless wanderer, whose trail
may never be followed. O Black Spider, may you hold her soul in your web
so that it shall never get through the meshes. What is the name of the
soul? They two have come together. It is mine!

Listen! Ha! And now you have hearkened, O Ancient Red. Your
grandchildren have come to the edge of your body. You hold them yet more
firmly in your grasp, never to let go your hold. O Ancient One, we have
become as one. The woman has put her (x x x) soul into our hands. We
shall never let it go! Yû!

(Directions.)--And this also is for just the same purpose (the preceding
formula in the manuscript book is also a love charm). It must be done by
stealth at night when they are asleep. One must put the hand on the
middle of the breast and rub on spittle with the hand, they say. The
other formula is equally good.

#### Explanation.

This formula to fix the affections of a young wife is taken from the
manuscript sheets of the late Gatigwanasti. It very much resembles the
other formula for the same purpose, obtained from A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>inï,
and the brief directions show that the ceremony is alike in both. The
first four paragraphs are probably sung, as in the other formula, on
four successive nights, and, as explained in the directions and as
stated verbally by A\`yû'<sup>n</sup>inï, this must be done. stealthily
at night while the woman is asleep, the husband rubbing his spittle

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

on her breast with his hand while chanting the song in a low tone,
hardly above a whisper. The prayer to the Ancient One, or Ancient Red
(Fire), in both formulas, and the expression, "I come to the edge of
your body," indicate that the hands are first warmed over the fire, in
accordance with the general practice when laying on the hands. The
prayer to the Black Spider is a beautiful specimen of poetic imagery,
and hardly requires an explanation. The final paragraph indicates the
successful accomplishment of his purpose. "Your grandchildren"
(tsetsûli'sï) is an expression frequently used in addressing the more
important deities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Shorten a Night-Goer on this Side](sfoc49.md)
