[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sfoc31)  [Next](sfoc33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GÛ<sup>n</sup>WANI'GISTÛ'<sup>n</sup>Ï DITANÛ<sup>n</sup>WÂTI'YÏ.

Yû! Sgë! Usïnu'lï hatû'<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Giya'giya' Sa\`ka'nï,
ew?satâ'gï tsûl\`dâ'histï. Usïnu'lï hatlasi'ga. Tsis'kwa-gwû' ulsge'ta
uwu'tlani\`lëï'. Usïnuli'yu atsahilu'gïsi'ga. Utsïnä'wa
nu'tatanû'<sup>n</sup>ta. Yü!

Yû! Sgë! Usïnu'lï hatû<sup>n</sup>gani'ga, Diga'tiskï Wâtige'ï,
galû'<sup>n</sup>latï iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta ditsûl\`dâ'histï. Ha-nâ'gwa
usïnu'lï hatlasi'ga. Tsi'skwa-gwû dïtu'nila'-w?itsû'hï higese'ï. Usïnûlï
kë'\`tati'gû\`lahi'ga. Utsïnä'wa adû<sup>n</sup>ni'ga. Yû!

#### Translation.

### TO TREAT GÛ<sup>n</sup>WANI'GISTÛ'<sup>n</sup>Ï--(SECOND).

Yû! Listen! Quickly you have drawn near to hearken, O Blue Sparrow-Hawk;
in the spreading tree tops you are at rest. Quickly you have come down.
The intruder is only a bird which has, overshadowed him. Swiftly you
have swooped down upon it. Relief is accomplished. Yû!

Yû! Listen! Quickly you have drawn near to hearken, O Brown Rabbit-Hawk;
you are at rest there above. Ha! Swiftly now you have come down. It is
only the birds which have come together for a council. Quickly you have
come and scattered them. Relief is accomplished. Yû!

#### Explanation.

This formula, also for Gû<sup>n</sup>wani'gistû'<sup>n</sup>ï or
Atawinë'hï, was obtained from A\`wan'ita (Young Deer), who wrote down
only the prayer and explained the treatment orally. He coincides in the
opinion that this disease in children is caused by the birds, but says
that it originates from the shadow of a bird. flying overhead having
fallen upon the pregnant mother. He says further that the disease is
easily recognized in children, but that it sometimes does not develop
until the child has attained maturity, when it is more difficult to
discern the cause of the trouble, although in the latter case dark
circles around the eyes are unfailing symptoms.

The prayer--like several others from the same source--seems incomplete,
and judging from analogy is evidently incorrect in some respects, but
yet exemplifies the disease theory in a striking manner. The disease is
declared to have been caused by the birds, it being asserted in the
first paragraph that a bird has cast its shadow upon the sufferer, while
in the second it is declared that they have gathered in council (in his
body). This latter is a favorite expression in these formulas to
indicate the great number of the disease animals.

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

Another expression of frequent occurrence is to the effect that the
disease animals have formed a settlement or established a townhouse in
the patient's body. The disease animal, being a bird or birds, must be
dislodged by something which preys upon birds, and accordingly the Blue
Sparrow-Hawk from the tree tops and the Brown Rabbit-Hawk
(Diga'tiskï--"One who snatches up"), from above are invoked to drive out
the intruders. The former is then said to have swooped down upon them as
a hawk darts upon its prey, while the latter is declared to have
scattered the birds which were holding a council. This being done,
relief is accomplished. Yû! is a meaningless interjection frequently
used to introduce or close paragraphs or songs.

The medicine used is a warm decoction of the bark of Kûnstû'tsï
(Sassafras--Sassafras officinale), Kanû<sup>n</sup>si'ta (Flowering
Dogwood--Cornus florida), Udâ'lana (Service tree--Amelanchier
Canadensis), and Uni'kwa (Black Gum--Nyssa multiflora), with the roots
of two species (large and small) of Da'yakalï'skï (Wild Rose--Rosa
lucida). The bark in every case is taken from the east side of the tree,
and the roots selected are also generally, if not always, those growing
toward the east. In this case the roots and barks are not bruised, but
are simply steeped in warm water for four days. The child is then
stripped and bathed all over with the decoction morning and night for
four days, no formula being used during the bathing. It is then made to
hold up its hands in front of its face with the palms turned out toward
the doctor, who takes some of the medicine in his mouth and repeats the
prayer mentally, blowing the medicine upon the head and hands of the
patient at the, final *Yû!* of each paragraph. It is probable that the
prayer originally consisted of four paragraphs, or else that these two
paragraphs were repeated. The child drinks a little of the medicine at
the end of each treatment.

The use of salt is prohibited during the four days of the treatment, the
word (amä') being understood to include lye, which enters largely into
Cherokee food preparations. No chicken or other feathered animal is
allowed to enter the house during the same period, for obvious reasons,
and strangers are excluded for reasons already explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This Tells About Moving Pains in the Teeth (Neuralgia?)](sfoc33.md)
