[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc30)  [Next](sfoc32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GÛ<sup>n</sup>WÂNI'GISTÂ'Ï ADANU'<sup>n</sup>WÂTÏ.

Sgë! Ha-tsida'wëiyu, gahus'tï aginúl\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Gû<sup>n</sup>gwäda-g'anad?diyû' tsida'wëi'yu. Ha-Wähuhu'-gwû
hitagu'sgastanë\`hëï. Ha-nâ'gwa hü\`kikahû<sup>n</sup>nû'
ha-dustü'\`gahï digesû'<sup>n</sup>ï, iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta
wû<sup>n</sup>\`kidâ'-hïstani'ga.

Sgë! Ha-tsida'wëi'yu, gahu'stï aginu'l\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Gû<sup>n</sup>gwä-daga'nad?diyû' tsida'wëi'yu. Ha-Uguku'-gwû
hitagu'sgastanë'heï' udâhi'yu tag'u'sgastanë'hëï'. Ha-na'gwadi'na
hû<sup>n</sup>kikahû<sup>n</sup>nû'. Hanânâ'hï digesû'<sup>n</sup>ï,
iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta wû<sup>n</sup>\`kidâ'hïstani'ga.

Sgë! Ha-tsida'wëi'yu, gahu'stï aginu'l\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Gû<sup>n</sup>gwäda-ga'nad?diyû tsida'wëi'yu. Ha-Tsistu-gwû
hitagu'sgastanë'hë'ï udâhi'yu tagu'sgastanë'hëï'. Ha-nâ'gwadi'na
hû'<sup>n</sup>kikahû'<sup>n</sup>nû. Ha-sunû<sup>n</sup>da'sï
iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta kane'skawâ'dihï digesû'<sup>n</sup>ï,
wû<sup>n</sup>\`kidâ'hïstani'ga.

Sgë! Ha-tsida'wëi'yu, gahu'stï aginu'l\`tï nige'sû<sup>n</sup>na.
Gû<sup>n</sup>gwädaga'nad?di'yû tsida'wëi'yu. Ha-De'tsata'-gwû
(hi)tagu'sgastanë'hëï udâhi'yu tagu'sgastanë'hëï'. Ha-nâ'gwadi'na
hû<sup>n</sup>kikahû'<sup>n</sup>na. Ha-udâ'tale'ta
digesû'<sup>n</sup>ï, iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta
wû<sup>n</sup>\`kidâ'hïstani'ga.

(Degâ'sisisgû'<sup>n</sup>ï)-Hiä'-skïnï' unsdi'ya
dïkanû'<sup>n</sup>wâtï tsa\`natsa'yihâ'ï tsaniska'iha'ï;
gû<sup>n</sup>wani'gista'ï hi'anûdï'sgaï'. Ämä' dûtsati'stïsgâ'ï nû'\`kï
tsusû'hita dïkanû'<sup>n</sup>wâtï Ulsinide'na
dakanû'<sup>n</sup>wisgâ'ï. Û'<sup>n</sup>tsa iyû'<sup>n</sup>ta
witunini'dastï yigesâ'ï.

#### Translation.

### TO TREAT THEM WHEN SOMETHING IS CAUSING SOMETHING TO EAT THEM.

Listen! Ha! I am a great ada'wehi, I never fail in anything. I surpass
all others-I am a great ada'wehi. Ha! It is a mere screech owl that has
frightened him. Ha! now I have put it away in the laurel thickets. There
I compel it to remain,

Listen! Ha! I am a great ada'wehi, I never fail in anything. I surpass
all others--I am a great ada'wehi. Ha! It is a mere hooting owl that has
frightened him. Undoubtedly that has frightened him. Ha! At once I have
put it away in the spruce thickets. Ha! There I compel it to remain.

Listen! Ha! I am a great ada'wehi, I never fail in anything. I surpass
all others--I am a great ada'wehi. Ha! It is only a rabbit that has
frightened him. Undoubtedly that has frightened him. Ha! Instantly I
have put it away on the mountain ridge. Ha! There in the broom sage I
compel it to remain.

Listen! Ha! I am a great ada'wehi, I never fail in anything. I surpass
all others--I am a great ada'wehi. Ha! It is only a mountain sprite that
has frightened him. Undoubtedly that has frightened him. Ha! Instantly I
have put it away on the bluff. Ha! There I compel it to remain.

(Prescription)--Now this is to treat infants if they are affected by
crying and nervous fright. (Then) it is said that something is causing
something to eat them. To treat them one may blow water on them for four
nights. Doctor them just before dark. Be sure not to carry them about
outside the house.

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

#### Explanation.

The Cherokee name for this disease is Gu<sup>n</sup>wani'gistâï', which
signifies that "something is causing something to eat," or gnaw the
vitals of the patient. The disease attacks only infants of tender age
and the symptoms are nervousness and troubled sleep, from which the
child wakes suddenly crying as if frightened. The civilized doctor would
regard these as symptoms of the presence of worms, but although the
Cherokee name might seem to indicate the same belief, the real theory is
very different.

Cherokee mothers sometimes hush crying children by telling them that the
screech owl is listening out in the woods or that the De'tsata--a
malicious little dwarf who lives in caves in the river bluffs--will come
and get them. This quiets the child for the time and is so far
successful, but the animals, or the De'tsata, take offense at being
spoken of in this way, and visit their displeasure upon the *children
born to the mother afterward*. This they do by sending an animal into
the body of the child to gnaw its vitals. The disease is very common and
there are several specialists who devote their attention to it, using
various formulas and prescriptions. It is also called ätawi'nëhï,
signifying that it is caused by the "dwellers in the forest," i. e., the
wild game and birds, and some doctors declare that it is caused by the
revengeful comrades of the animals, especially birds, killed by the
father of the child, the animals tracking the slayer to his home by the
blood drops on the leaves. The next formula will throw more light upon
this theory.

In this formula the doctor, who is certainly not overburdened with
modesty, starts out by asserting that he is a great ada'wehi, who never
fails and who surpasses all others. He then declares that, the disease
is caused by a more screech owl, which he at once banishes to the laurel
thicket. In the succeeding paragraphs he reiterates his former boasting,
but asserts in turn that the trouble is caused by a mere hooting owl, a
rabbit, or even by the De'tsata, whose greatest exploit is hiding the
arrows of the boys, for which the youthful hunters do not hesitate to
rate him soundly. These various mischief-makers the doctor banishes to
their proper haunts, the hooting owl to the spruce thicket, the rabbit
to the broom sage. on the mountain side, and the, De'tsata to the bluffs
along the river bank.

Some doctors use herb decoctions, which are blown upon the body of the
child, but in this formula the only remedy prescribed is water, which
must be blown upon the body of the little sufferer just before dark for
four nights. The regular method is to blow once each at the end of the
first, second, and third paragraphs and four times at the end of the
fourth or last. In diseases of this kind, which are not supposed to be
of a local character, the doctor blows

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

first upon the back of the head, then upon the left shoulder, next upon
the right shoulder, and finally upon the breast, the patient being
generally sitting, or propped up in bed, facing the east. The child must
not be taken out of doors during the four days, because should a bird
chance to fly overhead so that its shadow would fall upon the infant, it
would *fan the disease* back into the body of the little one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Treat Gû<sup>n</sup>wani'gistû'<sup>n</sup>ï](sfoc32)
