[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sfoc26)  [Next](sfoc28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SPECIMEN FORMULAS.

## NOTE ON THE ORTHOGRAPHY AND TRANSLATION.

In the Cherokee text both d and g have a medial sound, approximating the
sounds of *t* and *k* respectively. The other letters are pronounced in
regular accordance with the alphabet of the Bureau of Ethnology. The
language abounds in nasal and aspirate sounds, the most difficult of the
latter being the aspirate *\`l*, which to one familiar only with English
sounds like *tl*.

A few words whose meaning could not be satisfactorily ascertained have
been distinctively indicated in the Cherokee text by means of italics.
In the translation the corresponding expression has been queried, or the
space left entirely blank. On examining the text the student can not
fail to be struck by the great number of verbs ending in *iga*. This is
a peculiar form hardly ever used excepting in these formulas, where
almost every paragraph contains one or more such verbs. It implies that
the subject has just come and is now performing the action, and that he
came for that purpose. In addition to this, many of these verbs may be
either assertive or imperative (expressing entreaty), according to the
accent. Thus *hatû'<sup>n</sup>-gani'ga* means "you have just come and
are listening and it is for that purpose you came." By slightly
accenting the final syllable it becomes "come at once to listen." It
will thus be seen that the great majority of the formulas are
declarative rather than petitional in form-laudatory rhapsodies instead
of prayers, in the ordinary sense of the word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Formula for Treating the Crippler (Rheumatism)](sfoc28)
