[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc25004)  [Next](cc25006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Also I in the first year of Darius the
Mede, *even* I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et ego anno primo Darii medi steti in
roboratorem, et auxilium illi.  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148)

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>Interpreters explain this verse in various
ways. Some think the angel fought for the Persian king, and follow up
their opinion, because he did not for the first time begin now to defend
that monarchy in favor of the chosen people, but had done so from the
very beginning. Others refer this to Michael, as the angel declares that
he introduced the assistance of Michael. But that is forced and cold. I
do not hesitate to state the argument to be from the greater to the
less, and we have an instance of this in a tragedy of Ovid’s. I have
been able to preserve you; do you ask whether I can destroy you? Thus
the angel says, I have erected the Persian monarchy; I have not the
slightest doubt of my present power to restrain these kings, lest they
should pour forth their fury upon the people. The full meaning is this,
the king of the Persians is nothing, and can do nothing except through
me. I was God’s servant in transferring the monarchy of the Medes and
Chaldeans to the Persians, as well as that of the Babylonians to the
Medes. God, says he, entrusted me with that office, and so I placed
Darius upon the throne. You now see how completely I have him in my
power, and how I can prevent him from injuring my people should he be so
inclined. When the angel boasts of *his standing forward to help
Darius,* he claims nothing to himself, but speaks as it were in the
person of God. For angels have no power distinct from God’s when he uses
their agency and assistance. There is no reason for any inquiry whether
the angel ought to use this boastful language and claim anything for
himself. For he does not claim anything as really his own, but he skews
himself to have been an agent in the change of dynasty when Babylon was
subdued by the Medes, and the empire transferred to Darius. For
although, as we have previously shewn, Cyrus obtained the victory, yet
he transferred the honors of government to his uncle Cyaxares. The
Hebrews are accustomed to consider him as king for the first two years;
Cyrus began to reign after this period; and now, when the angel appears
to Daniel, the third year had arrived, as we saw at the beginning of the
chapter.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou daily and
familiarly deignest to grant us the light of heavenly doctrine, that we
may come to thy school with true humility and modesty. May our docility
be really apparent; may we receive with reverence whatever proceeds from
thy lips, and may thy majesty be conspicuous among us. May we taste of
that goodness which thou dost manifest to us in thy word, and be enabled
to rejoice in thee as our Father; may we never dread thy presence, but
may we enjoy the sweet testimony of thy paternal grace and favor. May
thy word be more precious to us than gold and worldly treasures, and,
meanwhile, may we feed upon its sweetness, until we arrive all that full
satiety which is laid up for us in heaven through Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Fify-Sixth

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**2.** And now will I shew thee the truth.
Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth
shall be far richer than *they* all: and by his strength through his
riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Et nunc veritatem annuntio tibi: ecce
adhuc tres reges stabunt in Perside, et quartus ditabitur opibus mignis,
 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) prae omnibus et secundum
fortitudinem suam, in, *inquam*, opibus suis,  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) excitabit omnes contra regnum
Graecorum.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>We<span id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span> must now
understand God’s intention in thus informing his servant Daniel of
future events. He was clearly unwilling to gratify a vain curiosity, and
he enlarged upon events necessary to be known, thus enabling the Prophet
not only privately to rely on God’s grace, through this manifestation of
his care for his Church, but also to exhort others to persevere in the
faith. This chapter seems like a historical narrative under the form of
an enigmatic description of events then future. The angel relates and
places before his eyes occurrences yet to come to pass. We gather from
this very clearly how God spoke through his prophets; and thus Daniel,
in his prophetic character alone, is a clear proof to us of God’s
peculiar favor towards the Israelites. Here the angel discusses, not the
general state of the world, but first the Persian kingdom, then the
monarchy of Alexander, and afterwards the two kingdoms of Syria and
Egypt. From this we cleverly perceive how the whole discourse was
directed to the faithful. God did not regard the welfare of other
nations, but wished to benefit his Church, and principally to sustain
the faithful under their approaching troubles. It was to assure them of
God’s never becoming forgetful of his covenant, and of his so moderating
the convulsions then taking place throughout the world, as to be ever
protecting his people by his assistance. But we shall have to repeat
this again, and even more than once, as we proceed.

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>First of all, the angel states, *Three kings
shall yet stand up in Persia* With respect to the clause, *Behold! I
announce to you the truth,* I explained in yesterday’s Lecture how
frequently he confirmed his prophecy whenever he treated events of the
greatest importance, which seemed almost incredible. *I shall tell you
the real truth; three kings shall stand up.* The Jews are not only very
ignorant of everything, but very stupid also- then they have no sense of
shame, and are endued with a perverse audacity; for they think there
were only three kings of Persia, and they neglect all history, and
mingle and confound things perfectly clear and completely distinct.
There were eight kings of Persia of whom no mention is made here. Why,
then, does the angel say, *three kings should stand up?* This was the
first year of Darius, as we saw before. Hence, in their number of kings,
Cyrus, the first monarch, is included, together with his son Cambyses.
When these two kings have been decided on, a new question will arise
again; for some add Smerdis to Cambyses, though he was only an impostor;
for the Magi falsely thrust him in as the son of Darius, for the purpose
of acquiring the sovereignty to themselves. Thus he was acknowledged as
king for seven months; but when the cheat was discovered he was slain by
seven of the nobles, among whom was Darius the son of Hystaspes, and he,
according to the common narrative, was created king by the consent of
the others on the neighing of his horse. The variations of interpreters
might hinder us from reading them, and so we must gather the truth from
the event. For Smerdis, as I have stated, cannot be reckoned among the
kings of Persia, as he was but an impostor. I therefore exclude him,
following the prudence of others who have considered the point with
attention.

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span>We must now observe why Daniel mentions four
kings, *the fourth of whom,* he states, *should be very rich* Cambyses
succeeded Cyrus, who was reigning when the prophecy was uttered. He was
always moving about to distant places; he scarcely allowed himself rest
for a single year; he was exceedingly desirous of glory, insatiable in
his ambition, and ever stirring up new wars. Cambyses, his son, who had
slain his brother, died in Egypt, and yet added this country to the
Persian Empire. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, succeeded, and Xerxes
followed him. They are deceived who think Darius, the son of Hystaspes,
is the fourth king; without doubt the Prophet meant Xerxes, who crossed
the sea with a mighty army. he led with him 900,000 men; and, however
incredible this may appear, all historians constantly affirm it. He was
so puffed up with pride that he said he came to put fetters upon the
Hellespont, while his army covered all the neighboring country. This is
one point; the four kings were Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius the son of
Hystaspes, and Xerxes, omitting Smerdis. We may now inquire why the
angel limits the number to four, as the successor of Xerxes was
Artaxerxes, or Darius Longimanus, the long-handed, and some others after
him. This difficulty is solved by the following probable method, —
Xerxes destroyed the power of the Persian Empire by his rashness; he
escaped with the greatest disgrace, and was scarcely saved by the
baseness of his flight. He brought away but few companions with him
hastily in a small boat, and could not obtain a single transport,
although the Hellespont had been previously covered with his ships. His
whole army was almost cut to pieces, first at Thermopylee, then at
Leuctra, and afterwards at other places. From that period the Persian
Empire declined, for when its warlike glory was annihilated, the people
gave themselves up to sloth and idleness, according to the testimony of
Xenophon. Some interpreters expound the phrase, *three kings stood up,*
of the flourishing period of the Persian monarchy: they take the words
“stood up” emphatically, since from that period the nation’s power began
to wane. For Xerxes on his return was hated by the whole people, first
for his folly, then for his putting his brother to death, for his
disgraceful conduct towards his sister, and for his other crimes; and as
he was so loaded with infamy before his own people, he was slain by
Artabanus, who reigned seven months. As the power of Persia was then
almost entirely destroyed, or at least was beginning to decline, some
interpreters state these three kings to stand up, and then add Xerxes as
the fourth and the most opulent. But suppose we take the word “stood up”
relatively, with respect to the Church? For the angel states that the
Persian prince, Cambyses, stood before him, in an attitude of hostility
and conflict. The angel seems rather to hint *at the standing up of four
kings of Persia,* for the purpose of reminding the Jews of the serious
evils and the grievous troubles which they must suffer under their sway.
In this sense I interpret the verb “to stand,” referring it to the
contests by which God harassed the Church until the death of Xerxes. For
at that period, when the power of the Persians declined, a longer period
of rest and relaxation was afforded to the people of God. This is the
reason why the angel omits and passes over in silence all the kings from
Artabanus to Darius the son of Arsaces; for Arsaces was the last king
but one, and although Ochus reigned before him, we know from profane
historians how his posterity were reduced to the lowest rank under the
last Darius, whom Alexander conquered, as we shall see by and bye. For
this reason I think this to be the genuine sense of the passage, — from
Cyrus to Xerxes kings of Persia should stand up against the Israelites,
and during the whole of that period the contests should be renewed, and
the Jews would almost perish through despair under that continued series
of evils. Some say, four kings should stand forth until all the Jews
were led out; and we know this never to have been completed, for a small
portion only returned. As to my own opinion, I am unwilling to contend
with others, yet I hesitate not to enforce the angel’s wish to exhort
all the pious to endurance, for he announced *the standing up of these
four kings,* who should bring upon them various tribulations. As to the
fourth king, the statement of this passage suits Xerxes exactly. *The
fourth,* he says, *shall be enriched with wealth;* for the noun is of
similar meaning with the verb, as they both spring from the same root.
Truly enough Darius the son of Hystaspes determined to carry on war with
Greece; he made the attempt but without success, especially at the
battle of Marathon. He was cut off by sudden death when his treasures
were prepared and many forces were collected He thus left the material
of war for his son. Xerxes, in the flower of his age, saw every
preparation for war made ready to his hands; he eagerly embraced the
occasion, and gave no heed to sound advice. For, as we have already
stated, he destroyed himself and the whole monarchy, not by a single
slaughter only, but by four. And this power of raising an army of
900,000 men was no ordinary occurrence. If he had only carried with him
across the sea 100,000 men, this would have been a large force. But his
power of feeding such large forces while he passed through so many
provinces, and then of passing them across the sea, exceeds the ordinary
bounds of our belief. We are not surprised, then, at the angel’s
predicting the extreme wealth of this king.

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>He adds, *In his fortitude and in his riches
he shall stir them all up against the realm of the Greeks.* This was not
accomplished by Darius the son of Hystaspes. According to my former
statement, he attacked certain Grecian cities, but without producing
confusion throughout the whole East, as Xerxes his successor did. As to
the phrase, the kingdom of Javan, I willingly subscribe to their opinion
who think the word equivalent to the Greek word Ionia. For Javan went
forth in that direction, and dwelt there with his posterity in the
Grecian territory, whence almost the whole of Greece obtained its
present name. The whole Grecian nation is often called “Chittim,” and
some see good reason for their being termed “Machetae,” from Chittim the
son of Jayan, and thus by the addition of a letter we arrive at the
Macedonians. For the conjecture is probable that this people were first
called Maketae, and afterwards Macedonians. Without doubt, in this
passage and in many others, Javan. is put for the whole of Greece, since
Ionia was the portion of the country most celebrated in Judea and
throughout the East generally. Xerxes then stirred up against the realm
of Javan — meaning Greece — all the people of the East; for it is very
well known how his empire spread far and wide in every direction. It
follows: —

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#003)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**3.** And a mighty king shall stand up, that
shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span>**3.** Et stabit rex fortis, et dominabitur
dominatione magna, et faciet secundum voluntatem suam.  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151)

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span><span id="vi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>This refers to Alexander of Macedon. I have
already shortly stated the reason why the angel passed over all the
Persian kings from Artabanus to the last Darius, they did not engage in
any contests with the Jews up to *Xerxes* But when Alexander invaded
Asia, he struck the Jews with terror, as well as all other nations. He
came like lightning, and it is by no means surprising that the *Jews*
should be frightened at his arrival, because, as we formerly expressed
it, he flew with amazing swiftness. Alexander then rose up, not only by
the riches and might of his warlike preparations, but he necessarily
inspired the Jews with trepidation when they perceived their inability
to resist him, and thus he was deservedly hostile to them, because, from
the very beginning, they had despised his empire. Josephus also informs
us how he was moved at the sight of the high priest, and how he
determined to mitigate his rage against the Jews. For when he was at
home, before passing over into Asia, the vision of the high priest was
offered to him, for God had sent his angel under that disguise.  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) Alexander supposed it to be some
deity; but when the high priest met him in procession, the vision
returned to his *recollection,* and he was struck as if he had seen God
appearing to him from heaven. Whatever was the object of this
*occurrence,* Alexander clearly came into Judea with the intention of
utterly destroying the whole nation. This is the reason why the angel
carefully predicts this change. *A brave king,* therefore*, shall stand
up, and rule with extensive dominion, and do according to his pleasure;*
that is, he shall *succeed* as if he had all the events of the war under
his own hand and according to his own pleasure, as the event itself most
fully proved. It follows: —

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**4.** And when he shall stand up, his
kingdom shall be broken, and divided shall be divided toward the four
winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion
which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others
besides those.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et ubi constiterit, frangetur, *vel,
conteretur,* regnum ejus, et dividetur in quatuor ventos coelorum, *hoc
est, in quatuor plagas mundi,* et non posteritati ejus, et non secundum
dominationem ejus, qua dominatus fuerit: quia extirpabitur, *radicitus
evelletur,* regnum ejus, et aliis absque illis.

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span><span id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>This language is concise, but there is no
ambiguity in the sense. First of all the angel says, After that brave
king had stood up, his empire should be broken in pieces: for when
Alexander had arrived at his height, he suddenly fell sick, and shortly
afterwards died at Babylon. Ambassadors had assembled round him from
every quarter. He was quite intoxicated by prosperity, and very probably
poisoned himself. Historians, however, have viewed him as a remarkable
example of singular valor, and so they have pretended and have related,
because at least they thought so, that he was deceitfully poisoned by
Cassander. But we all know how intemperately and immoderately he
indulged in drinking; he almost buried himself in wine, and was seized
with disease amidst his cups, and sank under it, because no remedy was
found for him. This, then, was Alexander’s poison. Whichever way we
understand it, he fell suddenly, almost as soon as he began to stand.
After conquering nearly the whole East, he came to Babylon, and was
uncertain in his plans as to the employment of his forces, after he had
procured peace for the whole East. He was then anxious to transfer his
armies to either Europe or Africa. The angel says, *After he had stood
up,* meaning, after he had acquired the monarchy of the whole East, *his
kingdom should be broken up.* He uses this simile, because the whole
power of Alexander was not so much extinguished as broken into separate
parts. We know how the twelve chiefs who were his generals drew the
spoils to themselves; every one took a portion of his kingdom, and
divided it among themselves, as we have previously stated, just as if it
were torn from their master’s body. All consented in raising his brother
Aridaeus to the dignity of king, and they called him Philip, that, while
his sons were young, the memory of his father might commend them to the
world. But four kingdoms at length issued from Alexander’s monarchy. It
is unnecessary here to refer to what we may read at our leisure in the
writings of historians.

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>The Prophet only touches shortly on those
points which relate to the instruction of the Church; he does not relate
in order or in detail the events narrated in history; he only says, *His
empire shall be broken, and shall be divided,* says he, *towards the
four winds of heaven* The angel omits that partition which assigned the
treasure to one, and gave the office of counselor to Philip: Perdiccas
was the guardian of his son, and he with others obtained a portion of
his dominions. Seleucus obtained Syria, to whom his son Antiochus
succeeded; Antigonus became prefect of Asia Minor; Cassander, the father
of Antipater, seized the kingdom of Macedon for himself; Ptolemy, the
son of Lagus, who had been a common soldier, possessed Egypt. These are
the four kingdoms of which the angel now treats. For Egypt was situated
to the south of Judea, and Syria to the north, as we shall afterwards
have occasion to observe. Macedonia came afterwards, and then Asia
Minor, both east and west. But the angel does not enter into any
complicated details, but shortly enumerates whatever was necessary for
the common instruction of the elect people. The common consent of all
writers has handed down these facts, — four kingdoms were constituted at
length out of many portions, after the chiefs had been so mutually slain
by one another that four only survived, namely, Ptolemy, Seleucus,
Antigonus, and Cassander. Afterwards the kingdom of Antiochus was
extended when Antigonus was conquered; for Antiochus added Asia Minor to
the kingdom of Syria. But Antiochus stood only for a time, and hence the
angel truly and properly states this empire to have been divided into
four parts.

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>He next adds, *And not to his posterity* No
one could have guessed what the angel predicted so many years before
Alexander’s birth; for he was not born till a hundred years after this
period. Those who know the boldness of his warlike schemes, the rapidity
of his movements, and the success of his measures, would never be
persuaded of this result, — the complete destruction of all his
posterity, and the utter extinction of his race.

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>Had Alexander lived quietly at home, he might
have married, and have become the father of children who would have been
his undisputed successors. He died young, soon after reaching the age of
thirty; still he might have married, and have had heirs to his throne.
He had a brother, Aridaeus, and other relations, among whom was his
uncle Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, and a royal offspring might thus have
been preserved, and a successor prepared for him. After he had subdued
both upper and lower Asia, he became master of Syria, Egypt, and Judea,
and extended his power to the Persians, while his fame extended over
Africa and Europe. Since no one dared to raise a finger against him, as
he possessed a most magnificent army, and all his generals were bound to
him by most important benefits, and so many of his prefects were
enriched by his extreme liberality, who would have thought that all his
posterity and relations would be thus blotted out? He left; two sons,
but they were slain as well as his brother Aridaeus, while his wives and
his mother, aged eighty years, shared the same fate. Nor did Cassander
spare her, for she intrigued against him. At length, as if God would
punish so many slaughters committed by Alexander, he wished his whole
posterity to be extinguished. And yet, as I have stated, no foreign
enemy was the agent in inflicting such heavy punishments. He had
subjugated the whole East, and his bearing was such, as if the whole
monarchy of that portion of the world had descended to him from his
ancestors by hereditary right. As the world contained no enemy for him,
his foes sprang from his own home; they slew his mother, his wives, his
children, and all his relatives, and utterly rooted out all his race. We
observe, then, with what clearness and certainty the angel predicts
events entirely concealed from that age, and for hundred years
afterwards, and such as would never be, credited by mankind. There seems
a great contrast in the language; *his kingdom shall be broken, it shall
be divided towards the four winds of heaven, and not to his posterity;*
that is, although the four kingdoms should spring up in the four
quarters of the world, yet, none of Alexander’s posterity should remain
in a single place, or obtain even the least portion of his dominions.
This was a remarkable proof of God’s wrath against the cruelty of
Alexander; not that he was savage by nature, but ambition seized upon
him, and made him bloodthirsty, and indisposed him to desire any end to
his warfare. God, therefore, avenged that grasping disposition of
Alexander’s, by allowing the whole of his race thus to perish with
disgrace and horrible cruelty. On this account that. pride of his which
wished to be thought a son of Jupiter, and which condemned to death all
his friends and followers who would not prostrate themselves before him
as a god; — that pride, I say, never could secure a single descendant to
reign in his place, or even to hold a single satrapy. *Not to his
posterity,* says the angel, *and not according to his dominion.*

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span>He passes to the four kings of which he had
spoken: *It shall not break forth*, he says, namely, *from the four
kings*. He had already stated their foreign extraction, not in any way
derived from the family of that king; for none of the four should equal
his power, because his kingdom should be expired. Here the angel seems
to omit intervening events, and speaks of an ultimate destruction. We
know how the past king Perseus was conquered by the Romans, and how the
kingdom of Antiochus was partly destroyed by war, and partly oppressed
by fraud. And the angel seems to mark this. We may interpret it more to
the point, by considering the cessation of Alexander’s empire, with
reference to his own race, as if the angel had stated that none of his
successors should acquire equal power with himself. And why so? Not one
of them could accomplish it. Alexander acquired so mighty a name that
all people willingly submitted to his sway, and no single successor
could sustain the burden of the whole. Hence his kingdom, as far as it
related to himself and His posterity, was divided, and no one succeeded
to his power and his opulence*. And it shall be given to others.* The
angel here explains his meaning. The destruction of the kingdom ought
not to be explained particularly of single parts, for each seized his
own portion for himself, and his successors were all strangers. And *to
others besides those;* meaning, his kingdom shall be seized upon by
officers who are not of his posterity; that is, strangers shall rush
into Alexander’s place, and no *successor* shall arise from his own
kindred. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005)<span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span>**5.** And the king of the south shall be
strong, and *one* of his princes; and he shall be strong above him, and
have dominion; his dominion *shall be* a great dominion.

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et roborabitur rex austri, et ex
principibus ejus, et roborabitur adversus eum, et dominabitur: dominatio
magna, dominatio ejus.

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span><span id="vi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span>Here the angel begins to treat of the kings
of Egypt and of Syria. He does not mention the king of Syria yet, but
will do so in the next verse; but he begins with the king of Egypt, the
neighboring monarchy to that of Israel. He says, the king of the south,
meaning, the king of Egypt, would be brave. He next adds, *and one of
his princes.* Many take this in one context; but I think the angel
transfers his discourse to Antiochus the son of Seleucus. *And one of
his princes,* he says, meaning, one of Alexander’s princes, shall
strengthen himself against him. For the letter <span
id="vi.vii-p6.1"></span>ו, *vau,* is taken in the sense of opposing, and
implies an opposition between Ptolemy the son of Lagus, and Antiochus
king of Syria. *Hence the king of the south shall grow strong* — another
of Alexander’s chiefs shall grow strong against him, and shall have
dominion. We know how much larger and more wealthy the kingdom of Syria
was than that of Egypt, especially when Asia Minor was added to it.
Without doubt, the angel was acquainted with the future superiority of
Antiochus to Ptolemy, when these two kings are mutually compared. But
the rest to-morrow.

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou not only
deignedst to unfold future events to thy servant Daniel, and to the
pious who waited for the advent of thine only-begotten Son, that they
might be prepared for all sufferings, and might perceive the Church to
repose under thy care and protection, but also wishedst these prophecies
to profit us at this day, and to confirm us in the same doctrine: Grant
us to learn how to cast all our cares and anxieties on thy paternal
providence. May we never doubt thy oversight of the cares of thy Church
in these days, and thy protection against the fury of the ungodly who
try all means of destroying it. May we repose in peace under that
guardianship which thou hast promised us, and struggle on under the
standard of the cross; and possess our souls in patience, until at
length thou shalt appear as our Redeemer with outstretched hand, at the
manifestation of thy Son, when he returns to judge the world. — Amen.

<span id="vi.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Seventh

<span id="vi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p1"></span><span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#006)<span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p2"></span>**6.** And in the end of years they shall join
themselves together; for the king’s daughter of the south shall come to
the king of the north to make all agreement: but she shall not retain
the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall
be given up, and they that brought her, and he that beget her, and he
that strengthened her in *these* times.

<span id="vi.x-p3"></span>**6.** Et in fine annorum sociabuntur,
*convenient inter se,* et filia regis austri veniet ad regem aquilonis
ut faciat recta: et non retinebit vires brachii, et non stabit ipse,
neque semen ejus, et dabitur ipsa, et qui adduxerit eam, et qui genuerit
ipsam, et roborabit eam temporibus illis, *vel, roboraverit.*

<span id="vi.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.x-p5"></span><span id="vi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p6"></span>As to the explanation of the words, the king
of the south, we have stated to be the king of Egypt, and that of the
north, of Syria. To do right things, means to make mutual peace; he
shall not retain the strength of his arm, is, his arm shall not retain
its strength; he shall not stand refers to his father Ptolemy, or
Antiochus Theos, as we shall afterwards see. And then we must take the
<span id="vi.x-p6.1"></span>ו, *vau,* negatively, and read, nor his
seed, which some translate his arm. She shall be delivered up, implies
being given up to death, while some understand her parent, to be her
mother or her nurse. Here, then, the angel prophesies the state of the
kingdoms of Egypt and Syria; and still he has respect to the Church of
God, as we stated yesterday, which was placed in the midst of these two
nations. We must always strive to ascertain the intention of the Holy
Spirit. He wished to support the pious under those convulsions by which
they would be agitated and afflicted. Their confidence might have been
utterly subverted unless they had been persuaded that nothing happens at
random, since all these events were proclaimed beforehand. Again, God
had sent his angel to Daniel, which proved both his power and his
determination to defend his Church, and he would accomplish this,
because he wished the faithful admonished beforehand neither rashly nor
yet without profit. But we must first relate the history — the angel
says, *At the end of the times two kings should enter into covenant and
friendship* He had announced the superiority of the king of Syria; for
when Antigonus was conquered, and his son was dead, Seleucus the first
king of Syria far surpassed Ptolemy in his power and the magnitude of
his dominion. But a mutual rivalry arose between them, and there were
some slight skirmishes on both sides, till the condition of Ptolemy
became weakened, and then Seleucus rushed tumultuously, with the
ferocity of a robber rather than the magnanimity of a king. After they
had continued the contest for some time, Berenice the daughter of the
second Ptolemy, named Philadelphus, was given in marriage to Antiochus
Theos. She is also called Beronice and Bernice. He was so blinded with
pride, as to take the name of Theos, which means God; he was the third
of that name, the former king being called Soter, meaning preserver For,
as Seleueus had acquired so many and such mighty possessions, his sons
did not consider their authority fully established, and so they assumed
these magnificent titles for the sake of inspiring all nations with the
terror of their frame. Hence the first Antiochus was called Sorer, and
the second Theos. Now the second Ptolemy, named Philadelphus, gave his
daughter in marriage to Antiochus Theos. By this bond peace and
friendship were established between them, just as at Rome, Pompey
married Julia the daughter of Caesar. And we daily observe similar
occurrences, for when one king has in his power a daughter, or niece, or
other relatives, another king finds himself possessed of male and female
relations, by whose intermarriage they confirm a treaty of peace. It was
so in this case, although historians attribute some degree of craft to
Philadelphus in bestowing his daughter on Antiochus Theos. He supposed
this to be a means by which he might ultimately acquire the dominion
over all Syria, and over the other provinces under the sway of
Antiochus. Whether this really was so or not, profane historians prove
the fulfillment of the angel’s prediction. Without the slightest doubt,
God, in his wonderful counsels, dictated to these historians what we
read at the present time, and made them witnesses of his own truth. This
thought, indeed, never entered their minds, but when God governs the
minds and tongues of men, he wishes to establish clear and convincing
testimony to this prophecy, for the purpose of shewing the real
prediction of every occurrence. *At the end of the years,* says he,
*they shall become united.*

<span id="vi.x-p7"></span>He next states, *And the daughter of the king
of the south,* meaning Bernice, whom we have mentioned, *shall come to
the king of the north,* meaning the king of Syria, Antiochus Theos. This
alliance was contracted in defiance of justice. For Antiochus repudiated
his wife Laodice, who was the mother of two sons whom she had born to
Antiochus; namely, Seleucus Callinicus, and Antiochus the younger, named
Hierax, a hawk, on account of his rapacity. We perceive, then, how he
contracted a second marriage, after an unjust and illegal divorce of his
first wife. Hence it is not surprising if this alliance was cursed by
the Almighty. It turned out unhappily for both the kings of Egypt and
Syria. Ptolemy ought not to have thrust his daughter upon Antiochus, who
was already married, nor yet to have allowed her to become a second
wife, while the king’s real wife was divorced. We perceive, then, how
God became the avenger of these crimes, while the plans of Antiochus and
Philadelphus turned out in. Some think that Antiochus was fraudulently
poisoned by his first wife, but as the point is doubtful, I pronounce no
opinion. Whether it was so or not, Antiochus had a son by Bernice, and
died immediately after being reconciled to his former wife. Some
historians state, that after she had recovered her dignity and rank as
queen, having once experienced her husband’s fickleness and perfidy, she
took sure means of preventing another repudiation. When Antiochus was
dead, this woman was enflamed with vengeance, and in the perverseness of
her disposition, she impelled her son to murder her rival, especially
stimulating Seleucus Callinicus who succeeded to his father’s throne.
Hierax was then prefect of Asia Minor; hence she stimulated her son with
fury to murder her rival. For, although Antiochus Theos had been
reconciled to her, yet some degree of rank and honor still attached to
Bernice the daughter of Ptolemy. And her son perpetrated this murder
with the greatest willingness, and with the basest cruelty and perfidy;
for he persuaded her to entrust herself to his care, and then he
murdered both her and her son.

<span id="vi.x-p8"></span>The angel now says, *When the daughter of the
king of the south shall come to the king of the north, his arm shall not
retain his strength* The language is metaphorical, as that marriage was
line a common arm to both sides; for the king of Egypt stretched forth
his hand to the king of Syria for mutual protection. *That arm,* then,
*did not retain its strength;* for Bernice was most wickedly slain by
her stepson, Seleucus Callinicus, as we have stated. He says, also, *she
should come to make alliances* Here, by way of concession, the angel
calls that conjugal bond <span id="vi.x-p8.1"></span>םידשימ*, misrim,*
“*rectitudines,*” “conditions of agreement,” because at first all
parties thought, it would tend to that result. But. Antiochus had
already violated his marriage vow, and departed from his lawful
alliance. Nothing, therefore, was right on his side. Without the
slightest doubt he derived some advantage from the plan, as kings are
always in the habit of doing. And with respect to Ptolemy, many
historians, as we have already mentioned, suppose him to have longed for
the kingdom of Syria. Whether or not this was so, their mutual
transactions were not sincere, and so the word signifying “rectitude” is
used, as we have said, only by concession. The angel does not speak in
their praise, or excuse the, perfidy of either, but he rather enlarges
upon their crime, and from this we gather how they abused the sanctity
both of marriage and of treaties, which God wished to be held sacred by
all mankind. Hence, though the word is honor-able in itself, yet it is
used in a disgraceful sense, to shew us how the angel condemned King
Ptolemy for this base prostitution of his daughter, and Antiochus for
rejecting his wife, and marrying another who was not a real wife, but
only a concubine. And, perhaps, God wished to use the lips of his angel
to point out the tendency of all royal treaties. They always have the
most specious appearances — national, quiet public peace, and similar
objects which can be dexterously made prominent. For kings always court
favor and praise for themselves from the foolish vulgar, whenever they
make treaties of peace. Thus all these alliances have no other tendency
than to produce social deception, and at length they degenerate into
mutual perfidy, when one party plots insidiously and wickedly against
another.

<span id="vi.x-p9"></span>The angel adds next, *He shall not stand;*
using the masculine gender, and most probably referring to Antiochus, as
well as to Ptolemy his father-in-law. *Neither he nor his seed shall
stand,* meaning his son by Bernice the daughter of Ptolemy. I dare not
translate it “*arm,*” because in my opinion the letter <span
id="vi.x-p9.1"></span>ו*, vau,* is needed in the word for “arm;” so I
take it to denote “*seed.*” He afterwards adds, *And she shall be
delivered up* — thus returning to Berenice — either by treachery or to
death; and *those who led her forth* — meaning her companions. Whenever
any incestuous marriage is contracted, some persons of disgraceful
character are sure to be concerned in bringing his new wife to the king.
And very probably there were factions in the palace of Antiochus; one
party being more attached to Seleucus and his brother, and his mother
Laodice; while others desired a change of government, according to the
usual state of affairs. The advisers of the marriage between Antiochus
and Bernice were sent as a guard of honor to attend them to Syria, and
the angel states all these to have been delivered up together with the
queen. He afterwards adds, *And those who were her parents* From the
absence of a grammatical point under the letter <span
id="vi.x-p9.2"></span>ה, *he,* many think the noun to be of the feminine
gender. And as it may mean mother, they treat it as if her nurse was
intended, but I leave the question in doubt. He now adds*, and those who
strengthened her at those times* He, doubtless, intends to designate all
those who wished to curry favor with the king, and thus took part in
this marriage between him and the daughter of the king of Egypt. The
whole of that faction perished, when Berenice was slain by Seleucus
Callinicus. If, then, he did not spare his stepmother, much less would
he spare the faction by which he was deprived of his hope of the
kingdom, and through whom his mother Laodice had suffered the disgrace
of a divorce. It now follows, —

<span id="vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#007)<span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p2"></span>**7.** But out of a branch of her roots shall
*one* stand up in his estate, which shall come with an army, and shall
enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against
them, and shall prevail:

<span id="vi.xi-p3"></span>**7.** Et stabit ex germine, *vel, surculo,*
radicum ejus, *nempe Berenice,*  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
in gradu suo,  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) et veniet cum
exercitu,  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) et veniet in
munitionem regis Aquilonis, et faciet in illis,  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) et praevalebit.

<span id="vi.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.xi-p9"></span><span id="vi.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p10"></span>The angel treats here of Ptolemy Euergetes,
the third king of Egypt, who succeeded his father Philadelphus. He
collected large forces to revenge the insult offered to his sister, and
thus carried on the war with Seleucus Callinicus, who had become king
after his father’s death. The angel, therefore, now touches shortly on
this war, by saying, *There shall stand up a shoot from the root of that
queen.* Very possibly he was younger than his sister Berenice. He says,
*He shall stand in his own degree,* meaning, in the royal rank. The
interpretation of those who translate, He shall stand in his father’s
rank, is forced. What is it then? *He shall stand in his own rank;* that
is, he shall arrive at his own rank by hereditary right. Although,
therefore, at first all thought the death of Berenice would be
unrevenged through her father being dead, here the angel announces that
her brother should be like a branch, and become the avenger of this
great wickedness. *He shall stand,* then, *in his* rank, meaning, he
shall arrive at the royal throne, *from* the *branch* or germ *of her
root,* namely, Berenice. *He shall come with an army against
Callinicus.* Profane writers bear witness to this. *And he shall come
even to the fortification of the king of the north* He entered Syria,
and caused so great a terror that many fortified cities surrendered
themselves to him. During this war he drew to himself many cities which
seemed impregnable; whence it is not surprising to find the angel
stating his arrival at the fortifications. Some translate it
“*dwelling-place,*” but without reason, and thus injure the Prophet’s
meaning. *He shall come unto the very fortification,* meaning, he shall
arrive in Syria, and shall posses many fortified cities.

<span id="vi.xi-p11"></span>He next adds, *And he shall work on them,*
meaning, he shall prosper; for this word when used without any addition,
implies in Hebrew performing great exploits. *He shall proceed* and
acquire power over the greater part of Syria, *and shall prevail.* By
this last word he explains how superior he should be to Callinicus. For
this king sent for his younger brother whose fidelity he suspected, and
thought it the safest course to treat with his enemy. But young Hierax,
the hawk, determined to use that expedition to his own advantage. He was
not content with his own province of Asia Minor, but he anticipated
being his father’s sole heir, especially as he had hired some troops
from Gaul, who had invaded Asia Minor, Bithynia, and other provinces. He
was greatly puffed up, and betrayed his own covetousness. Seleucus
Callinicus preferred making peace with his enemy to fostering his
brother’s resources. At length Hierax more and more developed the
perversity of his mind. For he openly declared war against his brother,
to whose assistance he pretended to have come, after having been sent
for according to agreement. His brother Seleucus had promised him a
portion of Asia as far as Mount Taurus; and when he saw himself the
victim of his impious and disgraceful snares, he openly waged war with
his brother. But he was conquered at length, and thus received the
reward of his impiety. Thus Ptolemy Euergetes prevailed, while he
departed from Syria after spoiling his enemy, according to what follows
—

<span id="vi.xii"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#008)<span id="vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p2"></span>**8.** And shall also carry captives into
Egypt their gods, with their princes, *and* with their precious vessels
of silver and of gold; and he shall continue *more* years than the king
of the north.

<span id="vi.xii-p3"></span>**8.** Atque etiam deos ipsorum cum
conflatibus ipsorum, et cum vasis pretiosis ipsorum,  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) auri et argenti in captivatem ducent
in AEgyptum,  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) et ipse *pluribus*
annis stabit quam rex aquilonis.

<span id="vi.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xii-p7"></span><span id="vi.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p8"></span>The angel explains more fully what he had
already stated briefly, namely, Ptolemy should be the conqueror, and
spoil the whole of Syria almost according to his pleasure. Profane
writers also shew us the great number of images which were taken away,
and how Egypt recovered its gods of silver and gold which it had lost a
long time ago. Thus the event proved the truth of the angel’s prophecy.
The particle <span id="vi.xii-p8.1"></span>םג *gem,* is interposed for
the sake of amplifying the subject, to inform us of the unequal
condition of the peace, and how Ptolemy exercised the rights of a
conqueror in spoiling the whole of Syria according to his lust. It is
added, *He shall stand for more years than the king of the north.* Some
restrict this to the duration of the life of *each* king, and others
extend it farther. Probably the angel speaks of Ptolemy Euergetes, who
reigned forty-six years. As God extended his life so long, we are not
surprised at the angel’s saying it should last longer than the king of
Syria’s. This explanation is applicable to the present case, for if he
had died before, Callinicus might have recovered the effects of the war;
but as Ptolemy survived, he dared not attempt any-thing, being assured
of the utter fruitlessness of any effort against the king who had
vanquished him. It follows: —

<span id="vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#009)<span id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p2"></span>**9.** So the king of the south shall come
into *his* kingdom, and shall return into his own land.

<span id="vi.xiii-p3"></span>**9.** Et veniet in rename rex austri, et
redibit in terram suam.

<span id="vi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p6"></span>This clause belongs to the former verse; as
if he had said, Ptolemy shall return by a peaceful march after this
hostile invasion of Syria. For he might have some fears lest his enemy
should not be completely prostrated. But as he departed as conqueror,
the angel announces his safe arrival in his own land. The words “come”
and “return” are used emphatically, implying the absence of all harass,
fear, and danger.  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) He returned
to his kingdom and his own land, since he could not trust to the
quietness of the enemies whom he had laid prostrate. It follows: —

<span id="vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#010)<span id="vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** But his sons shall be stirred up,
and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and *one* shall
certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return,
and be stirred up, *even* to his fortress.

<span id="vi.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Et filii ejus provocabuntur, et
congregabunt multitudinem copiarum magnarum: et veniendo veniet,
inundabit et transibit: revertetur et incitabitur usque ad munitionem
ejus.

<span id="vi.xiv-p4"></span>**11.** And the king of the south shall be
moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, *even* with
the king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the
multitude shall be given into his hand.

<span id="vi.xiv-p5"></span>**11.** Tum exacerbabitur rex austri, et
egressus pugnabit adversus eum, adversus regem aquilonis, et stare
faciet, *statuet,* multitudinem magnam, tradeturque multitudo illa in
manum ejus.

<span id="vi.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xiv-p7"></span><span id="vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p8"></span>Here the angel passes to the third war,
namely, that which the son of Callinicus stirred up against Ptolemy
Philopator. After the death of Euergetes, the two sons of Callinicus
united their forces, and endeavored to recover Syria, and especially
that part of it of which they had been deprived. When they were already
on their expedition, and their forces were on their march, the elder
Seleucus died, and his surviving brother was Antiochus, called the
Great. Ptolemy, called Philopator, which means a lover of his father,
was then alive. He was so called in consequence of the parricide of
which he was guilty, having put to death both parents, together with his
brother. The word is used by way of ridicule, and a sense the opposite
to that expressed is implied by this epithet, which is honorable in
itself, and expresses the virtue of filial piety. But he slew his
father, mother, and brother, and on account of all these impious
murders, the name of Philopator was applied to him as a mark of
disgrace. As, therefore, he was so thoroughly hated by his own people,
the sons of Callinicus, namely, Seleucus Ceraunus the elder, and
Antiochus the Great, thought the time had arrived for the recovery of
the lost cities of Syria. For he was detested and despised in
consequence of his numerous crimes. They therefore anticipated little
trouble in recovering their possessions, when their enemy was thus
branded with infamy, and had many domestic foes. This is the reason why
the angel says of the sons of Callinicus, *They shall be provoked, and
shall lead a multitude of great armies;* it may mean “great forces,” as
some historians relate the collection of two very strong armies. Unless
I am mistaken, Antiochus the Great had 70,000 foot and 5000 horse.
Ptolemy excelled in cavalry as he had 6000 horse but only 62,000 foot,
as Polybius informs us in his fifth book.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) They were nearly equal in forces, but
the confidence of the two sons of Callinicus, of whom alone the angel
now speaks, was increased when they beheld their wicked enemy so greatly
detested in *consequence* of his parricide. He afterwards says, *He
shall come.* He changes the number, since the elder brother, being the
eldest son of Callinicus, namely, Seleucus Ceraunus, died while they
were preparing for the war, and they say he was slain by his attendants
in passing through Asia Minor. Whether this was so or not, all
historians unite in stating that Antiochus the Great alone carried on
the war with Philopator. He shall *come* so as *to overflow and pass
through* He recovered that part of Syria which he had lost, and when he
approached Egypt, then Philopator met him. Profane historians state him
to have been a coward, and never to have obtained power by open bravery,
but by fear alone. He was too late in preparing his forces for resisting
his enemy.

<span id="vi.xiv-p10"></span>This is the reason why the angel says, *The
king of Syria,* or *of the north*, *should come, even to the citadels,*
or fortifications; for at length Philopator roused himself from slumber,
for he never put on his arms to repel an enemy except when compelled by
the direst necessity. Hence he adds, *The king of the south shall be
irritated,* or exasperated. He uses the word “exasperated,” because, as
I have just said, he would never have opposed himself to his enemy
Antiochus except lie had perceived his own kingdom placed in great
jeopardy. He might have taken patiently the loss of Syria, so long as
Egypt had been safe; but when his life and all his possessions were in
danger, he became sufficiently exasperated to attack his foe; and yet he
prevailed, as we shall afterwards see. I cannot complete this subject
to-day, and so I shall draw to a close. Philopator became victorious,
and yet he was so sluggish that he distrusted his friends and foes
alike, and was forced by this very fear to make peace with his enemy,
although he was really the conqueror. Not only could he have driven back
his enemy whom he had vanquished, but he might have taken possession of
his territories; but he did not dare to do this, he was conscious of
being a parricide, and knew to his cost how hateful his name was among
all men. Hence, although superior in strength, and actually the
conqueror of his enemy in battle, he dared not proceed further. But we
will explain the remainder another time.

<span id="vi.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.xv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou hast deigned to
set before our eyes as in a glass that peculiar providence of thine by
which thou defendest thy Church: Grant, that being confirmed by these
examples, we may learn to repose entirely upon thee. Amidst the numerous
disturbances by which the world is at this time agitated, may we remain
quiet under thy protection. May we so commit our safety to thee as never
to hesitate, whatever may happen, as to our future safety and security.
Whatever we may suffer, may it all issue in our salvation, while we are
protected by thy hand; thus will we call upon thy name with sincerity of
mind, and thou wilt in return shew thyself as our Father in thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-Eighth

<span id="vi.xvi-p2"></span>In our last Lecture we explained why the
angel mentions the exasperation of King Ptolemy. Unless he had been
dragged into the war, his disposition was so sluggish that he would have
suffered many cities to be wrested from him, and he would never have
been moved by either the disgrace or the loss. But at length he took up
arms, on seeing with what a stern and bold enemy he had to deal. he
afterwards adds, *He shall go out to battle against the king of the
North,* meaning Antiochus king of Syria. *And he shall set in array a
large multitude.* This may be referred to either of them, for Antiochus
then brought into the field a large army; he had 5000 horse and 70,000
foot. Ptolemy was superior in his cavalry, which amounted to 6000 men.
This clause will suit the case of Antiochus. *He shall bring into the
field a great multitude, and the multitude shall be given into his
hand,* meaning Ptolemy’s. The context seems thus to flow on more easily:
yet if any one prefers considering it as applicable to Ptolemy himself,
I will not contend the point. It is not of much consequence, because the
angel simply pronounces the superiority of Ptolemy in this battle, in
which he conquered Antiochus the Great. Besides, we must notice, that he
was not the conqueror by his own industry, or valor, or counsel, or
military skill; but because the Lord, who regulates the events of
battles, wished at that time to subdue the pride of Antiochus the Great.
It now follows, —

<span id="vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#012)<span id="vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p2"></span>**12.** *And* when he hath taken away the
multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down *many*
ten thousands: but he shall not be strengthened *by it*

<span id="vi.xvii-p3"></span>**12.** Et tolletur multitudo illa, *hoc
est, sese attollet,* et elevabitur cor ejus, et dejiciet myriades, *hoc
est, magnas copias,* et non roborabitur.

<span id="vi.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xvii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvii-p6"></span>The angel here marks the close of the war.
Had Ptolemy’s valor seconded his good fortune, he might easily have
seized upon the whole kingdom of Syria, as profane historians report.
But he was so given up to his own lusts, that he willingly entered into
treaty with his enemy. On his return to his kingdom he slew his wife
Eurydice, and was guilty of other enormities; he suffered a wicked
woman, the sister of Agathocles, a victim of his passions, to rule over
his kingdom, and lastly, he became a very foul example of a very cruel
and degraded man. Therefore, the angel says at the beginning, *his army
should raise him aloft; his heart should be elevated,* in consequence of
his prosperity. He not only caused terror to Antiochus, but through all
the neighboring regions. Where he might have drawn to himself the whole
power of the East, he then declined in his course. He subdued, indeed, a
hostile army, and in this exploit he was in no slight degree assisted by
his sister Arsinoe, as historians relate, but yet after great slaughters
he did not retain his position. And what was the obstacle? His idleness
and drunkenness, and his caring for nothing but banquets and
debaucheries, and the most obscene pleasures. This caused his fall,
after he had been raised even to the clouds by his victories. It
afterwards follows, —

<span id="vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p2"></span>**13.** For the king of the north shall
return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, shall
certainly come after certain years with a great army and with much
riches.

<span id="vi.xviii-p3"></span>**13.** Et redibit rex aquilonis, *rex
Syriae,* et statuet multitudinem magnam praeut antea,  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) et circiter finem  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) temporum annorum, *ad verbum*,
veniendo veniet cum exercitu magno, et cum opibus magnis.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="vi.xviii-p7"></span>**14.** And in those times there shall
many stand up against the king of the south: also the robbers of thy
people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall
fall.

<span id="vi.xviii-p8"></span>**14.** Et temporibus illis multi stabunt
contra regem AEgypti, et filii dissipatores populi tui sese attollent,
ad stabiliendam visionem, et corruent.

<span id="vi.xviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vi.xviii-p10"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p11"></span>Here the angel prophesies of other wars.
For he first describes the war which was carried on by Antiochus against
the Egyptians, after the death of Philopater, who left as his heir, a
little son named Ptolemy Epiphanes. When, therefore, he perceived the
land deprived of its king, he drew up an army and invaded Egypt. As the
Egyptians had no strength to resist him, an embassy was sent to Rome;
and we know how eager the Romans were to become involved in all the
business of the world. With the view of extending their empire still
further and wider, they sent immediately to Antiochus the Great, and
commanded him to desist from the war; but after many trials he failed of
success, until he engaged in a very desperate battle with Scopas, and at
length obtained a victory. In the meantime, the Egyptians were far from
idle: although they hoped to be able to subdue the empire of Antiochus
by the assistance of the Senate, yet they carefully fitted out an
armament of their own under their General Scopas, who was successful in
many of his plans, but was finally defeated in the borders of Judea. The
angel now describes this war. *The king of Syria shall return,* he says;
meaning, after the death of Ptolemy Philopator, he rested for a while,
because he had been unsuccessful with his forces, and they were so
entirely disorganized that he had no confidence in the success of any
expedition. But he thought Egypt would give him no trouble, as it had
lost its head and was like a lifeless corpse. Then he was elevated with
fresh confidence, and returned to Egypt. *And he shall arrange a greater
multitude than at the first* He had a large and powerful army, as we
have said, and a noble armament of cavalry: he had 70,000 foot, and was
still collecting greater forces. The angel signifies the future arrival
of the king of Syria, after the interval of a certain time. *At the end
of the times of the years he shall surely come,* that is he shall break
forth. The angel seems to use this expression for the sake of increasing
its certainty; for he at first despised the Romans in consequence of
their great distance from him, and he had no fear of what afterwards
occurred. He never supposed they had such boldness in them as to cross
the sea against him.

<span id="vi.xviii-p12"></span><span id="vi.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p13"></span>He afterwards adds*, And in those times
many shall stand against the king of the South,* or Egypt. The angel
hints, that Antiochus the Great would not be his only enemy; and
historians inform us of his treaty and alliance with Philip king of
Macedon, for carrying on this war. Without doubt, the two kings stirred
up the whole of Asia Minor, and they were so unitedly powerful, that
many were excited to take part with them. It seemed to be all over with
the kingdom of Egypt, and thus the angel says, *many should stand up
against the king of the South* He adds, *and his sons dissipation.* The
Hebrews call “robbers” <span id="vi.xviii-p13.1"></span>םיצירפ
*pheritzim.* The root of this word is <span
id="vi.xviii-p13.2"></span>ףרפ, *pheretz,* which signifies to break or
dissipate, and sometimes to destroy. Without doubt, the angel here uses
the word to imply factious men, for the people had no other chance of
standing, except by remaining quiet and united. The word then applies to
those who violated that unity; for when any one attached himself to
foreign monarchs, Judea became exposed as a prey to either the Syrians
or Egyptians. Some interpreters apply this passage to the younger Onias,
who seized on Heliopolis, and drew some exiles with him, and there built
a temple, as we learn from Josephus and the Book of Maccabees. For he
pretended to have the prophecy in <span
id="vi.xviii-p13.3"></span>[Isaiah
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#000)<span id="vi.xviii-p13.3"></span>,
on his side, where it is said, And there shall be an altar to God in the
midst of Egypt, (<span id="vi.xviii-p13.4"></span>[Isa
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xviii-p13.4"></span>.) Without doubt, the Prophet here predicts
the enlargement of God’s kingdom through the propagation of his religion
throughout the whole world. As Egypt was to the last degree devoted to
idolatry, Isaiah here shews how the pure and perfect worship of God
should prevail in Egypt. As if he had said, Even the Egyptians who have,
hitherto endeavored to abolish true and sincere piety, shall be added to
God’s people, and shall worship him acceptably. We know the Prophet to
be here treating figuratively of the spiritual reign of Christ, and to
be always bringing forward the shadows of his own time. By the word
“altar” he simply means the worship of God. That impostor, Onias, when
he erected his profane temple and polluted the sacred altar, boasted in
his fulfillment of this prophecy of Isaiah.

<span id="vi.xviii-p14"></span>This then is the meaning of the passage.
*The sons* — *dissipaters of thy people* — *shall exalt themselves to
establish the vision;* that is, under a fallacious pretext of fulfilling
Isaiah’s prediction, *and yet they shall fall. It* may also have all
indefinite meaning, as if the angel declared that; these multitudes
should not come forth unless by God’s secret counsel. We know how much
this thought tends to lighten the sorrow of the pious, and how much
consolation it brings, when we recognize all the tumults of the world as
springing from the fixed counsel of God. Nothing then appears to happen
at random, but mortals are agitated because God desires to inflict his
punishments upon them, and the Church is often shaken because God wishes
to prove and examine the patience of his people. We may, therefore, take
this prophecy absolutely; as if the angel had said. These apostates and
dissipaters never proposed to fulfill this prophecy of Isaiah’s, and yet
there was nothing confused, or out of order in all these events, as God
was fulfilling what he had testified by his own Prophets. Wherefore we
may receive this prediction simply, just as we do other similar ones
scattered throughout the prophets. We have already heard how the Prophet
was forewarned of the many distresses of the Church, on purpose to lead
the faithful to acquiesce in the providence of God, when they saw things
so disturbed throughout the world. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="vi.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p1"></span><span id="vi.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#015)<span id="vi.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p2"></span>**15.** So the king of the north shall come,
and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities: and the arms of
the south shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither *shall
there be any* strength to withstand.

<span id="vi.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Et veniet rex aquilonis et fundet
aggerem,  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) et capiet urbem
munitionum; et brachia austri, *hoc est,* *AEgypti,* non stabunt, neque
populus electorum ejus, neque virtus *erit* ad standum.

<span id="vi.xix-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xix-p6"></span><span id="vi.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p7"></span>The angel follows up the same sentiment. He
says, When Antiochus the Great shall burst forth, there shall be no
valor in the Egyptians to resist him, for he shall take a fortified
city. There is a change of number here, for he means fortified cities.
For he should recover the cities which he had formerly lost, and should
arrive at the city Raphia in Egypt. The explanation follows, *The arms
of Egypt shall not stand, nor the people of its levies.* This relates to
Scopas, who was sent forth with large forces: at first he prospered, but
he was afterwards vanquished in the conflict, and had no courage to
persevere in resistance. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="vi.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p1"></span><span id="vi.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016)<span id="vi.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p2"></span>**16.** But he that cometh against him shall
do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he
shall stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.

<span id="vi.xx-p3"></span>**16.** Et faciet veniens ad eum pro
beneplacito suo, *hoc est, pro suo libidine,* et nullus stabit coram
facie ejus, et stabit in terra desiderabili, et consumetur, *alii nomen
esse volunt, consumptio,* in manu ejus.

<span id="vi.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xx-p5"></span><span id="vi.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xx-p6"></span>The angel proceeds with the same discourse.
He says, Antiochus the Great should accomplish his wishes, and should
spread the terror of his arms in every direction, and thus no one would
dare to oppose him. *He shall do* therefore *according to his will,* he
says, *and none shall stand before his face; and he shall stand in the
desirable land;* meaning, he shall bring his victorious army into Judea,
*and there shall be a great consumption under his hand,* or Judea shall
be consumed and ruined under his hand. We originally stated, that the
angel’s mission did not authorize him to great these events as military
exploits are usually narrated by historians. Enough is revealed to lead
the faithful to acknowledge God’s continual regard for their safety.
Experience also assures us of every occurrence being divinely foreseen,
and thus they would acknowledge how everything tended to promote their
welfare. God’s predictions of future events were never in vain, and the
angel now declares the future coming of Antiochus *to the desirable
land.* We have previously given the reason for the use of this epithet
as applied to Judea, — not through any natural excellence over other
lands, but because God had chosen it for himself as his seat and
dwelling-place. The excellence of this land depended entirely on the
gratuitous beneficence of God. It might seem inconsistent to grant such
license to an impious tyrant and robber, and to allow him to overrun
Judea, which God had marked out with peculiar honor, in adopting it as
his dwelling-place, and calling it his residence. (<span
id="vi.xx-p6.1"></span>[Ps 132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xx-p6.1"></span>.) But we know that the Church, while on its
pilgrimage in this world, enjoys no freedom from many infliction’s; for
it is profitable for the sons of God to be humbled under the cross, lest
they should grow restive in the world, and give themselves up to
luxuries, and sleep upon the desires of the flesh. The angel, indeed,
omits the reason why God suffered Antiochus thus cruelly to oppress the
sacred land; but the faithful had been taught by the Law and the
Prophets how the Church was subject to various tribulations. It is
sufficient, then, to relate the event with simplicity: *and the pleasant
land shall be consumed under his hand,* or there shall be a consumption.
It matters but little which way we read it as far as the sense is
*concerned.* The angel here encourages Daniel and all others to the
exercise of patience, lest they should faint under this divine scourge;
for he permitted Antiochus to wander about like *a* robber, and to
exercise severe tyranny and cruelty against the Jews I need not discuss
these events at greater length, as they are found in the Books of the
Maccabees I will only touch on one point briefly; Antiochus did not of
his own accord harass the Jews by leading his army into their country,
but he was stirred up by impious priests. So great was their perfidy and
barbarity that they willingly betrayed God’s Temple, and exposed their
nation to the most distressing calamities. That was a severe trial:
hence God consulted the interests of his own worshippers by predicting
events which might weaken their confidence and cause them to indulge in
despair. It follows, —

<span id="vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#017)<span id="vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p2"></span>**17.** He shall also set his face to enter
with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus
shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting
her: but she shall not stand *on his side,* neither be for him.

<span id="vi.xxi-p3"></span>**17.** Et ponet faciem suam  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) ad veniendum cum potentia totius
regni, et rectitudines cum eo:  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166)
et faciet, et filiam mulierum dabit illi ad perdendum eam, sed non
stabit ipsa, et non erit ipsa ei.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="vi.xxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxi-p8"></span><span id="vi.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p9"></span>He here describes the second war of
Antiochus against Epiphanes, who was then growing old; and so he gave,
him his daughter Cleopatra in marriage, hoping in this way, by subtle
contrivances, to subdue the kingdom of Egypt. For he thought his
daughter would remain faithful to his interests; but she rather
preserved her conjugal fidelity to her husband, and hesitated not to
espouse her husband’s quarrel against her father. She faithfully adhered
to her husband’s interests according to her duty, and never listened to
the cunning designs of Antiochus. Thus he was deprived of his
expectation, and his daughter never became the means of his acquiring
authority over Egypt. Before this marriage of his daughter with Ptolemy,
he had tried the effect of war, bug in this he failed; and when he
perceived the interposition of the Romans, he desisted from future
hostilities, and consoled himself with the thought which we have already
expressed, of receiving immediate assistance against Egypt through his
daughter. *He turns,* therefore, *to come with the power of his whole
kingdom;* meaning, he collects all his forces to overwhelm Ptolemy
Epiphanes, who was then but a young man, and had neither obtained any
great authority, nor arrived at sound wisdom and discretion. When he
perceived his want of success in the fortune of war, *he gave him the
daughter of women,* referring to her beauty. This is the explanation of
interpreters, who suppose the phrase to imply her remarkable beauty.

<span id="vi.xxi-p10"></span>As to the next clause, those who translate
it, *and the upright with him,* think the Jews are intended, for
Antiochus had received them in surrender, and there were many who openly
espoused his cause. They think the Jews so called as a mark of honor,
and as upright with respect to the worship of God. But this appears to
me too forced. I hesitate not to suppose the angel to signify the
superior character of the agreement between Antiochus and Ptolemy, when
the former found the impossibility of obtaining his adversary’s kingdom
by open warfare. Although the Romans had not yet sent forth any
armament, yet Antiochus began to fear them, and he preferred the use of
cunning in providing for his own interests. Besides this, as we lately
mentioned, he was longing for other booty, for he immediately
transferred the war into Greece, as the angel will inform us. But he
first announces, *his giving away his daughter to destroy her* He here
reproves the artifice of Antiochus the Great, in thus basely selling his
(laughter, as if she were a harlot. As far as he possibly could, he
induced her to slay her husband either by poison or by other devices.
Hence, *he gave up his daughter to destroy her, but she did not stand by
him, and was not for him;* meaning, she did not assent to her father’s
impious desires, and was unwilling to favor such monstrous wickedness.
We read in profane writers the fulfillment of these predictions of the
angel, and thus it more clearly appears how God placed before the eyes
of the pious, a mirror in which they might behold his providence in
ruling and preserving his Church. It now follows, —

<span id="vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#018)<span id="vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p2"></span>**18.** After this shall he turn his face
unto the isles, and shall take many: but a prince for his own behalf
shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease; without his own
reproach he shall cause *it* to turn upon him.

<span id="vi.xxii-p3"></span>**18.** Et vertet faciem suam ad insulas,
et capiet multas, et quiescere faciet, *hoc est, retorquebit,* princeps
opprobrium ejus apud ipsum. Ideo non torquebit opprobrium suum in ipsum.

<span id="vi.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxii-p6"></span>There is some obscurity in these words, but
the history will afterwards determine the angel’s meaning. First, as to
the word “islands,” he doubtless means Asia Minor and the maritime
coasts; also Greece, Cyprus, and all the islands of the Mediterranean
Sea. It was a Jewish custom to call all places beyond the sea “islands,”
as they were not very well skilled in navigation. Therefore he says, *He
will turn his face to the islands;* that is, he shall turn to the
opposite regions of the world. The Mediterranean Sea is known to be
between Syria and Asia Minor; Cilicia, too, is between them, which was
also under the dominion of Antiochus, although the seed of his power was
Syria. Hence he calls Asia Minor, and Greece, and the Mediterranean
islands, all “isles,” with respect to Syria and Judea. This occurred
when the AEtolians renewed the war after the defeat of Philip. The
Romans were the originators of this war in Greece, and they had the
honorable pretext of liberating the whole of Greece after Philip of
Macedon had seized upon many cities most skillfully fortified. But the
Etolians were proud and puffed up with the desire of superiority, as the
event ultimately proved. They boasted themselves to be the liberators of
Greece; they used the help of the Romans, but professed to be the
principal leaders in the war, and when they saw Chalcis and other cities
held by the Romans, the spirit of envy took possession of them. Titus
Flaminius withdrew his garrisons from their cities, but yet the
*A*Etolians were not satisfied; for they wished for the sole
pre-eminence and the entire departure of the Romans. With this view they
sent their ambassadors to Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, to
king Philip, and also to Antiochus. Thoas was the principal author of
this contention, for after stirring up the neighboring nations, he set
out himself to Antiochus. When the *A*Etolians were puffed up by the
large promises which he brought back, they expected to produce peace
throughout Greece without the slightest trouble. Meanwhile Antiochus
only advanced as far as Asia Minor with but a small force. He led
Hannibal with him, whose fame alone inspired the Romans with dread; and
had he taken his advice, he would certainly have had no difficulty in
expelling the Romans. But the flatterers of His court did not allow
Hannibal’s advice to prevail with this foolish king. Then Villius also
cunningly rendered Antiochus suspicious of his advice: for he had been
sent as ambassador into Asia Minor, had insinuated himself into his
favor, and had acquired his friendship, and was so engaged in daily
conference with him, that Antiochus suspected the fidelity of Hannibal
to his interests. Hence he carried on that war entirely without method,
or plan, or perseverance. When he arrived at Chalcis, he was smitten
with the passion for a damsel there, and celebrated a foolish marriage
with her, as if he had been completely at peace Thus he had citizen of
Chalcis for his father-in-law, while he was mighty monarch, unequaled by
any throughout the world. Although he conducted himself thus he
considerately, yet the celebrity of his fame rather than his personal
exertions, enabled him at first to take many cities, not only in Asia
Minor and on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, but also in Greece
itself. He recovered Chalcis and other cities which had been seized upon
by the Romans. The angel relates this as if the event had already
occurred, and yet we are aware of them all being as yet future.

<span id="vi.xxii-p7"></span>*He will turn his face to the islands, and
will take many, and a general shall cause him to cease, and shall turn
his reproach against himself* Antiochus often fought against the Romans,
and always without success, although he sometimes thought himself
superior; but from the time when Attilius the prefect of the fleet
intercepted his supplies, and thus stopped his progress, M. Acilius the
consul began to gain the mastery by land, and his power became gradually
more and more enfeebled. When conquered in a naval engagement by Livius
the praetor, he suffered a severe loss, and then when too late he
acknowledged his error in not obeying the counsels of Hannibal; but he
had lost the opportunity of renewing the war. Hence the angel here says,
*A leader should make his reproach return upon himself* This signifies
how Antiochus should be puffed up with foolish pride, and how his insane
boastings should rebound upon his own head, as he had vomited them forth
with open mouth against the Romans. When he speaks here of *his
disgrace,* I interpret it actively, as making his reproach remain; for
the word <span id="vi.xxii-p7.1"></span>תפרח *cherepheth,* means
reproach, but there are two ways of interpreting it, actively and
passively. But as I have already said, the angel more probably speaks of
his foolish boasting, for he had despised the Romans with contempt and
insult. We know how foolishly he insulted them by his ambassadors among
all the assemblies of Greece. A *leader,* then, either Acilius or Lucius
Scipio, who drove him beyond Mount Taurus, *made his disgrace rest upon
himself, and he shall not turn away his own disgrace;* that is,
Antiochus vomited forth his reproaches against the Romans with swollen
cheeks, but with utter futility. All these disgraceful speeches came to
nothing, and never injured the Romans in the least; but *that leader,*
either Lucius Scipio or Acilius, according to my statement, returned
these reproaches upon himself by which he hoped to lay the Romans
prostrate, but they turned out nothing but wind. The angel therefore
derides the pride of Antiochus by saying, *A leader should come who
should throw back these reproaches upon himself,* and prevent them from
returning upon either this leader or the Romans. He takes the head as
representing. the whole body.

<span id="vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since it pleases thee
to exercise our confidence by not allowing us any fixed or stable rest
upon earth, that we may learn to rest in thee while the world rolls over
and over even a hundred times. May we never doubt either our protection
under thy hand, or the perpetual issue of all things in our good.
Although we are not beyond the reach of darts, yet may we know the
impossibility of our suffering under any deadly wound, when thou puttest
forth thy hand to shield us. May we have full confidence in thee, and
never cease to march under thy standard with constant and invincible
courage, until at length thou shalt gather us into that happy rest which
is laid up for us in heaven, by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xxiv-p1"></span>Lecture fifty-ninth

<span id="vi.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.xxv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#019)<span id="vi.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxv-p2"></span>**19.** Then he shall turn his face toward
the fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be
found.

<span id="vi.xxv-p3"></span>**19.** Et vertet faciem suam ad munitiones
terrae suae, et impinget, et cadet, neque invenietur.

<span id="vi.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxv-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxv-p6"></span>Here either the base end of Antiochus is
denoted, who was slain in a popular tumult while spoiling the temple of
Belus, or else the event of the war between him and the Romans is
described. This war was conducted under the auspices of Lucius Scipio,
because Cneius Scipio, the conqueror of Africa, had offered himself as
his brother’s lieutenant-general, and after his death that province was
committed to him. But, as we have said, the resources of Antiochus had
been cut off before this. He had lost, the cities of Asia, and if he had
ceded them at first, he might have quietly retained the greater part of
Asia Minor. But as he extended his wings over Greece, and hoped by this
means to become completely master of the whole of Greece and Macedonia,
he could not be induced to withdraw his garrisons from those cities, but
at length was compelled to give up Asia Minor. In this way, then, the
angel describes the progress of the war by saying, *He will turn his
face towards the fortifications of his own land;* that is, when
compelled to relinquish Greece, he will betake himself to fortified
places. He was very safe there, and in a region sufficiently at peace;
he had almost impregnable towns on all sides, and appeared to be free
from warfare. Historians relate this to have been done by the skill of
Cneius Scipio. For his son was then a captive under Antiochus, and he
knew him to have greater authority than his brother, although he only
possessed the title of lieutenant-general. They record his persuading
Antiochus not to try his fortune by any decisive engagement. However it
was, it is quite evident that he delayed fighting till he was compelled
by a sense of shame, as all men accused him of cowardice in not daring
to try the issue of an engagement, when he possessed so large an army.
The Romans had scarcely ever taken the field against so strong a force,
and yet, according to the narrative of Titus Livius, they never
displayed less terror or concern. The extent of the forces of Antiochus
is readily apparent from the slaughter which occurred; in one day 50,000
men perished; and this would be almost incredible, unless it were borne
out by numerous and trustworthy testimonies. In this way the angel said,
*Antiochus should return,* as he did not go forth to meet Lucius Scipio,
but suffered him to pass on. Had he given the least sign of resistance,
without doubt Philip had in iris hand and power the whole force of the
Romans. Many indeed pronounced the conduct of L. Scipio to be rash, in
daring to allow Philip such license, as he had been lately conquered,
and was still exasperated in consequence of the loss and disgrace which
he had suffered. For if Antiochus had been on the alert to restrain the
enemy, it would have been all over with the Roman army in those narrow
and rugged defiles; but, as we have stated, he kept his army in idleness
and luxury among fortified towns. If another and a probable sense is
preferred, the sentence applies to his *base* retreat to further Asia,
where he fell, slain by the rustic population. *He shall fall, and shall
not be found* Antiochus in truth continued to reign from the period of
the destruction of his army and of his acceptance of the conditions
which the Romans imposed. He obtained peace, but not without the payment
of a heavy fine while he retained the name of king. Although he united
with the Romans in an honorable treaty, yet he was forced to retire
beyond Mount Taurus, to pay a large sum of money on account of the
expenses of the war, to give hostages, and to divide the ships equally
with the Romans. In this latter case he was grossly and fraudulently
deluded, for L. Scipio commanded all the ships to be cut to pieces, and
delivered the materials to Antiochus, to whom they were utterly
worthless. He knew the man to be deceptive and restless, and so he
treated him with barbarity, according to his deserts. As far as the
hostages are concerned, we find Antiochus and Demetrius his sons as
hostages at Rome even after his death. He was left in peace indeed, but
was deprived of the cities of Asia Minor, and was ordered to betake
himself beyond Mount Taurus. Those ravines were the boundary of his
empire; a part of Asia was assigned to Eumenes, and many cities became
independent. Antiochus, by way of concealing his disgrace, made a joke
of it, saying he had managed cleverly, for the government of Asia Minor
was a great trouble to him. He had another ample and opulent kingdom
with which he might well be content: I have hitherto been but a steward
in Asia, he used to say, and the Romans have relieved me of that
encumbrance.

<span id="vi.xxv-p7"></span>When, therefore, the angel says, *After his
fall, he should be no longer king;* this may be understood of his
ignominious death which followed shortly afterwards. His avarice was
insatiable, and when compelled to pay a large tribute to the Romans, he
pretended to be reduced to extreme poverty; then he wished to spoil the
temple of Jupiter Dodoneus, and was slain there during a tumult. This
last word ought properly to be referred to this event, for King
Antiochus was not found, because these rustics slew him in the tumult
which arose. Thus far concerning Antiochus the Great; Seleucus now
follows, who was his first successor. He had three sons, Seleucus whom
many call Ceraunus, then Antiochus Epiphanes, and Demetrius. Concerning
Seleucus the angel speaks as follows, —

<span id="vi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#020)<span id="vi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p2"></span>**20.** Then shall stand up in his estate a
raiser of taxes *in* the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he
shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.

<span id="vi.xxvi-p3"></span>**20.** Et stabit super locum ejus transire
faciens exactorem *in* honore regni,  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) et diebus paucis conteretur, idque non
ira, neque in praelio.

<span id="vi.xxvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxvi-p6"></span><span id="vi.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p7"></span>Seleucus, it is well known, did not long
survive his father, for he was put to death either by poison, or by his
domestics. Suspicion fell upon his brother Antiochus, who was sent back
to his country after his father’s death was known. Demetrius alone was
retained, who afterwards escaped by flight, for he left the city under
the pretense of hunting, and followed the bank of the Tiber as far as
Ostia, where he embarked on a small vessel, preferring to run all risks
to remaining in perpetual banishment. Concerning Seleucus, the angel
says, *he shall stand in his place,* meaning, he shall succeed by
hereditary right to the office of Antiochus the Great. Thus *he shall
cause the exactor to pass over* Some translate, He shall take away the
exactor; for the verb <span id="vi.xxvi-p7.1"></span>רבע *gneber,* in
Hiphil, signifies to take away. The Hebrews use the verb of this clause
in the sense of excluding. Some interpreters think this language implies
the praise of Seleucus for lessening the tributes imposed by his father,
but historians shew this view to be false, and condemn his avarice and
rapacity. In some points he was superior to his brother Antiochus;
although both lustful and cruel to those around him. Through indulgence
in great expenses, he could not be moderate and lenient towards his
subjects; for luxury and prodigality always draw with them cruelty in
the exaction of tribute. For he who is thus profuse, must necessarily
extract the very blood from his people. As Seleucus was thus devoted to
self-indulgence, this sense is more appropriate — *he made the exactor
to pass through,* meaning, he laid new and fresh taxes on all his
subjects. Nothing but this is said of him, since he was immediately put
to death, as the second clause of the verse informs. us. If we prefer
taking the words — the glory of the kingdom — by way of opposition,
Seleucus will be praised as an honor and an ornament. But I think we
must supply the letter <span id="vi.xxvi-p7.2"></span>ל*, l,* and
understand the passage thus, — *He who shall cause the exactor to pass
through shall stand in his place, and shall be destroyed in a few days*
By the word “destroyed,” he signifies a bloody death. *But not in
anger,* says he. I wonder why some translate it “in mutual *conflict,*”
because the Hebrews imply “anger” by this word; meaning, he should not
perish in open warfare, or in the course of a battle, but by the hands
of his domestics. Historians differ as to the kind of death which he
died, some saying he was poisoned, and others, slain by the sword. But
this difference is of no consequence. Antiochus Epiphanes next succeeds
him.

<span id="vi.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021)<span id="vi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvii-p2"></span>**21.** And in his estate shall stand up a
vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but
he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.

<span id="vi.xxvii-p3"></span>21. Et stabit super locum ejus probrosus,
et non dabunt ei  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) decorem regni,
 <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) et veniet cum pace, et
apprehendet regnum per blanditias.

<span id="vi.xxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxvii-p7"></span><span id="vi.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvii-p8"></span>Historians agree in representing Antiochus
Epiphanes to have been of a very crafty disposition, and some state his
departure from Rome to have been by stealth. He was most probably
dismissed by the Romans, on the news of his father’s death, as they were
content with his brother Demetrius. They had other hostages besides, who
were among the chief nobles of the land, as well as this third son of
the king. However this was, all are agreed in relating his cunning. He
was so cruel and fierce, that Polybius says he was called Epimanes by
way of a nickname, and as he assumed the name of Illustrious, he was
called the Madman, on account of his turbulent disposition. He was a
monster puffed up with various vices; being of a slavish and flattering
temperament, he endeavored to acquire the favor of Rome by artifice, as
we shall afterwards discover. But when he was not actuated by fear, his
cruelty and ferocity were beyond all bounds. For this reason he is
called *contemptible.* He was held in some esteem at Rome, and was
received by a portion of his people with great applause. But he was not
endued with any heroic or even regal qualities, for he always flattered
the Romans, and insinuated himself into the favor of the citizens in
this way, until he came to his kingdom as a suppliant; and then the
angel calls him a contemptible or despicable person. Another reason
equally probable may be brought forward, namely, his seizing upon the
throne by fraud and wickedness, after setting aside the legitimate heir.
For Seleucus left a successor whom this perfidious plotter deprived of
his rights, and thus fraudulently acquired the kingdom for himself. We
know of what importance God makes every one’s calling, and how he
restrains men from rashly arrogating anything to themselves, as they
ought always to be satisfied with that station which is assigned them by
God. As, therefore, Antiochus seized on the kingdom without any right to
it, and drove out the lawful heir, he was contemptible before God, and
would never have been king at all except; by violence and tyranny on his
part, as well as by deceit. and cunning devices. I have no hesitation in
stating that the angel here censures the perverse conduct of Antiochus,
by calling him *despised* through the absence of all nobleness of
feeling.

<span id="vi.xxvii-p9"></span>He next adds, *They shall not confer upon
him the honor of royalty.* By these words he announces the injustice of
his reign through not being chosen by the votes of the people. We have
stated that the son of Seleucus ought to have reigned without any
dispute, but the very person who should have been his nephew’s guardian,
wickedly deprived his ward of his paternal inheritance. Hence the angel
speaks of him rather as a robber than as a king, because he seized upon
the kingdom, and was not elected by the popular choice. It follows, —
*he shall come in peace, and seize the kingdom by flatteries* This is
the explanation of the last clause. It might be asked, how did he
deprive his nephew of his kingdom? the reply is — *he shall come
peacefully,* meaning, he shall lay aside everything which he was
agitating in his mind, and should not openly boast of his being king,
but should deceitfully act in the character of guardian until he had the
power of ruining his ward. *He shall come,* then, peacefully, *and shall
seize the kingdom by flatteries* Thus we see the angel’s meaning in
these words. Besides, although Daniel did not see all these things, nor
even many of the chosen people, yet they tasted enough of these
prophecies to satisfy them, and to banish anxiety from their minds. They
were permitted to perceive God speaking through his angel, and
experience taught them the truth of everything which is contained here,
even if many events should be hidden from them. But it was God’s object
to support the spirits of the pious, even to the advent of Christ, and
to retain them in tranquillity amidst the greatest disturbances. Thus
they would acknowledge the value of the promise of the Redeemer, after
he had been set forth, as will be mentioned at the close of the chapter.
I will now proceed to the next words.

<span id="vi.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#022)<span id="vi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxviii-p2"></span>**22.** And with the arms of a flood
shall they be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; yea, also
the prince of the covenant.

<span id="vi.xxviii-p3"></span>**22.** Et brachia inundatione obruentur,
*ad verbum, inundabuntur,* a conspectu ejus, et conterentur, atque etiam
dux foederis.

<span id="vi.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxviii-p6"></span>We may naturally conjecture that the
dominions of Antiochus were not immediately at peace, because a portion
of his court favored the lawful heir. As it always happens in every
change of government, there were many tumults in Syria before Antiochus
could remove his adversaries out of his way. For although the kingdom of
Egypt was then destitute of a head, as Ptolemy, called Philometor, was
then only a boy, his counselors were in favor of the son of Seleucus,
and so by secret supplies afforded their aid to the faction opposed to
Antiochus. He had much trouble not only with his own people, but also
with the neighboring nations. All pitied the lot of his ward, and his
being quite undeserving of it moved many to render him every possible
help. The boy was aided by the favor of Egypt, and of other nations.
Thus Antiochus was subject to many severe commotions, but the angel
announces his final conquest. *The arms,* he says, *shall be inundated*
This is a metaphorical expression; for whatever aid the son of Seleucus
acquired, was not by his own efforts, for he could use none, but by that
of his friends. *The arms,* then, meaning, all the auxiliaries which
should assist in the restoration of the son of Seleucus, *should be
overwhelmed by an inundation* This is another metaphor, signifying, they
shall be drowned as by a deluge; and by this figure the angel hints not
only at the victory of Antiochus, but at its great facility. It was like
a deluge, not by its own strength, but because God wished to use the
hand of this tyrant in afflicting the Israelites, as we shall afterwards
see, and also in harassing both Egypt and Syria. Antiochus was in truth
God’s scourge, and is thus compared to a deluge. Hence he says, *out of
his sight.* He shews the terror of Antiochus to be so great, that at his
very appearance he should dispirit and prostrate his enemies, although
he was without forces, and was neither a bold nor a persevering warrior.

<span id="vi.xxviii-p7"></span>*And they shall be broken,* says he, *and
also the leader of the covenant;* meaning, Ptolemy shall take the part
of His relative in vain. For the son of Seleueus was the cousin of
Ptolemy Philometor, since, as we have said, Cleopatra had married
Ptolemy Philopator, whence this Philometor was sprung, and Seleueus was
the brother of Cleopatra. He, then, was the *leader of the covenant*
Ptolemy, indeed, who was but a boy, could neither undertake nor
accomplish anything by his own counsel, but such was his dignity in the
kingdom of Egypt, that he was deservedly called *leader of the
covenant,* since all others followed the power of that king. The event
fully proved with what ill success all who endeavored to eject Antiochus
from his possessions, contended against him. It now follows, —

<span id="vi.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#023)<span id="vi.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p2"></span>**23.** And after the league *made* with
him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become
strong with a small people.

<span id="vi.xxix-p3"></span>**23.** Et a conjunctione cum eo faciet
dolum, et ascendet, et praevalebit cum exigua gente, *vel, manu.*

<span id="vi.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxix-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxix-p6"></span>The angel points out some interruption of
the wars, because Antiochus would be content for a time with Syria, and
would not make an attempt of Egypt. It was a great point to repel the
attempts of all those who wished to recover the rights of his nephew.
There is no doubt that the whole country was impoverished and exhausted
with the continual expense of these wars; for whenever fresh commotion’s
arose, it was necessary to draw new levies from these provinces, and
This occasioned very great expense. It is not surprising, then, if
Antiochus, who was of a cunning disposition, negotiated a temporary
peace with his nephew Ptolemy Philometor the king of Egypt. His sister
Cleopatra still survived, and this was an honorable excuse. The angel,
then, states first, the proposal of a truce leading to settled peace
between the two sovereigns. He adds, however, the perfidious conduct of
Antiochus in his friendships. *During,* or after *these agreements,* he
*shall deal treacherously with him* Although, therefore, he pretended to
be the friend and ally of his nephew, yet he conducted himself
deceitfully towards him. *And he shall ascend, and shall prevail by a
small band;* meaning, he shall attack the boy suddenly. For when Ptolemy
anticipated a lasting friendship with his uncle, Antiochus took the
opportunity of fraudulently attacking some cities with a small force: He
thus deceived his enemy, who thought all things would be tranquil with
him; and so when Ptolemy had no fear of his uncle, he suddenly lost some
of his cities. The angel means this; *he shall rise* by deceit, and
*shall prevail without large forces,* because there shall be no
suspicion of warfare. It is easy enough to oppress an enemy in a state
of tranquillity, and in the absence of all fear. It is afterwards added,
—

<span id="vi.xxx"></span>

<span id="vi.xxx-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#024)<span id="vi.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxx-p2"></span>**24.** He shall enter peaceably even upon
the fattest places of the province; and he shall do *that* which his
fathers have not done, nor his fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter among
them the prey, and spoil, and riches: *yea,* and he shall forecast his
devices against the strong holds, even for a time.

<span id="vi.xxx-p3"></span>**24.** In pace, et in pinguedinibus
regionis, *aut provinciae,* veniet, *hoc est, in deliciis,* et faciet
quae non fecerunt patres ejus, et patres patrum ejus: spolia et praedam,
et substantiam illis dispertiet,  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) et super munitiones cogitabit
cogitationes suas, idque ad tempus.

<span id="vi.xxx-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxx-p6"></span><span id="vi.xxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxx-p7"></span>The history is here continued: The angel
shews how Antiochus in a short time and with a small band should acquire
many cities, *as he should come in peace upon the fatness of the
province,* implying his oppressing them while sleeping in security. He
shews also how he should become conqueror, not by any hostile invasion
of Egypt, but by cunning and stealth he should deprive King Ptolemy of
his cities when he least expected it. There should be no appearance of
war; hence he says, *he shall come in peace upon the fatness of the
land* The word “fatness” is used metaphorically for “richness.” When the
Egyptians supposed all danger to be far removed, and were persuaded of
the friendship of Antiochus towards them, and relied on him as an ally
should any adversity arise, they indulged themselves in luxuries till
Antiochus came suddenly and subdued them. He next adds, *He shall
despise the spoil, and prey, and goods, which belonged to them* Some
take the words for spoil and prey in the sense of “soldiers,” and join
it with the verb <span id="vi.xxx-p7.1"></span>רוזבי *ibzor,* “he shall
disperse,” meaning, he shall distribute their possessions among his
soldiers, to conciliate their good will, and to prepare them for new
wars, as we know how easily soldiers are enticed when they receive the
rewards of their service; for they are actuated solely by covetousness
and avarice. Some writers expound it in this way — Antiochus shall
divide the prey among his soldiers, but I prefer the other sense — he
*shall disperse the prey, and the spoil, and the goods, of the
Egyptians* After suddenly oppressing the Egyptians, he shall proceed to
spoil them like a robber.

<span id="vi.xxx-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *And against the
fortifications shall he devise machinations,* meaning, he shall lay his
plans for seizing the fortified cities. For at; first he penetrated as
far as certain cities, and occupied first Coelo-Syria, and afterwards
Phoenica, but could not quickly possess the fortified towns; hence he
deferred the execution of his plans to a more suitable time. Therefore,
the angel says, *he shall arrange his plans against the fortified
cities, but only for the time;* meaning, he shall not immediately bring
forward his intentions, hoping to oppress his nephew when off his guard.
Thus under the disguise of peace an access to these cities would always
be open to him, and he would reconcile to himself all whom he could
corrupt by either gifts or other devices. We perceive, then, how a
summary is here presented to us of the arts and schemes by which
Antiochus should deprive his nephew of a portion of his territory and
its towns, how suddenly he should invade some of the weakest in a state
of unsuspecting tranquillity; and how by degrees he should invent
machinations for seizing upon the stronger towns as well as he could. He
also says, *for the time* The cunning and malice of Antiochus was always
apparent throughout these transactions. He did not engage in open
warfare, but was always endeavoring to add to his possessions by
indirect frauds, — a course which was not without its success.

<span id="vi.xxx-p9"></span>When it is said*, He shall do what neither
his fathers nor his fathers’ fathers did,* this must be restricted
solely to Egypt. For Seleucus the first king of Syria enjoyed a wide
extent of dominion, then he prospered in warfare, and his fame
flourished even to a good old age, and though at last he was
unsuccessful in battle, yet on the whole he was a superior and
celebrated warrior. Besides this we know him to have been one of the
chief generals of Alexander the Great. As to his son Antiochus, we have
previously observed the wide extent of his dominion, and how highly he
was esteemed for prudence and valor. The angel does not compare
Antiochus Epiphanes generally with either his fat, her, or grandfather,
or great-grandfather, but only with respect to Egypt. For his ancestors
always longed after Egypt, but their designs against it were entirely
frustrated; he, however, was more successful in his aggression where his
ancestors had failed in their attempts. Hence it becomes manifest how
God overrules the events of war, so that the conqueror and the
triumphant hero is not the man who excels in counsel, or in prudence, or
valor, but he who fights under the heavenly leader. It pleases God at
one time to afflict nations, and at another to set over them kings who
are really his servants. So he wished to punish Egypt by the hands of
this robber. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="vi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#025)<span id="vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxi-p2"></span>**25.** And he shall stir up his power and
his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the
king of the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and
mighty army; but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices
against him.

<span id="vi.xxxi-p3"></span>**25.** Et excitabit robur suum, et cor
suum adversus regem austri, cum exercitu magno: et rex austri
irritabitur ad praelium cum exercitu magno, et robusto valde: et non
stabit, quia cogitabunt contra eum cogitationes.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172)

<span id="vi.xxxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxi-p6"></span><span id="vi.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxi-p7"></span>The angel here announces how Antiochus
Epiphanes after prevailing by fraud, should become bolder in his daring.
he should venture to levy a hostile army and invade Egypt openly,
without any further dissimulation. He therefore says, *at length he
shall rouse his strength and his courage* He had previously crept along
through hiding-places and fastnesses, and had not roused either his
strength or his courage when remaining quiet at home; meanwhile he
obtained the possession of various towns by treachery and other
artifices. This was only creeping on by burrowing underground. But he
now openly declares war, and brings his forces into the field of battle,
and thus *stirs up his strength and his courage* As I have already said,
his new method of warfare is here described as unusual with him, as his
audacity, doubtless, gradually increased through that series of success
which he had enjoyed, and by which he had become more powerful than his
nephew, through the practice of deceit. He afterwards adds, *with a
great army.* He had mentioned a small band, he now places opposite to it
a large army; for it required a long space of time to collect extensive
pecuniary resources for carrying on the war, and also for enlarging and
extending his own boundaries. He was thus able to enroll fresh levies,
while his prosperity induced many to become his auxiliaries. As he found
himself in every way superior to his nephew, he collected a great army.
*The king of the south also shall be irritated;* that is, he shall not
dare to harass his own uncle Antiochus, but shall be forced to open
warfare. *He shall come, then, with a great army,* very great, strong,
and powerful, says he, *but he shall not stand, because they shall
devise devices against him;* meaning, he shall be conquered by
treachery. Here the angel signifies that Ptolemy should have sufficient
courage to resist, had he not been betrayed by his adherents. We shall
more clearly perceive this in the next verse to-morrow.

<span id="vi.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xxxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may remain
quiet under thy shelter and protection, hi the midst of those numerous
disturbances which thou ever submittest to our eyes in this world. May
we never lose our courage when an occasion is given to Satan and our
enemies to oppress us, but may we remain secure trader thy protection,
and every hour and every moment may we fly to thy guardianship. Relying
on thine unconquered power, may we never hesitate so to pass through all
commotion’s, as to repose with quiet minds upon thy grace, till at
length we are gathered into that happy and eternal rest which thou hast
prepared for us in heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiii-p1"></span>Lecture sixtieth

<span id="vi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#026)<span id="vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p2"></span>**26.** Yea, they that feed of the portion
of his meat shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many
shall fall down slain.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p3"></span>**26.** Et qui comedent portionem cibi
ejus, conterent eum, et exercitus ejus obruetur, et cadent vulnerati
multi.

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxiv-p6"></span>The angel predicted, yesterday, that
Ptolemy should not stand forth in battle, through the treachery of his
own adherents. He now expresses the kind of treachery, for his chief
courtiers or counselors should be the authors of this perfidy. He
opposes the common soldiers to their leaders, for in the second clause,
he shews how the soldiers should discharge their duty without sparing
either their life or their blood. We now understand the Holy Spirit’s
intention in this verse, for he says the authors of this perfidy should
not be ordinary men, but the chief among the counselors. They are said
to eat at the king’s table, as in the first chapter we saw how a portion
was given to Daniel, and to his companions, from the royal food at the
king’s table. Thus he shews how dishonorable this perfidy was, as they
eat at his table, and were his intimate companions. *They shall destroy
him,* says he, *and his army shall be overwhelmed* He shews that many
were prepared for this duty, who would boldly and freely expose their
lives to danger for their king’s safety and their country’s defense,
*but many should fall wounded* He signifies that there should be a great
slaughter in his army, and the issue of the battle would not be
according to his wish, because his generals would not preserve their
fidelity to their sovereign. By this example the angel describes to us
the ordinary situation of kings. They choose their counselors not by
their honesty, but by the mere appearance of congeniality in their
affections and tastes. If a king is avaricious, or cunning, or cruel, or
sensual, he desires to have friends and attendants who will not check
either his avarice or his craftiness, his cruelty or his lust. Hence
they deserve the conduct which they receive, and experience treachery
from those whom they ought not to treat with so much honor, if they
considered themselves in duty bound to God and to their people. It now
follows,-

<span id="vi.xxxv"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#027)<span id="vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p2"></span>**27.** And both these kings’ hearts *shall
be* to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall
not prosper: for yet the end *shall be* at the time appointed.

<span id="vi.xxxv-p3"></span>**27.** Et duorum regum cor ipsorum, *hoc
est, et cor his duobus regibus,* in malum: et in mensa eadam, *una,*
mendacium loquentur, et non prospere eveniet, quia adhuc finis ad tempus
statutum.

<span id="vi.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxv-p6"></span>The angel here narrates that the close of
this war should be by treaties and a hollow pretense of peace after the
slaughter which Ptolemy had sustained. Although Antiochus might have
followed up his own good fortune, yet he durst not venture to push his
advantage to the extremity, but according to his disposition, he thought
it more to his interest to make peace with his enemy. We have already
alluded to his craftiness and his want of openness and integrity. The
angel predicts the existence of bad faith in both these kings; the uncle
and nephew will meet, says he, and sup together, and pretend the
greatest friendship, *but they shall speak lies,* says he, *at the same
table;* meaning, they shall plot against each other, and each shall act
fraudulently for his own ends. This prophecy indeed seems to be of
little consequence to the faithful; but it was needful to shew that in
such a state of confusion they could not hold out without being
furnished with all kinds of support. If the angel had only said
generally, first there shall be war, and then a temporary peace, this
would not have been sufficient to sustain the minds of the pious; but
when the details are so clearly pointed out, a remarkable confirmation
is afforded them. Thus the faithful have no reason for doubting that God
has spoken, when the angel predicts the future so exactly, and so openly
narrates it, as if a matter of history.

<span id="vi.xxxv-p7"></span>He next adds, *Yet it shall not prosper,
because the end is for the time,* says he. The angel recalls the
faithful to the providence of God, as our minds always naturally rest in
the midst of earthly things. We apprehend with our minds only as far as
we see with our eyes. We always ask the reasons “why this happens” and
“why that course of proceeding has not turned out well,” entirely
omitting the will of God. Hence the angel meets this fault and stupidity
of men by saying, that whatever these kings were plotting should fail of
success, *since the end was for the time;* meaning, God would hold many
occurrences in suspense. While, therefore, we are considering only
second causes, we perceive how the supreme power resides with God alone,
and he governs by his will the mutual transactions of mankind. No slight
advantage would result to the faithful from this instruction, because,
while kings are devising many schemes, and using great cunning and all
the perverse artifices of diplomacy, God still restrains their minds. He
holds events by his secret bridle, and allows nothing to happen without
his heavenly decree. Although we may gather this general instruction
from this passage, yet the angel doubtless restricts what I have said to
the historical events immediately before us. The end had not yet
approached, yet the fitting time was fixed beforehand by God’s secret
counsel, so that Antiochus conquers at one period and retreats at
another, as we shall see. It follows: —

<span id="vi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#028)<span id="vi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p2"></span>**28.** Then shall he return into his land
with great riches; and his heart *shall be* against the holy covenant;
and he shall do *exploits,* and return to his own land.

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p3"></span>**28.** Et revertetur in terram suam cum
opibus magnis, et cor ejus ad foedus sanctitatis, et faciet, et
revertetur in terram suam.

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="vi.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p6"></span>Here the angel predicts the calamitous
nature of that peace for the people of God, because Antiochus should
turn his arms against Jerusalem and the whole Jewish people. It is said,
*He shall return to his own land,* because he shall not possess Egypt.
This return implies the victory of Antiochus, and yet his betaking
himself within the boundaries of his own realm. When he adds, with great
pomp, or *great riches,* he shews the source *whence* that wealth should
be *derived,* — *his heart should be against the holy covenant.* He
partially destroyed Jerusalem and the temple of God. He was compelled to
leave the temple and many treasures, through either shame, or reverence,
or a miracle, as we read in the 2nd Book of Maccabees (<span
id="vi.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>[2Ma
5:2](../../../bib/apo/ma2005.htm#002)<span id="vi.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>.)
He would willingly have stripped the whole temple, but God then
restrained him, while he had gathered for himself great wealth. Hence
the angel joins the two events, he should return to Syria with great
wealth, and his heart should be against the holy covenant. Some refer
this to persons, as if the angel meant the people who were in covenant
with God. But the simpler sense pleases me better, — he should carry on
war against God, because he was not enriched with such ample spoils as
he had expected. We have mentioned his making peace with his enemy:
lest, therefore, this expedition should be fruitless, he spoiled the
temple of God. Thus *his heart was elated against God and against his
holy covenant* The other exposition is too cold and too forced.

<span id="vi.xxxvi-p7"></span>*And he shall do it and shall return to
his own land.* This return at the end of the verse is taken in a
different sense from that at the beginning, as now he should use his own
will as a conqueror, and no one should oppose his arrival in his own
territories. These two expressions are to be read *together,* — *he
shall do it and return to his own dominions* The meaning of the word for
“do” we have already explained. The angel signifies the absence of every
obstacle which could prevent the destruction of the city and temple by
Antiochus. This was a severe trial, and would cause the minds of the
faithful to be disturbed and tossed about because God gave up his temple
to this cruel tyrant, and permitted the sacred vessels and the hidden
treasures to be carried off with the greatest ignominy. It was
necessary, then, to inform the faithful beforehand of this grievous
slaughter, lest its novelty should astonish them and overthrow the
constancy of their faith. Hence we gather this practical instruction —
God often predicts many sorrowful events for us, and yet this
instruction ought not to embitter our feelings; for he wishes to fortify
us against the trial which the novelty of the event, must occasion. Thus
the angel, while treating of occurrences by no means agreeable, was a
useful herald of all the calamities which must happen, lest anything
unusual or unexpected should fall upon the pious. Thus they would
acknowledge the affliction to proceed from God’s hand; and while they
were exposed to the lust of Antiochus, yet God by his certain and
incomprehensible counsel allowed much license to this impious tyrant. It
afterwards follows

<span id="vi.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p2"></span>**29.** At the time appointed he shall
return, and come toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or
as the latter.

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p3"></span>**29.** Ad tempus revertetur et veniet in
AEgyptum: et non erit ut prius, it a posterius.  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p5"></span>**30.** For the ships of Chittim shall
come against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have
indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even
return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p6"></span>**30.** Et venient contra eum naves
Cithim, et debilitabitur,  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) et
revertetur, et indignabitur adversus foedus sanctitatis, et faciet, et
revertetur, et intelliget,  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) ad
desertores foederis sanctitatis.

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p10"></span><span id="vi.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p11"></span>First of all, the angel says, Antiochus
should return a short time afterwards and take possession of Egypt. This
was the fruit of that pretended peace and perfidious friendship which
has already been mentioned. For the uncle and nephew banqueted together
in mutual distrust, as the angel has already stated, and as we found in
the 27th verse of this chapter. This deception was shortly afterwards
dissolved, when Antiochus, without any reasonable impulse, returned to
Egypt. In this way he shewed his want of nothing but an opportunity for
breaking the truce, and he only delayed it for a time, because he had no
wish to oppress his nephew in haste. This, then, is one point. We may
take the word <span id="vi.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>דעומ *mogned,* “time,”
for a period divinely predetermined; but. as this explanation may seem
too forced, I am contented with the common one. *He shall return,* then,
*for a time, and shall come,* says he*, to Egypt; but the latter
exposition shall not be like the former;* for the whole preparation for
war which had struck such terror into Egypt should lose its effect. He
had seized on a portion of the kingdom, and King Ptolemy Philometor was
besieged when Publius Popilius arrived, of whom the angel will presently
speak. For the cause of his return is added, —

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p12"></span><span id="vi.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p13"></span> *ships shall come from Chittim* We have
explained this word elsewhere. By comparing all the passages of
Scripture in which the word occurs, we shall find all the Gentiles
denoted by it, from Macedon through the whole of Greece, as far as
Illyricum and Italy. The ancients used another term for the Macedonians;
they call them *Maketoe,* and some think the letter M a useless
addition. But whether this be so or not, the circumstances shew the
Macedonians, and Greeks, and other transmarine nations, to have been
called Chittim. If any one still disputes about this word, let us desist
from all contention; still, we cannot help observing what the perpetual
tenor of Scripture enables us to discover, — that the Macedonians,
Greeks, and Italians are included under this term. This passage is free
from all doubt, because Antiochus was restrained not by the Greeks but
by the Romans. Ambassadors were sent by them, not for this purpose
alone, but to investigate the whole state of Greece and Asia Minor. The
affairs of Greece were then very unsettled, and the Romans were turning
their attention towards Achaia, for they thought the Achaean league
would become too powerful. Among these ambassadors was P. Popilius, a
stern man, as we may venture to conjecture, but austere and barbarous.
When he met with Antiochus, who was then besieging Alexandria, and held
the boy-king in captivity, he addressed him after his own manner. King
Antiochus received him graciously, and mildly, and even blandly, and
wished even to salute him, for, as we have already stated, his
disposition was naturally servile. Popilius rejected all these advances,
and ordered him to keep his familiarities for private intercourse; for
Antiochus had been intimate with him when a hostage at Rome, during his
father’s lifetime. He rejected all these acts of courtesy, and explained
to him the commands of the Senate, and ordered him instantly to depart
from Egypt. The king said he would consult with his friends. But he was
unable to lay aside his accustomed sternness; he drew a circle with the
wand which he held in his hand, and ordered the king to summon his
counselors, and to deliberate on the spot, otherwise he must declare war
at once. When the king perceived this barbarian acting so decisively, he
dared no longer to hesitate or dissemble, but threw himself at once into
the power of the Senate, and suddenly retired from the country. This
history is now described by the angel. All these events were as yet
unperformed, but God set before the eyes of the pious what was then
entirely concealed and contrary to the expectation of mankind. The angel
therefore states the reason wily that expedition of Antiochus should be
quite unlike the last one. *There shall come against him,* says he,
*ships of Chittim,* meaning Italy, *and he shall grieve and return;*
that is, he shall obey, although he shall feel indignant at such
imperious treatment, and be compelled to retreat with every mark of
disgrace. It was unworthy of a king to demean himself so humbly at the
mere word of his adversary.

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p14"></span>This accounts for his indignation: *But
he shall return and be indignant against the covenant of holiness;*
meaning, he shall turn his rage against the temple and city of God. This
second return involved the Jews in a far longer period of slaughter than
the former one. Antiochus was then unwilling to return home, unless
laden with spoil, after pretending to establish peace; but now he was
compelled to retreat with great disgrace, and this only exasperated and
enraged him. Hence he acted most outrageously towards both the people
and the temple of God. Thus the angel says, *He shall be indignant
against the holy covenant, and shall do so and return* He repeats the
same language twice as if he had said, Antiochus should return to Syria
without effecting his object, through obeying the Roman Senate, or
rather his old friend whom he had known at Rome. We have already stated
the reason, which we shall afterwards more fully explain, why the angel
predicted the fury of the king as turned *against the holy covenant* It
is this, — the confidence of the pious would naturally be injured by
observing the divine permission granted to the tyrant for spoiling the
temple.

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p15"></span>He next adds, *And he shall act with
intelligence towards the forsakers of the holy covenant* The angel here
points out the manner in which secret agreements should take place
between Antiochus and those apostates who should desert God’s holy
covenant. It is quite clear that he was summoned to Jerusalem, first, by
Jason, and then by Menelaus. (<span id="vi.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>[2Ma
4:19-23](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>.) I shall touch but briefly events recorded
in history. Profane authors inform us accurately of these occurrences,
and besides this, a whole book of Maccabees gives us similar
information, and places clearly before us what the angel here predicts.
Every one who wishes to read these prophecies with profit, must make
himself familiar with these books, and must try to remember the whole
history. Onias the elder was a holy man; his son has been previously
mentioned. (<span id="vi.xxxvii-p15.2"></span>[2Ma
3:1](../../../bib/apo/ma2003.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.2"></span>.) For, with the view of escaping from
snares, he set out for Egypt and built a temple, as Josephus informs us,
and pretended to fulfill that passage in Isaiah which says, There shall
be an altar to God in Egypt. But Onias the elder, who discharged
faithfully and sacredly the office of high priest, was put to flight,
and eventually put to death. Then Jason, whom he had sent to appease
Antiochus, assumed the high priesthood, and betrayed the temple and the
whole nation, as well as the worship of God. (<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.3"></span>[2 Macc.
4:7](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#007),
[35](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#035)<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.3"></span>.) He afterwards met with the reward which
he deserved, for he was slain, and then Menelaus succeeded him, and
conciliated the favor of Antiochus. (<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.4"></span>[2 Macc.
5:9](../../../bib/apo/ma2005.htm#009), [2 Macc.
4:27](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xxxvii-p15.4"></span>.) The authority of the priesthood prevailed
so far as to enable him to draw with him a great portion of the people.
Here, then, the angel predicts how Antiochus, on approaching the city,
should have deserters and apostates as His companions. The words are,
*He shall apply his mind to the forsakers of the holy covenant,* and the
sense is by no means obscure. Antiochus should not make open war against
the Jews, but one faction should go forth to meet him and ingratiate
themselves with him. I run through these events briefly, because when I
afterwards arrive at a general summary, it will be far more convenient
to elicit the general improvement. The angel says next:

<span id="vi.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p2"></span>**31.** And arms shall stand on his
part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take
away the daily *sacrifice,* and they shall place the abomination that
maketh desolate.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p3"></span>31. Et brachia ab ispso stabunt, et
profanabunt sanctuarium roboris, *aut virtutis*, et abolebunt juge,
*sacrificium scilicet,* et ponent abominationem quae obstupefaciet.
 <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p5"></span>**32.** And such as do wickedly against
the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know
their God shall be strong, and do *exploits.*

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p6"></span>32. Et impie agentes contra foedus
abducet in errorem blanditiis,  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)
et populus intelligentes  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) Deum
suum roborabuntur et facient.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p10"></span><span id="vi.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p11"></span>Here the angel describes the intestine
evils of the Church, and more fully explains what he touched on in the
last verse. He says, *The arms shall stand up for Antiochus* Some
explain this of the garrison which that tyrant imposed on Jerusalem But
it is seems too far-fetched. I do not hesitate to suppose the angel to
refer here to the apostates and forsakers of the Law. *Arms,* then,
*shall stand up from him,* meaning, he shall not contend in his own
strength, but shall rely upon the people’s assistance. Many should offer
themselves in obedience to him, and thus Antiochus would find a party
devoted to himself at Jerusalem, which should willingly prostitute
itself to his will. He afterwards adds, *They shall profane the
sanctuary of strength* The angel here joins together Antiochus and these
impious apostates. (<span id="vi.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>[2Ma
5:2](../../../bib/apo/ma2005.htm#002)<span
id="vi.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>.) To favor him, the temple is said to be
polluted, and this was fulfilled when the statue of Jupiter Olympius was
erected there. The tyranny and violence of Antiochus continued long
afterwards, as we shall see in its own place. He brought the statue of
the Olympian Jove into the temple, for the purpose of overthrowing the
worship of God, and then he introduced other corruption’s, which
vitiated the purity of God’s service. He might in one moment have
overthrown the whole Law, but he first tried to mingle many
superstitions with God’s Law, and thus to estrange the Jews by degrees
from true and sincere piety. The angel speaks of *the sanctuary of
power,* to shew the faithful that Antiochus is not the conqueror of God,
who was never deprived of his power, but continued the guardian and
keeper of his temple even unto the end. He uses this epithet for the
temple, to assure the pious that God had not given way to the violence
of the tyrant. His authority stood untouched and untainted, although his
temple was exposed to such foul pollution.

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p12"></span>Lastly, he wished the faithful to
retain by this teaching a sense of God’s unconquered power in choosing
that temple for his dwelling-place, although for a time Antiochus was so
insulting, and was permitted to profane it with his impious crew. This
instruction urged the pious to look upon God’s power with the eye of
faith, although it was then hidden from their view, and was trampled
under foot by the impious in the pride of their audacity. Sorrowful
indeed was the spectacle of this statue erected within the temple, for
God, according to our previous statement, promised to be the defender of
that sacred mountain. When the impious were raging thus insultingly, who
would not have thought God to be altogether conquered and unable to
defend his residence any longer? The angel then here encourages the
faithful to cultivate far different thoughts from those suggested by the
prospect before them. The temple, then, seemed weak and deprived of
every protection, and yet with respect to God it was still a sanctuary
of strength. He next adds, *And they shall abolish the continual
sacrifice,* which really occurred; but I pass it over shortly now, as I
shall have another opportunity of explaining it suitably and fully. *And
they shall place,* or set up, *that abomination which shall cause
astonishment* For who would not have been astonished when he saw the
temple deserted by the Almighty? For if God cared for the temple
services, why did he not resist rage like this? Why did he suffer
himself to be subjected to such disgraceful indignity? The angel meets
such temptations as these by saying, even if the very best men are
astonished at such disgrace, yet nothing happens by chance; for God had
already foreseen and decreed all things. They would not have been
predicted, unless God had wished to prove the people’s faith, and to
exact the penalty for their ingratitude. But I cannot complete the
subject to-day.

<span id="vi.xxxix"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xxxix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are
instructed by thy Spirit and armed by thy sacred teaching, we may carry
on the war bravely with open enemies and with all who boldly oppose true
religion. May we also constantly despise all domestic foes and
apostates, and resist them manfully. May we never be disturbed, even if
various tumults should arise in thy Church. May we fix our eyes upon
thee, and always expect a happier issue than appears possible at the
time, until at length thou shalt fulfill thy promises. And may all
events which now seem contrary to us, issue in our salvation, when thy
Son our Redeemer shall appear. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xl"></span>

<span id="vi.xl-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-First

<span id="vi.xl-p2"></span><span id="vi.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xl-p3"></span>We stated in the last Lecture, the
seriousness of the test by which God proved the faithfulness of his
people, in allowing Antiochus such unbounded liberty to pollute the
Temple, and to abolish, for a time, all the sacrifices and services. He
next set up in the midst of the Temple that abomination which cast down
the spirits of the pious; for that prodigy could not be witnessed
without the most profound astonishment. No one could suppose it
possible, that God would expose his own sanctuary to such dishonor, as
it was the only one which he had chosen in the whole world. It now
follows, *And he shall deceive the transgressors of the covenant with
blandishment, but a people knowing their God will retain it firmly and
practice it* Here Daniel more clearly expresses what he had previously
said of the corruption and overthrow of God’s worship, as Antiochus
should enticingly win over to himself a perfidious portion of those who
were nominally, at, least, God’s people. He thus repeats what we
observed before. These hypocrites were like the arms of Antiochus; for
had he captured the city by the force of arms, still he would not have
dared to offer these insults to God’s Temple, unless he had received
assistance from those apostates who rejected all fear of the Almighty,
and whom ambition and avarice alone had impelled to unite with that
impious tyrant, who was the avowed and professed enemy of their
religion. The angel, then, here confirms what he had previously said,
shewing how the wicked and impious despisers of the covenant should be
tools in the hand of this robber. For the first word of verse 32 is
derived from <span id="vi.xl-p3.1"></span>עשר *reshegn,* “to do
wickedly,” and refers to that special act of sinfulness, their despising
God’s covenant. This refers to those intestine enemies who had
previously boasted themselves to be sons of Abraham, and who were masked
by circumcision, the sign of that covenant. He does not here point out
any of the mere dregs of the people, but the impious priests, Menelaus,
Jason, and others like them, as the passage has already been explained.
He says then, *these should be deceived by the blandishments of
Antiochus* He doubtless offered to the priests and to others what he
thought they would value most; one he set over the Temple, another he
deceived with vain and fallacious promises for a time, by distributing a
variety of gifts among them. In this way he corrupted them all by his
flatteries. To these the Prophet opposes the sincere worshippers of God,
and the Hebrew copula ought to be understood here as implying this
contrast. He had already spoken of many as deceived by vain promises,
and had called them transgressors of the covenant: he now adds, *But the
people who know God shall strengthen themselves and shall do it* The
angel means that the perfidy of those of whom he had spoken, should not
prevail with the pious to lead them into the same alliance of
wickedness, and to hurl them headlong into the same snares. Although
such was the perfidy of these revolters, yet *all who know God,* says
he, *shall strengthen themselves*

<span id="vi.xl-p4"></span>This passage is specially worthy of notice,
as experience teaches how very few stand their ground, when many fall
away. The example of one often draws with it a hundred into the same
rule; but the constancy of a hundred is scarcely sufficient to retain
one in his position. In this case we behold the depth of our natural
depravity. For we are not only moved, but shaken by the very slightest
breezes, and even when God sets before us a firm resting-place, still we
do not cease our vacillation. When an Apostle sets before us the
examples of the saints, he says, a cloud of witnesses is ever gazing
upon us, with the view of retaining us in the fear of God, and in the
pure confession of our faith. (<span id="vi.xl-p4.1"></span>[Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001)<span id="vi.xl-p4.1"></span>.)
But that cloud vanishes too soon from our view. Meanwhile, if any
trifler whom we know to be a man of no weight, and whom we have
ourselves condemned, — if such a one should decline even so little from
the right way, we think such an example sufficient to excuse us.
Wherefore, I had good reason for stating how this passage lays open to
us our perverse and malignant disposition. We can scarcely be attracted
towards God by a multiplicity of appliances, but we are easily dragged
towards the devil to our own destruction. Hence we ought diligently to
meditate upon this passage, and continually to reflect upon the
Prophet’s language. Although apostates may be deceived by flatteries and
reject God’s worship, betray the Church and throw off all semblance of
piety, yet all the pious shall stand fast in the faith. Let no one
therefore quote the example of the thoughtless to excuse his fault, if
he trait are the perfidious, the double-minded, and the hypocritical.
The angel here depicts to us a picture of the Church, by shewing how
many should prove backsliders; but this levity, inconsistency, and
perfidy ought never to be an obstacle to the foes of God to impede their
progress in faith and piety.

<span id="vi.xl-p5"></span>We should also notice the epithet which
designates the pious. *They are called a people knowing their God.* The
people may be supposed to mean the vulgar, but this is forced. It may
also be simply opposed to the profane Gentiles; but I think there is
here an implied contrast between the true and genuine sons of Abraham,
and the false Israelites, who boasted themselves to be members of the
Church when they had nothing but the empty title. For in the prophets as
in the writings of Moses, the name “people” is often used in a favorable
sense for that elect nation which God had adopted as peculiarly his own.
All the Israelites who were descendants of Abraham after the flesh, used
to boast with much vanity in their being the elect people, and thus the
word was ever on their lips. Wherefore the Prophet reproves the foolish
boasting of those who were a. accustomed to shelter themselves under the
name of God, and without having anything real in themselves. Hence *the
people,* meaning God’s people, *shall strengthen themselves;* but, by
way of correcting any erroneous view, he adds, *who shall know God,* as
in the 73d Psalm, (<span id="vi.xl-p5.1"></span>[Ps
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="vi.xl-p5.1"></span>.)
How good is the God of Israel to those who are upright in heart! Here
the Prophet restricts the name of Israel to the elect sons of Abraham
who cultivate piety seriously and heartily, as it had become a prevalent
habit carelessly to misuse this name of God. So here, *the people who
shall know their God,* means his true people — those whom he
acknowledges as his elect. The angel here makes a distinction between
the pious sons of Abraham and the pious worshippers of God. It is worthy
of careful observation, that the angel assigns their knowledge of God as
the cause and foundation of their constancy. How then, we may ask, does
it come to pass, that some few are left, when the apostates thus
prostitute themselves? Because their knowledge of God shall prevail, and
enable them to overcome these attacks, and bravely to repel them, and to
become superior to any temptations. We see, then, the source whence our
own fortitude is derived — the knowledge of God. This acknowledgment is
no vain and cold imagination, but springs from that faith which spreads
its living root in our hearts. Hence it follows, we do not really
acknowledge God, unless we boldly contend when we are put to the test,
and remain firm and stable, although Satan endeavors, by various
machinations, to weaken our faithfulness. And unless we persist in that
firmness which is here described, it is quite clear, that God has never
been truly and really acknowledged by us. The relation too is not
without its weight in the phrase, *the people who shall know their God*
Here is a silent reproof, since God revealed himself to the Israelites
as far as was sufficient to retain their allegiance. No one, therefore,
could offer any excuse without being guilty of impiety, sacrilege, and
perfidy, after being so fully instructed by the Law and the prophets.
This instruction must now be applied to our own times.

<span id="vi.xl-p6"></span>We observe in these days how many fall off
from the Church. Persecution sifts all those who profess to belong to
Christ, and thus many are winnowed like chaff, and but a small portion
remain steadfast. Their backsliding ought not to overthrow our
faithfulness when they so carelessly forsake all piety, either through
being enticed by the allurements of Satan, or deceived by the conduct of
the ungodly. Let us bear in mind the assertion of the angel, and thus
the true knowledge of God will reign supreme in our hearts, and we shall
still proceed in the course we have pursued. And to shew how
consistently the faithful progress in the teaching of the Law and the
Gospel, he says*, they shall strengthen themselves and shall do it.*
Here the word “to do” is taken in the sense of to “*execute*” —
“exploiter,” as we say in France; meaning, they shall summon their
courage to discharge their duty; for the word “to do,” or “to execute,”
is referred to the vocation of the pious; they should not be sluggish or
slothful in the discharge of their duty, says the Prophet, but should
gather courage for these contests. And whence? from the acknowledgment
of God. We observe, too, that faith is no idle feeling or cold
imagination, lying suffocated in our minds, but an energizing principle.
For we may say that from faith springs strength, and from strength
execution, and thus we avoid all slothfulness hi our calling. It follows
—

<span id="vi.xli"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p1"></span><span id="vi.xli-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033)<span id="vi.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p2"></span>**33.** And they that understand among the
people shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by
flame, by captivity, and by spoil, *many* days.

<span id="vi.xli-p3"></span>**33.** Et intelligentes populi docebunt
multos, et cadent in gladio, et flamma, et exilio, *vel, captivitate,*
et direptione, diebus multis.

<span id="vi.xli-p4"></span>**34.** Now when they shall fall, they shall
be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with
flatteries.

<span id="vi.xli-p5"></span>**34.** Et in cadendo,  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) juvabuntur auxilio  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) modico: et adjungent se illis multi in
blanditiis.

<span id="vi.xli-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.xli-p9"></span><span id="vi.xli-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p10"></span>With reference to the words, they mean,
*those who shall be taught among the people shall make many understand*
Some take the first word of the verse transitively, as “those who shall
instruct,” but this is wrong; and they shew their ignorance by supposing
the relative pronoun understood before the next verb, as if it were,
“and those who shall teach.” The simple sense is, “Those who shall be
wise among the people shall teach many.” Here the Prophet, under the
angel’s guidance, predicts the multitude of apostates as well as the
existence of some of an opposite character, who should retain the people
within the pure worship and fear of God. Without doubt, he speaks
specially of the priests. The greater part were defaulters, and they
implicated the foolish vulgar in their wickedness. We observe similar
effects at this day in the Papacy, as they corrupt the whole world by
their sacrifices. At that time the priests laid snares for the people,
and drew them almost all with them into the same impiety. The angel here
allows the existence of some wise men among the people; I do not
restrict this entirely to the priests, although I suppose the angel to
begin with them. A small portion of them taught the truth, and God
joined a party with them, but yet the angel predicts the existence of
another remnant. Yet afterwards, in the second place, he embraces others
who were truly proficient in God’s law, and although the obligations of
the priesthood did not bind them, yet they labored to recall the
wandering into the way of salvation. He says, then, *Whosoever should be
skillful should teach many.* There is also here a tacit contrast between
the honest servants of God and those fictitious teachers who pride
themselves on their titles; as we observe an instance of this in these
days in the Papacy. For bishops and cardinals, abbots and pretenders of
this kind, strut about with insolence and stupefy the miserable vulgar.
What? do not we represent the Church? Is not judgment with us, as well
as the interpretation of the Law and of Scripture? As, therefore, in
these times these impostors arrogate to themselves all knowledge and
wish to be thought equal to the angels, so we know it came to pass among
the ancient people. The Prophet, therefore, here chastises that foolish
confidence by saying, *Those who shall be understanding among the
people;* meaning, the truly wise. As if he had said, those masked
hypocrites acquire reputation for themselves, but without the slightest
reason. God considers those only intelligent who remain in the pure
doctrine of his Law, and practice piety with simplicity and sincerity.
Hence he calls these, *the intelligent among the people.* He repeats the
word “people,” in the same sense as before, implying that all who use
this name are not true Israelites before God, as true knowledge of him
is required. What kind of knowledge or skill is meant, we easily
ascertain from the next verse. For all knowledge which men think they
possess without this acquaintance with God, is nothing but vanity.
These, therefore, *shall teach many* This prediction of the angel not
only asserts the existence of some among the people who should remain
constant amidst such grievous assaults, and should preserve the
integrity of their faith, but says they should be the directors of
others; as if he had said, God will grant to each of his elect, not only
the power of a bold resistance and of preserving himself pure and
uncontaminated amidst every corruption, but at the same time he will
render these good men the supporters of others, either in preventing
their decline, or if they have fallen off, in bringing them back into
the right path.

<span id="vi.xli-p11"></span>Lastly, the angel signifies how small a
seed God should preserve in his Church as the teachers and rulers of
others, though but few in number; as Isaiah says, God shall consume his
people, but that consumption should leave some remnant, and then it
shall flow forth. (<span id="vi.xli-p11.1"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="vi.xli-p11.1"></span>.)
The sentiment of this passage is the same; even if many should
degenerate and depart from the faith, and this spirit should extend to
the whole people, yet some few should stand firm perhaps ten in a
thousand — and these should be God’s ministers in gathering together a
new Church; and thus the land which was formerly sterile, should profit
by this irrigation and produce new seed. *Those,* therefore, *who shall
be wise among the people shall teach many.* While the angel is here
predicting the future, we ought to take to ourselves this admonition:
the more each of us becomes a proficient in the faith, the more he ought
to exert his utmost endeavors to teach his rude and ignorant neighbors
according to this exhortation of the angel. God does not stretch forth
his hand to us to lead each of us to follow his own course, but to
assist others and to advance their spiritual progress. We read therefore
here, a condemnation of the slothfulness of those on whom God has
bestowed much knowledge and faith, when they fail to use the trust
committed to them for the edification of their brethren. This prediction
of the angel ought to influence each of us, as a law and rule, to seek
the profit of his brethren according to the measure of his
*intelligence.* The angel adds, — these should not be teachers of
shadows, who prescribe men’s duty at their ease, and dispute without
inconvenience, danger, or personal trouble, about what is right in
itself and pleasing to God, but they should be strenuous warriors for
the truth. Here, therefore, the angel joins his instruction with
fortitude, as by this measure it would overcome all dangers, anxieties,
and terrors. The passage becomes, in this way, most useful to us in
these days, if we only learn to reflect upon what God delivers to us by
his angel and his prophet. In conclusion then, the angel demonstrates
how God never approves of any teachers as true and legitimate, unless
they deliver their message as if ready to defend it, and prepared to
seal it with their blood whenever it shall be necessary. We must read
the two clauses together, *Those who teach many the worship of God shall
fall by the sword and the flame;* meaning, they would rather fall or
perish a hundred times by the sword and the flame than desist from their
office of teaching. Besides, the angel here mentions the various kinds
of death, for the sake of exhortation; for, had he mentioned only *the
sword,* he would not have fully expressed the usefulness of this
instruction. Whatever teachers God sets over his Church, they are not
fully proved in the discharge of their duty by overcoming a single form
of temptation, but they must contend with foes on the right hand and on
the left, and must not allow the variety of their perils to weaken
either their constancy or their fortitude. If the sword threaten them on
one side, and fire on the other, — if they must suffer the spoiling of
their goods and banishment from home, nevertheless these teachers must
persevere in their course. We observe, then, the multiplicity of
conflicts here enumerated by the angel, to teach us the strength of the
grace of the Spirit in supporting the teachers and rulers of the Church,
and in preventing them from yielding to any temptations while contending
even with the sword, and fire, and exile, and the spoiling of their
goods.

<span id="vi.xli-p12"></span>He adds, *And that too for many days* This
circumstance possesses great weight, as we observe many endure for a
time with a manly and intrepid courage, who afterwards languish, and
then vanish away and become utterly unlike their former selves. The
angel, however, here promises to those who should be sustained by the
Spirit of God an invincible constancy. They should gather fresh courage
for fresh conflicts, not only for a single day, or month, or year, but
it should never fail them. He adds next,

<span id="vi.xli-p13"></span><span id="vi.xli-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p14"></span> *And when they shall fall, or* shall have
fallen, *they shall be strengthened,* or assisted, *with a small help*
Without the slightest doubt, the angel here speaks of the Maccabees, by
whose assistance the faithful were gathered together and *completely*
separated from those apostates who had betrayed God’s temple and
worship. He calls the help *small,* and truly it was so. For what could
the Maccabees do to resist Antiochus? The powerful influence of this
king is well known; and what was Judea when compared with Syria? The
Jews indeed had destroyed their own power; we have already seen how they
violated treaties, and corrupted the majority of their own people there
was neither skill, nor plan, nor concert among them. *The help, then*,
*was small,* which God sent them. But then the angel shews how God would
afford succor to his people when in distress, and allow them some
alleviation from the cruelty of the tyrant.

<span id="vi.xli-p15"></span>He adds next, *Many shall join themselves
to them by flatteries* Even from this small number the angel cuts off
the greater part, and informs them of the miserable condition of the
Church, because very few should dare to oppose the madness of the
tyrant, and out of these few many should be hypocrites The whole of this
chapter must be interpreted of Antiochus, and yet doubtless God wishes
to promote our improvement by these prophecies. They belong equally to
us; for as God governs his Church in a variety of ways, so he always
sustains it under its various crosses and trials.

<span id="vi.xli-p16"></span>Besides this, the old enemy the devil, who
formerly opposed the Church, is equally troublesome to us. He assails us
partly by enemies without and partly by enemies within. Such teaching as
this was useful, not only to the ancients, but, to us also in the
present day. First of all, the angel predicts the assistance to be
received by the faithful as *small.* Let us learn, then, when God wishes
to succor and to help us, — that he does not always exert the fullness
of his power. He does not thunder from heaven and overthrow our enemies
by the first stroke of his lightning; but he enables us to contend
successfully with our cross, and thus we are far separated from the
reprobate by our firmness in resistance. Again, from the second clause
we must notice the absolute certainty of many hypocrites being found
mingled with the souls of God, and when God purges his Church, but a
small portion will remain sincere, just as in these days the very
counterpart of this prophecy is exhibited before our eyes. The whole
Papacy is called the Church of God; we are but few in number, and yet
what a mixture exists even among us? How many in these days profess
attachment to the Gospel, in whom there is nothing either solid or
sincere! If God should search narrowly into small Churches, still among
these few, some would be found deceivers. It never has been otherwise,
or shall be different. until the end of the world. Here, then, we are
admonished to desire, as far as lies in our power, the purity of the
Church, and to avoid all impurity, because, in desiring auxiliaries too
eagerly on the pressure of any urgent necessity, we shall be certain to
become sprinkled with many stains which may ultimately cover us with
confusion. The angel doubtless here reproves a fault in the conduct of
the Maccabees. Although God stirred them up to afford some consolation
to his Church, their proceedings are not to be approved; for it does not
follow that all their actions were praiseworthy because their cause was
pious and holy. But I must defer this subject till to-morrow.

<span id="vi.xlii"></span>

<span id="vi.xlii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xlii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as at this day thou
dost try the faith of thy people by many tests, that they may obtain
strength from the unconquered fortitude of thy Holy Spirit. May we
constantly march under thy standard, even to the end, and never succumb
to any temptation. May we there join intelligence with zeal in building
up thy Church: as each of us is endowed with superior gifts, so may he
strive for the edification of his brethren with greater boldness,
manliness, and fervor, while he endeavors to add numbers to the cause.
And should the number of those who are professed members of thy Church
diminish, yet may some seed always remain, until abundant produce shall
flow forth from it, and such fruitfulness arise as shall cause thy name
to be glorified throughout the whole world, in Jesus Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="vi.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.xliii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Second

<span id="vi.xliii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain what the
angel said about the future persecution of the Church, and its
subsequent consolation. He first shewed how all the intelligent among
the people should be subject to the cruelty of their enemies, in
consequence of their manly perseverance in teaching others. We have
shewn how inefficient those teachers whom God has set over his Church
would be, if they discharged their duties at ease and in the shade, and
were unprepared to undergo all contests, and intrepidly to expose their
lives to a variety of dangers. This, then, is a living and efficacious
method of touching, when we do not cease to discharge our duties in the
midst of sword and flame. But, on the other hand, we must notice how
much this instruction is sought for when these fatal conflicts arise.
Many in these days listen to our instruction concerning Christ; only
they must continue without injury or annoyance. We observe many greedily
drinking in the evangelical doctrines; but yet when anything disperses
the crowd they flee immediately, and with as little consideration as
when they first joined the assembly. That conduct which we daily observe
was equally common in former times. Clearly enough this fault has been
rampant throughout all ages, and it is innate in men not only to escape
the cross and all things vexatious, but especially to disclose their own
infirmities, because they are unwilling to undergo any danger for the
worship of God and the free confession of the truth. This passage, then,
must be noticed, since the Prophet not only exhorts the learned and the
wise to instruct others, but he prescribes a rule for the infirm and
unlearned, urging them to strengthen theme-selves against all
temptations, when they see all things in confusion, and Satan plotting
for the complete annihilation of piety. As this is the angel’s language,
we must diligently notice the circumstances of the times, for he was not
here instituting a peaceful school, and discoursing like philosophers at
their ease concerning virtue without any practical contest; but he
enforces the duty of both learning and teaching, even if a variety of
deaths should be placed before our eyes. He speaks next, as I have
lately stated, the language of consolation. God shews how he would
afford help to his elect, although it might possibly seem of no
consequence to them. For he dwells on *the smallness of the assistance*
— which literally happened. Without doubt the angel referred to
Mattathias and his sons, usually called the Maccabees. (<span
id="vi.xliii-p2.1"></span>[1 Maccabees
2:1](../../../bib/apo/ma1002.htm#001)<span id="vi.xliii-p2.1"></span>.)
A restriction is put upon that help by an allusion to the members who
should prove hypocritical out of that small band. We are fully aware how
the Church would be reduced in its extent, for all would not prove sound
in the faith, but the greater part would be drawn aside by those
fallacies which the angel here calls *blandishments.* This was a very
grievous trial to the faithful when they perceived their own fewness and
weakness in the face of their enemies. Besides, they dared not trust
those allies who had pledged their faith to them and made wonderful
promises, since many were deceived by these flatteries, and abandoned
the cause through want of sincerity of mind.

<span id="vi.xliii-p3"></span>We have already adverted to the usefulness
of such instruction for our own times.; for we ought to apply it
personally to ourselves, as our circumstances are similar to those of
the ancients. Out of the great multitude of those who wish to be
esteemed Christians, we observe how very few retain the pure and
uncorrupted worship of God. The Papists treat their own community, which
is defiled with filth of all kinds, as the only Church; there piety is
utterly subverted or else contaminated with the multitude of
superstitions. And even in that small company which has withdrawn itself
from the Papal idolatries, the greater part is full of perfidy and
deceit. They pretend to remarkable zeal, but if you thoroughly examine
them, you will find them full of deception. For if God should probe his
Church to the quick, as he did some years ago in Germany, and as he may
do shortly in our own case, in all these serious conflicts, and amidst
these persecutions, many will boast in the bravery of their
championship, and yet their zeal will quickly ooze away. When the Lord,
therefore, exercises us by methods similar to those by which he proved
the ancient Church, this ins6ruetion ought always to occur to our
remembrance, lest our minds should grow dull and languid.

<span id="vi.xliii-p4"></span>This passage may lead us to inquire
whether the angel approved of all the exploits of the Maccabees. We may
reply to the question in two opposite ways. First of all, if any one
persists in contending from the angel’s words for God’s approval of
every action of the Maccabees, this view is by no means correct. God
might use the Maccabees in succoring the wretched Israelites, and yet it
does not follow that they conducted the good cause properly and
lawfully. It very often occurs, when the faithful offer their services
to God, and have one object set before them, that they fail either
through inconsiderate zeal, or through partial ignorance. Whether we
take this view or not, our object is often good when our manner of
proceeding is objectionable. And thus it was with the Maccabees; God,
doubtless, stirred up Mattathias to collect the dispersed remnant of the
people, to restore his worship, and to purge his temple from the
abominations which Antiochus had set up. Yet in the troublous times
which occurred, his sons, doubtless, failed in many points of duty. The
cause which they undertook was just, while particular actions of theirs
cannot be approved by us. It now follows —

<span id="vi.xliv"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xliv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035)<span id="vi.xliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p2"></span>**35.** And *some* of them of understanding
shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make *them* white, *even*
to the time of the end: because *it is* yet for a time appointed.

<span id="vi.xliv-p3"></span>**35.** Et ex intelligentibus cadent ad
probandum  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) in ipsis,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) et mundandos,  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) et dealbandos usque ad tempus finis,
*id est, finitum,* quoniam adhuc usque ad praefixum tempus.

<span id="vi.xliv-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.xliv-p8"></span><span id="vi.xliv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p9"></span>The angel pursues the same sentiment as
before shewing us how the children of God, in their eagerness to defend
the cause of piety, should be subject to many grievous persecutions.
*Some of the learned shall fall;* meaning, that calamity shall not be
for a single moment only; for those who earnestly desired to defend the
true worship of God should perish by the sword, and by fire, and by
other methods of destruction, and their successors, too, should suffer
the same calamities. The phrase, *the learned should fall,* implies the
perishing of the very flower of the Church. There will always be much
refuse among a people, and the greater part of it flies off and revolts
when their religion requires of them the sacrifice of their life. A few
remain, here called intelligent, who, as we stated yesterday, are not
wise after the flesh. Making provision for the flesh, implies taking
care of themselves, and of their own interests, running no risks, and
avoiding all troubles; while those are called intelligent, who,
forgetful of their own lives, offer themselves in sacrifice to God. They
do not hesitate to incur universal hatred, and are prepared to meet
death with fortitude. The angel, therefore, predicts the perishing of
the flower of the Church. For who could have expected the name of God to
have existed upon earth when all His sincere worshippers were thus
murdered with impunity? The severity of the despotism of Antiochus is
notorious, no one dared to utter a word, all the sacred books were
burnt, and he thought the worship of God entirely abolished. Women with
their children were promiscuously seized for burning, and the satellites
of this tyrant did not spare the mothers with infants hanging on their
breasts. (<span id="vi.xliv-p9.1"></span>[1Ma
1](../../../bib/apo/ma1001.htm#000)<span id="vi.xliv-p9.1"></span>.)
During the progress of such atrocious cruelty, who would not have
thought the whole seed of God to have been extinct? But the angel here
shews the true result to have been different, namely, *that the sons of
God should be purged, cleansed, and whitened* He signifies that all
events should not prove so destructive, but should rather promote their
salvation. This passage unfolds to us the nature of true prudence in the
sight of God; for we ought to be prepared for death, rather than be
turned aside from the free and ingenuous profession of the heavenly
doctrine, and from the true worship of God. For this necessity is
imposed on the sons of God — to fall either by the sword or by fire, and
to suffer the spoiling of their goods, and banishment from their homes.
The angel points out from the result how persecutions which seem to
issue in the destruction of the Church, are yet profitable and salutary
to the sons of God, as This is the method of their being *purified, and
cleansed, and whitened* But we must always remember how some defiling
dregs, which require clearing out, remain in the elect, nay, even among
the holy Martyrs. The angel does not here treat of hypocrites, or of
ordinary believers, but of whatever is most conspicuous and most perfect
in the Church, and yet asserts their need of purification. None,
therefore, he concludes, possess such sanctity and purity as to prevent
the remnant of some pollution which requires to be removed. Hence it
becomes necessary for them to pass through the furnace, and to be
purified like gold and silver. This is extended to all God’s martyrs.

<span id="vi.xliv-p10"></span>This reminds us of the great folly of the
Papists, in imagining the merits of saints to be transferred to us, as
if they had more than they required for themselves. Indulgences, as they
call them, depend upon this error, according to the following reasoning,
— had Peter lived to the ordinary period of human life, he would have
proved faithful to the end, and then would have merited the crown of the
heavenly kingdom; but when he went beyond this, and poured out his blood
in martyrdom, some merits were superabundant; these ought not to be
lost, and hence the blood of Peter and Paul profit us at this day for
the remission of sins. This is the Papal theology, and these miserable
sophists are not ashamed of these gross blasphemies, while they vomit
forth such foul sacrilege. But the angel’s teaching is far different; —
the martyrs themselves are benefited by meeting death for their
adherence to the truth, because God *purges, and cleanses,* and refines,
*and whitens them.* The angel would not have said this except some
admixture of dross still defiled the purity of the saints. But this
doctrine ought to be more than enough to animate us to undergo all
dangers, when we see ourselves stained and polluted with hidden dross;
besides this, we ought certainly to determine that death would be
profitable in this sense, as God will then purge us from those vices by
which we are both infected and defiled. Whence the value of the
repetition here; the angel does not simply say *to purge* them, but
adds, *to cleanse and whiten them.* Whatever holiness may shine forth in
the best of men, yet many stains and much defilement he concealed within
them; and thus in consequence of their many failings, persecution was
always useful to them.

<span id="vi.xliv-p11"></span>The angel mitigates whatever might seem
exceedingly bitter, by saying, *until the time of an end,* meaning, a
fixed and definite time. These words imply the merciful character of
God, in not urging his people beyond their strength, as Paul also states
his faithfulness in granting them a happy issue out of their trials, and
in not pressing’ us beyond the measure of that strength and fortitude
which he has conferred upon us. (<span id="vi.xliv-p11.1"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xliv-p11.1"></span>.) The angel predicts an end to these evils,
and confirms this opinion by saying, *even to a determined time* In the
last clause he signified the temporary nature of the persecutions of
which he had spoken; for they should not cease directly, nor yet for two
or three years. By the words, *as yet even to a time determined,* he
urges the sons of God to prepare themselves for new contests, as they
should not reach the goal for the space of a year. But if God wished to
humble them for three, or ten, or a hundred years, they should not
despond, but wait for the time divinely predetermined, without depending
on their own will. This is the substance of the instruction conveyed. It
now follows:

<span id="vi.xlv"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p1"></span><span id="vi.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036)<span id="vi.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p2"></span>**36.** And the king shall do according to
his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every
god, and shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods, and shall
prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is
determined shall be done.

<span id="vi.xlv-p3"></span>**36.** Et faciet secundum voluntatem suam,
*vel, libidinem,* rex: et extollet se, et magnificabit se supra omnem
Deum, et contra Deum deorum loquetur mirabilia, et prospere aget usque
ad consummationem irae, quoniam decisio facta est, *vel decisa est,
nempe consumptio.*

<span id="vi.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xlv-p5"></span><span id="vi.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p6"></span>This passage is very obscure, and has
consequently been explained in very opposite ways by interpreters. And
whatever is obscure, is usually doubtful, and there would be little
utility and no termination, if I were to narrate the opinions of them
all. I shall therefore follow another method, and omitting all
superfluous labor, I shall simply inquire the angel’s meaning. I must,
however, refer briefly to opinions received by the consent of the
majority, because they occupy the minds of many, and thus close the door
to the correct interpretation. The Jews, for instance, are not agreed
among themselves, and their difference of opinion only serves to produce
and perpetuate darkness, rather than to diffuse the clearness of light.
Some explain it of Antiochus, and others of the Romans, but in a manner
different to that which I shall afterwards state. The Christian
expositors present much variety, but the greater number incline towards
Antichrist as fulfilling the prophecy. Others, again, use greater
moderation by supposing Antichrist to be here obliquely hinted at, while
they do not exclude Antiochus as the type and image of Antichrist. This
last opinion has great probability, but. I do not approve of it, and can
easily refute it. Antiochus did not long survive the pollution of the
Temple, and then the following events by no means suit the occurrences
of this time. Nor can his sons be fairly substituted in his place, and
hence we must pass on to some other king, distinct from Antiochus and
his heirs. As I have already stated, some of the Rabbis explain this of
the Romans, but without judgment, for they first apply the passage to
Vespasian, and Titus his son, and then extend it to the present times,
which is utterly without reason, as they chatter foolishly, according to
their usual custom. Those who explain it of Antichrist, have some color
of reason for their view, but there is no soundness in their conclusion,
and we shall perceive this better in the progress of our exposition. We
must now discover what king the angel here designates. First of all, I
apply it entirely to the Roman Empire, but I do not  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) consider it to begin at the reign of
the Caesars, for this would be unsuitable and out of date, as we shall
see. By the word “king” I do not think a single person indicated, but an
empire, whatever be its government, whether by a senate, or by consuls,
or by proconsuls. This need not appear either harsh or absurd, as the
Prophet had previously discussed the four monarchies, and when treating
of the Romans he calls their power a kingdom, as if they had but a
single ruler over them. And when he spoke of the Persian monarchy, he
did not refer to a single ruler, but included them all, from Cyrus to
the last Darius, who was conquered by Alexander. This method of speech
is already very familiar to us, as the word “king” often means
“kingdom.” The angel, then, when saying, *a king shall do* anything,
does not allude to Antiochus, for all history refutes this. Again, he
does not mean any single individual, for where shall we find one who
exalted himself against all gods? who oppressed God’s Church, and fixed
his palace between two seas, and seized upon the whole East? The Romans
alone did this. I intend to shew more clearly to-morrow how beautifully
and appositely everything related by the angel applies to the Roman
empire; and if anything should appear either obscure or doubtful, a
continued interpretation will bring it to light and confirm it.

<span id="vi.xlv-p8"></span>We lay this down at once; the angel did not
prophesy of Antiochus, or any single monarch, but of a new empire,
meaning, the Roman. We have the reason at hand why the angel passes
directly from Antiochus to the Romans. God desired to support the
spirits of the pious, lest they should be overwhelmed by the number and
weight of the massacres which awaited them and the whole Church even to
the advent of Christ. It was not sufficient to predict the occurrences
under the tyranny of Antiochus; for after his time, the Jewish religion
was more and more injured, not only by foreign enemies, but by their own
priesthood. Nothing remained unpolluted, since their avarice and
ambition had arrived at such a pitch, that they trod under foot the
whole glory of God, and the law itself. The faithful required to be
fortified against such numerous temptations, until Christ came, and then
God renewed the condition of his Church. The time, therefore, which
intervened between the Maccabees and the manifestation of Christ ought
not to be omitted. The reason is now clear enough why the angel passes
at once from Antiochus to the Romans.

<span id="vi.xlv-p9"></span>We must next ascertain how the Romans became
connected with the elect people of God. Had their dominion been limited
to Europe alone, the allusion to them would have been useless and out of
place. But from the period of the kings of Syria being oppressed by many
and constant devastation’s in war, both at home and abroad, they were
unable to injure the Jews as they had previously done; then new troubles
sprang up through the Romans. We know, indeed, when many of the kings of
Syria were indulging in arrogance, how the Romans interposed their
authority, and that, too, with bad faith, for the purpose of subjecting
the east to themselves. Then when Attalus made the Roman people his
heir, the whole of Asia Minor became absorbed by them. They became
masters of Syria by the will of this foolish king, who defrauded his
legal heirs, thinking by this conduct to acquire some regard for his
memory after his death. From that period, when the Romans first acquired
a taste of the wealth of these regions, they never failed to find some
cause for warfare. At length Pompey subdued Syria, and Lucullus, who had
previously carried on war with Mithridates, restored the kingdom to
Tigranes. Pompey, as I have already remarked, subjected Syria to the
Romans. He left, indeed, the Temple untouched, but we may conjecture the
cruelty which he exercised towards the Jews by the ordinary practice of
this people. The clemency of the Romans towards the nations which they
subdued is notorious enough. After Crassus, the most rapacious of all
men, had heard much of the wealth of the Jews, he desired that province
as his own. We know, too, how Pompey and Caesar, while they were
friends, partitioned the whole world among themselves. Gaul and Italy
were assigned entirely to Caesar; Pompey obtained Spain, and part of
Africa and Sicily; while Crassus obtained Syria and the regions of the
east, where he miserably perished, and his head, filled with gold, was
Carried about in mockery from place to place. A second calamity occurred
during that incursion of Crassus, and from this time the Jews were
harassed by many and continual wars. Before this period, they had
entered into an alliance with the Romans, as we are informed by the
books of the Maccabees, as well as by profane writers. Therefore, when
they granted liberty to the Jews, (<span id="vi.xlv-p9.1"></span>[1
Maccabees 8](../../../bib/apo/ma1008.htm#000)<span
id="vi.xlv-p9.1"></span>, and 14) it; was said  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) they were generous at the expense of
others. This was their ordinary and usual practice; at first they
received with friendship all who sought their alliance by treaty, and
then they treated them with the utmost cruelty. The wretched Jews were
treated in this way. The angel then alludes to them first, and
afterwards speaks of Antiochus. All these points, thus briefly
mentioned, we must bear in mind, to enable us to understand the context,
and to shew the impossibility of interpreting the prophecy otherwise
than of the Romans.

<span id="vi.xlv-p11"></span>I now proceed to the words, *The king shall
do according to his will* I have stated that we need not restrict this
expression to a single person, as the angel prophesies of the continued
course of the Roman monarchy. *He shall raise himself and magnify
himself,* says he, *above every god.* This will be explained by and bye,
where the king is said to be a despiser of all deities. But with
reference to the present passage, although impiety and contempt of God
spread throughout the whole world, we know how peculiarly this may be
said of the Romans, because their pride led them to pass an opinion upon
the right of each deity to be worshipped. And, therefore, the angel will
use an epithet for God, meaning fortitude’s and munitions, <span
id="vi.xlv-p11.1"></span>םיזעמ *megnezim* as in <span
id="vi.xlv-p11.2"></span>[Da
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038)<span id="vi.xlv-p11.2"></span>.
That passage, I shall show you to-morrow, has been badly explained; for
interpreters, as we shall discover, are utterly “at sea” as to its
meaning.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) But here the angel, by
attributing contempt of the one God and of all deities to the Romans,
implies their intense pride and haughtiness, in which they surpassed
other profane nations. And, truly, they did not preserve even a
superstitious fear of God; and while they vauntingly paraded the
superior piety of both their ancestors and themselves, yet, an accurate
perusal of their writings will disclose what they really thought. They
made a laughingstock of all divinities, and ridiculed the very name and
appearance of piety, and used it only for the purpose of retaining their
subjects in obedience. The angel then says most truly of his empire, *it
shall magnify itself against all deities;* and *it shall speak wonderful
things against the God of gods,* by which the Jewish religion is
intended. For before they had passed into Asia Minor, and penetrated
beyond Mount Taurus, they were ignorant of the law of God, and had never
heard of the name of Moses. They then began to take notice of the
worship of some peculiar god by that nation, and of the form of their
piety being distinct from that of all other people. From the period of
the knowledge of the peculiarities of the Jewish religion being spread
among the Romans, they began to vomit forth their blasphemies against
*the God of gods* We need not gather together the proof of this from
their histories; but Cicero in his oration for Flaccus, (section. 28,)
tears most contemptuously to pieces the name of the true God; and that
impure slanderer — for he deserves the name — so blurts out his
calumnies, as if the God who had revealed himself to His elect people by
his law, was unworthy of being reckoned with Venus or Bacchus, or their
other idols. Lastly, he treats the numerous massacres to which the Jews
were exposed, as a proof of their religion being hated by all the
deities; and this he thinks ought to be a sufficient sign of the
detestable character of their religion. The angel then has every reason
to declare the Romans puffed up with pride and haughtiness, as they did
not hesitate to treat the name of the true God with such marked
contempt.

<span id="vi.xlv-p13"></span>*He shall utter,* says he, *remarkable
things against the God of gods* The angel seems to refer to a single
individual, but we have stated his reference to be to this empire. He
adds next, *And he shall prosper until the consumption,* or completion,
or consummation *of the indignation, since the determination has been
made* Here also the angel treats of a long succession and series of
victories, which prevent the application of the passage to Antiochus.
For he died immediately after he had spoiled the Temple; all his
offspring perished by each other’s hands; and the Romans, to their great
disgrace, acquired possession of Syria and that portion of the East. We
must necessarily explain this of the Romans, as they notoriously
prospered in their wars, especially on the continent of Asia. And if
they were sometimes in difficulties, as we shall see to-morrow when
treating the words which the angel will then use, they soon recovered
their usual success. The angel here says, *This king shall prosper till
the end of the indignation;* meaning, until God should punish the
hypocrites, and thus humble his Church. I refer this to God, as I shall
explain more at length tomorrow.

<span id="vi.xlvi"></span>

<span id="vi.xlvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.xlvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as in these days the
affairs of the world are in a state of disturbance, and as wherever we
turn our eyes we see nothing but horrible confusion: Grant, I pray, that
we may be attentive to thy teaching. May we never wander after our own
imaginations, never be drawn aside by any cares, and never turn aside
from our stated course. May we remain fixed in thy word, always seeking
thee and always relying on thy providence. May we never hesitate
concerning our safety, as thou hast undertaken to be the guardian of our
salvation, but ever call upon thee in the name of thine only-begotten
Son. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xlvii"></span>

<span id="vi.xlvii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Third

<span id="vi.xlvii-p2"></span>We yesterday commenced an explanation of
the prophecy, in which the angel begins to treat of the Roman Empire. I
then shewed the impossibility of applying any other exposition to the
passage, as it would have been absurd to pass by the point most
necessary to be known. At the very beginning, we stated that God did not
inform Daniel of other occurrences for the purpose of pandering to the
foolish and vain curiosity of the many, but to fortify his servants, and
to prevent their falling away in the midst of these most grievous
contests. But after the death of Antiochus, we know by what various and
grievous machinations Satan had endeavored to overthrow the faith of all
the pious. For this reason their courage required propping up. If the
whole of this period had been passed over in silence, God would have
appeared to have neglected his servants. Therefore either our
yesterday’s subject of comment would have been useless, or else this
clause ought to be added, lest the prophecy should appear either
defective or mutilated. And we previously observed, while the angel was
predicting future changes, there was no omission of the Roman Empire,
which is again introduced here. Let us remember, then, that the angel is
not now speaking of Antiochus, nor does he make a leap forwards to
Antichrist, as some think, but he means a perpetual series. Thus the
faithful would be prepared for all assaults which might be made upon
their faith, if this rampart had not been interposed. The remainder of
the verse now remains to be explained, *Even to the end of the wrath,
because the decision has been made* The angel had narrated the
perverseness of this king in not sparing the living God, but in darting
his calumnies against him. He now adds, *He shall prosper even to the
end of the wrath* The angel doubtless here meets the next trial which
might utterly overwhelm the faithful, unless they hoped for some
termination to it. By *wrath* he does not mean the rage of those who
were sent as proconsuls into Asia and the East, or even the bitterness
and rigor of the Roman people and Senate, but the word refers to God. We
must remember, then, what I have previously impressed, namely, the sons
of God are called upon to examine their faults, to humble themselves
before God, without either murmuring or complaining when chastised by
his rods. We know how impatient human nature is in bearing adversity,
and how grudgingly men submit to the cross, not only stubbornly refusing
it, but openly rebelling against God. Hence those who are oppressed by
his hand are always outrageous, unless he displays himself as their
judge. The angel then here presents us with a reason why God did not
rashly expose his Church to the lust of the impious; he only wished to
exact the punishment due to their sins; and judgment ought always to
begin at the house of God, as we learn from another prophet. (<span
id="vi.xlvii-p2.1"></span>[Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)<span id="vi.xlvii-p2.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.xlvii-p2.2"></span>[Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)<span id="vi.xlvii-p2.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.xlvii-p2.3"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="vi.xlvii-p2.3"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xlvii-p3"></span>The conclusion, then, the angel, in the
first place, exhorts the pious to repentance, and shews them how
deservedly God laid his hand upon them, because it was absolutely
necessary. He then mitigates what would otherwise have been too severe,
by adding, *till the end,* or completion. The word signifies both
consumption and end, but it here means end, or completion. The
explanation next follows, *since the determination,* or decision, *has
been made,* says he. This means, God will not pursue his children to
extremities without moderation, but will bring their punishment to an
end after they have been humbled. As we read in the 40th chapter of
Isaiah, the time of their warfare was completed, when God pitied his
Church, and freed it from the tyranny of its enemies. (<span
id="vi.xlvii-p3.1"></span>[Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="vi.xlvii-p3.1"></span>.)
Isaiah there speaks in the person of God; the Church had received
double, meaning, sufficient punishment had been exacted. It almost
implies his being displeased with himself for having been too severe
against his Church, as we are familiar with the indulgence with which he
usually treated his children. He says, then, in this passage, *Even to
the end of the wrath;* meaning, the punishment should be but temporary,
as God had prescribed a certain termination which should put an end to
all their troubles and anxieties. It follows: —

<span id="vi.xlviii"></span>

<span id="vi.xlviii-p1"></span><span id="vi.xlviii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#037)<span id="vi.xlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlviii-p2"></span>**37.** Neither shall he regard the God
of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he
shall magnify himself above all.

<span id="vi.xlviii-p3"></span>**37.** Et ad deos patrum suorum non
attendet, et ad desiderium, *vel, amorem,* mulierum, et ad ullum Deum
non attendet, quia super omne, *super omnia,* sese magnificabit.

<span id="vi.xlviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.xlviii-p5"></span><span id="vi.xlviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlviii-p6"></span>I do not wonder at those who explain this
prophecy of Antiochus, experiencing some trouble with these words; for
they cannot satisfy themselves, because this prediction of the angel’s
was never accomplished by Antiochus, who did neither neglect all deities
nor the god of his fathers. Then, with regard to the love of women, this
will not suit this person. But it is easy to prove by other reasons
already mentioned, the absence of all allusion here to Antiochus. Some
refer this prophecy to the Pope and to Mohammed, and the phrase, the
love of women, seems to give probability to this view. For Mohammed
allowed to men the brutal liberty of chastising their wives, and thus he
corrupted that conjugal love and fidelity which binds the husband to the
wife. Unless every man is content with a single wife, there can be no
love, because there can be no conjugal happiness whenever rivalry exists
between the inferior wives. As, therefore, Mohammed allowed full scope
to various lusts, by permitting a man to have a number of wives, this
seems like an explanation of his being inattentive to the love of women.
Those who think the Pope to be intended here remind us of their
enforcing celibacy, by means of which the honor of marriage is trodden
under foot. We know with what foulness the Roman Pontiffs bark when
marriage is hinted to them, as we may see in the decrees of Pope
Siricius, in the seventh chapter of the first volume of the Councils.
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) They quote the passage, Those
who are in the flesh cannot please God; and thus compare marriage with
fornication, thereby disgracefully and reproachfully throwing scorn upon
an ordinance sanctioned by God. We observe, then, some slight
correspondence, but the remaining points will not suit this idea. Some
assert that as Mohammed invented a new form of religion, so did the
Pope; true indeed, but neither of them are intended here, and the reason
is, because God wished to sustain the spirits of his people until the
first coming of Christ. Hence he predicts by his angel the sufferings to
be endured by the Church until Christ was manifest in the flesh. We must
now come to the Romans, of whom we began to explain the passage.

<span id="vi.xlviii-p8"></span>The angel says, *The king shall pay no
regard to the gods of his fathers.* The application of this clause is at
first sight obscure; but if we come to reflect upon the outrageous pride
and barbarity of the Romans, we shall no longer doubt the meaning of the
Prophets words. The angel states two circumstances; this king should be
a despiser of all deities, and yet he should worship one god, while the
singular and magnificent pomp displayed should exceed all common
practices. These two points, so apparently opposite, were found united
in the Romans. Our explanation will appear clearer by adding the
following verses,

<span id="vi.xlix"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p1"></span><span id="vi.xlix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038)<span
id="vi.xlix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p2"></span>**38.** But in his estate shall he honour
the God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour
with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.

<span id="vi.xlix-p3"></span>**38.** Et Deum fortitudinum, *vel,
munitionum,* in loco suo honorabit: et Deum quem non cognoverunt patres
ejus honorabit cum auro, et argento, et lapide pretioso, et
desiderabilibus,  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) *hoc est,
rebus omnibus pretiosis.*

<span id="vi.xlix-p5"></span>**39.** Thus shall he do in the most strong
holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge *and* increase with
glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the
land for gain.

<span id="vi.xlix-p6"></span>**39.** Et faciet adversus munitiones
fortitudinum cum Deo alieno, quem agnoverit, multiplicabit gloriam, et
dominari faciet eos in multis, et terram dividet pretio.

<span id="vi.xlix-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.xlix-p8"></span><span id="vi.xlix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p9"></span>As I have already hinted, at the first
glance these statements seem opposed to each other; the king of whom we
are now treating shall despise all deities, and yet shall worship a
certain god in no ordinary way. This agrees very well with the Romans,
if we study their dispositions and manners. As they treated the worship
of their deities simply as a matter of business, they were evidently
destitute of any perception of the divinity, and were only pretenders to
religion. Although other profane nations groped their way in darkness,
yet they offered a superstitious worship to some divinities. The Romans,
however, were not subject to either error or ignorance, but they
manifested a gross contempt of God, while they maintained the appearance
of piety. We gather this opinion from a review of their whole conduct.
For although they fetched many deities from every quarter of the world,
and worshipped in common with other nations Minerva, Apollo, Mercury,
and others, yet we observe how they treated all other rites as
worthless. They considered Jupiter as the supreme deity. But what was
Jupiter to them in his own country? Did they value him a single
farthing, or the Olympian deity? Nay, they derided both his worshippers
and himself. What then really was their supreme god? why the glow of the
Capitol; without the additional title of Lord of the Capitol, he was
nobody at all. That title distinguished him as specially bound to
themselves. For This reason the Prophet calls This Roman Jupiter *a god
of bulwarks,* or of powers. The Romans could never be persuaded that any
other Jupiter or Juno were worthy of worship; they relied upon their own
inherent strength, considered themselves of more importance than the
gods, and claimed Jupiter as theirs alone. Because his seat was in their
capital, he was more to them than a hundred heavenly rulers, for their
pride had centered the whole power of the deity in their own capital.
They thought themselves beyond the reach of all changes of fortune, and
such was their audacity, that every one fashioned new deities according
to his pleasure. There was a temple dedicated to fortune on horseback;
for this gratified the vanity of the general who had made good use of it
is cavalry, and obtained a victory by their means; and in building a
temple to equestrian fortune, he wished the multitude to esteem himself
as a deity. Then Jupiter Stator was a god, and why? because this pleased
somebody else; and thus Rome became full of temples. One erected an
image of fortune, another of virtue, a third of prudence, and a fourth
of any other divinity, and every one dared to set up his own idols
according to his fancy, till Rome was completely filled with them. In
this way Romulus was deified; and what claim had he to this honor? If
any one object here — other nations did the same — we admit it, but we
also know in what a foolish, brutal, and barbarous state of antiquity
they continued. But; the Romans, as I have already intimated, were not
instigated to this manufacture of idols by either error or superstition,
but by an arrogant vanity which elevated themselves to the first rank
among mankind, and claimed superiority over all deities. For instance,
they allowed a temple to be erected to themselves in Asia, and
sacrifices to be offered, and the name of deity to be applied to them.
What pride is here! Is this a proof of belief in the existence of either
one god or many? Rome is surely the only deity, — and she must be
reverently worshipped before all others!

<span id="vi.xlix-p10"></span>We observe then how the expression of this
verse is very applicable to the Romans; *they worshipped the god of
bulwarks,* meaning, they claimed a divine power as their own, and only
granted to their gods what they thought useful for their own purposes.
With the view of claiming certain virtues as their own, they invented
all kinds of deities according to their taste. I omit the testimony of
Plutarch as not quite applicable to the present subject. He says in his
problems, it was unlawful to utter the name of any deity under whose
protection and guardianship the Roman State was placed. He tells us how
Valerius Soranus was carried off for foolishly uttering that deity’s
name, whether male or female. These are his very words. And he adds as
the reason, their practice of using magical incantations in worshipping
their unknown divinity. Again, we know in what remarkable honor they
esteemed “the good goddess.” The male sex were entirely ignorant of her
nature, and none but females entered the house of the high priest, and
there celebrated her orgies. And for what purpose? What was that “good
goddess?” Surely there always existed this *god of bulwarks,* since the
Romans acknowledged no deity but their own selves. They erected altars
to themselves, and sacrificed all kinds of victims to their own success
and good fortune; and in this way they reduced all deities within their
own sway, while they offered them only the specious and deceptive
picture of reverence. There is nothing forced in the expression of the
angel, — *he will pay no attention to the gods of his fathers;* meaning,
he will not follow the usual custom of all nations in retaining
superstitious ceremonies with error and ignorance. For although the
Greeks were very acute, yet they did not dare to make any movement, or
propose any discussions on religious matters. One thing we know to be
fixed among them, to worship the gods which had been handed down by
their fathers. But the Romans dared to insult all religious with freedom
and petulance, and to promote atheism as far as they possibly could.
Therefore the angel says, he *should pay attention to the god of his
fathers* And why? They will have regard to themselves, and acknowledge
no deity except their own confidence in their peculiar fortitude. I
interpret the phrase, *the desire of women,* as denoting by that figure
of speech which puts apart for the whole, the barbarity of their
manners. The love of women is a scriptural phrase for very peculiar
affection; and God has instilled this mutual affection into the sexes to
cause them to remain united together as long as they retain any spark of
humanity. Thus David is said to have loved Jonathan beyond or surpassing
the love of women. (<span id="vi.xlix-p10.1"></span>[2Sa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#026)<span id="vi.xlix-p10.1"></span>.)
No fault is there found with this agreement, otherwise the love of David
towards Jonathan would be marked with disgrace. We know how sacred his
feelings were towards him, but “the love of women” is here used *par*
*excellence,* implying the exceeding strength of this affection. As
therefore God has appointed this very stringent bond of affection
between the sexes as a natural bond of union throughout the human race,
it is not surprising if all the duties of humanity are comprehended
under this word by a figure of speech. It is just as if the angel had
said; this king of whom he prophesies should be impious and
sacrilegious, in thus daring to despise all deities; then he should be
so evil, as to be utterly devoid of every feeling of charity. We observe
then how completely the Romans were without natural affection, loving
neither their wives nor the female sex. I need not refer to even a few
examples by which this assertion may be proved. But throughout the whole
nation such extreme barbarity existed, that it ought really to fill us
with horror. None can obtain an adequate idea of this, without becoming
thoroughly versed in their histories; but whoever will study their
exploits, will behold as in a mirror the angel’s meaning. This king,
then, should cultivate neither piety nor humanity.

<span id="vi.xlix-p11"></span>*And he shall not pay attention to other
gods, because he shall magnify himself against them all.* The cause is
here assigned why this king should be a gross despiser of all deities,
and fierce and barbarous against all mortals, *because he should magnify
himself above them all* That pride so blinded the Romans, as to cause
them to forget both piety and humanity; and so this intolerable
self-confidence of theirs was the reason why they paid no honor to any
deity, and trampled all mortals under foot. Humility is certainly the
beginning of all true piety; and this seed of religion is implanted in
the heart of man, causing them whether they will or not to acknowledge
some deity. But the Romans were so puffed up by self-consequence, as to
exalt themselves above every object of adoration, and to treat all
religions with contemptuous scorn; and in thus despising all celestial
beings, they necessarily looked down on all mankind, which was literally
and notoriously the fact. Now, the second clause is opposed to this, *He
shall worship or honor the god of fortitude’s* He had previously used
this word of the Temple, but this explanation does not seem suitable
here, because the angel had before expressed the unity of God, while he
now enumerates many gods. But the angel uses the word “fortitude’s,” or
“munitions,” for that perverse confidence by which the Romans were
puffed up, and were induced to treat both God and men as nothing hi
comparison to themselves. How then did these two points agree — the
contempt of all deities among the Romans, and yet the existence of some
worship? First, they despised all tradition respecting the gods, but
afterwards they raised themselves above every celestial object, and
becoming ashamed of their barbarous impiety, they pretended to honor
their deities. But where did they seek those deities, as Jupiter for
instance, to whom all the tribe of them were subject? why, in their own
capitol. Their deities were the offspring of their own imaginations, and
nothing was esteemed divine but what pleased themselves. *Hence* it is
said, *He shall honor him in his own place.* Here the angel removes all
doubt, by mentioning the place in which this god of fortitude’s should
be honored. The Romans venerated other deities wherever they met with
them, but this was mere outward pretense. Without doubt they limited
Jupiter to his own capitol and city; and whatever they professed
respecting other divinities, there was no true religion in them, because
they adored themselves in preference to those fictitious beings. Hence
*he shall worship the god of ramparts in his place, and shall honor a
strange god whom his fathers knew not*  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189)

<span id="vi.xlix-p13"></span>Again, *He shall honor him in gold, and
silver, and precious stones, and all desirable things;* meaning, he
shall worship his own deity magnificently and with remarkable pomp. And
we know how the riches of the whole world were heaped together to
ornament their temples. For as soon as any one purposed to erect any
temple, he was compelled to seize all things in every direction, and so
to spoil all provinces to enrich their own temples. Rome, too, did not
originate this splendor for the sake of superstition, but only to raise
itself and to become the admiration of all nations; and thus we observe
how well this prophecy is explained by the course of subsequent events.
Some nations, in truth, were superstitious in the worship of their
idols, but the Romans were superior to all the rest. When first they
became masters of Sicily, we know what an amount of wealth they
abstracted from a single city. For if ever any temples were adorned with
great and copious splendor and much riches, surely they would confess
the extreme excellence of those of Sicily. But Marcellus stripped almost
all temples to enrich Rome and to ornament the shrines of their false
deities. And why so? Was it because Jupiter, and Juno, and Apollo, and
Mercury, were better at Rome than elsewhere? By no means; but because he
wished to enrich the city, and to turn all sorts of deities into a
laughingstock, and to lead them in triumph, to shew that there was no
other deity or excellence except at Rome, the mistress of the world. He
afterwards adds, *He shall perform* Here, again, the angel seems to
speak of prosperity. Without doubt he would here supply courage to the
pious, who would otherwise vacillate and become backsliders when they
observed such continued and incredible success, in a nation so impious
and sacrilegious, and remarkable for such barbarous cruelty. Hence he
states how the Romans should obtain their ends in whatever they
attempted, if their fortitude should prevail, as if it were their deity.
Although they should despise all deities, and only fabricate a god for
themselves through a spirit of ambition; yet even this should bring them
success. This is now called a *foreign deity.* Scripture uses this word
to distinguish between fictitious idols and the one true God. The angel
seems to say nothing which applies especially to the Romans. For the
Athenians and Spartans, the Persians and the Asiatics, as well as all
other nations, worshipped strange gods. What, then, is the meaning of
the name? for clearly the angel did not speak after the ordinary manner.
He calls him *strange,* as he was not handed down from one to another;
for while they boasted vainly in their veneration of the idols received
from their ancestors, together with all their sacred institutions and
their inviolable rites, yet they inwardly derided them, and did not
esteem them worth a straw, but only wished to retain some fallacious
form of religion through a sense of shame. We remember the saying of
Cato concerning the augurs, “I wonder when one meets another how he can
refrain from laughing!” thus shewing how he ridiculed them. If any one
had asked Cato either in the senate or privately, What think you of the
augurs and all our religion? he would reply, “Ah! let the whole world
perish before the augurs; for these constitute the very safety of the
people and of the whole republic: we received them from our ancestors,
therefore let us keep them for ever!” Thus that crafty fellow would have
spoken, and thus also would all others. But while they prated thus to
each other, they were not ashamed to deny the existence of a Deity, and
so to ridicule whatever had been believed from the very beginning, as
entirely to reduce to nothing the traditions received from their
forefathers. It does not surprise us to find the angel speaking of a
*strange god* which was worshipped at Rome, not, as I have said, through
superstition or mistake, but only to prevent their barbarity from
becoming abominable throughout the world. *That God,* says he, *whom he
had acknowledged:* great weight is attached to this word. The angel
means, that the whole divinity rested on the opinion and will of the
sovereign people, because it was agreeable to its inclination, and
promoted its private interest. As the plan of worshipping any gods would
be approved, and they would pride themselves in their own pleasure, they
should boast with great confidence, that there could be no piety but at
Rome. But why so? Because they acknowledge strange gods, and determine
and decree the form of worship which was to be preserved. The angel thus
places the whole of the religion of Rome in lust, and shews them to be
impure despisers of God.

<span id="vi.xlix-p14"></span><span id="vi.xlix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p15"></span>He afterwards says, *He shall multiply the
glory* This may be referred to God, but I rather approve of a different
interpretation. The Romans should acquire great wealth for themselves,
and should increase wonderfully in opulence, in the magnitude of their
empire, and in all other sources of strength. Therefore *they shall
multiply the glory,* meaning, they shall acquire new territories, and
increase their power, and accumulate a multitude of treasures. This
explanation fits in very well with the close of the verse, where he
adds, *he shall make them rule far and wide* This is a portion of that
glory which this king shall heap upon himself, for he should be superior
to the kings over many lands, and should distribute the booty which he
had acquired, and that, too, *for a price* He says, therefore, *he shall
make them rule over many;* for the relative is without a subject, which
is a frequent practice of the Hebrews. Whom, then, should the Roman
king, or the Roman empire, thus cause to have dominion? Whoever rendered
them any assistance should receive his reward from a stranger, as we
know Eumenes to have been enriched by the booty and spoil of Antiochus.
The provinces also were distributed according to their will. The island
was given up to the Rhodians, while a kingdom was wrested from another,
and the *A*Etolians enlarged their dominions. As each party labored hard
for their benefit, and incurred large expenses, so the Romans conferred
riches upon them. After conquering Antiochus, they became the more
liberal towards Attalus and Eumenes, and thus they became masters of the
greater part of Asia. Again, when they had deprived Nabis, the tyrant of
Sparta, of the greater part of his territories, those who had taken care
to gratify the Romans, were favored with the spoils they had seized from
him. We have another instance in the favor’s conferred upon Massinissa
after the conquest of Carthage; for after being expelled from his own
kingdom, his dominion extended far and wide throughout the continent of
Africa: after being deprived of his paternal sovereignty, he had not a
spot in the world on which to plant his foot until they bestowed upon
him what they had seized from the Carthaginians. And how did they manage
this? *They shall divide the soil for a price,* says the angel; thus
obliquely reproving the cunning of the senate and Roman people, because
they did not give away these ample dominions gratuitously; they would
willingly have devoured whatever they had acquired, but they found it
better policy to sell them than to retain them. They did not sell at any
fixed price — for the word “price” here need not be restricted to a
definite sum of money — but displayed their avarice, and sold and
distributed for the sake of gain, just as much as if all these
territories had been immediately reduced into provinces of their empire.
They had need of great resources; it was objectionable to continue their
garrison in perpetuity in the cities of Greece, and hence they proclaim
perfect freedom through them all. But what sort of liberty was this?
Each state might choose its senate according to the pleasure of the
Romans, and thus as each acquired rank and honor in his own nation, he
would become attached and enslaved to the Roman people. And then, in
this condition of affairs, if any war should spring up, they sought aid
from these friends and allies. For had they been only confederate, the
Romans would never have dared to exact so much from each tributary
state. Let us take the case of the Carthaginians. After being reduced by
many exaction’s to the lowest pitch of poverty, yet when the Romans made
war against Philip and Macedon, and against Antiochus, they demanded
ships from these allies. They demanded besides, as a subsidy, an immense
quantity of gold, silver, provisions, garments, and armor, till at
length these wretched Carthaginians, whose very life-blood the Romans
had drained, still sent for the war whatever gold they had remaining,
and all they could scrape together. Thus Philip king of Macedon is
compelled to destroy himself, by plunging his own sword into his body;
for every state of Greece was forced to contribute its own portion of
the expenses of the war.

<span id="vi.xlix-p16"></span>We perceive, then, how *the lands were
divided for a price,* each with regard to its own utility, not by fixing
a certain defined money value, but according to the standard of
political expediency. And what kind of bargaining did they afterwards
mutually execute? We have an instance of it in the prevalence of
proscription among the Romans, by which they turned their rapacity
against their own vitals. They had previously confiscated the goods of
their enemies. Philip, for instance, was forced to pay a large sum of
money to repurchase the name of king and the portion of territory which
remained his own. Antiochus and the Carthaginians were subject to the
same hardship. The Romans, in short, never conquered any one without
exhausting both the monarch and his dominions to satisfy their
insatiable avarice and cupidity. We now perceive *how they divided the
lands for a price,* holding all kings in subjection to themselves, and
bestowing largesses upon one from the property of another.

<span id="vi.xlix-p17"></span>We now perceive the angel’s meaning
throughout this verse, *The King should be so powerful as to bestow
dominion on whomsoever he pleased in many* and ample territories, but
not gratuitously. We have had examples of some despoiled of their royal
dignity and power, and of others restored to the authority of which they
had been deprived. Lucullus, for instance, chose to eject one king from
his dominions, while another general restored him to his possessions. A
single Roman citizen could thus create a great monarch; and thus it
often happened. Claudius proposed to the people to proscribe the king of
Cyprus, although he was of the royal race; his father had been the
friend and ally of the Roman people, he had committed no crime against
the Roman empire, and there was no reason for declaring war against him.
Meanwhile he remained in security at home, while none of those
ceremonies by which war is usually declared took place. He was
proscribed in the market-place by a few vagabonds, and Cato is
immediately sent to ravage the whole island. He took possession of it
for the Romans, and this wretched man is compelled to cast himself into
the sea in a fit of despair. We observe, then, how his prediction of the
angel was by no means in vain; the Roman proconsuls distributed kingdoms
and provinces, *but yet for a price,* for they seized everything in the
world, and drew all riches, all treasures, and every particle of value
into the whirlpool of their unsatisfied covetousness. We shall put off
the remainder.

<span id="vi.l"></span>

<span id="vi.l-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.l-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as in all ages the
blindness of mankind has been so great as to lead them to worship thee
erroneously and superstitiously, and since they manifest such duplicity
and pride as to despise thy name, and also the very idols which they
have fashioned for themselves: Grant, I pray thee, that true piety may
be deeply rooted in our hearts. May the fear of thy name be so engraven
within us, that we may be sincerely and unreservedly devoted to thee.
May each of us heartily desire to glorify thy name, and may we endeavor
to lead our brethren in the same course. Do thou purge us more and more
from all dissimulation, until at length we arrive at that perfect purity
which is laid up for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="vi.li"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Fourth

<span id="vi.lii"></span>

<span id="vi.lii-p1"></span><span id="vi.lii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040)<span id="vi.lii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lii-p2"></span>**40.** And at the time of the end shall the
king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come
against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with
many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow
and pass over.

<span id="vi.lii-p3"></span>**40.** Et im tempore finis configet cum eo
rex austri, et tanquam turbo iruet rex aquilonis, cum curru et
equitibus, et navibus multis: et veniet in terras, et exundabit, et
transibit, *pervadet*

<span id="vi.lii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.lii-p5"></span><span id="vi.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lii-p6"></span>As to the time here mentioned, it is a
certain or predetermined period’ the kings of the south and the north we
have already shewn to refer to Egypt and Syria, such being their
position with respect to Judea. The word <span
id="vi.lii-p6.1"></span>חגנ *neech, confliget,* is literally he shall
“push with the horns,” while the word translated, “he shall rush as a
whirlwind,” is deduced from <span id="vi.lii-p6.2"></span>רעש *segner,*
“to be stormy.” The angel here predicts the numerous victories by means
of which the Romans should extend their empire far and wide, although
not without great difficulties and dangers. He states, *The king of the
south should carry on war with the Romans for a definite period* I dare
not fix the precise time intended by the angel. So great was the power
of Egypt, that had the kings of that country relied upon their native
resources, they might have summoned courage to make war upon the Romans.
Gabinius the proconsul led his army there for the sake of restoring
Ptolemy. He expelled Archelaus without much trouble, and then like a
mercenary he risked his life and his fame there, as well as his army.
Caesar was in danger there, after vanquishing Pompey; then Antony next
made war upon Augustus, assisted by the forces of Cleopatra; then Egypt
put forth all her strength, and at his failure was reduced herself to a
province of Rome. The angel did not propose to mark a continued series
of times, but only briefly to admonish the faithful to stand firm amidst
those most grievous concussions which were then at hand. Whatever be the
precise meaning, the angel doubtless signified the difficult nature of
the struggle between the Romans and the Egyptians. I have already stated
the witness of history to the fact, that the Egyptians never made war
against the Romans in their own name; sometimes events were so confused
that the Egyptians coalesced with the Syrians, and then we must read the
words conjointly — thus the king of the south, assisted by the king of
the north, should carry on war with the Romans. The angel thus shews us
how the king of Syria should furnish greater forces and supplies than
the Egyptian monarch, and this really happened at the beginning of the
triumvirate. He states next, *The king of the south* should come *with
chariots and horses and many ships.* Nor is it necessary here to
indicate the precise period, since the Romans carried on many wars in
the east, during which they occupied Asia, while a part of Libya fell to
them by the will of its king without arms or force of any kind.

<span id="vi.lii-p7"></span>With reference to these two kingdoms which
have been so frequently mentioned, many chiefs ruled over Syria within a
short period. First one of the natives was raised to the throne and then
another, till the people grew tired of them, and transferred the
sovereignty to strangers. Then Alexander rose gradually to power, and
ultimately acquired very great fame: he was not of noble birth, for his
father was of unknown origin. This man sprang from an obscure family,
and at one period possessed neither authority nor resources. He was made
king of Syria, because he pretended to be the son of Seleucus, and was
slain immediately, while his immediate successor reigned for but a short
period. Thus Syria passed over to the Romans on the death of this
Seleucus. Tigranes the king of Armenia was then sent for, and he was
made ruler over Syria till Lucullus conquered him, and Syria was reduced
to a province. The vilest of men reigned over Egypt. Physcon, who was
restrained by the Romans when attempting to wrest Syria from the power
of its sovereign, was exceedingly depraved both in body and mind and
hence he obtained this disgraceful appellation. For the word is a Greek
one, equivalent to the French *andouille;* for *physce* means that
thicker intestine into which the others are usually inserted. This
deformity gave rise to his usual name, signifying “pot-bellied,”
implying both bodily deformity and likeness to the brutes, while he was
not endowed with either intellect or ingenuity. The last king who made
the Romans his son’s guardians, received the name of Auletes, and Cicero
uses this epithet of “flute-player,” because he was immoderately fond of
this musical instrument In each kingdom then there was horrible
deformity, since those who exercised the royal authority were more like
dogs or swine than mankind. Tigranes, it is well known, gave the Romans
much trouble. On the other side, Mithridates occupied their attention
for a very long period, and with various and opposite success. The
Romans throughout all Asia were at one period put to the sword, and when
a close engagement was fought, Mithridates was often superior, and he
afterwards united his forces with those of Tigranes, his father-in-law.
When Tigranes held Armenia, he was a king of other kings, and afterwards
added to his dominions a portion of Syria. At length when the last
Antiochus was set over the kingdom of Syria by Lucullus, he was removed
from his command by the orders of Pompey, and then, as we have stated,
Syria became a province of Rome. Pompey crossed the sea, and subdued the
whole of Judea as well as Syria’ he afterwards entered the Temple, and
took away some part of its possessions, but spared the sacred treasures.
Crassus succeeded him — an insatiable whirlpool, who longed for this
province for no other reason than his unbounded eagerness for wealth. He
despoiled the Temple at Jerusalem; and lastly, after Cleopatra was
conquered, Egypt lost its royal race, and passed into a Roman province.
If the Romans, had conquered a hundred other provinces, the angel would
not have mentioned them here; for I have previously noticed his special
regard to the chosen people. Therefore he dwells only on those
slaughters which had more or less relation to the wretched Jews. First
of all he predicts the great contest which should arise between the
kings of Egypt and Syria, *who should come on like a whirlwind,* while
the Romans *should rush upon the lands like a deluge, and pass over
them.* He compares the king of Syria to a whirlwind, for at first he
should rush on impetuously, filling both land and sea with his forces.
Thus he should possess a well-manned fleet, and thus excite fresh
terrors, and yet vanish away rapidly like a whirlwind. But the Romans
are compared to a deluge. The new king of whom he had spoken *should
come,* says he, *and overflow,* burying all the forces of both Egypt and
Syria; implying the whole foundations of both realms should be swept
away when the Romans passed over them. *He shall pass over,* he says;
meaning, wherever they come, the way shall be open for them and nothing
closed against them. He will repeat this idea in another form. He does
not speak now of one region only, but says, *they should come over the
lands,* implying a wide-spread desolation, while no one should dare to
oppose them by resisting their fury.

<span id="vi.liii"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p1"></span><span id="vi.liii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041)<span
id="vi.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p2"></span>**41.** He shall enter also into the
glorious land, and many *countries* shall be overthrown: but these shall
escape out of his hand, *even* Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the
children of Ammon.

<span id="vi.liii-p3"></span>**41.** Et veniet in terram desiderii, et
multae, *regiones scilicet,* cadent, et hae evadent e manu ejus, Edom,
Moab, et principium filiorum Ammon.

<span id="vi.liii-p4"></span>**42.** He shall stretch forth his hand
also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.

<span id="vi.liii-p5"></span>**42.** Et mittet, *hoc est, extendet,*
manum suam in terras, et terra AEgypti non erit in evasionem.  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190)

<span id="vi.liii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.liii-p8"></span><span id="vi.liii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p9"></span>The land of Judea is called the pleasant or
desirable land, because God thought it worthy of his peculiar favor. He
chose it for his dwelling-place, called it his resting-place, and caused
his blessing to remain in it. In this verse also, regions are treated,
and not merely cities, as the regions of Edom and of Moab. After the
angel had briefly predicted the occurrence of the most grievous wars
with the Romans, he now adds what he had briefly commenced in the last
verse, — namely their becoming conquerors of all nations. *They shall
come,* he says, *into the desirable land* This is the reason why the
angel prophesies of the Roman empire, for he was not sent to explain to
Daniel the history of the whole world, but to retain the faithful in
their allegiance, and to persuade them under the most harassing
convulsions to remain under the protection and guardianship of God. For
this reason he *states,* — *they shall come into the desirable land*
This would be a dreadful temptation, and might overthrow all feelings of
piety, as the Jews would be harassed on all sides, first by the Syrians
and then by the Egyptians. And we know with what cruelty Antiochus
endeavored not only to oppress but utterly to blot out the whole nation.
Neither the Syrians nor the Egyptians spared them. The Romans came
almost from the other side of the globe; at first they made an alliance
with these states, and then entered Judea as enemies. Who would have
supposed that region under God’s protection, when it was so exposed to
all attacks of robbery and oppression? Hence it was necessary to
admonish the faithful not to fall away through this utter confusion.

<span id="vi.liii-p10"></span>*They shall come,* then, *into the
desirable land, and many regions shall fall;* meaning, no hope should
remain for the Jews after the arrival of the Romans, as victory was
already prepared to their hand. The angel’s setting before the faithful
this material for despair was not likely to induce confidence and
comfort, but. as they were aware of these divine predictions, they knew
also that the remedy was prepared by the same God who had admonished
them by means of the angel. It was in his power to save his Church from
a hundred deaths. This prophecy became an inestimable treasury,
inspiring the faithful with the hope of the promised deliverance. The
angel will afterwards add the promise intended to support and strengthen
and revive their drooping spirits. But he here announces that God’s aid
should not immediately appear, because he would give the Romans full
permission to exercise a cruel sway, tyranny, and robbery, throughout
the whole of Asia and the East. He says, *The lands of Edom, Moab, and a
portion of Ammon should escape from their slaughter* This trial would in
no slight degree affect the minds of the pious: What does he mean? He
suffers the land that he promised should be at rest, to be now seized
and laid waste by its enemies! The land of Moab is at peace and enjoys
the greatest tranquillity, and the condition of the sons of Ammon is
prosperous! We should here bear in mind what the prophets say of these
lands: Esau was banished into the rugged mountains, and God assigned to
the Moabites a territory beyond the borders of the land of blessings.
(<span id="vi.liii-p10.1"></span>[Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)<span id="vi.liii-p10.1"></span>.)
The Jews alone had any peculiar right and privilege to claim that
territory in which the Lord had promised them perfect repose. Now, when
Judea is laid waste and their foes according to their pleasure not only
seize upon everything valuable in the city and the country, but seem to
have a special permission to ravage the land at their will, what could
the Jews conjecture? The angel therefore meets this objection, and
alleviates these feelings of anxiety to which the faithful could be
subject from such slaughters. He states that the territories of *Edom*
and *Moab,* and of the *children of Ammon,* should be tranquil and safe
from those calamities. By the expression, *to the beginning of the
children of Ammon,* he most probably refers to that, retreat whence the
Ammonites originated. For doubtless the Romans would not have spared the
Ammonites unless they had been concealed among the mountains, for every
district in the neighborhood of Judea was subject to the same distress.
Those who interpret this passage of Antichrist, suppose safety to be
extended only to that portion of the faithful who shall escape from the
world and take refuge in the deserts. But there is no reason in this
opinion, and it is sufficient to retain the sense already proposed as
the genuine one. He afterwards adds, *The Romans should send their army
into the land, and even in the land of Egypt, they should not escape*
The angel without doubt here treats of the numerous victories which the
Romans should obtain in a short time. They carried on war with
Mithridates for a long period, and then Asia was almost lost; but they
soon afterwards began to extend their power, first over all Asia Minor,
and then over Syria; Armenia was next added to their sway, and Egypt
after that: meanwhile this was but a moderate addition, till at length
they ruled over the Persians, and thus their power became formidable.
Wherefore this prophet was fulfilled by *their extending their power
over many regions, and by the land of Egypt becoming a portion of their
booty* It follows:

<span id="vi.liv"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p1"></span><span id="vi.liv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#043)<span id="vi.liv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p2"></span>**43.** But he shall have power over the
treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of
Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians *shall be* at his steps.

<span id="vi.liv-p3"></span>**43.** Et dominabitur thesauris auri, et
argenti, et omnibus desiderabilibus  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) AEgypti, et Lybiae, et Aethiopiae
ingressibus suis.

<span id="vi.liv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.liv-p6"></span><span id="vi.liv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p7"></span>I have previously stated that though the
language applies to a single king, yet a kingdom is to be understood,
and our former observations are here confirmed. Although many nations
should endeavor to resist the Romans, they should yet be completely
victorious, and finally acquire immense booty. Their avarice and
covetousness were perfectly astonishing; for he says, *they should
acquire dominion over the treasures of gold and silver, and should draw
to themselves all the precious things of Egypt, Libya, and Ethiopia; and
that, too, in their footsteps.* In these words he more clearly explains
our previous remarks upon the emblem of the deluge. All lands should be
laid open to them; although the cities were fortified, and would thus
resist them by their closed gates, yet the way should be open to them,
and none should hinder them from bursting forth over the whole east, and
subduing at the same time cities, towns, and villages. This we know to
have been actually accomplished. Hence there is nothing forced in the
whole of this context, and the prophecy is fairly interpreted by the
history. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="vi.lv"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p1"></span><span id="vi.lv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044)<span id="vi.lv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p2"></span>**44.** But tidings out of the east and out
of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great
fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.

<span id="vi.lv-p3"></span>44. Rumores vero,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) terrebunt eum ab oriente, et ab
aquilone: egredieturque cum ira magna, ut perdat et internecione deleat
multos.

<span id="vi.lv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.lv-p6"></span><span id="vi.lv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p7"></span>The angel’s narrative seems here to differ
somewhat from the preceding one, as the Romans should not succeed so
completely as to avoid being arrested in the midst of their victorious
course. He says, *they shall be frightened by rumors,* and the events
suit this case, for although the Romans subdued the whole east with
scarcely any trouble, and in a few years, yet they were afterwards
checked by adversity. For Crassus perished miserably after spoiling the
temple, and destroyed himself and the flower of the Roman army; he was
conquered at Carrse, near Babylon, in an important engagement, through
betrayal by a spy in when he had placed too much confidence. Antony,
again, after dividing the world into three parts between himself, and
Octavius, and Lepidus, suffered miserably in the same neighborhood
against the Parthians. We are not surprised at the angel’s saying, *The
Romans should be frightened from the east and the north,* as this really
came to pass. Then he adds, *they should come in great wrath;* meaning,
although they should lose many troops, yet this severe massacre should
not depress their spirits. When their circumstances were desperate, they
were excited to fury like savage beasts of prey, until they rushed upon
their own destruction. This came to pass more especially under the reign
of Augustus; for a short period he contended successfully with the
Parthians, and compelled them to surrender. He then imposed upon them
conditions of peace; and as the Roman eagles had been carried into
Persia, much to their disgrace, he compelled this people to return them.
By this compulsion he blotted out the disgrace which they had suffered
under Antony. We see, then, how exceedingly well this suits the context,
— *the Romans shall come with great wrath to destroy many;* as the
Parthians expected to enjoy tranquillity for many ages, and to be
perfectly free from any future attempt or attack from the Romans. It now
follows, —

<span id="vi.lvi"></span>

<span id="vi.lvi-p1"></span><span id="vi.lvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045)<span id="vi.lvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lvi-p2"></span>**45.** And he shall plant the tabernacles
of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he
shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

<span id="vi.lvi-p3"></span>**45.** Et figet tabernacula palatii sui
inter maria ad montem desiderii sanctitatis, et veniet ad finem suum, et
non auxiliator ei.

<span id="vi.lvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.lvi-p5"></span><span id="vi.lvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lvi-p6"></span>The angel at length concludes with the
settled sway of the Romans in Asia Minor and the regions of the coast,
as well as in Syria, Judea, and Persia. We have already shewn how
everything here predicted is related by profane historians, and each
event is well known to all who are moderately versed in the knowledge of
those times. We must now notice the phrase, The Roman king *should fix
the tents of his palace* This expression signifies not only the carrying
on of the war by the Romans in the east, but their being lords of the
whole of that region. When he had said they should fix their tents
according to the usual practice of warfare, he might have been content
with the usual method of speech, but he contrasts the word “palace” with
frequent migrations, and signifies their not measuring their camp
according to the usage of warfare, but their occupying a fixed station
for a permanence. Why then does he speak of tents? Because Asia was not
the seat of their empire; for they were careful in not attributing more
dignity to any place than was expedient for themselves. For this reason
the proconsuls took with them numerous attendants, to avoid the
necessity of any fixed palace they had their own tents, and often
remained in such temporary dwellings as they found on their road. This
language of the angel — *they shall fix the tents of their palace* —
will suit the Romans exceedingly well, because they reigned there in
tranquillity after the east was subdued; and yet they had no fixed
habitation, because they did not wish any place to become strong enough
to rebel against them. When he says, *between the seas,* some think the
Dead Sea intended, and the Lake of Asphalt, as opposed to the
Mediterranean Sea. I do not hesitate to think the Persian Sea is
intended by the angel. He does not say the Romans should become masters
of all the lands lying between the two seas, but he only says *they
should fix the tents of their palace between the seas;* and we know this
to have been done when they held the dominion between the Euxine and the
Persian Gulf. The extent of the sway of Mithridates is well known, for
historians record twenty-two nations as subject to his power.
Afterwards, on one side stood Asia Minor, which consisted of many
nations, according to our statement elsewhere, and Armenia became theirs
after Tigranes was conquered, while Cilicia, though only a part of a
province, was a very extensive and wealthy region. It had many deserts
and many stony and uncultivated mountains, while there were in Cilicia
many rich cities, though it did not form a single province, like Syria
and Judea, so that it is not surprising when the angel says the Romans
*should fix their tents between the seas,* for their habitation was
beyond the Mediterranean Sea. They first passed over into Sicily and
then into Spain; thirdly, they began to extend their power into Greece
and Asia Minor against Antiochus, and then they seized upon the whole
east. On the one shore was Asia Minor and many other nations; and on the
other side was the Syrian Sea, including Judea as far as the Egyptian
Sea. We observe, then, the tranquillity of the Roman Empire *between the
seas,* and yet it had no permanent seat there, because the proconsuls
spent their time as foreigners in the midst of a strange country.

<span id="vi.lvi-p7"></span>At length he adds*, They should come to the
mountain of the desire of holiness* I have already expressed the reason
why this prophecy was uttered; it was to prevent the novelty of these
events from disturbing the minds of the pious, when they saw so
barbarous and distant a nation trampling upon them, and ruling with
pride, insolence, and cruelty. When, therefore, so sorrowful a spectacle
was set before the eyes of the pious, they required no ordinary supports
lest they should yield to the pressure of despair. The angel therefore
predicts future events, to produce the acknowledgment of nothing really
happening by chance; and next, to shew how all these turbulent motions
throughout the world are governed by a divine power. The consolation
follows, *they shall come at length to their end, and no one shall bring
them help* This was not fulfilled immediately, for after Crassus had
despoiled the temple, and had suffered in an adverse engagement against
the Parthians, the Romans did not fail all at once, but their monarchy
flourished even more and more under Augustus. The city was then razed to
the ground by Titus, and the very name and existence of the Jewish
nation all but; annihilated. Then, after this, the Romans suffered
disgraceful defeats; they were east out of nearly the whole east, and
compelled to treat with the Parthians, the Persians, and other nations,
till their empire was entirely ruined. If we study the history of the
next hundred years no nation will be found to have suffered such severe
punishments as the Romans, and no monarchy was ever overthrown with
greater disgrace. God then poured such fury upon that nation as to
render them the gazing-stock of the world. Tim angel’s words are not in
vain, *their own end should soon come;* after they had devastated and
depopulated all lands, and penetrated and pervaded everywhere, and all
the world had given themselves up to their power, then the Romans became
utterly ruined and swept away. *They should have gone to help them*
Without doubt this prophecy may be here extended to rite promulgation of
the gospel; for although Christ was born about one age before the
preaching of the gospel, yet he truly shone forth to the world by means
of that promulgation. The angel therefore brought up his prophecy to
that point of time. He now subjoins, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc25005.htm#fr_148) <span
id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> That is, I stood by to strengthen and assist
him. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc25005.htm#fr_149) <span
id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span> Or, he shall be rich with great opulence. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc25005.htm#fr_150) <span
id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span> Or, with his riches, that is, when he shall
prevail. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc25005.htm#fr_151) <span
id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span> That is, as he wishes, or according to his
lust. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc25005.htm#fr_152) <span
id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> There are various minor errors in the edition
1617, which are correct in the edition of 1571. For *example,* on folio
94, verse 3, <span id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>*violavit* occurs for <span
id="vi.v-p8.2"></span>*volavit;* and on folio 95, verse 3, <span
id="vi.v-p8.3"></span>*non* begins the sentence instead of <span
id="vi.v-p8.4"></span>*nam* — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc25005.htm#fr_153) <span
id="vi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p4"></span> The relative article is in the feminine
gender. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc25005.htm#fr_154) <span
id="vi.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p5"></span> Some translate, “in its degree;” but I see
no reason for it. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc25005.htm#fr_155) <span
id="vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p6"></span> <span id="vi.xi-p6.1"></span>לא *al*, is
here used in the sense of “with;” yet some translate it literally, to
his army; but the former exposition is preferable. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc25005.htm#fr_156) <span
id="vi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p7"></span> That is, among the fortifications, or among
the people. The number is changed, and it can only be referred to the
people — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc25005.htm#fr_157) <span
id="vi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p4"></span> That is, with desirable vessels, as I
formerly stated on this word.-*Calvin,*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc25005.htm#fr_158) <span
id="vi.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xii-p5"></span> Or, they shall lead captive into Egypt
their gods, together with their images and their desirable vessels of
silver and *gold.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc25005.htm#fr_159) <span
id="vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p7"></span> The edition of 1617 has <span
id="vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>*modestia* incorrectly for <span
id="vi.xiii-p7.2"></span>*molestia* The error is corrected in subsequent
editions. The reader of the original must be prepared for many verbal
inaccuracies in this edition. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc25005.htm#fr_160) <span
id="vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiv-p9"></span> Calvin quoting from memory has not stated
the numbers accurately. See Polyb., lib. 5, p. 421, edit. Casaubon.
Paris; also the Dissertations at the end of this volume. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc25005.htm#fr_161) <span
id="vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p4"></span> That is, he will collect a greater army
than before — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc25005.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p5"></span> That is, at the close, at a fixed time,
at the end — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc25005.htm#fr_163) <span
id="vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xviii-p6"></span> Or, “many,” for there are two words in
the original, “great and many.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc25005.htm#fr_164) <span
id="vi.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xix-p4"></span> That is, he shall build up a mound by
casting up stones, and wood, and earth. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc25005.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p4"></span> That is, he shall turn himself. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc25005.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p5"></span> Some translate, “the upright,” pl.,
(*recti*) “with him.” The copula may be superfluous, as we often find it
in the Scriptures. We must read it in one context, — he shall make
alliances with him, as we saw before. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc25005.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vi.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxi-p6"></span> That is, she shall not obey his will, nor
stand by him. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc25005.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vi.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvi-p4"></span> Some translate this word as if in
opposition with the last, — “the honor or glory of the realm.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc25005.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vi.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvii-p4"></span> That is, they shall not commit to him. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc25005.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vi.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxvii-p5"></span> That is, they shall not confer the glory
of the *kingdom.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc25005.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vi.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxx-p4"></span> Or, he shall disperse their property. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc25005.htm#fr_172) <span
id="vi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxi-p4"></span>That is, they shall agitate against him
perfidious counsels. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc25005.htm#fr_173) <span
id="vi.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p4"></span> That is, the issue should be different,
for the latter expedition should not succeed as the former one did. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc25005.htm#fr_174) <span
id="vi.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p7"></span> Or, he shall grieve, which sense I
rather prefer. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc25005.htm#fr_175) <span
id="vi.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxvii-p8"></span> That is, he shall apply his *mind.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc25005.htm#fr_176) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p4"></span> We have treated this word before. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc25005.htm#fr_177) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p7"></span> That is, he shall pervert them more and
more by flatteries. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc25005.htm#fr_178) <span
id="vi.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xxxviii-p8"></span> That is, all the people who
acknowledge. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc25005.htm#fr_179) <span
id="vi.xli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p6"></span> When they shall fall. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc25005.htm#fr_180) <span
id="vi.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p7"></span> These two words spring from the same root;
as “they shall be fortified,” comes from “fortitude,” so “they shall be
assisted,” from “assistance.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc25005.htm#fr_181) <span
id="vi.xliv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p4"></span> Or, to be tried; the word properly
signifies to pour out. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc25005.htm#fr_182) <span
id="vi.xliv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p5"></span> That is, to purify them. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc25005.htm#fr_183) <span
id="vi.xliv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xliv-p6"></span> Or, to purge them again. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc25005.htm#fr_184) <span
id="vi.xlv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p7"></span> The edit. of 1617 has <span
id="vi.xlv-p7.1"></span>*nunc* instead of <span
id="vi.xlv-p7.2"></span>*non,* which is the correct reading. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc25005.htm#fr_185) <span
id="vi.xlv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p10"></span> The Latin is “<span
id="vi.xlv-p10.1"></span>*ille* *dicebat,*” the French has “<span
id="vi.xlv-p10.2"></span>*un* *quidam disoit,*” — a curious mixture
which implies uncertainty. Can it be Crassus? — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc25005.htm#fr_186) <span
id="vi.xlv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlv-p12"></span> <span id="vi.xlv-p12.1"></span>See the
Dissertations<span id="vi.xlv-p12.3"></span> at the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc25005.htm#fr_187) <span
id="vi.xlviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlviii-p7"></span> The French edition altogether omits this
reference to the *Concilia* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc25005.htm#fr_188) <span
id="vi.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p4"></span> That is, with all precious things. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc25005.htm#fr_189) <span
id="vi.xlix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p12"></span> The word “Mahuzzin” has occasioned a
great variety of translations. See Wintle *in loco,* and the
Dissertation on this passage at the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc25005.htm#fr_190) <span
id="vi.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liii-p6"></span> That is, “shall not escape,” or “snatch
itself away.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc25005.htm#fr_191) <span
id="vi.liv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.liv-p4"></span> That is, over all precious things. —
*Calvin*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc25005.htm#fr_192) <span
id="vi.lv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.lv-p4"></span> Probably “reports” or “statements” which
should be heard. — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc25006)
