[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc25009)  [Next](cc25011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 25: Daniel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>A NOTICE OF SOME ANCIENT  
CODEXES AND VERSIONS.

<span id="xi-p2"></span>Those of the Septuagint are of most importance.
Dr. WELLS has compared the Alexandrian and Roman MSS., and arranged in
parallel columns their various readings, adding also the Hebrew
original. We have remarked in *the Preface,* p. 49, that early in the
second century Theodotion’s version was substituted for that of the
Septuagint. *Rosenmuller* has remarked its variations from the original
Hebrew and Chaldee text, particularly in chaps. 3, 4, 5, and 6. He cites
various examples, and refers us to. *Eichhorn* and *Bertholdt* for
details. Jerome followed Origen, who used a mark to denote any
difference between his *copy* of the Alexandrian version and the Hebrew
text. *Hengstenberg,* p. 234 and following, English Translation, has
answered some objections of the Neologians concerning this point.
*Daniel juxta LXX.* was first edited at Rome by the Society for
Propagating the Faith, in the year A.D. 1772, fol., from a codex
discovered in the Chisian Library. It is accompanied with a Latin
version, with the Septuagint chronology, with the Greek and Latin of
Hippolytus, and with the Greek and Latin of Theodotion’s version. It was
reprinted at Gottingen, A.D. 1774, and again at Trajectum ad Rhen., A.D.
1775, by *Ch. Segaar,* (Utrecht.) See Masch’s Bibl. Sac., part 2. vol.
2, pp. 320-322. Various other collations of these two codexes have been
made. Dr. Holmes, formerly *Dean* of Winchester, published in A.D. 1805,
the

<span id="xi-p3"></span>Book of Daniel according to the texts of
Theodotion and the Septuagint. For this edition 311 MSS. were collated,
and their variations marked. The Sixtine or Roman edition of 1587 has
been adopted, while the Complutensian and Aldine variations, as well as
those of Dr. Grabe, have all been noticed.

<span id="xi-p4"></span>Versions.

<span id="xi-p5"></span>There are three chief versions made from the
Septuagint text: viz., the Syriac, the old Latin or Italic, and the
Arabic. They are useful in determining the original Greek phrases used
by the Alexandrine translators. the Vulgate Latin forms a fourth and
later version, and their differences and agreements have been carefully
noticed by Dr. *Wells.* The Syriac version was edited, translated into
Latin, and illustrated by a preface and critical notes by *Cajetanus
Buggatus,* Mediolani, (Milan,) A.D. 1788, with the following title, —
*Daniel secundum editionem LXX. interpretum ex Tetraplis desumptam. Ex
codice Syro-Estranghelo Bibliothecae Ambrosianae Syriace. Wintle* in his
notes makes good use of the variations of these versions as well as
*Rosenmuller* in his elaborate expositions of the text. We are informed
by Jerome that *Theodotion’s* Greek version of Daniel was universally
used in the Greek and Eastern *Churches.*

<span id="xi-p6"></span>Another Greek version of Daniel occurs in an
edition of a codex in the Library of St. Mark’s at Venice, first
published and illustrated with notes by *Jo. Bapt. Caspare D’Ansse de
Villoison.* Argentorati, A.D. 1784.

<span id="xi-p7"></span>A codex rescriptus, containing fragments of
Daniel in a Latin version made before the time of Jerome, was discovered
in the University Library at Wurtzburg by Dr. Feder. The fragments were
published by Dr. Munter, Hafniae, A.D. 1821, 8VO. The codex is supposed
to be as old as the sixth or seventh century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Commentators on Daniel](cc25011)
