[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt00)  [Next](kt02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

THE following series of Kwakiutl tales was collected by me on various
journeys to British Columbia. In Volumes III and X of the Publications
of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition I have published a considerable
number of myths written down by Mr. George Hunt of Fort Rupert, B. C.,
who speaks Kwakiutl as his native language. These tales were written
under my direction, and the language was revised by me phonetically, the
text being dictated to me in part by Mr. Hunt, in part by other natives.

Since all the texts contained in the Publications of the Jesup
Expedition have been written down by the same individual, they present a
certain uniformity of diction. In order to overcome this, I collected
during the work of the Jesup Expedition, as well as at other times,
tales from the lips of natives, and these present the necessary control
material for checking the reliability of the language and form of the
tales recorded by Mr. Hunt. The tales contained on pp. 1-243 of this
volume were all dictated to me in this manner.

At the end of the volume a number of tales are given which were not
obtained in the original.

FRANZ BOAS.                 

NEW YORK, June, 1910.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Q!â'nêqê?laku and Xatê'tsEn](kt02)
