[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt01)  [Next](kt03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# 1. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> and Xatê'tsEn.

Tradition of the Qô'm?ênox<sup>u</sup>, a Clan of the
Lê'<u>g</u>wi~~l~~da?x<sup>u</sup>.

(

Dictated by Wa'nuk<sup>u</sup>, 1893.)

Xatê'tsEn was sitting in his house when his attendant came and said,
"Don't sit here in the house, for somebody is coming to the beach
here."--"Maybe this is what I am expecting, that will make things right
on the beach." Then Xatê'tsEn went out of his house to invite
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. Then (Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>) entered the
house of Xatê'tsEn, and he was given dried (salmon to eat. It was dried)
meat of the double-headed serpent. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> began to eat
it, and his body became contorted. Then Xatê'tsEn spoke. "Don't urge our
friend here (to eat)." Then Xatê'tsEn and Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> went
out of the house. Xatê'tsEn looked at his salmon-weir. Then
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> transformed him into stone. Xatê'tsEn became a
man again, because he also had supernatural power. (He said,) "Go on,
take warning, friend! Now I will also do something to you." Then
Xatê'tsEn transformed his friend into stone, but
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> became a man again.

Then he warned Xatê'tsEn. "Take warning, friend! Now I will try you
again." They took hold of each other, and Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> held
Xatê'tsEn by his sides. He lifted him up. Then Xatê'tsEn was transformed
into fog. He became a man again. Then Xatê'tsEn spoke. "Go on, take
warning, friend! Now I will do something to you also." Then Xatê'tsEn
lifted Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> and threw him upward. Then
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> also became fog. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>
became a man again.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Then Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> spoke. "Go on, take warning, friend! Now I
will try to lift you from the rock." Then Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> took
hold of Xatê'tsEn and threw him upward. He transformed Xatê'tsEn into a
crane, and the crane began to fly. Xatê'tsEn became a man again. Then he
also warned Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. "Go on, take care, friend!" Then
Xatê'tsEn took hold of Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> and threw him upward. A
crane was flying there. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> became a man again.

Then Xatê'tsEn spoke. "Oh, indeed, you have supernatural power, friend!
Come, let us go to my playground." Then they went aboard his canoe, and
they paddled, going to Xatê'tsEn's play-round. They were dressed quite
with the same kind of belts; namely, double-headed serpents.
Double-headed serpents also were their canoes. Then they arrived at the
playground.

Then Xatê'tsEn spoke. "Take care, friend! else you might have a mishap
on my playground. Nobody who ever tried to come and play on it has
succeeded a single time. This is what makes it slippery, the blood of
those who came from time to time to play here." Then Xatê'tsEn spoke.
"You go on first, friend!" Thus Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> was told by his
friend. "(No,) you first," said Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. "You said that
it is your playground."--"Let me go first, friend," said Xatê'tsEn, on
his part. Then he (Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>) clapped on the gunwale of
his canoe with his paddle, and Xatê'tsEn ran up. Xatê'tsEn ran straight
up. He did not rest on his resting-place halfway up: he just turned
round and came down again and jumped into his canoe.

Then Xatê'tsEn spoke. "Now you go, friend!" Thus he said to
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. "Take care, fasten your belt well, else it
might (drag) behind you!" Then Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> ran. He had
nearly reached the top when he

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

slipped on the rock. His belt came off, and Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>
fell down. He fell into the water and sank. Then Xatê'tsEn went away to
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>'s canoe, and upset it on the water. "Indeed,
you have no real supernatural power, friend," thus he said while
upsetting Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>'s canoe.

Xatê'tsEn waited in vain for Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> to show himself,
but Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> just did mischief to Xatê'tsEn's land.
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> transformed into stone a beaver that was
sitting by the river. Then Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> caught sight of the
watchman at the salmon-weir of Xatê'tsEn. He transformed into stone him
and his pole. Then he also transformed into stone the watchman of
Xatê'tsEn. Then Xatê'tsEn was vanquished by Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>,
for Xatê'tsEn did not know what Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> was doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. SE'n~~l~~ê?](kt03)
