[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt04)  [Next](kt06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4. Scab.

Tradition of the DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup>.

(*Dictated by Charlie Wilson*, 1900.)

It was when the Thunder-Bird clan lived at G\*iô'x. They had many
children. Then Scabby-Body had scabs all over his body, and his father
felt badly on account of his scabby child. Then he called his tribe into
(his house). His tribe came. They all came in with the women and
children, and entered the house. Then Cedar-Dancer spoke, and said,
"Welcome, tribe!" thus he said, "that you have come quickly, following
my word, for it would not be good if you were infected in the way my son
is, for his body is scabby. He has a bad sickness. Therefore I wish that
we leave him, and that we go far away, all of us, with our women and our
children."

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Then his tribe felt glad. They went home to get ready. They tied their
goods into bundles, and launched their canoes. They all went with the
tribe. Then they started. They left the child sitting there. The child
was alone on the ground. All the people pulled up the posts, the houses,
the planks, and went aboard their canoes. Then they left, and the child
was there alone.

One old person did not want to go, for she wished that the same might
happen to her as to her grandson; but the tribe did not allow it. Then
the old woman took a mussel-shell and put fire into it; and she left
dried salmon as provisions for the child. Then the old person was taken
and put aboard the canoe. The tribe started and left.

Then the boy made a fire on the ground \[with the fire\]. Then it was
burning, and the child was sitting on the ground. He cried pitifully on
account of what his father and his mother had done when they left. Then
his heart became strong, and he scratched his body, and the boils came
off of his body. He scratched his body a second time. Then his stomach
began to move. His stomach began to swell. Then he scratched again, and
a hand came out and showed itself on his stomach. Then he scratched
himself, and the hand drew back into his stomach. Then he kept still,
and the hand came out again from his stomach. He kept still, and his
heart was, strong, and he did not scratch himself, for, behold! that was
the reason that the hand always drew back into his stomach when he would
scratch himself. Then his heart became strong, and he did not scratch.
Then the hand came farther out of his stomach, and the boy looked, and
watched it coming. Then a boy jumped out of his stomach, and now there
was not one scab on the body of the child.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Then the boy who had jumped out of the stomach of the child said, "I am
the one on account of whom you were thus." Thus said the child,--the
child that had jumped out of his stomach. "I am the cause of your being
scabby, because I was in you. Now you are well. You will never be in the
same way again, for I have come out of your stomach." Then his father
felt glad. 'Thank you!" said the father, "that I have just obtained you
as a supernatural treasure. Have I not found you by good luck?" Then the
child spoke, and said, "Now you shall call me Scab."--"Am I not going to
do so?" said the father.

Then he sat down with his child. He felt lonely. He felt really lonely.
Then Scab spoke, and said to his father, "Don't long for me. I shall go
to the other side of the beach." Then the child Scab started and went to
the other side of the beach. He went to a river. He waded across, and
went straight to the place where the dead sisters of his father were
(buried in) boxes on the point of land. Then he took needles (of an
evergreen tree) and put them in the fold of his shirt. Then he started
and went into the water at the mouth of the river. He went straight down
to the mouth of the river. Then he turned round to the right side,
carrying in the fold of his shirt the needles, and he wished: "You shall
be steelhead salmon." He said so, and put the needles into the water at
the mouth of the river. Then he turned back, and went again to the dead
sisters of his father. Then he carried more needles in the fold of his
shirt and went again to the mouth of the river. He turned around to the
right side and threw the needles into the water. Scab said, "You shall
be silver salmon." Then he went back again to the dead sisters of his
father, and carried in the fold of his shirt needles which were on the
ground on

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the beach where the graves were. Then he started and went again to the
mouth of the river, and again he put the needles into the water after he
had turned round; and he spoke again, and said, "You shall be
dog-salmon." Then he went again to the dead sisters of his father, and
carried needles in the fold of his shirt. He started again, and went to
the mouth of the river, and he turned round again to the right side, and
poured out the needles into the water. Then he spoke. "You shall be
spring salmon." Then he started again, and went to the graves to get
needles from the boxes of the dead sisters of his father. Then he went
back again to the mouth of the river. He turned round again, and said,
"You shall be bull-heads. Every time when my father's tribe comes," thus
he said, "you shall eat from time to time." Thus said Scab. Then Scab
started. He was halfway across the river. Then he turned back and looked
seaward. Then he saw a vast amount of splashing, Behold! these were the
various kinds of fish that came splashing to the mouth of the river.
They had been the needles, and they had become salmon.

Then he started running, and went to his father. "Arise he said to his
father, "let us go to the other side of the beach." Thus said Scab to
his father. Then the father arose from the ground. "Important is your
speech, child," said he, and arose to go to the place to which his son
had referred, where he should go with him. They started and went to the
river. Immediately they began to build a house on the bank of the river.
Very many salmon came to the mouth of the river. Then the father felt
glad on account of what his son had done.

Then Scab made a request. "Make a spear," thus said Seal), "that you may
go on and split and roast, and that I may in the mean time spear the
salmon."--"Go

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

on," said the father. Then the child speared salmon. The father roasted
\[the salmon\] and cut the salmon. Then they obtained much from the
river. Then he and his child got tired of working \[salmon\].

Night came. Then they slept in the house. In the morning he (Scab)
arose. Then he looked at what they had obtained from the river. "Oh," he
said, "what has become of what we obtained from the river? There is
nothing there now." Thus said Scab to his father. "But important is your
word, child," said the father. Then the father arose. "Don't talk about
it," said Scab to his father. "You go now and spear salmon, and I will
cut salmon, and I will roast them after you go spearing."

"Go ahead," said the father. The father began to spear, and the child
began to cut and roast the salmon. He had not been doing so long when
the house was full. Then they got tired. Then they had obtained much
from the river. When they finished working on the ground, night came. It
was evening. Then Scab spoke, and said, "Do look, and make a bow and
four arrows."--"I shall \[go on and\] do what you refer to, master."
Then the father made what his son had referred to. Then he finished.
Scab was really glad, for the bow that his father had made was very
good.

Now, it had been night for a long time. The night was light. Then Scab
said to his father, "Sleep now." Thus said Scab to his father. "Let me
do so, master," said the father. "Don't speak loud," said Scab to his
father. "I shall just pinch your foot if I should see
anything."--"Indeed, do so, master," said the father. "Go on, sleep,
don't feel uneasy," said Scab. "I shall not go far away. I shall be here
on this side of our house."--"All right, my dear," said the father. Then
the father went to sleep.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Now, it was past midnight, and for a long time Scab was sitting on the
ground on the side of his little house. Then a man came from the
woods,--a tall man. He saw him. Scab examined him. Then Scab recognized
that he was the Dzô'noq!wa. Then Scab jumped into his little house and
pinched the feet of his father. The father arose. "Don't (speak) loud,
keep quiet!" Then he arose. Then he saw the reason why his child had
pinched him. The Dzô'noq!wa appeared black through the hole through
which the light was shining. Then Scab spanned his bow and was ready.
The Dzô'noq!wa felt about, and felt with his hand through the hole; then
he put his hand entirely through the hole. Scab did not wish to shoot
his hand, thus he thought; he wished to shoot his breast if it should
show through the hole. Then his breast showed through the hole, and he
(Scab) shot him in the right side of the breast, and then also in the
left side, and then again one (arrow) in the right side, and then again
one in the left side. Two arrows were in each side of the breast of the
Dzô'noq!wa. Then the Dzô'noq!wa felt them and went back into the woods,
crying "Oh!" The Dzô'noq!wa cried "Oh!" loudly. Probably the shot of
Scab gave him pain. Then the Dzô'noq!wa went far into the woods, pushing
down the trees, and he did so because he was angry because the shot of
Scab gave him pain. He started.

Then Scab and his father slept. Then (Scab) was half awake, and he was
about to get up in the morning. Then, when it was morning, he arose,
also his father. Then he made a fire on the ground in his house and ate.
After he had eaten, he sat down on the ground in his house. Then Scab
got ready; he finished. Scab had his face blackened, and put on his head
a ring of red cedar-bark, and he put a neck-ring, around his neck; then

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

he put on bird-down. There was much bird-down on his body. Then he said,
"Do not wait for me." Thus said Scab to his father. "I am going to walk
on the ground to this place inland from the beach."--"Go on, master!"
Thus said his father.

Then Scab started. He went up the bank of the river. Then he went into
the woods and walked inland. He had not been going long when he
discovered a trail. Then he saw a pond \[of water\], and he sat down on
the ground. He was adorned around the neck, he had a ring on his head,
he was feathered, and his face was blackened. He had not been sitting on
the ground long when, behold! a little Dzô'noq!wa girl came walking
along. "Oh," said Scab to the little Dzô'noq!wa woman, "for whom do you
draw water?" Thus he said to the little Dzô'noq!wa woman, for she was
carrying a bucket. "Oh," said that little Dzô'noq!wa woman, "I fetch
water for father." Thus she said. "Why?" said Scab. "What is the cause
of his feeling ill?"--"I do not know what ails him," said the little
Dzô'noq!wa woman. "\[Go on,\] listen," said Scab. "\[Do not\] say that a
strong shaman came here, and that he sits on the ground by the side of
this water."

Then said the father of the child,--namely, of the
Dzô'noq!wa,--(speaking) to his child, "\[For\] what may we have to pay
him, mistress?" Thus said the Dzô'noq!wa to his little daughter. Then
the little Dzô'noq!wa woman went out, and she came to Scab. The little
Dzô'noq!wa woman did not take care of her bucket, for the word of the
man who was sitting on the ground by the water was now important to her.
The little Dzô'noq!wa woman said, "\[For\] what may father have to pay
you?"--" I will not take any of the things in your house."--\["And so
what shall I not have of the things that may be in your house?"\]

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Then the little Dzô'noq!wa woman started. Every now and then she would
fall down on the ground fainting, on account of the importance of the
word of the man who was sitting on the ground by the side of the water.
Then the little Dzô'noq!wa a woman entered. Evidently the word of this
shaman is exceedingly important. He says he does not care \[not\] to
have any of the things in our house." Then the big. Dzô'noq!wa groaned
very much on account of his shot-wound. Go to him," said the Dzô'noq!wa
to his child. "Just advise him about our house \[if he should enter our
house\]." The child started and went to Scab. "What is your name?" said
the little Dzô'noq!wa woman to the one sitting on the ground by the
water. "My name is Scab."--"They say you shall come; just take care when
you enter our house. Our house has a snapping, door."--"What of it?"
said Scab, "I am a man of supernatural power." Thus said Scab. Then Scab
started.

Then he chewed hellebore and entered the house. The little Dzô'noq!wa
woman went ahead, and Scab followed. He jumped in and blew out saliva on
both sides of the house, on account of the double-headed serpent which
was darting out its tongues on each side of the door of the house. Then
Scab stood by the fireplace of the Dzô'noq!wa, turned around to the
right, and started to the rear, where the Dzô'noq!wa was lying. Not all
the Dzô'noq!wa could see him, on account of their number in the house.
Then he sat down on the floor away from the fire of the Dzô'noq!wa, and
he felt with his right hand of the chest of the Dzô'noq!wa. He felt his
arrow. "Ah, ah!" he said (to himself), "this one has stolen your
supplies of salmon." Then he felt his arrow, and was glad because he
felt his arrow. He felt all his four arrows which he had shot in the
house on the bank of the river.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Then Scab arose and began to sing his sacred song and he went around in
the house; four times he went around in the house, and then he went back
to the place where he had sat on the floor on the side away from the
Dzô'noq!wa. Then he felt of his arrows, and he scratched the shot-wound
with his nails. Then the Dzô'noq!wa felt really feeble, for Scab felt
the end of his arrow. The Dzô'noq!wa groaned, and his breath became
nothing. He did not allow Scab to touch the chest of the Dzô'noq!wa, for
he felt very weak, because he had much pain. Therefore the Dzô'noq!wa
called out very loud when he groaned. Then Scab put his month (to the
wound) and sang his sacred song. He took hold of the end of his arrow
with his teeth. Then he bit one, and he pulled it out, and he shoved it
down in front of his own body. The great number (of people) did not know
that he had obtained his arrow. Then he began again on the left side of
the chest. He pulled out his one arrow, and arose from the floor of the
house when he had obtained his one arrow.

Then Scab began to speak: "How are you? Is your manhood not getting
better?" Thus said Scab to the Dzô'noq!wa. "Stop, my dear!" said the
Dzô'noq!wa. "I met you by good luck, for evidently you are a strong
shaman. Do go on with what you are doing. \[But\] you will \[not\] make
me alive, and what may I do in return for your favor, my dear?" Then
Scab sang again his sacred song, and Scab felt glad because he was going
to get supernatural power at the place where he had entered. Again he
began to sing his sacred song, and applied his mouth to the chest of the
Dzô'noq!wa. Scab was tormenting the Dzô'noq!wa more. Then he took the
end of his arrow with his teeth. Now, two arrows were in the chest of
the Dzô'noq!wa. Then he took hold of it (the second) with his teeth and
pulled up his arrow, and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

again he arose from the floor of the house. Scab was not careful in
vain, for the Dzô'noq!wa did not know at all what Scab was doing,

Then Scab questioned the Dzô'noq!wa again. "Are you not feeling better?"
Thus said Scab to the Dzô'noq!wa. "Stop talking in vain, my dear, for
how should your slave here \[come to life\] get well? just go on doing
this, my dear, what you have been doing. I found you by luck." Thus said
the Dzô'noq!wa again. "Go on, now, sit up on the floor." Thus said Scab
to the Dzô'noq!wa. Then the Dzô'noq!wa sat up. The Dzô'noq!wa was really
strong.

Then Scab began to speak. "Now I have treated you three times," thus
said Scab to the Dzô'noq!wa, "and so I will do once (more) when you
arise. Now you will be really strong."--"Just go on, supernatural one,
take care of what you are doing in the house." Then Scab applied his
mouth again to the chest of the Dzô'noq!wa; and Scab kept on tormenting
him, for he knew now that the Dzô'noq!wa would be well. Then he applied
his mouth to the chest of the Dzô'noq!wa, and he took hold of his arrow
with his teeth. Then he pushed it, and then pulled it. Scab pushed his
arrow to and fro. Therefore the Dzô'noq!wa groaned for pain, because
(Scab) was tormenting the Dzô'noq!wa when he pushed his arrow to and
fro. Then Scab thought that he would now get his arrow. "Now, take care,
my, dear!" said Scab to the Dzô'noq!wa. "Now I shall really begin, so
that you may be well quickly." Thus said Scab to the Dzô'noq!wa. "Your
word is true, my, dear," said the Dzô'noq!wa. Then Scab went around on
the floor of the house again, singing his sacred song: then he sat down
again on the place in the house where he had been sitting before. He
took (hold of) his arrow with his teeth and pulled it out. "Now

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I have finished. Now there will be no pain at
all in your chest."

Then the Dzô'noq!wa arose. "\[For\] what should I say?" Thus said the
Dzô'noq!wa. "For did not I get by luck what our friend here has done?
Now come, (you) whom I obtained by good luck; but did (you) not restore
me to life?" Thus said the Dzô'noq!wa to the number of his fellows in
the house. Then the Dzô'noq!wa began to speak again. "But do I not start
with you, friend?" Thus said the Dzô'noq!wa to Scab. "Now you shall be
the owner of my house, on account of what you have done to me, you who
restored me to life; and you shall have my daughter for your wife. Just
select my most beloved daughter; and you shall have my water, because it
has no equal; this my water is called the water of life. Take care,
son-in-law!" Thus said the Dzô'noq!wa to Scab. "Take good care of my
daughter, and this box of your wife shall (also) go."

Then the Dzô'noq!wa stopped speaking, and Scab arose and began to
express his thanks for the words of the Dzô'noq!wa. Thank you for what
you have done to me. That is why I have done so on the ground,
endeavoring to get supernatural power. Now I really have for
supernatural treasure the qualities of your house, and why should you
feel uneasy in vain on account of your child? I shall not hurt her."
Thus said Scab to his father-in-law.

"Now go on, arise," said the Dzô'noq!wa to Scab, "and carry on your back
one of the boxes of your wife." The box stood on the floor in the middle
of the house. Then Scab arose and went to get it. Scab tried to lift the
box, but he was not able to do so. Scab was altogether too weak for the
box of his wife. Scab was not strong enough for the box. Then the
Dzô'noq!wa began

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

to speak to his child. "Don't think in vain that your husband will take
care of your box. Evidently he is not strong enough for it." That box
could not be lifted. It was a small box. Then the wife of Scab arose.
She lifted up the little box with her finger, and carried the little box
in one hand. Then Scab started with his wife. Then the wife of Scab took
some of that water, the water of life., and they went to their house on
the bank of the river, the house of (Scab's) father.

Then Scab entered the house. What should be the matter with his father?
There were only bones lying there. Behold, he was dead! It had not
seemed to Scab that he had been away long; but, behold! it had been four
years--what Scab had been doing \[on the ground\]. Then Scab wept. He
cried really on account of his father, for it seemed there was no way to
revive him, on account of what he had done inland, because Scab had
thought that he would get a wife quickly because there was no one to
take care of him and his father. Therefore Scab felt sorry, for now his
wife had come in vain. Then Scab told his wife, "Pity this (your)
father-in-law, who evidently has been dead \[since\] a long time." Thus
said Scab to his wife. "Look at this," said Scab to his wife, "this is
it." The wife could not see, for that is the way a Dzô'noq!wa should be.
The Dzô'noq!was have no way to see (well), for their eyes are deep-set.
"This is it," he said, and took the hand of his wife. Then he made her
feel the bones. "Oh," said the Dzô'noq!wa, his wife, "that is why you
cried when we first entered your house. Don't cry!" she said to her
husband; "let us sit down on the floor, that our house may come,--the
one that comes from my father."

Then they sat down on the floor, and she tapped repeatedly on her box.
Scab did not know that the time

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

had come for the house of which his father-in-law had spoken to be on
the ground. Then the house came and stood on the ground, at the place of
his former little house. Not at all on the ground was the past house for
storing fish. Then the large house came,--the one that was seen by Scab
inland. The house had a snapping-door; and the double-headed serpents
with darting tongues were on each side of the door of the house; and the
wolves in the house were doing the same, their tongues were also
darting. Then the wife of Scab turned her mouth to her father-in-law. He
had not come to life: only bones were still on the floor of the house.
Then the wife of Scab opened her water (box); then she put her hands
into the water and sprinkled it on her father-in-law. Four times she
sprinkled on her father-in-law a little water. Then her father-in-law
arose. "Yê!", said her father-in-law, "but the sleep has been really
sweet in my eyes."--"Don't say that, father," said Scab to his father,
"you have been dead. Only the one who has come here and is sitting in
the house has taken pity on you,--this, my wife. Do you see this house?
This is the supernatural treasure I obtained at the place to which I
went, and this property of my wife cannot be lifted."

Then the father was glad on account of what his son had done when he
obtained a supernatural treasure. "Thank you, child, for indeed I had
good luck, in that you came and favored your slave here, and that you
obtained supernatural treasures, child." Then the child and the
father-in-law were glad because they had a good house.

For one year he lived in the house at that place; then Scab felt
downcast. Very early in the morning Scab arose and went down to the
beach. It was very low tide. Then Scab stood on the beach, and he saw
some one

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

sailing along on the sea. "Head ashore, that I may go aboard!" Thus he
said to the Goose. "Yä! but we have much clover aboard." Then Scab saw
again some one sailing along. "Yä! head ashore, that I may go aboard."
The Loon was coming ashore. "Yä! but we have much herring aboard." Then
the Loon left. Then Scab discovered \[again\] the Albatross. "Head
ashore, that I may go aboard." Thus said Scab again. The Albatross came
near shore. "Yä! our canoe is too cranky." Then the Albatross left. Scab
saw again somebody sailing along. "Head ashore, that I may go
aboard."--"Yä! but we have too many barnacles aboard." Thus said the
Scaup-Duck. Then the Scaup-Duck left.

Then Scab discovered no one sailing along. They were just paddling about
to no purpose. Behold! Seals were paddling about." Head ashore, that I
may go aboard," (said Scab.) "What do you want to go for?" said the
Seals to Scab. "I want to marry the daughter of our chief."--"Maybe you
can \[only\] not do it. Maybe you cannot cling to us, for we do not
often emerge (come up to breathe)." Then the Seals left. There were two
seals. Again somebody came paddling about. They went quite close to the
shore to Scab. "Ah, head ashore, that I may go aboard."--"Stop," said
the Land-Otters, "perhaps you cannot do it. Perhaps you cannot hold on
to us, for we are not quiet, we go about quickly. There is nothing that
we do not do. We roll about on the sea." Then the Land-Otters left.

Then Scab tried to give up, and tried to go home. Again he looked
seaward. Then he saw somebody out at sea. Again Scab shouted, "Ah, head
ashore that I may go aboard." They came and tried quickly to come
ashore. They came almost to Scab. "What do you want, my dear?" said the
Harlequin-Duck (female). There

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

were two Charitonettæ. "I wish to marry the princess of our
chief."--"Well, come, it is good what you say," said the Duck, "only
take care and poke us from time to time with your finger if your breath
should give out. Do you see that large mountain? We dive under that
large mountain. Take great care, else you will not obtain what you talk
about."--"Indeed, I shall do so," said Scab to the Duck. "Let us \[go\]
try to dive with our friend here," said the Ducks. "Go ahead," he said.
Then they dived, and they were under water a long time when they dived.
Then they emerged. It was not Scab's wish when they went and emerged: it
was the wish of the Ducks when they emerged. "Behold! the mind of our
friend here is strong," said the Ducks. "Behold! we shall not advise our
friend in vain strongly," said the Ducks. Then they came near the large
mountain. "Now we will go and dive under this large mountain," said the
Ducks. Verily, the mind of Scab was strong on account of what the Ducks
said, for they had warned him. "Take care," said the Ducks, "else it may
happen to you by your own doing, as you may meet misfortune by what we
are doing now." Thus said the Ducks. "Just go on," said Scab. "First
poke us under the middle of the large mountain," said the Ducks. "Just
go on," said Scab to his friends.

 

Then they began to dive. They dived for a longtime under the mountain.
Scab's mind was strong, for he did not disobey the words of his friends.
Then they emerged on the other side of the large mountain. Immediately
Scab saw a brightness. "Do you not see that brightness?" said the Ducks
to Scab. "I do," said Scab. "That is where we are going to," said the
Ducks. "Let us go

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

on and see what will happen to our friend," said the Ducks.

Then they deliberated what to do for their friend. "Ya!" said one of the
Ducks. "This is my plan for what our friend shall do later on, because
from time to time our chief needs fire-wood. Let us go on," said the
Ducks, "let us go on to the head of the bay." Then they swam, and went
on to the head of the bay. Then they discovered good fire-wood. The
fire-wood was alder. It was really dry. The fire-wood was good to be
chopped across in three pieces. "Let us put our friend in this hole at
the end of the fire-wood." Then Scab entered the end of the fire-wood.
Then the Ducks finished what they had planned for their friend. Then the
Ducks towed out the fire-wood, which was now the hiding-place of Scab.
They towed it to the beach at the door of our chief. It was just
beginning to be ebb-tide, and the fire-wood was left dry on the
beach,--right on the beach of our chief. The Ducks watched it when the
fire-wood was lying on the beach. Then the Ducks dived on the beach,
watching (to see) if the hiding-place of their friend should drift away.

Then day came, and our chief rose early and went down to his beach. Our
chief went back again and took his axe, and he came back. "That is very
good firewood," said our chief. Then he began to chop the firewood, the
hiding-place of Scab. Then he carried the fire-wood on his shoulder into
his house. Then he carried another piece of fire-wood. The fire-wood was
chopped into three pieces. Then he carried another one on his shoulder:
that was the hiding-place of Scab, that one piece of fire-wood. Last
came the place where Scab was. He put it down from his shoulder in the
house, near the door. Then Scab was inside the fire-wood. He continued
to be in it.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

Then the Moon came home, and the Moon began to speak. "Oh!" said the
Moon, "what shall we do that our dear child may have a husband, walking
about in this one country?" Thus said the Moon to our chief. 'This one
to whom I refer is called Scab. He has for his wife the little
Dzô'noq!wa woman." Then the Moon went. The Sun came and sat down in the
house. "Ah," said the Sun, "what shall we do that our dear nice little
child shall have a husband, the one who has for his wife the little
Dzô'noq!wa woman?" Then Scab was really glad on account of the words
going to and fro from Moon and Sun, and he remained in his place inside
the firewood. Night came, and it was dark. At the middle of the rear of
the house was the bedroom of the princess of our chief. Beautiful,
really fine, was her room. Then Scab came out of his fire-wood and sat
down on the floor of the house. Then he discovered what he had gone for
in the rear of the house. Then the parents of the child slept. Scab
arose and went to her quietly. Scab went and came to the place where she
was who was referred to as his wife. Then Scab felt with his hand for
the feet of the child. "Go away!" said the child. Then Scab again
touched her feet. "Go away!" said again the child. She thought that it
was a dog who touched her in her room, where she was lying down.
"Don't!" said Scab, "don't drive me away," said Scab. "I thought it was
desired that you should have me for your husband. I am called Scab."
Thus said Scab. Then the child of our chief said, "Welcome!"

Then he lay down with the girl. She was very glad because they were
married. Then the married couple played together. Then her father awoke
from hearing that they were playing together. "My dear," said the
father, "you ought to drive away this one, child!" thus said the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

father, "else it may walk about in the house behind you." Thus said our
chief to his child. Then our chief went to sleep again. He did not sleep
long, when Scab again played with his wife. Then the wife of our chief
awoke from hearing playing in the rear of the house. "My dear," said the
wife of our chief to her daughter, "do drive that away, child!" Thus
said the wife of our chief. She thought that it was a dog with whom her
child was playing.

"You are foolish," said the daughter of our chief. "I thought you said
that I should have this one for my husband."--"Do get up," said the
woman to her husband. "Very important is what our daughter says." Then
our chief arose and made a fire. The fire in the house was burning.
"Arise, slaves!" said our chief. Then they arose and spread mats in the
rear of the house; then he called his daughter and her husband.

Then the married couple arose; and they were sitting in the house for a
long time, in the rear of the house, when our chief spoke. "Welcome!"
said our chief to Scab. "I thought beforehand that it was you, Scab,"
said our chief, "because you were desired by all of us, the (whole)
number in the house. Evidently you are not an ordinary man, because not
one man ever reached my house; therefore I think you are not an ordinary
man. Only take care of your marriage." Thus said our chief to Scab.

Then Scab began to speak. "Thank you for what you have said," said Scab
to our chief. "I am a good man, I do not fail in what I wish to do."
Then Scab staid a long time at his place. Then Scab became downcast, and
he was really downcast. The daughter of our chief asked, "What is the
cause of your being downcast?" Thus said his wife. "Don't deny it, if
you should desire

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to go home."--"I am only downcast because I long for my father." Thus
said Scab. "Let us go and see your father."

Then his wife got ready, and put on what she (used to) have on as her
means of flying. Then she went out with her husband. "Only cling to my
back," said his wife. Then she began to fly. She was going to see her
father-in-law. For a long time the child of our chief went along flying.
Then she saw his house. "Is that your house," said the daughter of our
chief. "That's it," said Scab. Then she soared downward, going to the
house of her husband. She arrived there. Then she entered and looked
about in the house, and what should there be? They were all dead. The
father of Scab, and his daughter-in-law the little Dzô'noq!wa woman.
Then Scab spoke. "Don't be this way in the house," said Scab to his
father. "I have again obtained supernatural power," said Scab to his
father. "Important is your word, child," said the father of Scab.
"\[But\] again he has supernatural power, that child!" said the father
of Scab. Go on, let me know quickly what kind of supernatural power you
have, child." Then Scab spoke. "I have been far away." Thus said Scab to
his father. I was above our world. I have obtained for my wife the
daughter of our chief above. It is as though I were more than natural.
Therefore I say this,--I am more than natural, because we just came
flying along from her house, coming towards our house here."

Then the little Dzô'noq!wa woman was jealous when she saw his second
wife; but the little Dzô'noq!wa woman did not speak about doing
anything, and the daughter of our chief did not speak about doing
anything. Then the Dzô'noq!wa woman began first in the house. She showed
the second wife what kind she was,--that she was also not a common
person. Then the little Dzô'noq!wa woman

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

moved in the house. She went around the house, dancing around. Then the
daughter of our chief became a woodpecker, and sat on a pole standing in
the middle of the house. Then the little Dzô'noq!wa woman was quiet in
the house. Then the princess of our chief changed places with her in the
house. She also went around. The daughter of our chief flew around in
the house. Then she sat still, and the little Dzô'noq!wa woman flew
about in the house. Then the little Dzô'noq!wa woman was a bluejay, and
the bluejay flew about in the house a long time. Then she sat quiet, and
the child of our chief became a red flicker, and the flicker flew around
in the house for a long time. Then their faces were monstrous, showing
that they were not common persons. Then the woodpecker sat still; and
our lady, the daughter of our chief, began again. She was a
qô'los. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Our lady did her utmost with
the little Dzô'noq!wa woman.

Then our lady said that she was tired of the little Dzô'noq!wa woman.
They had been flying around the house for a long time, going to and fro
in the house, flying to and fro. Then they sat still and came to their
senses in the house. Scab and his father just enjoyed looking at the
doings of his (Scab's) wives. Then they finished in the house. Then our
lady, the daughter of our chief, spoke. "Behold, really you are not an
ordinary person." Thus said our lady to the little Dzô'noq!wa woman. "I
know that you are not an ordinary person." Thus said our lady. Then she
was glad, and she was very friendly with the second wife. They gave to
eat to their father-in-law and to their husband.

Scab did not love the little Dzô'noq!wa woman much. He loved the
daughter of our chief. He had a dislike for the little Dzô'noq!wa woman.
Now they had been in

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

their house for a long time. They were happy in the house. Then our lady
became downcast, and Scab said to his wife, "Don't deny it if you long
for your parents." Thus said Scab to his wife. "I desire to go home,"
said our lady. "Let us go home to your house," said Scab. Then our lady
put on what she used to have on, and they went out of the house.

"Don't feel uneasy about me," said Scab to his father, "we shall not be
(away) long; a little while and we shall see you again." Then our lady
spoke. "Take care," she said to her husband, "hold fast and cling to my
shoulder," thus she said to her husband, "else you may hurt yourself. It
would be your mind if you should let go from clinging to my shoulder."
Then Scab was flown away with, and they were, going to the house of his
wife. For a long time she had been flying along with Scab. They were
halfway to where they were going and whence they had come (before). It
seems, Scab did not know what he had done before,--he must have been
asleep,--and therefore he let go of his wife, and he fell down, and Scab
came down spinning around. Our lady just went on flying to our chief.
Then our lady reached her house. She was asked by her parents, "Where is
your husband?" Thus said our chief. "He made a great mistake," said our
lady to her father. "I tried to warn him that he should take care and
cling to my shoulders while we were coming this way. Evidently he did
not know what he was doing; evidently he fell asleep; therefore he did
not know what he was doing; therefore he did not tell me. I just saw him
going, spinning around, going downward." Our chief did not say anything
about what his daughter had done.

Then the father of Scab became uneasy. He was not

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

quiet; he always had some place where he wanted to go about at both
sides of the house. His father paddled about. Then he saw his dead son
drifting about. He recognized at once that it was his son. "Evidently
you made a mistake, Found-by-Good-Luck." Thus he said to his dead child.
Then he took his child aboard, for he was dead, and he went home to his
house. Then he buried him behind his house. He did not tell his
daughter-in-law, the little Dzô'noq!wa woman, about what her husband
Scab had done; and the father of Scab lived now with his
daughter-in-law. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[77:1](kt05.htm#fr_1.md) A mythical bird.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. L!â'lamîn](kt06.md)
