[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt05)  [Next](kt07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 5. L!â'lam<u>î</u>n.

Tradition of the ?nE'm<u>g</u>ês.

(*Dictated by ?nEmô'gwis*, 1900.)

Qô'los was a bird when he came down. He looked for a house. Then the
bird disappeared, and he began to be a man. He became possessed of a
house, the outside of which was cloudless; and stars were on the house
that he brought down with him. Then he married. He had children, and
they became many, and they became the L!â'L!Elâm<u>î</u>n clan.

Then the son of L!â'lam<u>î</u>n went hunting on the sea at a place
called Beaver Cove. Then, while he was hunting, he met unexpectedly the
house of Rich-One, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) which was coming
up. He was taken down to below the sea. The name of the hunter was
Q!â'g\*iwê. Then he came, being brought up, and he came as the possessor
of the house, the (beams over the) door of which vomited. The beams were
sea-lions. He came, and his house stood on the ground at Foundation. At
times houses were built by

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

those who took his place, one after another. There were many things in
the house of L!â'lam<u>î</u>n. Birds were on top of it. Then he went to
this river (Nimkish), and he built a house on piles, and he became a
man. Then Paddled-to and T!â't!Endzîd, his children, took his place.

Then the hunter, the child of L!â'lam<u>î</u>n, went hunting; and every
time he went, he caught many sea-otters. Then he built a house at
Rolling-down. He took his hat and his large cape, and he became a man.
Then he made a trail, which is now the trail going to those named
Qâ'yokwadeEx. Then he gave to each of his children the crests which he
had obtained by magic. For a long time L!â'lam<u>î</u>n did not die. His
house was flooded by the deluge. Then he put on his Qô'los mask, and he
flew upward, and he went up. Only these, his children, are chiefs, after
he left them behind. Later on they just became people. This is just
placed on the ground from time to time, for L!â'lam<u>î</u>n to sit on
top of it. These are the crests. It is said that the North People were
the slaves of the children of L!â'lam<u>î</u>n. They ran away with the
crests they took away. Therefore it is said they have crests, and the
names T!â't!Endzîd and Paddled-to which were taken away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[81:1](kt06.htm#fr_2) A spirit of the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Kunô'sila](kt07)
