[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt09)  [Next](kt11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

# 9. Mountain-Goat Hunter.

Tradition of the <u>L</u>ê'<u>L</u>E<u>g</u>êd, a clan of the ?wâlas
Kwâ'g\*û~~l~~.

(*Dictated by Yâ'gô<u>L</u>as*, 1900)

Rolling-down saw (some) mountain-goats. "Let me go up to the
mountain-goats walking about on the rocks" (he said).--"Where are they?"
said his wife. "They are there at L!EsElê'k<sup>u</sup>."--"Don't talk
that way, else you might fall off (from the mountain). Don't talk that
way, else you might fall off."--"I do not fall off."--"Then go on," said
his wife. He had four wives. Then Rolling-down went up. He arrived and
hid. Then he took out his charm. He put the dried frog on the rock. Then
the mountain-goats could not walk. They just became like the frog, and
just lay there. Then he went and hid himself. He just sat by the side of
a rock and shot with his arrows. He hit the chest (of a mountain-goat),
then he also shot its neck.

He did not know that he was being pursued by a grisly bear. What should
it be? It was standing there, and began to growl. "Do not say so,
friend. I am your friend." Then the grisly bear sat down on the rock and
listened to the word of Rolling-down. Then another grisly bear arose and
began to growl. The bear went right up to take hold of him. He took the
man by the shoulder and threw him upward. Behold! there were many grisly
bears. They threw the man to one another while they were going up with
him to the top of the mountain. Then they came to a fine place in the
woods, and the man was thrown about by the grisly bears. His limbs were
torn to pieces. His fingers and his toes, and the bones of the man, were
scattered on the ground. Then the grisly bears left and went home, and
the man was dead.

Then one of the grisly bears felt badly, "Why did

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

you do so? Did you not hear what our dead friend said?"--"Not I," said,
on his part, another one,--the one who had killed the man. "What do you
think?" said, on his part, the one. "Don't you love our friend? Indeed,
I feel sad on account of our friend. Let us try to revive him. Go on to
Head-Wolf and Head-Runner, that all our friends may come, all the
animals."

Then many animals came. They assembled. They were going to the place
where the man had been killed, and sat on the ground. Then the bones of
the man were gathered up, and were pushed together. Some of the bones
had disappeared. Then the Ermine and the Mouse were sent, because they
had a good scent. They searched for the toes of the man. The ermine
found the toes of the man, and gave them to the supernatural person.
Then he put them on his feet, and the man was sprinkled with the water
of life. Then the man sat up on the ground and revived. To no purpose he
rubbed his eyes. He thought that he had only slept. Then he discovered
the many animals sitting there. "Now you are alive, friend. I killed you
by accident. Don't do it again, \["It had gone bad with you. That
happens only once"\] that you come up here, although you may know that
we were laying for the mountain-goats. That is called mountain-goat
hunting. For that reason our friend acted in this way. Now you are
alive. That was the reason he tried his supernatural powers. Now you
shall do as I do. Now your supernatural treasure will be this water of
life, and this means of throwing."

Then he sang his sacred song in the night, and his tribe heard it.
"Don't sleep, for somebody is singing his sacred song. It may be our
chief" He came to the other side of the village, singing his sacred
song. The house site was called Middle-of-Beach. Day had not come

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

yet when the tribe arose and went bathing. Then the sound was heard on
the other side. Then his tribe went across and tried to catch him. From
time to time he just flew away. For four days they tried to do so. Then
he was caught by G\*â'usd<u>ê</u>s. He was snared. (Time) was beaten for
him by his tribe. Then he threw (his supernatural power) at his tribe,
and his tribe groaned in the house. He did so to try to tease his tribe.
He had for children the princesses of chiefs. His tribe only worked for
him. His wives only went out and purified themselves. Then his tribe
planned that he should die. Their anger rose quickly when he teased
them. He was made to drink blood, menstrual blood of a woman. Then he
became sick; then he was given medicine by the one side of his tribe
(either father's or mother's family). Then he was bewitched that
something should happen to him quickly. It was not one year, and he lay
sick. Then he died when summer came. Then his tribe revived: they were
no longer afraid. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Wî'wag\*êsawê?](kt11.md)
