[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt12)  [Next](kt14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 12. The Mink Legend.

Mink and the Sun.

(

Dictated by MalE'd, a Kwâ'g\*û~~l~~, 1893.)

The future mother of Born-to-be-the-Sun was weaving wool, facing the
rear of the house. Then the sun was in the sky, and--the sun was shining
through the holes in the house; and the rays struck her back while she
sat facing the rear of the house, on her bed. Thus she became pregnant.
There was no husband of this woman. She gave birth, and
Born-to-be-the-Sun (Mink) became a child. Therefore it had immediately
the name Born-to-be-the-Sun, because it was known that its mother became
pregnant by the sun shining on her back.

Then Born-to-be-the-Sun was fighting with his friend Bluebird. Then
Bluebird made fun of Born-to-be-the-Sun because he had no father. Then
Born-to-be-the-Sun cried in the house to his mother, telling his mother
that he was called an orphan because he had no father. Therefore his
mother said to him that his father was the Sun.

Immediately Born-to-be-the-Sun said he would go and visit his father.
Then his mother made a request of the uncle of Born-to-be-the-Sun: "Make
arrows for this child, that he may go and see his father." He made four
arrows for him. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun shot one of the arrows upward.
It is said it struck our sky. Then he shot another one upward. It struck
the nock of the one that he had shot upward first; then again another
one, and it hit the end of his arrow. His arrows came down, sticking
together. Then he shot the last one, and it hit

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the end of the one he had shot before. They came to the ground.

Then the mother of Born-to-be-the-Sun took the end of the arrows and
shook them, and they became a rope. Then she cautioned her child,
(saying,) "Don't be foolish at the place where you are going." Thus
Born-to-be-the-Sun was told by his mother. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun
climbed the rope, going upward. He went to visit his father. He arrived,
and went through to the upper side of the sky.

Then Born-to-be-the-Sun sat on the ground next to his father's house.
Then Born-to-be-the-Sun was seen by a boy. Then he was asked by the boy,
"Why are you sitting there?"--"I came to see my father." Then the boy
entered, and reported to the chief. "This boy sitting on the ground near
the house comes to see his father." --"Ah, ah, ah! indeed! I obtained
him by shining through. Go ask him if he will come in."

Then the boy went out and called Born-to-be-the-Sun. Born-to-be-the-Sun
entered and sat down. Immediately he was taken care of by his father.
"Thank you, child, that you will change feet with me. I have tried not
to be tired from walking to and fro every day. Now you shall go, child."
Thus said the chief to his son.

Then he was cautioned by his father. "Don't walk fast where you are
walking along. Don't look right down to those below us, else you will do
mischief." Then he dressed him up with his ear-ornaments. Then he put on
his mask. Then he walked on the trail that was pointed out. He walked
along. "My dear master, don't sweep too much when you are walking along.
Don't show yourself \[through\] entirely when you are peeping through."
Then he started in the morning. He passed noon. Then in the afternoon
the sun was warm. Then he desired to

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

peep through. He swept away his aunts (the clouds). Already this world
began to burn. There was noise of the cracking of mountains, and the sea
began to boil. The trees of the mountains caught fire. Therefore there
are no good trees on the mountains, and therefore the rocks are cracked.

That was the reason of the fury of Born-to-be-the-Sun's father. The
chief pursued his child. He reached him when the sun was not low. Then
the clothing of Born-to-be-the-Sun was taken away. "Is that what I told
you? You have come only once." Born-to-be-the-Sun was just taken by the
neck by his father, and was thrown through the hole. Born-to-be-the-Sun
came down. A canoe was paddling along, and came right to
Born-to-be-the-Sun. "Is this our chief, Born-to-be-the-Sun, floating
about?" Then he raised his head on the water when they touched him with
the paddle. Born-to-be-the-Sun awoke and puffed. "Indeed, I have been
asleep on the water a long time.\` He went ashore and went inland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mink marries Kelp](kt14)
