[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt18)  [Next](kt20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mink pretends to die.

(Dictated by Yâ'<u>g</u>ô<u>L</u>as, a ?nE'm<u>g</u>ês, 1900.)

"Ananâ', ananâ'! I am dying in the house. Ananâ' ananâ'! Go to our tribe
and let them come, that we may deliberate how I shall be when I come to
an end." Then the tribe started. "Come, let us go and talk about the way
our chief is going to be. Indeed, he is getting worse." The tribe came
and sat down in the house. "Ananâ', ananâ'! Welcome! Is not this the
reason that I told you to come,--about the way in which I shall

137

be? Ananâ', ananâ'!"--"This is very important," said, on their part, his
tribe. "How shall our chief be? Don't be silent in regard to the way our
chief is going to be. Let us set up (the grave-box of) our chief!
Ananâ', ananâ'!--"Don't do that, else it will be said that I am a burl
on a tree."--"This is important. What shall we do with our chief?"--"Let
him be buried!"--"Ananâ', ananâ'!" he said, on his part. "Don't do that,
else it will be said that I look like a baking-oven."--"This is
important," they said, on their part. How shall we do this,"--"Let us
put him in a cave!"--"Ananâ', ananâ'! Don't do that, else it will be
said I look like a box-cover."--"This is important. What shall we do
with our chief? Let us put him on an island."--"Ananâ', ananâ'! Go
ahead, only don't let me be nailed down."

Then he died. He at once wished to die when it was said that he should
be on the island. Then his tribe buried him. They made a house for him,
and just put the box inside. Now, it was four days, when the women went
picking berries. They came paddling alongside the island. "This is the
grave-place of our chief," said, on their part, the women, crying
together, being sad on account of their dead chief. Then they saw
something jumping up on the rocks, carrying sea-eggs in a blanket. "Oh!
is not that Born-to-be-the-Sun going up from the beach"--"Hamamai'!" he
said, on his part. "I obtained supernatural power. Let Mother buy a mask
and rattle. I have supernatural power. I came to life again," said
Born-to-be-the-Sun. He just lied when he said he was dying. Behold! he
said that he would be on the island because there were many sea-eggs. He
just thought that he would be undisturbed eating his sea-eggs. His
mother

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

was brought. "I have supernatural power, Mother, because I came to
life."--"Thank you! I am alive on account of your ways, child." Then
they went to the woods and beat time for Born-to-be-the-Sun. He had a
mask on his forehead, and carried a rattle. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mink pretends to die (Another Version)](kt20)
