[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt22)  [Next](kt24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mink plays with Seal.

(Dictated by Yâ'<u>g</u>ô<u>L</u>as, a ?nE'm<u>g</u>ês, 1900.)

Then he said he would play with Young-Seal. "Where will you play?"--"We
will play rolling."--"Take care of your younger brother, else you might
cause an accident to your younger brother."--"I won't hurt him. He will
only look on." Then he started to go. He would play rolling.
Born-to-be-the-Sun rolled down the hill. 'Thus we will do," he said to
Young-Seal. "We will race, Young-Seal and Born-to-be-the-Sun rolled down
again and again. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun sat down. He thought that he
would pretend to hurt Young-Seal by accident. He was greedy for him. He
thought he would like to eat him. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun said, "Let us
go home." Thus he said to Young-Seal. "Let us come later on and play
to-morrow. We will always play here." Then Born-to-be-the-Sun borrowed
the fish-knife of Mother.

149

\[paragraph continues\] "Let me borrow your fish-knife, Mother."--"What
are you going to do with it?"--"I shall cut the ends of our spears,
(mine) and Young-Seal's."--"Take good care, else you might hurt your
younger brother by accident. You have no sense, you might hurt him."
won't do anything. I will not hurt him, for who would be my
play-fellow"'

Then Born-to-be-the-Sun started, and cut huckleberry-bushes, and
whittled their ends. Then he went to the place where he and Young-Seal
used to play. He put the whittled sticks into the ground. Then he went
home to call Young-Seal. "Let us go again to the place where we rolled
down."--"Let us go," he said. Then they started and went to their
play-ground. "We will race," said Born-to-be-the-Sun to Young-Seal. Then
they rolled, and went on as fast as they could. Young-Seal went very
fast. Then they went up again. Go a little farther, to this good place,"
said Born-to-be-the-Sun to Young-Seal. But he wished that he would go
right to the whittled sticks. Then he rolled down, and Young-Seal hit
the whittled sticks. The whittled sticks went just through Young-Seal,
and he could not get off. He was only struck on the head by
Born-to-be-the-Sun. "That was my plan, for I wished you might die. I
desired to eat you." Then he lifted him on his shoulder and hid
Young-Seal. He was dead. "Do let me borrow your fish-knife,
Mother."--"What are you going to do with it?" she said again. "We want
to cut the ends of our spears."--"You may have done that, but you could
not have done it wisely. You may have hurt your friend."--"If I had done
so, I should not have done right."

Then Mother suspected that her child had planned against Young-Seal.
Then she gave Born-to-be-the-Sun the fish-knife. Born-to-be-the-Sun
started and made a fire

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

on the ground to singe Young-Seal. After he had done so, he split him
and cut him to pieces. Then he carved Young-Seal. He cooked him, and he
was done. Then he ate him. He ate his younger brother. Then he went
home. "Where is your younger brother?" said Mother, on her part. "Is he
not playing?"--"You speak faintly. Evidently you have killed your
younger brother. Your face is quite full of fat."--"It would not be
right if I had done so, if I should really have done so and hurt him who
is rightly called my brother. He may have just gone somewhere. He said
before that he had been a long time at the place where he has
gone."--"Oh, I know you killed your younger brother," said Mother. "Ê!
you funny fellow! Behold! I really killed him."--"Why did you do that?"
said Mother.--"Was I not greedy for him because he was very fat?
Therefore I killed him secretly."--"You have no sense," said Mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mink imitates his Hosts](kt24.md)
