[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt24)  [Next](kt26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mink goes to make War with his Friend Land-Otter

(Dictated by MalE'd, a Kwâ'g\*u~~l~~, 1893.)

"Let us go and make war, friend," said Born-to-be-the-Sun to Land-Otter.
"Whom shall we make war against, friend?" said, on his part, Land-Otter
to Born-to-be-the-Sun. "Those are the ones whom we will take, on the
beach, the Innumerable-Ones." Then they started in the morning. If was
fogy. They paddled to an island. "Ê, ê, ê, ê!" said Born-to-be-the-Sun.
"Back-water! My nose-ornament fell into the water." Then his friend
tried to back-water. Born-to-be-the-Sun stood up in the canoe and dived.
He was not under water long when he came up carrying sea-eggs in the
fold of his blanket. Then he ate them. He only lied when he said that
his nose ornament fell into the water. What he meant was, that he had
seen the sea-eggs. Give me some, friend," said his friend Land-Otter.
"Don't," said Born-to-be-the-Sun. "Do those who war here and there give
to each other? Just go, friend," said Born-to-be-the-Sun to his friend
Land-Otter.

Then Land-Otter dived. He came up again, and Land-Otter did not get
anything. "How did you do it, friend?" said Land-Otter, questioning his
friend. "Put your face up and pull your knees up when you come up." Then
Land-Otter dived, and Born-to-be-the-Sun jumped up in the canoe,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

went to the bow of the canoe, and took what murdered by itself
Land-Otter. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun was standing in the canoe, ready for
his friend to come up lying on his back. When his face came up,
Born-to-be-the-Sun speared his friend just over the breast-bone. Then
his friend was dead. He just pushed his friend into the water.

Then Born-to-be-the-Sun went ashore. He went out of the canoe and sat
down on the beach. He pulled out his musk-bag and transformed it into a
man, who was sitting there, small, on the beach. Then he spoke to his
past Musk-Bag. "To what tribe do you belong, slave?" Thus said
Born-to-be-the-Sun. "I am the Musk-Bag of Born-to-be-the-Sun," \[only\]
said the child. "Don't say that, slave," said Born-to-be-the-Sun. "You
shall say, when you are asked, 'I am the prince of the
Innumerable-Ones.'" Then he went home. The Musk-Bag was sitting in the
bow of the canoe. He said that he had taken him in war. Then he wailed
for his past friend, "Ts!anâ'nanâ'! My friend died by going behind the
houses, ts!anâ'nanâ'! My friend died by going in front of the houses,
ts!anâ'nanâ'!"--"Our chief says something important on the water," said
his tribe. Then he went ashore. Born-to-be-the-Sun went out of the
canoe. Then he pulled out of the canoe the slave he had gotten. The
slave was questioned. "To what tribe do you belong, slave?" Thus was
said by the tribe of Born-to-be-the-Sun. "I am the musk-bag, of
Born-to-be-the-Sun," \[only\] said the slave. Then he was made fun of.
They just threw at each other the musk-bag of Born-to-be-the-Sun; and
Born-to-be-the-Sun's sister sang for him, "Try to sit on it! Try to sit
on his musk-bag!" Then Born-to-be-the-Sun tried to sit on his musk-bag,
and he caught it. He put it back in its place.

Then he entered the house. Then the wife of the dead

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

friend came in. She was dressed well, and inquired what had killed her
dead husband. "Don't!" said Born-to-be-the-Sun. "Go to your house. Let
me point out what killed my dead friend. Just stop up all the holes in
your house." Then the woman went home. Immediately she stopped up the
holes. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun entered her house. "That is what killed
my past friend," he said, pointing to her forehead. He went down
pointing at the body of the woman. "Lean back, that I may point out all
that killed my friend. Open your legs! That is what killed my friend."
There was no place on the woman's groins that he did not point at. Then
he climbed on Sawbill-Duck-Woman. He only wanted to cohabit with
Sawbill-Duck-Woman. "I am the one who did it to my dead friend." That is
the end. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[161:1](kt25.htm#fr_3.md) For the story of Mink and
the Wolves, see F. Boas, The Social Organization and the Secret
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians (Annual Report of the U. S. National
Museum for 1895, p. 725).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. The Deer and his Son.](kt26.md)
