[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt26)  [Next](kt28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 14. Great-Inventor.

(

Dictated by MalE'd, a Kwâ'g\*u~~l~~, 1893.)

The myth people were hard up for water. They only drank the juice of
roots. Then Great-Inventor went to get water for his tribe. He knew that
only one woman, living at Bull Harbor, had water. Then he got ready to
go to Bull Harbor. He arrived at Bull Harbor. She was warming her back.
He went in, and the woman was asleep. Then he took some dung and put it
behind the woman. Then Great-Inventor pushed her. "Don't sleep," he said
to the woman. "Evidently your house is soiled. I want to have a drink
from you." Thus said Great-Inventor to the woman. "Look at my mouth: it
is all dry, for I desire to drink."--"Go on, drink there," said the
woman, on her part, to Great-Inventor. Then Great-Inventor drank water.
He had his mouth in the water for a long time. Then the woman spoke,
"Don't, else I shall have nothing to drink." Then Great-Inventor looked
up and said, "I have not drunk yet. Look at my mouth! it is just dusty."
It is said that Great-Inventor had a bladder into which the water was
poured. "You

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

are awful," said the woman to Great-Inventor. "You are evidently a great
drinker."--"Then let me talk about your house being soiled," said
Great-Inventor. "Then go on, drink!" Great-Inventor was told. Then he
drank again, and his sea-lion bladder was full. Then the water of the
woman was at an end.

He went to the beach and went aboard his folding paddle-side canoe. Then
he crossed and went to the inland side (Vancouver Island). Then he
urinated and thus made the rivers. Where he sprinkled water, there were
small rivers. He went around the world making rivers. After four days he
had finished.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Then he returned to Crooked-Beach. Immediately he invited his tribe in.
Then he talked about the rivers he had made. Then he told his tribe that
he would get a wife from Salmon for the rivers. He got ready, with his
tribe, to get a wife from Salmon. Day came, and they started in the
canoes. When the canoes were loaded, his whole tribe went aboard the
folding canoe. Then they steered southward. "Don't let us be this way,"
said his tribe. "It is said that below is the place to paddle. There is
no storm there." Then (the canoe) went right down. It was under the sea,
and went along paddling underneath. Then he saw the color of the smoke
of Salmon. They carried up the canoe, and Great-Inventor pushed back the
trees. One tree stood alone on the ground. Then Great-Inventor whitened
its trunk. Very early in the morning the slave of Salmon came paddling
along the beach. Then Great-Inventor went into the tree. The slave
caught sight of it, and went right out of the canoe, going up to it.
Then he drove his wedge into the bottom of the tree, and Great-Inventor
bit off the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

point of the wedge,--the wedge that had never been blunted since Salmon
first became a man in the world. The slave cried on account of his
wedge. Then Great-Inventor came out of the opposite side of the tree.
"Why do you cry?" said Great-Inventor, on his part, to the slave. "On
account of this my broken wedge, I shall be struck by my master."--"Give
it to me," said Great-Inventor. Then the slave gave it to him, and
Great-Inventor took it and put it into his mouth. "Look at it, slave,"
said Great-Inventor to him. "How was its tip? Was it not this
way?"--"That is the way it was," said, on his part, the slave.

Then Great-Inventor asked the slave, "Has not the chief of Salmon a
child? Does not the child of Salmon take walks?"--"The princess of
Salmon comes first to meet me. She will try to carry on her shoulder the
heart of the fire-wood that I get." Then Great-Inventor told the slave
that he wished to get a wife from Salmon. "Only take care!" was said to
Great-Inventor by the slave. "Take this stone when you first cohabit
with her. Her crotch is always biting." Then Great-Inventor pushed down
the tree. The alder broke up on the ground. Then Great-Inventor wedged
it to pieces. He took care of its heart, for he wanted to go and hide in
it. Then the wood was taken aboard. The tribe of Great-Inventor came and
helped (with) the loading. When all the wood was aboard, the heart of
the tree was put on top, and Great-Inventor hid inside. Great-Inventor
left word with his tribe that they should go at daybreak. Then the one
who had gone to get fire-wood arrived at the beach, and the princess of
Salmon came to meet him who had gone for fire-wood. She waded to meet
him, and took the top piece of the wood that was lying there, in which
Great-Inventor was hiding. Right away he cohabited with her.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She did not get ashore, when the girl threw the
wood down on the beach. "Don't handle it roughly," the slave said to the
girl. Then the girl carried it again in her arms in front of her body.
Again Great-Inventor cohabited with her. Then she came to her house. The
child went right to the rear of the house with the wood, to her room.
Then at once Great-Inventor came out of it and took the girl for his
wife. It is said that Great-Inventor held in his mouth gum of the
white-pine. Immediately, the next day, the girl became pregnant.

In the morning the tribe of Great-Inventor came ashore. "Don't stay
thus, friend," was said to the girl. "Come to the fire with the one who
is lying down with you." Then the girl said to Great-Inventor, "Take
care! this is that with which they try to kill those who come from time
to time to us. It is the settee of my father. Squid-bones are in the
settee." Then Great-Inventor put a sandstone on his back. He just met
his tribe when they were coming into the house, and Great-Inventor came
out of the room. "Don't be that way," said Salmon to his wife, "but give
our son-in-law to eat." She just sent the younger sisters of
Great-Inventor's wife to the beach to play in the water. Then the
children became salmon. They became sockeye salmon. They were cut
quickly, and were roasted. Then the woman, the mother-in-law of
Great-Inventor, spoke. "Please gather up this clothing of these younger
sisters and go and throw it into the water."

Then all that was roasted was placed before them. Great-Inventor pulled
out the collar-bone of the sockeye and pushed it behind his ear. After
they had eaten, the bones were gathered and were thrown into the water.
Immediately the salmon jumped and came to life. Only one of them had no
blanket-pin.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

Then Great-Inventor spoke, "Don't let your parents be that way. It is
bad that they are too stout. Let us cut them. They will not die. Look! I
will cut my younger brother, Duck." Then Great-Inventor called Duck.
"Take care!" was said to the female duck. "Just rise from under your
younger brother when he is dead." Then Great-Inventor cut open the duck.
As soon as all the intestines were taken out, the duck was covered over.
Then the female duck stood up from under the cover. Then they were told
that he (the duck) had come to life. Then Salmon and his wife arose and
lay down on their backs on the board on which the duck had been cut up.
Immediately Great-Inventor cut up Salmon and his wife. "Don't touch them
for four days," said Great-Inventor to the tribe of Salmon. "Let us get
ready and go home." Then his crew went aboard, and Great-Inventor
carried his wife aboard in his arms. Then the side-paddles paddled.

The various kinds of Salmon also went aboard their canoes to follow
their chieftainess. The canoe of Great-Inventor just waited from time to
time for the canoes of the Salmon, for he wished to see the face of the
mountains when doing his work. "Do let me go ahead," said Deer. "Don't!
we must see the face of our land." Then Great-Inventor discovered the
land. "Go ahead, Deer!" said Great-Inventor. Then Deer arose in the
canoe, and jumped from one canoe of the salmon to another, and all the
canoes of the salmon capsized. Then the various kinds of salmon began to
jump, and Great-Inventor arose in his canoe and pointed to the rivers.
"You will go that way," said Great-Inventor, calling the names of the
rivers. Therefore salmon go to the rivers made by Great-Inventor. That
is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X\*â'nElku](kt28)
