[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt28)  [Next](kt30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 16. The Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> Legend. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

(Dictated by Q!ô'mg\*ilis, a ?naqE'mg\*ilisala, 1894)

### Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> and his Brother Only-One. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5)

Heron had for his wife Woodpecker-Woman. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>
and Only-One came, pretending to be the children

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

of Heron. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> came from above. He came to
see this world. Then Heron took cedar-wood (to make) a salmon-weir in
the river. Then he looked after his salmon-weir. One salmon was in his
weir. Heron said that he was hungry. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> and
Only-One were starving. Then Woodpecker-Woman roasted (the salmon). Then
it was roasted, and she tried out (the oil). They ate the salmon
quickly. They ate all the salmon. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> had
nothing. He was dying of hunger. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> and
Only-One came, and Heron said to his children,
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> and Only-One, "Oh, my dear ones, behold!
you must run away on account of what I have seen."

Then they went to sleep. Day came, and (Heron) looked at his
salmon-weir. Then there were two (salmon) in the salmon-weir. Heron said
that he was hungry. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> and Only-One were
starving. Then (Heron) cooked it quickly, roasted it, and ate it. He ate
both salmon. Then (Heron) rubbed some of the salmon-flesh on the head of
the old woman. "Come," said the old woman to
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>, "look at this!" Then
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> looked at it, and he discovered
salmon-meat on the head of the old woman.
Rooted-to-the-Floor-of-the-House was the name of the old woman.

"What is this meat?" said Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> to the old
woman. Then the old woman spoke. "That is what makes you all
starve,--this, what he obtains whenever he goes, and what he eats
quickly." Thus said the mother of Heron.

Then (Heron) looked again after his salmon-weir, and four salmon were
caught. Again he said, "Go roast it." Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>
and Only-One did not know (about it). They were hungry. They just went
into the corner of the house, and hid in the house. Heron came and
quickly roasted the four salmon. Then the four salmon were

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

roasted, and he ate. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> strung his bow
and shot Heron and Woodpecker- Woman, and they were dead. Then
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took Heron and tore him to pieces, and
threw the pieces of the dead Heron about. "You shall be the herons of
later tribes," said Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Then Heron began to
fly. "Qwâ, qwâ, qwâ!" said the dead Heron, and became a bird. Then he
did the same to his dead stepmother, Woodpecker-Woman. "You shall be the
woodpecker." Thus said Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Then she began
to fly and began to peck wood. That was the end. Then the two--Heron and
Woodpecker-Woman--became birds. Then he began to dig out the woman
rooted to the floor, the mother of Heron. (The root) only became thicker
below. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> gave up trying to dig out
the root. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[187:1](kt29.htm#fr_4) The dialect of the
?naqE'mg\*ilisala and of the La'Lasiqwala differ somewhat from that of
the more southern Kwakiutl tribes. It seems that at the present time the
Kwakiutl dialect is considered more "fashionable," and for this reason a
number of Kwakiutl expressions have crept into the text as here told.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[187:2](kt29.htm#fr_5) See publications of the
Jesup North pacific Expedition, Vol. X, p. 185.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>, and Ts!â'ts!ô](kt30)
