[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt33)  [Next](kt35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> marries the Daughter of Gwâ'?nâlâlis. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)

He arrived at Gwâ'?nâlâlis. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>
pretended to be an old man. He sat down by a water. "Wash, wash, child
of Gwâ'?nâlâlis!" (he thought). Then the children of Gwâ'?nâlâlis came.
They were four girls. They saw Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Then one
of the children of Gwâ'?nâlâlis said, "A nice little one is sitting on
the beach. He shall be my slave." Thus said the oldest child of
Gwâ'?nâlâlis. She took water and washed herself. Then she called
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. "Come, wash my back," said the oldest
child of Gwâ'?nâlâlis. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> washed the
back of the girl. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took gum and put
it on his first-finger. Then he touched with his first-finger the womb
of the child of Gwâ'?nâlâlis. He touched three of them from behind with
his finger, but he did not want to touch the one. "Why is this one so
daring? Do I know where you come from?"--"You will have her for your
wife," said Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> (referring) to the youngest
child of Gwâ'?nâlâlis. Then he married the child of Gwâ'?nâlâlis <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md). Then the older sisters of the wife of
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> became pregnant. Then the wife of
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> became pregnant, and she had a child.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Then Gwâ'?nâlâlis spoke. "Let us go and split boards." Thus said
Gwâ'?nâlâlis. Then they paddled. They saw what was to be split. Then
Gwâ'?nâlâlis drove in wedges, and the cedar-tree opened. Then the hammer
dropped. It fell into the cedar-tree. "Come get our hammer. It dropped
in," (said Gwâ'?nâlâlis). Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took the
hammer. Gwâ'?nâlâlis knocked out (the spreading sticks. The tree)
clapped together, and blood came out, and
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> was dead. Then he saw the blood of
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. He took the wedge and put it into the
wedge-bag. "Serves you right! You came to make me ashamed." Gwâ'?nâlâlis
started, carrying his wedge-bag. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>,
came, carrying the hammer. "Why are you going away?" said
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Gwâ'?nâlâlis said, "Come, let us go and
do our work!" Gwâ'?nâlâlis came and began to drive in his wedges. Then
the cedar tree opened. It was spread out. Then the hammer dropped in.
"Come get it! My hammer dropped in." Then
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> went into the cedar and got it, and
Gwâ'?nâlâlis knocked out the spreading-stick of the cedar tree. It
clapped together, and blood came out. "Serves you right! You came to
make me ashamed. You did not see what I was going to do to you."
Gwâ'?nâlâlis started. "Don't go away!" said
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. "I am bringing your hammer."--"Oh, that
is good, my dear!" said Gwâ'?nâlâlis. "I thought you were dead." Then
they finished their work and paddled home.

Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> threw rotten wood into the water.
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> said to the rotten wood, "You shall
become dolphins." Then the rotten wood began to jump and became
dolphins. They came and jumped at the head of Gwâ'?nâlâlis. Then his
face began to swell. His eyes could not be seen because he was swollen.
That was done by the dolphins. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took
salmon

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

berries, and put the berries into a bucket. Then he paddled, going home.
He took the salmon-berries and gave them to his mother-in-law \[his
parent-in-law; namely, his woman parent-in-law\] to eat. Then
Gwâ'?nâlâlis was hurt.

Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> lay down in the house. "Why are you
downhearted?" said the wife of Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>; and
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> spoke, and said, "The reason that I am
downhearted is that Only-One is probably dead." Thus said
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Then Gwâ'?nâlâlis spoke. "Go and see
him," Gwâ'?nâlâlis said to his child, "only take your chamber-vessel."
Thus said Gwâ'?nâlâlis to his child, the wife of
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>. Then he started to see his younger
brother. Now Only-One was dead. Then Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>
cried on account of his younger brother, when he was dead. The flesh of
Only-One was all gone. There were only bones. Then the wife of
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took her chamber-vessel and sprinkled
Only-One. He came to life. "Hë!" said Only-One, "I have been asleep for
a long time." Thus said Only-One. "You did not sleep," said
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> to his younger brother Only-One, "you
were dead."

Then Lord Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> spoke. I am going to start
again. I have seen much that is wrong, that I will set right," That is
the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[195:1](kt34.htm#fr_10.md) See Publications of the
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. X, pp. 196 et seq.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[195:2](kt34.htm#fr_11.md) "That means I will have
you for my wife," thought Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> in regard to
the youngest daughter of Gwâ'?nâlâlis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> meets Shaman](kt35.md)
