[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt35)  [Next](kt37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

### Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> revives the Ancestors of the Koskimo. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

He saw a village. There was no smoke of the village. Only one house had
smoke. He saw one child sitting in the house.
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> spoke. "Where are \[your\] the other
ones?" Thus said Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> to the child. "They
were eaten by this sea-monster."--"Drink!"--"No, else I shall die when
all this water is gone. That is all I live on."
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> took the water. He gave it to him, and
the child drank. Winter-Dance-of-the-World was his name.
Winter-Dance-of-the-World drank the water. "Go and draw some
water."--"No, else I'll die."--"Go put this belt on!" Then he put the
belt on. Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> gave his belt to the child. He
went and carried the bucket. He was girded with the snake-back. Then he
was devoured by the sea-monster. He was swallowed. Then
Q!â'nêqi?la<u>x</u><sup>u</sup> spoke. "Snake in belly, snake in belly,
snake in belly, snake in belly!" Then (the monster) began to vomit. The
child that had been dead came out among its tribe. Then he picked up the
bones and put them together. They were all together. Then he took the
water of life to them, and they came to life. All the many men came to
life. Then the many men started. Some had short legs. Then he finished.
These are the Koskimo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[201:1](kt36.htm#fr_13.md) See Publications of the
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. X, p. 217.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin of the Deer](kt37.md)
