[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt50)  [Next](kt52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ô'?mâ~~l~~ marries the Daughter of the Killer-Whale

Then he considered what to do \[looked at his heart\]. Then he made up
his mind. He was going to make love to the wife of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. He paddled in his folding canoe. All his
younger brothers were in the canoe. They paddled, and hid near the house
of

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Master-of-Salmon. (He thought,) "Come to get
fire-wood, come to get fire-wood, come to get fire-wood, slave of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World!" He came paddling along, looking for
fire-wood. Then he discovered fire-wood. "Where do you look for it?"
(said) the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, speaking to nobody.
He went ashore and took his wedges and split the wood. Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~
was inside of that tree. The slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World
split the wood. Then the wedge jumped out. The wedge was spoiled. He
looked at his wedge. Behold! the point was bitten off by Ô'?mâ~~l~~.
"Take it out, take it out, take it out!" he said.

(The slave) took another wedge and split wood. Then his wedge was
spoiled again. Then that slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World began to
cry, "Haai'! I am in for it! This wedge of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World, that has never been blunted since first
daylight appeared in our world, is spoiled. Surely I am in for it. I am
going to be struck by Killing-at-North-End-of-World on account of his
wedge here." Now all his four wedges were spoiled. Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ came
out and spoke. "O slave!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~, "why are you crying," Thus he
said to him. "I am crying on account of this wedge of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Surely I am in for it. I am going to be
struck by him on account of this wedge."--"Why do you cry? Come, and let
me put my tongue at its end!" Then he gave it to Ô'?mâ~~l~~, who put the
point, on to the wedge, and it was whole. "Why don't you look at the
heart of the wood \[eye\]?" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~ to the slave of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he wedged the heart \[eye\] of the
fire-wood. Then it fell. It just fell to pieces. Then he loaded his
canoe. "O slave!" said he to the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World,
"does not the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

sometimes meet you?"--"She meets me sometimes," said the slave of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. They paddled. Then he went into the piece
of fire-wood that was lying crosswise on top of the wood. (The slave)
paddled. He landed, and the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World came
and took the fire-wood. She was not yet out of the sea when Ô'?mâ~~l~~
embraced the woman. Then she threw down (the wood) and stared at it.
"Take it up, take it up, take it up!" (thought Ô'?mâ~~l~~.) Then she
took the wood up in her arms, and Ô'?mâ~~l~~ embraced her; but she did
not throw it down, although he had embraced her. She entered the house.
Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ came out and lay down with the woman, the wife of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he caught sight of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Behold! he was coming around the point,
(his canoe) filled with seals. Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ said, "Get ready. Go on,
and see where you go." Then he arose and went into the post of the
house. Then Killing-at-North-End-of-World entered. There were four of
them. They were stout. Then Killing-at-North-End-of-World caught sight
of Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Why are you in this way here in the house?" said
Killing-at-North-End-of-World to Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Come, come out!" Then
Ô'?mâ~~l~~ came out of the post and sat clown on the floor. Then
Ô'?mâ~~l~~ spoke, and said, "Why are you this way?" Thus said Ô'?mâ~~l~~
to Killing-at-North-End-of-World. "You are too stout."--"We are that
way."--"Don't be that way! Go to my younger brothers." Thus said
Ô'?mâ~~l~~.

Then his younger brothers were called, and they came. They jumped into
the house. "How pretty they are!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "All my younger
brothers are this way." Thus said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then Buffle-Head-Duck came
into the house. He did not walk rightly. He was stout. "Wa, wa, wa; wa,
wa, wa!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "He is the only one

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

who has not been cut open." Thus said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Come, brother!" said
Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Buffle-Head-Duck came and lay down on his back. Then he was
cut open, and his stomach was thrown away. They covered him when he was
dead. Harlequin-Duck was in hiding, and he jumped out. Then
Buffle-Head-Duck was really dead, but Harlequin-Duck pretended to be he.
Harlequin-Duck lifted the cover and jumped out. That took a short time.
It was not long.

"Go on, take pity on us!" said Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he
lay down on his back, and he was cut open with a knife. He was dead, and
also another one, and again another one, and still another one. Then
(Ô'?mâ~~l~~) took up his past wife, the daughter of Master-of-Salmon,
and took her aboard his canoe and paddled away. Thus he obtained the
wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, and Killing-at-North-End-of-World
was dead. Then Master-of-Salmon and his tribe launched their canoes and
paddled after Ô'?mâ~~l~~.

Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ nearly reached the shore. "Go on, paddle!" Ô'?mâ~~l~~
was told. Then he paddled with his one-day paddle. Then they went far
away over the water. Then he sat down again with the past wife of
Killing-at-North-End-of-World, the daughter of Master-of-Salmon. Then
the salmon and Ô'?mâ~~l~~ caught sight of these mountains. Ô'?mâ~~l~~
arose and pointed about. Then he turned to the water and let the salmon
go (to the rivers).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ô'?mâ~~l~~ gets the Soil](kt52)
