[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt62)  [Next](kt64.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

# 21. Ô'?meä~~l~~ (Chief-of-the-Ancients).

Tradition of the L!a'L!asiqwEla.

(*Recorded by George Hunt*.)

Chief-of-the-Ancients lived at a pretty place named Dzê'<u>g</u>Em, at
one end of Dancing-Place-Beach, with his younger brothers, all the myth
people; that is, the birds and plants. Then Chief-of-the-Ancients called
his younger brothers,--Canoe-Calking, Staying-in-Canoe, and
Going-from-One-End-of-the-World-to-the-Other, and also Raccoon; and also
his younger sisters,--Spoon-bringing-Woman, Winter-Dance-Woman, the
Crow.

As soon as all the tribes were in his house, Chief-of-the-Ancients
spoke, and said, "Oh, younger brothers! listen to what I am going to say
to you. I wish that my younger brothers have a dance in the house one of
these days. Now, you all shall paint yourselves, and you shall wear
masks." Thus he said. As soon as Chief-of-the-Ancients had finished
speaking, his younger brother Canoe-Calking also spoke, and said, "O
brothers! let us begin at one end and call our tribes of this world that
they come in and be painted by our elder brother,
Chief-of-the-Ancients." Thus he said. Immediately those who had been
seated went out. They all put on their belts, and they all took poles as
canes, for indeed all the myth people in the village were winter
dancers. As soon as those who were going to call all the myth people had
gone out, Chief-of-the-Ancients also went out of his house, and went
down to the beach, to the place where his Folding-Canoe was. Then he
took a drift-log and put it down on the beach on one side of the bow of
his Folding-Canoe. Then he took another drift-log and put it down

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

on the beach near the stern. Then he lifted the bow of his Folding-Canoe
from the beach and put it on the drift-log. Then he also went to the
stern and did the same to that also. Now he had lifted his Folding-Canoe
from the sand, for Dancing-Place-Beach is sandy. As soon as he had
finished, he went up from the beach to (his house, which) was already
cleared, that all the birds might come and sit down. This was when all
the birds were not yet painted; for then they were still men, as we are
now.

They had not all come yet, when Chief-of-the-Ancients began at one end
calling Harlequin-Duck, that he might paint him. When he had finished,
he called Loon, and he painted him pretty. Then he called
Golden-Eye-Duck and painted him. As soon as he had finished, he called
Tomtit and painted him. As soon as he had finished painting him, he
called Sea-Chicken. He painted him; and as soon as he had finished
painting him, he called Duck (?) As soon as he finished painting him, he
called Swallow; and as soon as he finished painting him, he called
Buffle-Head-Duck; and again, as soon as he finished painting him, he
called Mallard-Duck and painted him; and as soon as he finished painting
him, he called Teal-Duck and painted him; and again, as soon as he
finished painting him, he called Sawbill-Duck and painted him; and as
soon as he had finished, he called Cross-bill, Kingfisher, Robin,
Red-breasted-Robin, Magpie, Blue-billed-Duck, Hawk, Snow-Owl, Plover,
Snipe, Diver (?), Widgeon, Pintailed-Duck, Heron, Crane,
Red-winged-Flicker, Black-Woodpecker, Humming-Bird, Laughing- Goose, and
painted them.

As soon as he had finished painting them, Chief-of-the-Ancients began to
get tired. Therefore he called his younger brothers, Canoe-Calking,
Always-staying-in-Canoe, and
Going-from-One-End-of-the-World-to-the-Other, and

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

also the great man Raccoon, and other among his brothers whom he loved.
Then Chief-of-the-Ancients requested that they take his place in
painting those whom he tried to paint, for Chief-of-the-Ancients wished
to burn the bottom of his Folding-Canoe, for he desired to make war on
the fishes of the world beyond the ocean. Therefore he wished to burn
the bottom of his Folding-Canoe. He just asked his younger brothers to
go on painting any way they liked to paint.

However, it had taken Chief-of-the-Ancients two days to paint those whom
he had completed. Then Chief-of-the-Ancients started and went to split
boards, and tied them together. Then he lighted them at the end, and
went down to the beach to the place where his Folding-Canoe was. Then he
burned its bottom. His younger brothers, however, began at one end
painting. The first to be painted was Eagle, they made him white at each
end; then also Black-Duck (?); then also Golden-Plover, and then also
Loon (?). They only put some white around its neck, but they just put
black in the armpits of Golden-Plover. Now, the younger brothers of
Chief-of-the-Ancients had been painting for one day when they began to
be tired. Therefore they called Chief-of- the-Ancients to come again and
help them, when he finished burning the bottom of his Folding-Canoe.
Therefore Chief-of-the-Ancients came hurriedly, and left his work.
Chief-of-the-Ancients just attempted to paint well several of his
younger brothers. Then Canoe-Calking and several of his brothers spoke,
and said that they would be the last to be painted, and that they would
be painted best. Thus they said. Then Chief-of-the-Ancients became
angry, on account of his younger brothers, because they were very lazy.
Therefore he called the one who is named Deer to come and help him.

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

Indeed, Deer went immediately; and so Chief-of-the-Ancients called
Canoe-Calking, and Deer called Spoon-bringing-Woman; and
Chief-of-the-Ancients and Deer just blackened her all over; and they
just turned to the Oyster-Catcher and Albatross and Swan, for they were
in a hurry: therefore they just put lime on Swan and on the
Pintailed-Ducks (?).

As soon as he had finished painting them, Chief-of-the-Ancients called
his aunt (and asked her) to dress up. (He said,) "You shall be the
leader of my three brothers when they come to dance from one end to the
other on this long beach." Thus he said. Immediately his aunt the Fern
dressed herself; and as soon as she finished, the myth people arose.
Indeed, a great many began to sing. Then the Fern was their leader, and
danced, turning round; and following her were her nephews. Then they
went from one end of the pretty beach to the other, and
Chief-of-the-Ancients just sat down on the beach and watched his younger
brothers as they danced.

However, they went twice from one end to the other, dancing. Then
Chief-of-the-Ancients saw smoke at the place where his Folding-Canoe
was, on the beach. Immediately he went to look at it. Then he discovered
that his Folding-Canoe was already burned. Several myth people said that
when Chief-of-the-Ancients burned the bottom of his Folding-Canoe, he
set fire to it; and others said that the younger brothers of
Chief-of-the-Ancients burned it because they were angry because he had
just blackened them when he finished his painting. Therefore they were
blamed by Chief-of-the-Ancients for having burned his Folding-Canoe; for
what should Chief-of-the-Ancients do, since he was going to try to make
war on those on the other side of the ocean

Chief-of-the-Ancients just sat down in his house, and

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

his heart was bad on account of his younger brothers. Then he planned
what to do. Then he said that he would just scatter them, each to go to
the kind of birds (to which he belonged). After he had finished
planning, he called his younger brothers. The first one he called was
Deer. Then he told him what he had in mind, that they should be lost,
with his Folding-Canoe. Indeed, Deer told him immediately to go ahead.
Then Chief-of-the-Ancients asked Deer to call all the myth people from
the houses to come again and sit down at the place where they had been
sitting before. Deer went at once, and it was not long before all the
myth people sat down at the place where they had been sitting.
Chief-of-the-Ancients at once called Deer to stand by his side. Then
Chief-of-the-Ancients spoke, and said to his younger brothers that he
felt badly on account of what had happened to his Folding-Canoe, which
was burned. He said, "I'll make you all leave with my Folding-Canoe. Now
you shall scatter, each to his own \[different\] kind of birds. Go and
scatter! You will never again meet (in the time of) later generations."
Thus said Chief-of-the-Ancients to them.

Indeed, at once they assembled in pairs, and then they all scattered.
Chief-of-the-Ancients and Deer only \[still\] kept together. Then
Chief-of-the-Ancients said that he would go to Deer-Place. Immediately
they started, and they lived there for a long time. It is not known why
Chief-of-the-Ancients and his younger brother Deer began to quarrel, and
why Chief-of-the-Ancients made him become a deer and drove him into the
woods. Then Chief-of-the-Ancients remained alone.

He came to this place here, Tê'guxstê. There he lived for a long time.
He was just seen by G\*â'malag\*î?lak<sup>u</sup> paddling to and fro in
his self-paddling canoe. He was

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

there a long time, and then he was not seen any more. Either he had died
or he had gone to another place. He had disappeared. After that he was
never again talked about. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. Dâ'p!abê (Leader)](kt64.md)
