[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt65)  [Next](kt67.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 24. Q!ômg\*ust<u>â</u>Els (Wealth-coming-up).

Tradition of the Xô'yalas. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

(*Recorded by George Hunt*.)

Now you will listen to the tradition that I am going to tell you about
these spirits, those which are referred to by the Kwakiutl as Ghosts.
The village of the spirits of the deceased was in our Under-World, and
they had for their chief one whose name was Wealth-coming-up, and he had
a younger brother whose name was Having-Maggots-on-Back; and the tribe
of Wealth-coming-up was numerous. The chief felt uneasy on account of
his tribe, for they really could not be counted. Therefore he was
considering all the time whether he would move to a large good place.
Then he resolved that he would invite the wise men of his tribe.

 

He sent four attendants to go and invite in the wise men. It did not
take the attendants long to call them, when they all came into the
house; and then Wealth-coming-up spoke, and said, "Thank you, my dear
ones! This is the reason why I invited you in, to consider whether we
move to a large good place, and that we may have a look at the
Upper-World." Thus he said. Immediately all the wise men spoke together,
and said, "That's it, that's it, the Upper-World!" Thus they said.

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

Then Wealth-coming-up spoke again, and said, "Go on, brother
Having-Maggots-on-Back! you shall go up, that you may look for a place
for our village." Thus he said. Immediately Having-Maggots-on-Back got
ready and went upward. He came right up at Cut-Beach. Then he saw that
it was a good rocky place, and the rock was sandstone, and in the middle
there was a little river. Then Having-Maggots-on-Back approved of it. He
went back to the house of his elder brother, and he told him about the
nice place that had been seen by him at Cut-Beach.

 

Immediately Wealth-coming-up sent his four attendants to go and ask the
Ghosts to get ready. Immediately they all got ready. As soon as night
came, they all came in great numbers, and the numerous tribe carried
their property. Then they all came upward, and the Ghosts each carried
soil on his back, and they poured it out on the sandstone. Thus they
made a village site at Cut-Beach. As soon as the village site was
finished, Wealth-coming-up asked his people to clear. away the trees
behind the village, and therefore the place behind the houses of
Cut-Beach is thus. Therefore no trees grow up along (the village) on
account of the work of the Ghosts, On account of what Wealth-coming-up
said about the trees. This is what he said: "Oh, you that grow inland!
don't grow seaward of what I made for future

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

generations." Thus he said. Therefore trees do not grow behind the
houses of Cut-Beach. Now there were many large houses of the Ghosts, and
there was also a shell beach in front of the houses, on which was a
place for the canoes. Then the people in the village lived happily.

 

Wealth-coming-up saw a village at Side-of-Tide. Those were the ancestors
of the tribe named Xô'yalas, who had for their chief one who was named
Property-Maker. As soon as Wealth-coming-up saw the village at
Side-of-Tide, Property-Maker also saw the village of the Ghosts. Then
Property-Maker wished to investigate the village at Cut-Beach, for he
was much surprised because it had never been seen before. Therefore he
sent his young men to go look at it. Two young men purified themselves
with urine; and as soon as the two young men had finished purifying
themselves, they all went aboard two canoes; and all the many young men,
the ancestors of the Xô'yalas, paddled. They were approaching the beach
of the houses of the Ghosts when the Ghosts began to make a loud noise.
Then all the men and women, and also the children of the Ghosts, came
out of the houses; and the young men of Property-Maker became dizzy, and
their bodies were twisted about. Only two of them were not wrong,--those
who had washed with urine. They went back, towing their past tribe. Then
the two young men guessed why they were not hurt by the supernatural
power of the spirits, because they had washed with urine.

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then the two young men sprinkled urine over
their friends, and at once their bodies straightened out. This is the
first time that a cure was made with urine, and so the ancestors of the
Xô'yalas always washed with urine, and they have it now for making
cures.

 

Then the ancestors of the Xô'yalas began to make a noise, for they were
going to leave the village at Side-of-Tide. As soon as the tribe got
ready, the houses on the island began to tremble, and Side-of-Tide began
to move on the water; and it stopped on the water at Smooth-Water. As
soon as Wealth-coming-up saw the island, he felt glad. Then it occurred
to Wealth-coming-up that he was in the condition of having no wife.
Therefore he invited his tribe in, and he told them what he desired them
to do; and he told them that the one to whom he referred, whom he wanted
for his wife, was the princess of Inviter, of the Magic tribe.
Immediately his tribe said all at the same time that he should go on;
for the tribe would be glad (to see) their chief marry the princess of
Inviter.

 

Then he sent four attendants to woo the princess of Inviter of the Magic
tribe. Immediately the wise men and the four attendants went out. The
four attendants got ready and launched the large canoe. Then they went
aboard. The ancestors of men had supernatural power, and (therefore)
they arrived in one day at Yô'gwatê. Then one of the attendants asked
(the girl) in marriage

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

from the chief; and what could the chief say against the words of the
Ghosts? They were just sent by Inviter to get married quickly.

Then the four attendants went back, and they got back in one day from
where they had gone to. Immediately they related the good words of
Inviter, and immediately the Ghosts got ready to get married. Many of
them launched their canoes and went aboard. They were all aboard, and
Wealth-coming-up came also, standing on the ground outside of the house.
Then he spoke; and the great one asked for the magic power of his tribe,
that the people might not become contorted again when they should see
them. Immediately his whole tribe agreed to what he had said, and those
who were sitting in the canoes beat time. Then Wealth-coming-up spread
out his blanket to catch the supernatural power of his tribe; and then
he threw it into the ground, that it should become the supernatural
power of his one younger brother. Then all the spirits became ordinary
people.

 

After Wealth-coming-up finished his work, he went aboard his canoe, and
the many people paddled away. It was not yet noon when they arrived at
Yô'gwatê, the village of the Magic tribe. Immediately they began the
marriage ceremony. Then, as soon as the four attendants stopped
speaking, the attendants of the chief of the Magic tribe also began to
speak; and he made a speech about the carvings of the large house, and
also about the names; and as soon as he stopped speaking, the house came
moving from the ground and floated on the water; and

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

the four, attendants of Inviter brought the princess. As soon as she
went aboard the canoe of her great husband, the people of
Wealth-coming-up tied a rope to the large house, and they came towing
the large house.

 

It did not take them very long before they arrived at Cut-Beach, and
right away the numerous tribe just lifted the large house by the
corners, and they went and put it on the ground in the middle of the
village site; for why should they not do it? It was all finished by
evening. The great numerous tribe were always happy because their chief
was now living with his wife, and Wealth-coming-up was always giving
feasts.

 

They had been living for a long time at Cut-Beach. Then Wealth-coming-up
did not know why he wished to walk inland from Cut-Beach. The great one
started to go, and he had not gone far inland before he saw a
double-headed serpent. Immediately he bit the end of his tongue and drew
blood, and he spit the blood on the double-headed serpent; and he also
spit the blood on his cane, and that was the instrument with which he
struck the man in the middle <span id="fr_28"></span>[3](#fn_28.md) of the
double-headed serpent between the eyes. Immediately the man in the
middle of the double-headed serpent split in two. Then the double-headed
serpent was dead. Wealth-coming-up took the intestines of the
double-headed serpent and its scales, and he took the intestines of the
double-headed serpent and put them under ground, at the foot of a hill.
Then he took one end of it, and pulled it to the rear of the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

village. As soon as the intestines stretched out from the ground, the
great Wealth-coming-up spoke to the intestines, and said, "You shall be
the water of future generations, and you shall never cease running, even
in a dry summer." Thus he said. Then a little river began to run there.
The quality of Wealth-coming-up of being not an ordinary man was really
present again.

 

They staid there a long time. Then the tribe learned that
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> was coming to set everything right all around
our world. Immediately the great Wealth-coming-up spoke to his tribe.
And this is what he said to his tribe: "As soon as Lord
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> comes, I shall ask him to transform me into a
rock, and I shall be an island in this water, so that I may be seen by
later generations." Thus he said. Then one of his attendants also spoke,
and said, "O great chief! I will also be transformed into a rock by Lord
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>; but I will be under you, else you would remain
on the rock in this water." Thus he said to him. As soon as he stopped
speaking, they went out.

 

Then, after a long time, Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> came. Immediately the
great one was invited by Chief Wealth-coming-up. Then Lord
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> went to his house, and Wealth-coming-up spoke
to Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. He said to him, "O great Lord! I invite you
that you may turn me into a rock, that I may stay in the water at this
river, that I may be prayed to by later generations." Thus he said to
him. Immediately the Lord called him to go to the

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

water, and immediately the great Wealth-coming-up went ahead of his
attendant, and behind them went Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. Then
Wealth-coming-up and his attendant acted in their own way a little
upstream of the place where water is drawn. Then the attendant lay down
on his face, and the great Wealth-coming-up sat on his back. As soon as
he had sat down, he was transformed into a rock. Then the tribe of the
past chief just prayed to Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>, for they were really
frightened by what they had seen being done to their chief. That is the
end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[323:1](kt66.htm#fr_27.md) Compare, Publications of
the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. III, p. 377.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[333:3](kt66.htm#fr_28.md) The double-headed
serpent is represented as a serpent's body, with a serpent's head at
each end, and a man's head in the middle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. A?mâ'<u>x</u>wax\*sag\*îla (Potlatch-Giver)](kt67.md)
