[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt74)  [Next](kt76.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 33. The Blind Man who recovered his Eyesight.

Tradition of the Clan Ts!ôts!êna of the A'waîLEla.

(*Told by NEg\*ê'*.)

The A'waîLEla, the descendants of Ts!ô'na, were hungry. They had no
fish. They were travelling about looking for a river in which there were
fish, and they came to Qwa?la'd There was a blind man,
Âtâ'lats!eg\*a~~l~~, whom

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

his wife had left. His children, who were staying with their mother,
found a salmon in the river. They ran to their father, and told him, "We
found a salmon."--"Don't say that! Put a salmon-trap into the river."
The children obeyed, and their mother helped them put up the trap. Soon
the fish became more numerous, and the river was full of salmon. The
former wife of Âtâ'lats!eg\*a~~l~~ caught fish in the trap, and forbade
her children to give any to their father. When he asked them whether
they had salmon, they said that there were none. The woman ate all the
salmon alone. She only gave a little to the children to keep them quiet.
This continued for a long time.

One day the children saw something black on the other side of the river.
They told their father about it. He replied, "Don't say that! Maybe that
is what your dead grandfather used to call a black bear." They gave him
his bow and his arrows, and upon his request they pointed the arrow at
the bear. Then he spanned the bow and let go the arrow. He hit the bear.
The old man said, "That sounds as though I had killed it." Then the
woman, who was standing behind him, said, "No, you did not hit it; it
has gone." She, however, went across the river, skinned the bear, and
ate the meat.

Another day the children saw something red on the other side of the
river. The old man said, "Maybe it is a deer. Give me my bow." The woman
pointed the arrow. He shot and killed the deer. He said, "This sounds as
though I had hit it." But the woman claimed again that he had missed it.
She said, "I have been across, and I looked, but you have missed it."

Another day, when the children were playing again, they saw something
white. They shouted, "We see something white above us!" The old man
said, "Surely, that is a mountain-goat." He said, "Get ready, and I will

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

follow you. Take me up the mountain; I will hold on to you." The
children went up, took the old man along and he shot the mountain-goat.
Then they took it down again, and they had plenty to eat. His wife ate
all the tallow. She would chew it, and put it on the end of a stick and
melt it near the fire, and then she would suck it, as the Indians are
accustomed to do.

A few days after, the children saw four mountain-goats. Then again they
took up the man, who shot them. The mountain-goats fell down the
mountain. Then he asked his wife, "Do you see where it fell down?" She
replied, "Yes, do you say so that I may eat all the tallow?" Again he
asked her, and she again replied the same. Finally he became impatient,
and said, "Yes, go and eat and suck all the tallow, but lie down on the
rocks on your stomach when you are through eating." Then she ate all the
tallow, and she drank much water. Thus she was transformed into a mass
of tallow; and then she became a stone, which may be seen here to this
day.

Then the blind man said to the children, "Let us go up the river and see
who lives there." They went on; and soon they saw a bear, which he
killed. They went on, and next he killed deer and elk and all kinds of
animals. They came to another place and built a house. Then he said to
his children, "Stay here, children! I will go on ascending the river.
Wait here until I come back; and don't be afraid if I should stay away a
long time, even if it should be several years. I must go to the place
where I want to go." Then he left the children and went up the river.

He came to a lake, from which the river flows. There was a jam. There he
staid, and soon he felt the place moving. It rocked from one side to the
other, and the lake also began to rock. He also heard a noise. Then

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

he thought, "There must be something supernatural in the lake." And he
went into the lake and sat down. A Loon appeared in the middle of the
lake. It went to him, and said, "Come to me! Sit down on my back!" The
man replied, "Thank you, friend." Again the Loon said, "Come!" The man
replied, "I am blind. I cannot see." Then the Loon said, "Hold on to me;
and when your breath becomes short, poke me." He stepped on the back of
the Loon, who dived. After a little while the man poked the Loon. He
arose. When they came up, the Loon said, "Try harder if you want to get
what you desire." Then they dived again. They staid under water a long
time, and finally they came back to the place where they had first
dived. He did not poke the Loon until they had come up again. Then he
saw with surprise that the place where he had been was at the door of
the house where he wanted to get supernatural power. Somebody took him
in on his back. Somebody asked, "What does our friend want?" The reply
was given, "He wants to have supernatural power." He did not say
anything himself; but the Listener knew his thoughts. Then they restored
his sight, and they gave him the power to become rich easily; and they
gave him the death-bringer and the water of life. Then he went back to
his children.

He went down the river and reached his house. There he found his
children all dead; only the bones were there. He gathered them, put them
together, and sprinkled them with the water of life, and they revived.
They rubbed their eyes, and said, "How long did we sleep?"

The father said to them, "Get ready! Let us go down to the mouth of the
river. I am now another one; I am not what I was. We will go back and
take revenge on your stepmother." They reached their house, and he
revived the stone that had been his wife. Only her head

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

could be seen; the rest of her body was stone. She said, "Thank you,
master! Now you have obtained what you desired to have." And she asked
him to revive her entirely. She said, "Have pity on me!" and he replied,
to take his harpoon which he had obtained at the lake. It killed all
kinds of animals. The child went out, and soon came back bringing some
seals. "These we will eat. I cannot eat what you give me." Then Ts!ô'na
was ashamed. Then Âtâ'lats!eg\*a~~l~~ killed many animals, and gave them
to his tribe, who were hungry.

While the people were still eating, a canoe was seen coming, in which
there were many people. The people said, "A canoe is coming. Maybe they
want to make war on us." Then Ts!ô'na put on his bird-dress. He went
out; and it began to thunder, and it be-an to rain and to hail, and the
canoe foundered before the warriors could get ashore. He did so because
he was angry because his brother had declined the food he was going to
give him. But now he was satisfied. Then he said to his children, "Don't
let us remain this way. Let us call our brother, and let us invite in
all the different tribes, and let them eat what we have killed." Then
the children went out to invite in the other tribes. They came with
their wives and children. They were wondering what kind of food they
were going to receive. Then Âtâ'lats!eg\*a~~l~~ arose, and said, "We
invite you for this: bear, mountain-goat, deer, seal, and all kinds of
animals. I will give them to you, for I feel that you are the way that I
used to be when I was blind. You have not much food. Maybe there are no
salmon in your river, as it used to be at my place. Come on! I will
divide all this among you." Then the men, the women and children,
divided what was given to them, and they ate as much as they wanted.

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

Then he said to his children, "Let us visit our brother behind that
point of land." That is the place where his brother Ts!ô'na lived. When
he reached there, his brother said, "I understand that you obtained
supernatural power. I felt that you were coming, and I am glad to see
you." He led him to the rear of the house. Then Ts!ô'na put on his
thunder-bird dress, and said, "Stay here while I go hunting and looking
for fish." While he was away, his guests were sitting there. They heard
the thunder four times when he was catching his salmon. He carried it
home; it was the double-headed serpent. He put it before his guests. As
soon as Âtâ'lats!eg\*a~~l~~ saw the double-headed serpent, he looked at
it, but declined to eat. Ts!ô'na urged him; but he simply said, "Give us
something else to eat. I do not eat the kind of salmon you give me. Let
us go and see what we have at our village." Then he sent one of his
children, and told him "Yes, I will do so; but I will take revenge for
your badness." She begged his pardon, and promised not to do again what
she had done. She said, "Your children shall be my children, and I shall
love you as I love them." Then she asked for her life; but he said, "You
may live, but I shall punish you." He sprinkled her with the water of
life, and her whole body came out of the stone. Then he struck her with
his hands, and she ran about as a deer. Again he sprinkled her with the
water of life, and her head appeared out of the body of the deer. She
asked him to have pity on her; and he said, "Yes, but I shall return
what you did to me." He sprinkled more water of life on her, and she
became a woman again. Then he said, "You shall be a woman of the woods
(bEk!u's)." Then she became a woman of the woods. She ran back into the
woods; and there she has staid ever since, as the woman of the woods of
Q!wa?lâ'd.

\[Redactors note: The last three pages of this are scrambled, apparently
due to a printer's error. The story continues from the end of p. 450
("Only her head...") to the top of p. 452 ("...could be seen"). Then
from the end of p. 452, it apparently starts in the middle of p. 451
("Then he said to his children...") and runs to the end of p. 451 ("Then
he sent one of his children, and told him..."), to the top of p. 451
("..."Yes, I will do so;") and finished in the middle of p. 451 ("...she
has staid ever since, as the woman of the woods of Q!wa?lâ'd"). I have
rearranged the text so the narrative is consistent--JBH.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. Song-Dance](kt76.md)
