[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt78)  [Next](kt80.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 37. ?nâ'lak!ulEm.

Tradition of the P!ê'p!awiLênox<sup>u</sup>, a Clan of the
DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup>.

(*Told by NEg\*ê' and Hâ'nidzEm*.)

The DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup> had been attacked by their enemies, and all
were killed except ?nâ'lak!ulEm, the son of Ts!atä'i. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He did not know what to do, and finally he made
up his mind to look for supernatural power. He went up the river until
he came to the mountain G\*â'g\*<u>î</u>ldEm, on the east side of the
river. He rubbed his body with hemlock-branches as he went up the
mountain. Finally he reached the lake on the mountain, went into the
water and washed himself. There he found the "humming-bird of the water"
(k!wâ'k!umt!a), which sucked his blood. He staid in the water four days,
until he was only bones and sinews. After four days, while he was
sitting by the pond, a Loon came up from the lake. He said, "Oh, my
dear! I wish you would become a man, on account of the state in which I
am. I am deserving of sympathy. My tribe became mysterious. I am seeking
something good. I am seeking supernatural power."

The Loon replied, "What is it that is called man? for am. a man. Come
aboard my canoe, that we may go there."

Then he stepped on the back of the Loon, and was aboard his canoe. The
Loon said to him, "Just poke me with your finger when you feel that you
are exhausted, and that your breath is giving out." Then the Loon dived.
He staid under water a long time, until ?nâ'lak!ulEm poked him. Then he
emerged. The Loon said, "Can you not stand it any longer?" ?nâ'lak!ulEm
replied, "My breath has given out." The Loon told him that he had to try
to stay in the water a longer time. Again he dived and went a long
distance, longer than before. Then the man poked him, and he emerged
again. The Loon said again, "Your breath is too short. You must be able

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

to stay in the water a longer time. Try your best." Then he dived again,
and staid under water a long time. After they had gone quite a distance,
the man poked the Loon again, and he emerged. Again the Loon encouraged
him, and told him to hold out longer. The Loon dived again, saying, "You
must try your best if you want to get what you desire." Again they
dived, and came up again at the place where they had first gone into the
water.

The Loon had really taken him all around the lake. When he emerged, the
Loon said, "You have done well. You have been fortunate. You have
obtained what you desired." He advised him to stay by the shore of the
lake, and told him to keep up his courage and to stay until he was given
what he desired. ?nâ'lak!ulEm did not know that the Loon had taken him
to the door of the house where he was to receive his supernatural power.
He was sitting there when something emerged from the water. When it was
coming up, it made a peculiar noise; then he saw that it was a canoe
with paddles on each side, paddling by itself. It was steering to the
place where he was sitting. ?nâ'lak!ulEm was afraid. Suddenly the canoe
stopped, and he and the crew of the canoe were afraid of each other. He
fainted. When he came to, he said, "My dear, welcome! What do you do
here, my dear? Are you the reason of my being here, my dear? Are you the
reason of my doing this? Do I not want you for my supernatural
power?"--"Now you will have supernatural power. Now you will have good
luck."

There was a man in the canoe who was the child of

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Q!ô'mogwê, the chief of the underworld.
?nâ'lak!ulEm was asked, "What do you want to have?" Then he thought, "I
wish to have his death-bringer and his canoe." At once a bow was brought
out; and the man in the canoe said, "Now, see what is going to happen!"
He put an arrow to the bow, and pointed it to one side of the lake. At
once it was on fire. Then the man said, "That is the way it does. Now,
this will go to you, and also this canoe." Then he was asked, ""'hat is
your name?" He replied, "My name is ?nâ'lak!ulEm." Then ?nâ'lak!ulEm
inquired, "And what is your name?" The other one said, "My name is
Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup>, and this shall be your name." He
continued, "The whole river of Knights Inlet is full of monsters. Take
care when you go down the river!" Then the man who was given the name of
Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup> went down the river and killed all the
monsters. He saved many of the Dzâ'wadEênox<sup>u</sup>, who became his
slaves. He went on to the Lê'<u>g</u>w<u>î</u>~~l~~da?x<sup>u</sup>,
pulled them into his canoe, and made them his slaves. He married some of
them. They had children, and' they increased again in numbers, and they
became his tribe.

Now all the tribes went to make war against the A'waîLEla. They came to
Ha'nwadê, and there they fought for ten days. The warriors pulled almost
all the people into their canoes as slaves, and they only waited for the
last ones to be put aboard. Then the A'waîLEla sent for
Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup>, and asked him to help them. He came at
once, going along the other side of the inlet. When he came to the
cascade TsE<u>x</u>u'la, he came right across; and while he was still in
the middle of the water, he began to shoot arrows, which fell down quite
close to his canoe. When the people saw this, they shouted for joy,
because they thought that he was not a powerful

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

warrior. They said, "We thought you had supernatural power." But he had
been shooting only with cedar-twigs. When he was near enough, he took
his supernatural arrow and pointed it towards them; and the people fell
into the water like kelp (pâ'pôq!wanê) and were killed with lances. Then
the A'waîLEla gave their daughters to Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup> to
marry, and they made him many presents. For this reason the place is
called Qâ'yik!waas, which is just on this side of Ha'nwadê.

Then Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup> said, "Now let us make war against
the paddling-passages." He meant the people of Knights Inlet. He was
accompanied by his brothers, who were sitting in the middle of the
canoe. Then they saw something big coming up from the water
(wu'ndzêsbâl<u>î</u>s). He shot at it and killed it, and it was
transformed into foam. They went on, and came to another place. There a
man came up, standing on the back of the flat monster-fish
?nEmxx\*â'lig\*iû. He shot at it and killed it. Then he said, "Let us go
up the river G\*iô'x!" and they went along and came to a lake.

There he met a man and his family. They went to his house, and found the
children outside. When they saw the canoe coming, they ran in and called
their father, who told his children to invite the strangers to come into
the house. When they came ashore, they were asked, "Where are you
going?" They replied, "We are just paddling about. We heard that there
were monsters at this place, and we want to see them." Then they were
warned. "Don't go! Nobody returns who goes that way." But they merely
said, "Give us something to eat. We will continue our journey." Then the
man ordered his children to follow the strangers, to see what was going
to happen to them. When they went on, the water was perfectly smooth;
and Xa'niats!Emg\*i?ak<sup>u</sup> said, "I thought

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

this was a place of monsters." Then he saw herring jumping in the water,
first one, then another. The water began to boil, and became wilder and
wilder. He said, "Do you want to frighten me?" Then the herrings became
more and more numerous. They jumped over the canoe, and he saw that
there was a man in each herring. He tried to shoot them with his four
arrows, but they had no effect upon them. They became more and more
numerous, and he was drowned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[466:1](kt79.htm#fr_33.md) Upon being questioned,
the narrator gave this name. Those of the other ancestors were not
known. Compare the story of Xâ'näts!Emg\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> (Publications
of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. III, p. 123). The
story-tellers claimed the account given there to be exaggerated, and
said that the name <u>G</u>wâ'xuma (p. 123, line 36) is that of a place
near Dzâ'wadê; <u>G</u>wâ'wi~~l~~bê?, that of a place near Ha'nwadê.
When I asked a friend of the DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup> in regard to this
statement, he simply said that the narrators., not being
DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup>, were envious, and detracted from the
importance of the story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. <u>X</u>wâ'xwas](kt80.md)
