[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt79)  [Next](kt81.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 38. <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md)

Tradition of the G\*î'lg\*<u>î</u>l<u>g</u>am, a Clan of the Nimkish.

Xwâ'<u>x</u>was was the ancestor of the G\*î'lg\*<u>î</u>l<u>g</u>am.
When the Deluge came, he assumed the form of a salmon and went into the
lake at the foot of the mountain Xa'wolê, at the upper part of Nimkish
Lake. When the Deluge subsided, he landed at Flat Place
(Ôdz<u>â</u>'?l<u>î</u>s). There he lived all by himself. After some
time, Kunô'?sila came down in the form of the thunder-bird and joined
him. <u>X</u>wâ'xwas built a house. He prepared the posts and put them
up, and then he made the beams, but he did not know how to raise them.
Kunô'?sila took them up in his talons and placed them on top of the
beams. The name of <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was's house was
Only-House-on-Prairie (?nE'ms<u>g</u>Emdzâ'?las). In front of his house
is a rock which was called Thunder-Bird Place (Ku'n?was). This is the
place where Kunô'?sila used to have his salmon-trap, and where he caught
birds in snares.

After some time <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was became sick. He had a sore
(a'mta?), which increased in size, and which could

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

not be cured. Finally he died. This disease was inherited in his family,
so that it finally became their crest. All the members of his family are
liable to die of the same disease.

(*Second Version, told by NEg\*ä, a Nimkish*.)

In the beginning <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was was a salmon. When the Deluge
came, it carried the salmon up the mountains. When the waters subsided,
the salmon landed at Flat Place (Ôdz<u>â</u>'?l<u>î</u>s) and began to
build a house which he intended to name Only-House-on-Ground
(?nE'ms<u>g</u>Emdzâ'?las). He searched for stones to make a stone axe,
and found some on the bank of the river. Then he began to hew two heavy
posts for his house. He had his hair tied up in a knot on the back of
his bead. While be was working, he suddenly heard a loud noise behind
him, a short distance down the river. He turned round and saw a large
thunder-bird which had alighted, each of his feet resting on one of two
large bowlders that lay quite a distance apart. Then
<u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was said, "O master! I wish you were a man, so that
you might help me in my work." Then the thunder-bird took off his
feather garment and his mask, and showed his face. He said, "I will help
you." He flew up and lifted in his talons a large log which
<u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was had cut for the beam of his house, and laid it on
top of the post. Then he alighted again and took off his feather
garment. He told his bird mask to fly back to the sky, and said, "You
shall be heard when one of my descendants is about to die." Then the
bird flew up into the sky. The man took the name Kunô'?sila. He built a
house at Flat Place, and both he and <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was became the
ancestors of the G\*î'lg\*<u>î</u>l<u>g</u>am. Kunô'?sila's son was
Ê'wa<u>g</u>it, whose son was Wâ'xowit, whose son

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

was Anx?anw<u>î</u>sa<u>g</u>amê?, whose son was Ha'mdzid, whose son was
Yâ'<u>g</u>o<u>L</u>as, whose daughter was ?nE'mnas<u>â</u>laga. She was
the aunt of NEg\*ä', who told the story. One of the recent descendants
of <u>X</u>wâ'<u>x</u>was was Yâ'qa~~l~~?Enâla.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[471:1](kt80.htm#fr_34.md) See Franz Boas,
Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Küste Amerikas, p. 147; see
also p. 83 of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39. ?nEmô'gwis](kt81.md)
