[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt85)  [Next](kt87.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 44. Mâ'lêleqala.

Tradition of the Ma'malêleqala.

(*Told by Lâ'bid, a Ma'malêleqala*.)

Mâ'lêleqala knew that Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> was coming south after
having left his brother ?nEmô'gwis, and that he was transforming the
world. He also knew that the Deluge, which was sent by the Chief in
Heaven, was coming, and that people were preparing for it. Mâ'lêleqala's
house was on the island T!ô'<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>seXLalak<sup>u</sup>,
opposite Fort Rupert.

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He put down large trees like the logs of a
log-cabin, and caulked the openings with clay. When the Deluge came, it
covered his house, but he remained inside without being hurt. When he
thought that the Deluge had subsided, he and his younger brothers,
Hâ'naL!ênox<sup>u</sup> and <u>G</u>â'LEmaxs?ala, went out, and they
found that the country was dry again. They saw much driftwood, and
people were lying on it, holding on to it. Then <u>G</u>â'LEmaxs?ala
took a long hook and pulled the logs ashore. They became their tribe.
Hâ'naL!ênox<sup>u</sup> had bow and arrows. He put a string at the bow
end of his arrows and shot at the drifting logs. Then he pulled them
ashore. For this reason the members of the Hâ'naL!ênox<sup>u</sup> clan
show a bow and arrow at their festivals.

Mâ'lêleqala wished to travel, but he had no canoe. He felled a
cedar-tree and burned it out inside. At the same time he placed stones
on each side, so that the fire should not burn through the sides of the
wood. Thus he continued until he had made a serviceable canoe. Then he
started looking for a place in which to build his house. He came to Fort
Rupert (Tsa'xis). There he built a house at <u>L</u>â'<u>L</u>ek!uxLa. A
shell-heap may be seen at this place. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) His brothers accompanied him.

Now they were waiting for Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> to come. One day when
they were out in their canoe, they were met by another canoe. A man was
aboard. When he came near, he asked, "What are you doing here?"
Mâ'lêleqala replied, "What do you mean? Do you mean my canoe that is on
the water, or do you mean the red cedar-bark on my head?"
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> replied, "I mean the cedar-bark on your head. I
like it." Mâ'lêleqala was not quite sure whether it was
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> who had come. Then Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>
continued, "You and all your

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

descendants shall be the first to receive red cedar-bark in the winter
ceremonial."

Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> went on. He had just come from Gwa'dzê?, where
he had put the people to rights. As soon as Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> had
left, Mâ'lêleqala called his tribe in the evening, and he told them of
what had happened. For this reason a meeting is always held before the
winter-dance, in which the plans for the ceremonial are discussed.

Late at night the supernatural power appeared, singing like a bird. Then
they prepared for the dance of Mâ'lêleqala's daughters, whose names were
Q!wâ'q!waLEmg\*ilayû<u>g</u>wa and Wîlx\*stasîlayû<u>g</u>wa. They made
torches and assembled in front of the houses. The people carried large
planks, on which the girls were dancing one after the other. The people
sang, -

"Aya a haik\*as mêLa, lâ'k\*as amâ'sêL? yâ'wix\*ilidzEmsôx awâ'sk\*as?ô
lâ'k\*as amâ'sêL lê'li?stâlayu<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>sôx awâ'~~l~~k\*as?ôx
mêiLaya."

The people raised the torches high up while they were singing; but when
they did not close their song with the burden "awâ'ya," the two girls
disappeared one after the other, and their father said that they had
been taken away by the supernatural power. They staid away for a long
time, and for this reason the novices continue to do so at present. (The
people really hide the dancers, so that the uninitiated may think that
they have been taken away by the spirit, but they always stay in the
house where they are in hiding.)

One day the two girls went out. They saw something dark in the air. They
did not know what it was. When it approached, they saw that it was a
large bird which carried something in its talons. When it came still
nearer, they saw that it was the thunder-bird carrying the double-headed
serpent (sî'siuL). The bird dropped it near the

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

girls; and when the double-headed serpent touched the ground, it became
a salmon. It was quite small. Q!wâ'q!waLEmg\*ilayû<u>g</u>wa went to
pick it up; but as soon as she came near it, she disappeared. Nobody
knew what had become of her. Then Mâ'lêleqala took a piece of wood, and
went into his room, where he carved an image of his daughter, which he
intended to take her place.

While he was engaged in this work, the daughter of the lost woman
climbed to the roof of the house and pulled one of the boards aside.
Thus she was able to look into her grandfather's room, where she saw the
image, which looked just like her mother. Her grandfather called her,
and said, "Yes, it is your mother. Come and look at her." The girl came
down from the roof, went into her grandfather's room, and the old man
strangled her because she had seen what he was doing. He wrapped her up
in skin, and made a hole under the fireplace, where he buried her. For
this reason the preparations for the winter ceremonial are still kept
secret, and whoever sees the secrets without permission is killed.

In the evening they began the winter-dance (kwê'xala). The people took
their boxes and carried them into the house for their chief. There they
sat down quietly. Then a speaker arose and called
Hâ'naL!ênox<sup>u</sup> to go and take the boxes. He took one of them
up, went around the fire, and put it down behind the fire. Then there
began to be a noise in the house, and the people sang,-

"The great one is going to be Thrower with her throwing-stick. This
great Yâ'lag\*il<u>î</u>s. Hâ."

("Lâ'dzêLElalaê mâ'maq!ayasês mâ'magayû hêyâ'lag\*ilidzê â'dxêsg\*a
yâ'lag\*ilidzê. Hâ")

After they finished singing the song, they beat time, and various
dancers came in one after another,--the Thunder-Bird, the Grizzly Bear,
the Dzô'noq!wa, the Raven, the

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

Fool-Dancer, the Sea-Monster Dancer (yâ'g\*adala~~l~~), the
Hô'<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>hok<sup>u</sup>, and the Wasp Dancer. Every one
performed his dance and uttered his cries. After this the people sang
the following song:--

"Ah, great one, this great Yâ'lag\*il<u>î</u>s, great Winâ'lag\*ilîs;
great one who will take up with his hands.  
Â hâ'y<u>â</u>h<u>â</u>nô. Wonderful Power of madness. That is the way
your father did, madness.  
Almost discernible is the means by which yours would have been caused to
go, with which yours would have hung (??).  
This, because I really said ghost (= near by), bring close by, sitting
on fire (= ghost), trembling with hands in dance (= ghost dancer)."

On the fourth night they beat time again to bring back the women who had
disappeared. The old man, who would not let the people know what had
happened, because he was ashamed, first showed the face of the carving
he had made, pretending that it was his daughter. He had hidden some
people behind the house, who imitated his daughter's voice and the
voices of the spirits. Then a large board was let down from the roof, on
which the figure was seated. It seemed to move about like a living
person. The younger sister came back safely when the performance of
bringing back the novice was held. During this ceremony the figure was
shown again and disappeared again; and the people said that the woman
had gone back with the spirits, and that she would never return.

It is said that this whole performance was made in accordance with the
advice of Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>. Therefore the winter ceremonial is
performed in this manner.

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

Now, Mâ'lêleqala resolved to leave the place where he had lost his
daughter. He went to Pâ'tsawê, just east of Fort Rupert. There he built
a large, strong house and gave a festival to all the tribes, among whom
he distributed qô'xqow<u>î</u>s (a bush with cotton-like tips \[sp.?\])
and pearl shells (k\*ô'gw<u>î</u>s). Here his family increased. One day
his children were playing in a cave on the beach, which at high water is
under water. The children had put down mats, and were imitating the work
of their mothers, when the tide rose and cut off their retreat.
Mâ'lêleqala heard them crying, but was unable to save them, and they
were drowned. While there, he found a stick with a copper attached to
it, which had drifted ashore with the tide.

He made a copper plate out of it, sold it, and gave a great potlatch.
This was the first potlatch. Great-Smoke-Face (?wâ'las
Kwa'x\*ilanôkumê?) was the son of Mâ'lêleqala. Once he put a copper
plate down at the place where the people were in the habit of drawing
water, so that the first person to draw water in the morning should find
it. This was his way of giving away a copper. He was very wealthy. His
descendants were TsExtsExu'l<u>î</u>s, T!â't!Endzid,
NôL!Eqâ'<u>g</u>amê?, Sê'x\*wuq<u>â</u>la, <u>L</u>â'bid, Gwâ'maxalas,
L!â'gô<u>L</u>as, Lâ'xlaqalîs, Lâ'L!êlî~~l~~, G\*â'?dEn (= Gordon), and
<u>L</u>â'bid, or Kwâ'x\*ilanôkumêdzê, who told this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[480:1](kt85.htm#fr_38.md) See also F. Boas,
Indianische Sagen, etc., p. 146; and [p. 83](kt06.htm#page_83.md) of this
volume.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[481:1](kt86.htm#fr_39.md) It is about half a mile
west of Fort Rupert.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45. Nô'mas](kt87.md)
