[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](kt90)  [Next](kt92.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 49. Additions to the Myth of Kwêkwaxâ'wê?. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

(*Dictated by a ~~L~~au'its<u>î</u>s*.)

The myth people had nothing to eat. They made a salmon-trap, but no
salmon went into it. Then Great-Inventor went to the graves, and asked,
"Are not there any twins here?" He asked the first grave, which said,
"Go to another grave: there are twins there." Finally he found a grave
in which twin girls were buried. He sprinkled one of them with the water
of life, and she revived. He said, "I have revived you, because I want
you to try to accomplish what I have been working for. Please do help
me! I have revived you for this purpose." Then he married her.

The woman told him to collect some roots. of ferns (sâ'laedana). He went
out and gathered some. He asked his wife, "What shall I do with those
roots?" Then she asked him to strip off the leaves and throw them into
the water. She helped him do so. Then she threw them into the water. The
leaves covered the whole surface at Ostô'?wa, which is situated in the
country of the Na'k!wax\*da?x<sup>u</sup>, not far from Kingcombe Inlet.
Suddenly all the leaves disappeared, the water began to bubble, and

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

salmon were jumping in the river. They went into the salmon-trap. Then
the people went down and took out the fish. Deer's salmon-trap floated
away on the water. He had forgotten to make an opening in it. Then the
myth people cut the salmon and hung them up to dry.

Now, Great-Inventor went to get fuel to dry his salmon. He went every
day. He needed much fuel, because he had so many salmon to dry. When he
entered his house, the salmon caught his hair. Then he said, "Let me go!
Why do you want to hold me, you who come from the dead?" Then his wife
said, "What did you say there?" Great-Inventor replied, "What did I
say?" And his wife retorted, "You said, 'What are you doing, you who
come from the dead?'" At once his wife was transformed into foam. The
salmon fell down, and all disappeared. Only four salmon remained; and
Great-Inventor cried, "No, you do not come from the dead!" But even then
the salmon and his wife did not return.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Canoe-Caulking (Mê'mg\*ôlEm) and Deer (<u>G</u>ê'<u>x</u>ustâla) were
sad when Great-Inventor died. Canoe-Caulking sang "He was as great as
the sand of the sea." Then the Deer sang, ",He was as great as the
needles on the cedar-trees." Then his brother said, "Oh, that is too
much!" He threw him down the cliff, followed him, and pecked at him with
his beak. Both may still be seen, transformed into rocks, at
Crooked-Beach.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Great-Inventor's wife was E'lxs<u>â</u>'yu<u>g</u>wa. Mê'mg\*ôlEm (the
raven) was son of Great-Inventor, whose younger brother was
Young-Raccoon. When the latter made love

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

to Great-Inventor's wife, <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) he called
her <u>L</u>â'LExala <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45.md) because she was
painted red on the side of her chest and shoulders.

When he pretends to be sick and to die, he asks that the children be
requested to dance before him. They dance, and sing, "Mâ'kuls, mâ'kuls
de'dEg\*î!"

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Sawbill-Duck-Woman, when sent into the woods, is told to call
t!Enx\*t!Enntsô' instead of lê'x\*lEk\*!îsä'i. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46.md)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

K\*ê'xenêt (result of scraping) is placed under a red cedar. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[4](#fn_47.md) He is taken to Ku'n?waas, just west of
Crooked-Beach. <span id="fr_48"></span>[5](#fn_48.md)

They gather stones for ballast. The whale is gummed at Mâ'~~l~~mä, an
island just opposite Crooked-Beach. The name of the first young
thunder-bird is ?nâ'l?Ems<u>g</u>EmEm<u>g</u>ola<u>g</u>Emê?.

Born-to-be-the-Sun (the mink) lived at Crooked-Beach, while the Wolves
lived beyond the point, on the same island. There was no low water on
Born-to-be-the-Sun's beach, and he could not get any clams. Only the
Wolves had clams. One day he went to buy some clams from them, but they
declined to sell them. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun and Great-Inventor
resolved what to do. They resolved that one of them should pretend to
die. Great-Inventor pretended to be dead, and he was buried in a tree.
They knew that the Wolves always tried to get bodies. Soon the Wolves
came to get him. They climbed one on the other's back, and on top of all
of them was their chief. He always took the bodies out of

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

the grave-boxes with his tail. When the Wolf tried to get the body of
Great-Inventor, he cut off the Wolf's tail, and all the Wolves tumbled
down. They were frightened, and went home. Born-to-be-the-Sun, who had
been watching, got his friend down; and they took the tail of the chief
of the Wolves and placed it over their fire. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

At Gwa'yasdEms, just north of the village, is a cave. It looks like a
house with several platforms. The flat root of a tree in it is said to
be the drum of the myth people. The cave is quite dry. It is the
winter-dance house of Great-Inventor and of the myth people.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Deer also lived at Crooked-Beach. He obtained the fire from Sea-Otter,
who carried it on his tail. They sang to him, "As?anwê'." He wore wood
for his dancing-hat; and he put this into the fire. He ran away with it
after it caught fire, and they could not catch him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Southeast-Wind lay behind the island ME~~l~~abâ'na.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[491:1](kt91.htm#fr_43.md) See pp.
[217](kt50.htm#page_217.md) et seq.; also Publications of the Jesup North
Pacific Expedition, Vol. III, pp. 322 et seq.; F. Boas, Indianische
Sagen, etc., p. 174.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[493:1](kt91.htm#fr_44.md) Publications of the
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. III, pp. 282 et seq.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[493:2](kt91.htm#fr_45.md) Ibid., Vol. III, p. 286,
line 24.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[493:3](kt91.htm#fr_46.md) Ibid., Vol. III, p. 290,
line 24.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[493:4](kt91.htm#fr_47.md) Ibid., Vol. X, p. 177.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[493:5](kt91.htm#fr_48.md) Ibid., Vol. X, p. 180.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[494:1](kt91.htm#fr_49.md) The continuation is the
same as recorded before (Ibid., Vol. X pp. 88 et seq.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 50. Additions to the Myth of the Mink](kt92.md)
