[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bct06) [Next](bct08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

 

\[THE FOURTH THOUSAND YEARS--FROM THE REIGN OF REU TO THE TWENTY-SIXTH
YEAR OF THE LIFE OF EHUD.\]

 

   And in the days of Reu the Mesrâyê, who are the Egyptians, appointed
their first king; his name was Pun<u>t</u>os, and he reigned over them
sixty-eight years. And in the days of Reu a king reigned in Shebhâ
(Sâba), and in Ophir, and in Havilah. And there reigned in Sâba sixty of
the daughters of Sâba. And for many years women reigned in Sâba--until
the kingdom of Solomon, the son of David. And the children of Ophir,
that is, Send (Scindia ?), appointed to be their \[<span
id="fol_23a1"></span>Fol. 23*a*, col. 1\] Lophoron (?), who built Ophir
with stones of gold; now, all the stones that are in Ophir are of gold.
And the children of Havilah appointed to be their king <u>H</u>avîl, who
built Havilah, that is, Hend (India ?).

 

   **\[**NOTES.--According to the *Book of Adam* (iii. 23), the first
king of Egypt was called Yanuf; he built Memphis, that is, Mi<u>s</u>r.
Sasen reigned <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> in Sâba and built the
city of Sâba, the people of which are called "Sabeans." Bahlul, builder
of Bahlu, reigned over Lebensa in India. The first king of Sâba is said
to have been Menyelek I, the son of Solomon king of Mael and
Mâ<u>k</u>eda, Queen of Sheba.**\]**

 

   And Reu died, being two hundred and thirty-nine years old, and Serug
his son, and Nâ<u>h</u>ôr and Tarah (Tera<u>h</u>) buried him in
Aor\`în, the city which he built after his own name.

   And Serug lived thirty years and begot Nâ<u>h</u>ôr, and all the days
of his life were two hundred and thirty years. And in the days of Serug
the worship of idols entered the world. And in his days the children of
men began to make themselves graven images, and it was at this time that
the introduction of idols into the world took place. For the children of
men were scattered all over the earth, and they had neither teachers nor
lawgivers, and no one to show them \[<span id="fol_23a2"></span>Fol.
23*a*, col. 2\] the way of truth wherein they should walk, and for this
reason they became confused and fell into error. Some of them through
their error adored the heavens, and some of them worshipped the sun, and
moon and stars, and some of them the earth, and wild beasts, and birds,
and creeping things, and trees, and stones, and the creatures of the
sea, and <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> the waters, and the winds.
Now Satan had blinded their eyes so that they might walk in the darkness
of error, because they had no hope of a resurrection. For when one of
them died they used to make an image of him, and set it up upon his
grave, so that the remembrance \[of his appearance\] might not pass from
before their eyes. And error having been sown broadcast in all the
earth, the land became filled with idols in the form of men and women.
And then Serug died, being two hundred and thirty years old, and
Nâ<u>h</u>ôr, and Tarah \[<span id="fol_23b1"></span>Fol. 23*b*, col.
1\], and Abraham his sons, buried him in Sarghîn, the city which he
built after his own name.

   And Nâ<u>h</u>ôr was twenty-nine years old when he begot Terah. And
in the days of Nâ<u>h</u>ôr, in the seventieth year of his life, when
God looked upon the children of men, and saw that they were worshipping
idols, a great earthquake took place, and all their houses were
overturned and fell down; but the people did not understand within
themselves, and they added to their wickedness. And Nâ<u>h</u>ôr died
when he was one hundred and forty-seven years old, and Terah his son and
Abraham buried him. Terah was seventy-five years old when he begot
Abraham.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--Nâ<u>h</u>ôr was the son of Serug by his wife Melka,
and he married Iyosaka, the daughter <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>
of Kheber, the Chaldean, and she became the mother of Terah. The "Wind
Flood" came upon the earth in the days of Nâ<u>h</u>ôr. God opened the
storehouse of the winds and whirlwinds, and they uprooted the idols and
graven images, and they collected them together, and buried them under
the earth, and they reared over them these mounds that are in the world.
([*Book of the Bee*, chapter xxiii.](../bb/bb23)) God sent forth winds,
and the whirlwind, and earthquakes on the earth, until the idols were
broken one against another. Instead of repenting, men added to their
sins. *Book of Adam* (iii. 24.)**\]**

 

   And Terah was seventy-five years old when he begat Abraham. And in
the days of Terah, in his ninetieth year, sorcery appeared on the earth
in the city of Aôr (Ur), which Horon, the son of \`Abhâr, built. Now,
there was in the city a certain man who was very rich, and he died at
that time. And his son made an image of him in gold \[<span
id="fol_23b2"></span>Fol. 23*b*, col. 2\], and set it up upon his grave,
and he appointed there a young man to keep guard over it. And Satan went
and took up his abode in that image, and he spake to that youth (*i.e.*
the son of the rich man) after the manner of his father. And thieves
went into \[his house\], and took everything that the youth possessed,
and he went out to the tomb of his <span id="page_140">p. 140</span>
father weeping. And Satan spake unto him, saying, "Weep not in my
presence, but go and fetch thy little son, and slay him here as a
sacrifice to me, and forthwith everything which thou hast lost shall be
returned to me here." And straightway the youth did as Satan told him,
and he slew his son, and bathed in his blood. And Satan went forth
immediately from that image \[of gold\], and entered into the youth, and
taught him sorcery, and enchantments, and divination, and the lore of
the Chaldeans, and \[how to tell\] fortunes, and \[how to forecast\]
events, and \[how to foretell\] destinies. And behold, from that time
the children of men began to sacrifice their sons to devils and to
worship idols, for the devils entered into the images, and took up their
abodes therein.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--According to the *Book of Adam* (iii. 24), the young
man who ministered to the image had to sweep the ground around it, and
to pour out water before it, and to burn incense. The image seems to
have resembled somewhat the Ka-figure of the Egyptians, and its
attendant may be regarded as the equivalent of the Ka-priest. A marginal
note in the Syriac MS. of the "Cave of Treasures" in the British Museum
says that the city Aôr is Erech (Warka). The "Interpreter" (*i.e.*
Theodore), says it was Bêth <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> Mâhôzê
(Ctesiphon and Seleucia), that is, Bêth Arâmâyê, but both statements are
incorrect. The city referred to is Ur, where, in recent years,
excavations have been carried out by the British Museum and the
University of Pennsylvania. (*See* my *Babylonian Life and History*,
London, 1925, and the account of the excavations given at the end of the
present work, [page 275](bct12.htm#page_275).)**\]**

 

   And in the one hundredth year of the life of Nâ<u>h</u>ôr, when God
saw that the children of men were sacrificing their Sons to devils
\[<span id="fol_24a1"></span>Fol. 24*a*, col. 1\], and worshipping
idols, He opened the storehouses of the wind, and the gate of the
whirlwind, and a blast of wind went forth in all the earth. And it
uprooted the images, and the places where offerings were made to devils,
and it swept together the idols, and the images, and the pillared
buildings in a heap, and piled up great mounds \[of earth\] over them;
\[and they are there\] to this day. Now to this blast of wind learned
men have given the name of "Wind-Flood"; but certain who have erred have
said, "These mounds existed \[already\] in the days of the Flood \[of
waters\]. Now those who have said these things have erred greatly from
the truth; for before the Flood \[of waters\] there were no idols in the
earth, and it was not because of idols that the Flood came, but because
of the <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> fornication of the daughters of
Cain. And, moreover, at that time there were no men on this earth, which
was a waste and a desert. And our fathers were cast forth in days of
old, as it were, into exile, because they were not worthy to be \[<span
id="fol_24a2"></span>Fol. 24*a*, col. 2\] neighbours of Paradise. And
through the Ark they were driven forth to the mountains of <u>K</u>ardô,
and from there they were scattered about throughout all the earth. For
these mounds came into being because of idols, and in them are buried
all the idols of that time, and all the devils also who dwell in them
are in these mounds, and there is no mound which hath not devils in it.

 

\[Nimrod the fire-worshipper, and Yôn<u>t</u>ôn, son of Noah.\]

   And in the days of Nimrod, the mighty man (or giant), a fire appeared
which ascended from the earth, and Nimrod went down, and looked at it,
and worshipped it, and he established priests to minister there, and to
cast incense into it. From that day the Persians began to worship fire,
\[and they do so\] to this day.

   And Sîsân, the king, found a spring of water in Drôghîn, and he made
a white horse and set it over it, and those who bathed in the water used
to worship the horse \[<span id="fol_24b1"></span>Fol. 24*b*, col. 1\].
And from that time the Persians began to worship <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> that (*sic*) horse. \[According to the *Book of Adam* (iii.
25), the horse was made of gold.\]

   And Nimrod went to Yôkdôrâ of Nôdh, and when he arrived at the Lake
(or Sea) of A<u>t</u>râs, he found there Yôn<u>t</u>ôn, the son of Noah.
\[A marginal note in the Syriac MS. adds, "Noah begot this Yôn<u>t</u>ôn
after the Flood, and he honoured him in many things, and sent him to the
east to dwell there."\] And Nimrod went down and bathed in the Lake, and
he came to Yôn<u>t</u>ôn and did homage unto him. And Yôn<u>t</u>ôn
said, "Thou art a king; doest thou homage unto me?" And Nimrod said unto
him, "It is because of thee that I have come down here"; and he remained
with him for three years. And Yôn<u>t</u>ôn taught Nimrod wisdom, and
the art of revelation (divining ?), and he said unto him, "Come not back
again to me."

   And when Nimrod went up from the east, and began to practise the art
of divining, very many men marvelled at him. And when Îdhâshîr (Ardeshir
?), the priest who ministered to the fire that ascended from the earth,
saw that Nimrod was practising these exalted courses, he entreated the
devil, who appeared in connection with that fire, to teach him \[<span
id="fol_24b2"></span>Fol. 24*b*, col. 2\] the wisdom of Nimrod. And as
the devils were in the habit of destroying those who came nigh unto them
by sin, the devil said unto the priest, <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> "A man cannot become a priest and a Magian until he hath
known carnally his mother, and his daughter, and his sister." And
Îdhâshîr the priest did this, and from that time the priests, and the
Magians, and the Persians take their mothers, and their sisters, and
their daughters \[to wife\]. And this Îdhâshîr, the Magian, was the
first to begin to study the Signs of the Zodiac, and \[omens
concerning\] luck, and fate, and happenings, and motions of the eyes and
eyelids, as well as all the other arts of the learning of the Chaldees.
Now, all this learning is the error of devils, and those who practise it
shall receive, together with the devils, the doom of the Judgment. And
because this art of divination, which was employed by Nimrod, was taught
to him \[<span id="fol_25a1"></span>Fol. 25*a*, col. 1\] by
Yôn<u>t</u>ôn, none of the orthodox doctors have suppressed it; nay,
they have even practised it. Now the Persians call it "Gelyânâ " (*i.e.*
"Revelation") and the Romans "Estrômîôn" (*i.e.* "Astronomy"). But that
\[knowledge\] which the Magians have, viz. astrology, is sorcery and the
teaching of devils. There are some who say that it doth indeed \[teach
concerning\] luck, and happenings (*i.e.* future events), and fate, but
these are in error. Now Nimrod builded strong cities in the east, Babel,
and Nineveh, and Râsân (Râs \`Ain), and Selî<u>k</u>: (Seleucia), and
Ctesiphon, and Âdhôrbaighân; and he made three fortresses.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

 

\[The History of Abraham.\]

   And Terah, the father of Abraham, lived two hundred and fifty years,
and he died, and Abraham and Lot buried him in Hârrân. And there God
spoke unto Abraham, and said unto him, "Get thee forth from thy land,
and from among thy people, and come to the land which I will show thee."
And Abraham took his household, Sârâ his wife \[<span
id="fol_25a2"></span>Fol. 25*a*, col. 2\], and Lot, his brother's son,
and he went up to the land of the Amôrâyê (Amorites); and he was
seventy-five years old when he crossed the desert from the Euphrates.
And he was eighty years old when he pursued the kings, and rescued Lot,
his brother's son.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--When still a boy, Abraham had no belief in idols, and,
according to the *Kebra Nagast* (chapter xiii), "when he was twelve
years old his father sent him to sell idols. And Abraham said, 'These
are not gods that can make deliverance'; and he took away the idols to
sell even as his father had commanded him. And he said unto those unto
whom he would sell them, 'Do ye wish to buy goods that cannot make
deliverance, things made of wood, and stone, and iron, and brass, which
the hand of an artificer hath made?' And they (the people) refused to
buy the idols from Abraham because <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> he
himself had defamed the images of his father. \[An old tradition says
that Terah made idols of mud, and it is possible that some of these may
be represented by the terra-cotta figures of gods and goddesses which
have been found in such large numbers in recent years at Ur and other
ancient sites in Babylonia.\] And as he was returning he stepped aside
from the road, and he set the images down, and looked at them, and said
unto them, 'I wonder now if ye are able to do what I ask you at this
moment, and whether ye are able to give me bread to eat or water to
drink?' And none of them answered him, for they were pieces of stone and
wood; and he abused them and heaped revilings upon them, and they spake
never a word. And he buffeted the face of one, and kicked another with
his feet, and a third he knocked over and broke to pieces with stones,
and he said unto them, 'If ye are unable to save yourselves from him
that buffeteth you, and ye cannot requite with injury him that injureth
you, how can ye be called "gods"? Those who worship you do so in vain,
and as for myself I utterly despise you, and ye shall not be my gods.'
Then he turned his face to the East, and he stretched out his hands and
said, 'Be Thou my God, O Lord, Creator of the heavens and the earth,
Creator of the Sun and Moon, Creator of the sea and the <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> dry land, Maker of the majesty of the
heavens and the earth, and of that which is visible and that which is
invisible; O Maker of the universe, be Thou my God. I place my trust in
Thee, and from this day forth I will place my trust in no other save
Thyself.' And then there appeared unto him a chariot of fire which
blazed, and Abraham was afraid, and fell on his face on the ground; and
God said unto him, 'Fear thou not, stand upright.'"

   On the day of the birth of Abraham the house shone with a bright
light. Many people fell down, and there was a cry in a loud voice, which
said, "Woe is me! Woe is me! For he who shall crush my kingdom hath been
born." And he who cried out wept, and described the events which should
take place, saying, "It is he who shall burn down my abode." And there
were among the people certain men who said, "Kill this child forthwith,"
and those who spake thus knew well that grace would be given to Abraham.
And God set mercy in the heart of the father of Abraham, and he said to
the Satans, "Whence come ye, O ye who tell me that I should kill my son
who is a gracious gift of God?" And he reared the child . . . . . And
Abraham was circumcised by the hand of Gabriel and Michael, who helped
him. From the *Book of the Mysteries of Heaven and Earth*, ed.
Perruchon.**\]**

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

 

\[Abraham and Melchisedek.\]

   And at that time Abraham had no son, because Sârâ was barren.

   And when he returned from the battle of the kings, the agency of God
called him, and he crossed the mountain of Yâbhôs (Jebus ?), and
Melchisedek, the king of Shâlîm, the priest of the Most High God, went
forth to meet him. And when Abraham saw Melchisedek, he made haste and
fell upon his face, and did homage to him, and he rose up from the
ground and embraced him, and kissed him, and was blessed by him; and
Melchisedek blessed Abraham. And Abraham gave Melchisedek tithes of
everything which he had with him, and Melchisedek made him to
participate in the Holy Mysteries, \[of\] the bread of the Offering and
the wine of redemption. And after \[<span id="fol_25b1"></span>Fol.
25*b*, col. 1\] Melchisedek had blessed him, and made him to participate
in the Holy Mysteries, God spake unto Abraham, and said unto him, "Thy
reward is exceedingly great. Since Melchisedek hath blessed thee, and
hath made thee to partake of bread and wine \[with him\], I also will
assuredly bless thee, and I will assuredly multiply thy seed."

   And when Abraham was eighty-six years old Ishmael was born to him by
Hâghâr, the Egyptian woman, whom Pharaoh had given to <span
id="page_149">p. 149</span> Sârâ as a handmaiden. Now Sârâ was the
sister of Abraham on the father's side, because Terah took two women to
wife. When Yâwnû, the mother of Abraham, died, Terah took to wife a
woman whose name was "Naharyath" (or Shalmath, or Tona, or
Ta<u>h</u>dif), and of her Sârâ was born. It was because of this
\[fact\] that Abraham said, "She is my sister, the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother" ([Gen. xx.
2](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#20:2), 5).

 

\[The Birth of Isaac.\]

   And Abraham was ninety-nine \[<span id="fol_25b2"></span>Fol. 25*b*,
col. 2\] years old when God went into his house and gave Sârâ a son, and
he was one hundred years old when Isaac was born to him. And Isaac was
thirteen years old when his father took him and went up to the mountain
of Yâbhôs (Jebus) to Melchisedek, the priest of God, the Most High. Now
Mount Yâbhôs is the mountain of the Amôrâyê (Amorites), and in that
place the Cross of Christ was set up, and on it grew the tree which held
the ram that saved Isaac. And that same place is the centre of the
earth, and the grave of Adam, and the altar of Melchisedek, and
Golgotha, and <u>K</u>ar<u>k</u>aftâ, and Gefîftâ (Gabbatha). And there
David saw the angel bearing the sword of fire. There, too, Abraham took
up Isaac his son for a burnt offering, and he saw <span id="page_150">p.
150</span> the Cross, and Christ \[<span id="fol_26a1"></span>Fol.
26*a*, col. 1\], and the redemption of our father Adam. The tree (*i.e.*
thicket) was a symboI of the Cross of Christ our Lord, and the ram
\[caught\] in its branches was the mystery of the manhood of the Word,
the Only One. And, because of this, Paul cried out and said, "If they
had only known \[it\] they were not crucifying the Lord of glory." Let
the mouths of the heretics be stopped who in their madness impute
passibility to the Eternal God.

   Now, when Christ was eight days old, Joseph, the betrothed of Mary,
rose up to circumcise the Child according to the Law, and he circumcised
Him according to the custom that was the Law. In like manner Abraham
took up his son as an offering, but he at the same time \[fore\]saw in
this \[act\] the crucifixion of Christ. And this thing did Christ openly
proclaim before the multitudes of the Jews, saying, "Abraham, your
father, wanted to see My days, and he saw and was glad" ([John viii.
56](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#8:56)). Abraham saw the day of the redemption
\[<span id="fol_26a2"></span>Fol. 26*a*, col. 2\] of Adam, and he saw
and rejoiced, and it was revealed unto him that Christ would suffer on
behalf of Adam.

 

\[The founding of Jerusalem.\]

   And in that same year in which Abraham offered up his son as an
offering, in that same <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> year \[I say\]
Jerusalem was built; and the beginning of the building thereof was in
this wise. Melchisedek having appeared and shown himself to men, the
kings of the nations heard his history, and they gathered together and
came unto him.

 

\[The names of the kings who built Jerusalem.\]

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Abimelech, king of Gâdhâr.<br />
Âmarphîl, (Amraphel), king of Sen`âr.<br />
Arioch, king of Dâlâsâr (<em>sic</em>).<br />
Kardla`mar (Chedorlaomer), king of Elam.<br />
Tar`îl (Tidal), king of the Gîlâyê.<br />
Bârâ (Bera), king of Sodom.<br />
Barshâ (Birsha), king of Gomorrah.<br />
Shênâbh (Shinab), king of Adhâmâh.<br />
Shamâ`ir (Shemeber), king of Zeboim.<br />
Salâkh, king of Bâlâ`.<br />
Tâbhîk, king of Damascus.<br />
Ba<u>k</u>tôr, king of the desert.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   These twelve kings gathered together and came to Melchisedek, king of
Shâlim \[<span id="fol_26b1"></span>Fol. 26*b*, col. 1\], the priest of
the Most High God. And when they saw his appearance, and heard his
words, they entreated him to go with them. And he said unto them, "I am
not able to go from this place to any other"; and they took counsel
together about building him a city, and <span id="page_152">p.
152</span> said to each other, "Verily, he is the king of the whole
earth, and the father of all kings." And they built him a city and made
Melchisedek to live in it; and Melchisedek called the name thereof
"Jerusalem." And when Mâghôgh, the king of the south, heard \[of this\],
he came to him, and saw his appearance, and spake unto him, and gave him
offerings and gifts. And Melchisedek was held in honour by all, and he
was called the "Father of Kings."

 

\[Melchisedek.\]

   Now, as concerning what the Apostle said, "there was no beginning to
his days, and no end to his life" ([Heb. vii.
3](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#7:3)) \[<span id="fol_26b2"></span>Fol. 26*b*,
col. 2\], it has been thought by simple folk that he was not a man at
all, and in their error they have said concerning him that he was God.
God forbid that there should have been no beginning to his days or end
to his life. \[The Apostle spake thus\] because when Shem, the son of
Noah, took away Melchisedek from his parents, no word is said as to how
old he was when he went up from the East, and it is not said how old he
was at the time of his departure from this world. Now, he was the son of
Mâlâkh, the son of Arpakhshar, the son of Shem, and he was not the son
of one of the Patriarchs. And the Apostle said that none of his father's
family had ever ministered <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> at the
altar ([Heb. vii. 6](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#7:6)). The name of his father
is not written in the genealogies, because Matthew and Luke, the
Evangelists \[only\] wrote down the \[names of the\] Fathers \[in chief,
*i.e.* Patriarchs\]; and for this reason neither the name of his father
\[<span id="fol_27a1"></span>Fol. 27*a*, col. 1\], nor the name of his
mother, is known. The Apostle did not say that he had no parents, but
\[only\] that they were not written down in Matthew and Luke.

 

\[Kûmrôs.\]

   And in the one hundredth year \[of the life\] of Abraham there was a
king in the East whose name was "Kûmrôs." He built Shemesh<u>t</u>
(Samosata), after the name of his son Shemesh<u>t</u>ô, and Klawdîya
(Claudias), after the name of his daughter <u>K</u>âlôdh, and Pîrîn
after the name of his son Pôrôn.

 

\[Nimrod founds Nisibis, Harrân and Edessa.\]

   And in the fiftieth year of \[the life of\] Reu, Nimrod went up and
built Nisibis, and Edessa, and <u>H</u>arrân, which is Edessa. And
<u>H</u>arrânîth, the wife of Dâsân, the priest of the mountain,
surrounded it with a wall, and the people of <u>H</u>arrân made a statue
of her and worshipped her. And Baltîn, who was given to Tamûzâ
(Tammuz)--now because B\`êlshemîn loved her, Tammuz fled before him--set
fire to <u>H</u>arrân and burned it.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

 

\[The Death of Sârâ.\]

   And when Sârâ, the wife of Abraham, died, Abraham took to wife
<u>K</u>entôrâ \[<span id="fol_27a2"></span>Fol. 27*a*, col. 2\], the
daughter of Ba<u>kt</u>ôr, the king of the desert. And there were born
unto him by her Zamrân, and Ya<u>k</u>shân, and Mâdhân, and Medhyân, and
Ashbâk, and Shôh. \[*See* [Gen. xxv. 1](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#25:1), 2;
[1 Chron. i. 32](../../bib/kjv/ch1.htm#1:32). A marginal note in the
Syriac MS. says, "these sons of <u>K</u>entôrâ are called sons of Daran
by the prophet."\] And from these are sprung the Arabs.

 

\[Isaac and Rebecca.\]

   And when Isaac was forty years old, Eliezer, a son of the house of
Abraham, went down and brought Rab<u>k</u>â (Rebecca) from the east, and
Isaac took her to wife. And when Abraham died Isaac buried him by the
side of Sârâ.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--According to the *Book of Adam* (iv. 4), Abraham was 175
years old when he died, and Isaac and Ishmael buried him. Rebecca was
the daughter of Bethuel, the Aramean, a native of the town of Arâch
(Erech ?).**\]**

 

   And when Isaac was sixty years old Rebecca became with child of Esau
and Jacob. And being sorely afflicted, she went to Melchisedek, and he
prayed over her and said unto her, "Two <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be removed
from thy loins, that is to say, shall go forth from thy womb. One nation
shall be stronger than the other, and the elder shall be in subjection
to the younger, that is to say, Esau \[<span id="fol_27b1"></span>Fol.
27*b*, col. 1\] shall be in subjection to Jacob."

 

\[The founding of Jericho.\]

   And in the sixty-seventh year of \[the life of\] Isaac, Jericho was
built by seven kings, namely, the king of the Hittites, and the king of
the Amorites, and the king of the Girgantes, and the king of the
Jebusites, and the king of the Canaanites, and the king of the Hivites,
and the king of the Perizites; and each of them surrounded it with a
wall. Now the son of Me<u>s</u>rîn (Mizraim), the king of the Egyptians,
had founded Jericho in olden time. And Ishmael made a mill of the hands
(*i.e.* a handmill) in the desert, a mill of slavery (*i.e.* a mill to
be worked by, slaves).

 

\[Jacob's Ladder.\]

   And in the one hundred and third year of his life Isaac blessed
Jacob, who was forty years old, and having received the blessing from
his father, he went down into the desert \[<span
id="fol_27b2"></span>Fol. 27*b*, col. 2\] of Beersheba, and lay down to
sleep there; and when he was lying down he took a <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> stone and made a pillow of it. And he saw in his dream, and
behold, a ladder was set upon the earth. And the top of it was in the
heavens. And the angels of God were going up and coming down, and the
Lord stood at the top of it. And Jacob woke up from his sleep, and said,
"This is truly the house of God"; and he took the stone of his pillow,
and made it an altar, and he anointed it with oil. And he vowed a vow
and said, "Of everything which I have will I tithe for this stone." Now,
it is manifest to those who possess understanding that the ladder which
Jacob saw symbolizeth the Cross of our Redeemer. And the angels who were
going up and down were the ministers of Zechariah and Mary, and the
Magi, and the shepherds. And the Lord Who was standing at \[<span
id="fol_28a1"></span>Fol. 28*a*, col. 1\] the top of the ladder
symbolized Christ, Who stood on the Cross that He might go down to
redeem us.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The Power of God which was upon the top of the ladder
was \[a type of\] the manifestation of God the Word in pure flesh of the
formation of Adam. The place in which it appeared was a type of the
Church; the stone under his head, which he set up for an altar, was a
type of the altar; and the oil which he poured out upon it was like the
holy oil wherewith they anoint the altar. *Book of the Bee* ([chapter
xxvii](../bb/bb27)).**\]**

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

 

\[Jacob and Baptism.\]

   And when God had shown the blessed Jacob the Cross of Christ by means
of the Ladder of the Angels, and the coming down of Christ for our
redemption, and the Church, the House of God, and the altar by means of
the stone, and the offerings by means of the tithes, and the anointing
by means of the oil, Jacob again went down to the East that there God
might show him baptism. And Jacob looked, and saw, and beheld three
flocks of sheep lying down by a well; and there was a great stone placed
over the mouth of the well. And Jacob drew nigh, and rolled away the
stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the sheep of his mother's
brother. And having watered the flocks, he took Rachel and kissed her.

   Now by "Well" \[<span id="fol_28a2"></span>Fol. 28*a*, col. 2\] the
blessed Jacob indicated (or, depicted) baptism, which was covered over
(*i.e.* hidden) from the races of men, and generations and tribes. And
the three flocks of sheep which were lying down by the well are a type
of the three divisions and three groups \[who come\] for baptism,
namely, men and women and children. And that Jacob saw Rachel coming
with the flocks, and that he neither embraced her nor kissed her until
he had rolled away the stone from the well, and she had watered the
flocks, is in accordance with <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> the law
of the sons of the Church, who neither embrace nor kiss the Lamb of
Christ until baptism hath opened \[the way\]; they go down into the
waters and put on strength from them and then the sons of the Church
embrace and kiss. And as Jacob served with Laban for seven years, and
the woman he loved was not given to him, so also was it with the Jews,
who served Pharaoh, king of Egypt, in slavery, and went forth. \[<span
id="fol_28b1"></span>Fol. 28*b*, col. 1.\] For the Covenant of the
Church, the Bride of Christ, was not given unto them, but that Covenant
which was old, and worn out, and of no effect. Now the eyes of \[Leah\],
the first woman whom Jacob took to wife, were hateful, whilst the eyes
of Rachel were beautiful, and her countenance was radiant. A covering
(*i.e.* veil) was laid over the face of the first Covenant, so that the
children of Israel might not see the beauty thereof; as for the second
Covenant, it is wholly light.

 

\[Jacob's sons. The Death of Isaac.\]

   Jacob was seventy-seven years old when he received the blessing of
Isaac, his father, and he was eighty-nine years old when he begot
Reuben, his firstborn, by Leah. The sons of Jacob are these:--

   Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar and Zebulon; these are the sons
of Leah.  
    <span id="page_159">p. 159</span> Joseph and Benjamin were the sons
of Rachel.  
   Gad and Asher were the sons of Zilpah, the handmaiden of Leah \[<span
id="fol_28b2"></span>Fol. 28*b*, col. 2\].  
   Dan and Naphtali were the sons of Bilhah, the handmaiden of Rachel.

   And after twenty years Jacob returned to Isaac his father. And all
the days of the life of Isaac were one hundred and eighty years--until
the thirty-first year of the life of Levi--and he died in the one
hundred and twentieth year of the life of Jacob. Twenty-three years
after Jacob went up from <u>H</u>arrân, Joseph was sold to the
Midianites; he was sold during the lifetime of Isaac, and they mourned
for him. When Isaac died Jacob and Esau, his sons, buried him with
Abraham and Sârâ. Seven years later Rebecca died, and was buried with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Sârâ; and Rachel died and was buried with them.

   And Judah, the son of Jacob, took unto himself to wife Shû\` (Shuah),
the Canaanitess \[<span id="fol_29a1"></span>Fol. 29*a*, col. 1\], and
his father was grieved because he had taken to wife a woman of the seed
of Canaan. And Jacob said unto Judah, "May the Lord God of our fathers
Abraham and Isaac not permit the seed of Canaan to be mingled with our
families." And there were born unto Judah by Shuah, the Canaanite woman,
\`Îr (Er), Ônân, and Shêlâ (Shelah). And Judah took a wife <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> for Er his firstborn, Tâmâr, and he
consorted with her unnaturally, and God put him to death. And Judah gave
Tâmâr to Ônân, and as soon as his seed became available for Tâmâr he
wasted it, and him also did God put to death. Thus, God did not permit
the seed of Canaan to mingle with the seed of Jacob, even as Jacob
prayed God that the seed of Canaan, the firstborn of the lascivious Ham,
might not be mingled among the generations \[<span
id="fol_29a2"></span>Fol. 29*a*, col. 2\] of the Fathers. And God made
Tâmâr go out to the roadside, and Judah lay with her in the passion of
fornication, and she conceived and brought forth Pere<u>s</u> (Pharez)
and Zarah.

 

\[Jacob in Egypt.\]

   And Jacob and all his descendants went down into Egypt to Joseph, and
he lived in Egypt seventeen years; and Jacob died, being one hundred and
forty years old, and Joseph was fifty-six years old when his father
died, in the twelfth year of <u>K</u>âhâth. And the wise physicians of
Pharaoh embalmed him, and Joseph took him up \[to Canaan\] and buried
him with Abraham and Isaac his father.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--According to the *Book of Adam* (iv. 5), Jacob lived in
Egypt fourteen years, and died there at the age of 157 years, when
Joseph was 53 years old.**\]**

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

 

\[The Genealogies of the "Tribes" and the "Children of Israel."\]

   Now there are certain doctors who trace the genealogies of the Tribes
from the death of Jacob, and who mix them together, but they do not do
this in the light of knowledge. They set in the midst two genealogies,
one of the "Tribes," and the other of the "Children of Israel" \[<span
id="fol_29b1"></span>Fol. 29*b*, col. 1\]. Now fix thine attention on
these generations, and how they became mixed together. \[When\] they
went forth from Egypt: Judah begot Pharez, Pharez begot
<u>H</u>e<u>s</u>rôn (Hezron), Hezron begot Ârâm (Râm, [1 Chron. ii.
9](../../bib/kjv/ch1.htm#2:9)), Ârâm begot Amminadab, Amminadab begot
Na<u>h</u>shôn (Nahson), and Na<u>h</u>shôn was he who became prince of
Judah. And Amminadab gave the sister of Na<u>h</u>shôn to \`Îr (so in
the text, but read Eleazar), the son of Aaron, the priest; of her was
born Phinehas, the great priest, who prayed "and the plague was stayed"
([Num. xxv. 7](../../bib/kjv/num.htm#25:7), 8; [Ps. cvi.
30](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#106:30)). Behold, I have shown thee that from
Amminadab, the priesthood of the children of Israel was transmitted by
the sister of Na<u>h</u>shôn, and the kingdom by Na<u>h</u>shôn her
brother. Observe also that the priesthood and the kingdom were
transmitted by Judah to the children of Israel.

   And Na<u>h</u>shôn begot Shîlâ, that is to say, Salmôn, and Shîlâ
begot Boaz. Observe now <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> that the
kingdom went forth from Boaz and Ruth \[<span id="fol_29b2"></span>Fol.
29*b*, col. 2\], the Moabitess, for the old man Boaz took Ruth to wife
so that Lot, the son of Abraham's brother, might have participation in
the transmission of the kingdom. And God did not deprive the righteous
man Lot of the reward of his labour, because he had suffered in exile
with Abraham, and he received the angels of God in peace. And that the
righteous man Lot might not be reviled because he slept with his
daughters, God granted that the royal succession might be maintained by
the seed of both, and that Christ should be born of the seed of Lot and
Abraham. And from the seed of Ruth, the Moabitess, Obed was born, and
from Obed, Jesse, and from Jesse, David, and from David, Solomon; these
are the descendants of Ruth, the Moabitess, the daughter of Lot. And of
Na\`mâ (Naamah, [1 Kings xiv. 21](../../bib/kjv/kg1.htm#14:21)), the
Ammonitess, another daughter of Lot, whom Solomon took to wife \[<span
id="fol_30a1"></span>Fol. 30*a*, col. 1\], was born Rehoboam, who
reigned after Solomon.

 

\[Solomon.\]

   Now Solomon married many wives, seven hundred free-born women, and
three hundred concubines; and of the thousand women which he took to
wife, he had no son except from Naamab the Ammonitess. And why was it
<span id="page_163">p. 163</span> that God did not give him a son from
these \[others\]? It was in order to prevent the wicked seed of the
Canaanites, and Jebusites, and Amorites, and Hittites, and Gergasites,
and the seed of the peoples whom God hated, from mingling in the
succession of the genealogy of Jesus Christ.

 

   **\[**NOTE from the *Kebra Nagast*, chapter lxvii.--And the Angel of
God went down to Solomon and said unto him, "From being a wise man thou
hast turned thyself into a fool, and from being a rich man thou hast
turned thyself into a poor man, and from being a king thou hast turned
thyself into a man of no account, through transgressing the commandment
of God. And the beginning of thy evil was the taking of many wives by
thee, for through this thou didst transgress His Law, and His decree,
and the ordinance of God which Moses wrote and gave to you, to Israel,
that ye should not marry wives from alien peoples, but only from your
kinsfolk and the house of your fathers, that your seed might be pure and
holy, and that God might dwell with you. But thou didst hold lightly the
Law of God, thinking that thou wast wiser than God, and that thou
wouldst get very many male children. But the foolishness of God is wiser
than the wisdom of men, and he hath only <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> given thee three sons: the one who carried off thy glory into
an alien land, and made the habitation of God to be in Ethiopia; the one
who is lame of foot, who shall sit upon thy throne for the people of
Israel, the son of the kin of thy kin from Tarbâna, of the house of
Judah; and the one who is the son of a Greek woman, a handmaiden, who in
the last days shall destroy Rehoboam and all thy kin of Israel; and this
land shall be his because he believeth in Him that shall come, the
Saviour**\]**

 

\[The chiefs of Israel born in Egypt.\]

   Now the succession of the children of Israel is this: Levi, and
Amram, and Moses, and Joshua, the son of Nôn, and Caleb, the son of
Yôfannâ (Jephunneh). These were born in Egypt.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--Moses was the son of Amram, the son of Kohath, the son
of Levi; his mother's name was Yokâbâr (Jochebed). *Book of the Bee*
([chapter xxix](../bb/bb29)).**\]**

 

\[Moses.\]

   And when Moses was born he was cast into the river, and Shîpôr (in
Ethiopic, Sephurah), the Egyptian woman, the daughter of Pharaoh, took
him up, and he lived in the house of Pharaoh <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> for forty years. And then \[<span id="fol_30a2"></span>Fol.
30*a*, col. 2\] he killed Pethkôm, the Egyptian, the chief of the bakers
of Pharaoh. Now this was noised abroad in the house of Pharaoh, after
Pharaoh's daughter Makrî, who was called "Shîpôr Me<u>s</u>rên (*i.e.*
"Trumpet of Egypt"), was dead, and Moses was afraid, and he fled to
Midian, to Reuel, the Cushite, the priest of Midian.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--Moses was a beautiful child, and was called "Pantîl"
(Paltîêl ?), and "Amlâkyâ," and the Egyptians used to call him the
"Shakwîthâ of Pharaoh's daughter." Various names are given to this
princess, *e.g.* Makrî, Mary, Shîpôr, Tharmesîs, <u>T</u>armûthîsâ; Bar
Hebraeus says she was the daughter of Amûnpthîs, or Amûnpâthîôs. *Book
of the Bee* ([chapter xxix](../bb/bb29)).**\]**

 

   And Moses took to wife Zipporah, the Cushite woman, daughter of the
priest, and two sons were born to him--Gershom and Eliezer. And in the
second year of the life of Moses, Joshua, the son of Nôn, was born in
Egypt. And Moses was eighty years old when God talked with him from out
of the bush, and because of his fear his tongue halted, even as he said
to God, "Behold, my Lord, from the day wherein Thou didst speak to me I
have been halting of tongue." Moses lived in Egypt forty years, and in
the house \[<span id="fol_30b1"></span>Fol. 30*b*, col. 1\] of the
priest of Midian forty <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> years, and he
passed forty years in governing the people. And he died at the age of
one hundred and twenty years on Mount Nebo.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--From Adam until the death of Moses was 3,868 years.
*Book of the Bee* ([chapter xxx)](../bb/bb30). M<span
class="small">OSES</span>' R<span class="small">OD</span>.-Adam cut the
rod from a branch of the Tree of Good and Evil which grew in Paradise,
and he used it as a staff all his life. It passed from hand to hand to
Abraham, who smashed his father's idols with it. It went with him to
Egypt, and when it came to Jacob he used it as a shepherd's crook. Judah
received it and gave it to Tamar, and then an angel laid it up in the
Cave of Treasures until Midian was built. An angel showed Jethro the
Cave, and he took the rod from it, and from him it went of its own free
will to Moses. The rod became a serpent, and it swallowed up the rod of
Pôsdî, the sorceress. The rod was taken unto the promised land by
Joshua, and Phineas hid it in the dust at the gate of Jerusalem, where
it remained until Christ showed it to Joseph, who took it to Egypt and
brought it back to Nazareth. It passed to James, the brother of our
Lord, but was stolen by Judas Iscariot, who gave it to the Jews who were
crucifying our Lord; to them it "became a judgment and a fall." *Book of
the Bee* ([chapter xxx](../bb/bb30)).**\]**

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

 

\[The Successors of Moses.\]

   And Joshua, the son of Nôn, was the governor of the children of
Israel for twenty-seven years. And after the death of Joshua, the son of
Nôn, Kûshân, the Wicked (Chushanrishathayim), was lord over the people
for eighty years.

   And \`Athnâîl (Othniel), the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, the
son of Jephunneh, was lord over Israel for forty years.

   And then the children of Israel were in subjection to the Moabites
for eighteen years.

   And Ahôr (Ehud), the son of Gera, ruled the children of Israel for
eighty years.

 

<span class="small">AND IN THE TWENTY-SIXTH YEAR OF HIS LIFE THE FOURTH
THOUSAND YEARS CAME TO AN END</span>.  
(*See* *Book of Adam*, IV, chapter vii.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bct08)
