[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bct05) [Next](bct07.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

 

\[THE THIRD THOUSAND YEARS: FROM THE FLOOD TO THE REIGN OF REU.\]

 

\[Noah's entry into the Ark.\]

   The entrance of Noah into the Ark took place on the day of the eve of
the Sabbath (Friday), on the seventeenth day of the blessed month of
Îyâr (May). On the Friday, in the morning (*i.e.* the third hour) the
beasts and the cattle went into the lowermost storey; and at midday all
the feathered fowl and all the reptiles went into the middle storey; and
at sunset Noah and his sons went into the Ark, on the east side of \[the
third storey\], and his wife and the wives of his sons went to the west
side. And the body of Adam was deposited in the middle of the Ark,
wherein also all the mysteries of the Church were deposited. Thus women
in church shall be on the west \[side\] \[<span
id="fol_17a2"></span>Fol. 17*a*, col. 2\], and men on the east \[side\],
so that the men may not see the faces of the women, and the women may
not see the faces of the men. Thus also was it in the Ark; the women
were on the west \[side\], and the men on the east \[side\], and the
body of our father <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> Adam was placed
between \[them\] like a raised stand (or throne). And as quietness
reigneth in the Church between men and women, so also peace reigned in
the Ark between the wild beasts, and the feathered fowl, and the
creeping things (or reptiles). And as kings, and judges, and rich men,
and poor men, and governors, and sick men, and beggars, live in concord,
that is to say, in a general bond of peace, so also was it in the Ark.
For lions, and panthers, and savage beasts of prey lived in peace and
harmony with the cattle; and the beasts that were fierce and strong
lived in peace with those that were timid and weak; and the lion with
the ox, and the wolf with the lamb, and the lion's whelp \[<span
id="fol_17b1"></span>Fol. 17*b*, col. 1\] with the calf, and the serpent
with the dove, and the hawk with the sparrow.

 

\[The Flood.\]

   And when Noah and his sons had gone into the Ark, and his wife and
the wives of his sons, on the seventeenth day of the month of Îyâr
(May), at sunset, the door of the Ark was shut fast, and Noah and his
sons in captivity in the darkness. And as soon as the door of the Ark
was shut, the floodgates of the heavens were opened, and the foundations
of the earth were rent asunder, and Ocean, that great sea which
surroundeth the whole world, poured forth its floods. And whilst <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> the floodgates of heaven were open, and the
foundations of the earth were rent asunder, the storehouses of the winds
burst their bolts, and storm and whirlwinds swept forth, and Ocean
roared and hurled its floods upon the earth. And the children of Seth,
who had besmirched themselves in the mire of fornication, ran to the
door of the Ark, and entreated Noah to open to them the door of the Ark.
And when they saw the water floods which were swirling about them and
engulfing \[<span id="fol_17b2"></span>Fol. 17*b*, col. 2\] them on all
sides, they were in great tribulation, and they tried to climb up the
mountains of Paradise, but were unable to do so. Now the Ark was closed
and sealed, and the Angel of the Lord stood over one side of it that he
might act as the pilot thereof. And when the floods of waters mastered
the children of Seth, and they began to drown in their great and mighty
waves--then was fulfilled that which David spake concerning them,
saying, "I said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of the Most High.
([Ps. lxxxii. 6](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#82:6)..md) But since ye have done
this, and ye have loved the fornication of the daughters of Cain, like
them ye shall perish, and even as they did so shall ye die."

   And when the Ark was lifted up from the earth by the mighty strength
of the waters, all the children of men, and the wild beasts, and the
feathered fowl, and the cattle, and the creeping <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> things, and everything \[living\] on the face of the earth
was drowned. And the waters \[<span id="fol_18a1"></span>Fol. 18*a*,
col. 1\] of the Flood mounted up above all the tops of the high
mountains fifteen cubits \[variants, 25, 50 cubits\], according to the
measure of the Spirit. \[The cubit of the Holy Ghost = 3 ordinary
cubits.\] And the flood waxed strong, and the waters thereof lifted up
the Ark until it reached the skirts \[of the mountain\] of Paradise. And
as the flood had been blessed by Paradise (*i.e.* had been made holy),
it bowed its head, and kissed the skirts of Paradise and turned itself
back to destroy the whole earth. And the Ark flew on the wings of the
wind over the waters of the flood from east to west, and from north to
south, and it marked out \[by its path\] a cross on the waters. And the
Ark flew about for one hundred and fifty days, and it came to rest on
the mountains of <u>K</u>ardô (*i.e.* Ararat, the Jabal al-Jûdî of the
Arabs, near Jazîrat ibn \`Umar) in the seventh month, that is to say, in
the First Teshrî (October) on the seventeenth day thereof. And God
commanded the waters, and they became separated from each other. The
celestial waters were taken up, and ascended to their own place above
\[<span id="fol_18a2"></span>Fol. 18*a*, col. 2\] the heavens, whence
they came. The waters which had risen up from the earth returned to the
lowermost abyss \[under the earth\]; and those which belonged to <span
id="page_115">p. 115</span> the Ocean \[which surroundeth the whole
world\] returned to the innermost parts thereof. And the waters which
had been on the earth, and had been assigned to it by the Divine Nod for
the needs thereof from the beginning, remained upon it.

   And the waters diminished little by little until the tenth month,
which is Shebât (February), and on the first day thereof the tops of the
mountains appeared. And, forty days later, on the tenth day of the month
of Âdhâr (March), Noah opened the east window of the Ark, and sent forth
a raven to bring back tidings; and the raven departed and did not
return. And after the waters had diminished a little more from the
earth, Noah sent forth a dove; and it found no place to rest, and it
returned to Noah to the Ark. And after seven days he sent forth another
dove, and it returned to him, carrying in its beak an olive leaf. Now
the dove figureth for us the Two Covenants. In the First Covenant
\[<span id="fol_18b1"></span>Fol. 18*b*, col. 1\] the spirit which spake
by the Prophets did not find a place of rest among that rebellious
people (*i.e.* the Jews); and in the Second Covenant it rested on the
peoples through the waters of baptism.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The above description of the Flood agrees substantially
with that given in the *Book of Adam* (chapters ix and x), and in the
*Book of the Bee* ([chapter xx](../bb/bb20).md).**\]**

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

 

\[Noah leaves the Ark.\]

   And in the six hundred and first year of the life of Noah, on the
first day of the month of Nîsân (April) the waters had dried up from the
face of the earth. And in the second month, which is Îyâr (May), wherein
Noah went into the Ark on the twenty-seventh day, on the holy first day
of the week (Sunday), their going forth took place; and he and his wife
went forth, and his sons and their wives went with them. Now, when they
went into the Ark they went in in separate companies, Noah and his sons
\[in one company\], and his wife and their wives in another company; and
the men did not know the women until they went forth from the Ark. And
all the wild beasts, and all the cattle, and all the feathered fowl, and
all the creeping things went forth from the Ark on the first day of the
week.

 

\[Noah founds Themânôn, the city of the "Eight."\]

   And when they had gone forth Noah began work on the ground \[<span
id="fol_18b2"></span>Fol. 18*b*, col. 2\], and they built a city and
called the name thereof "Themânôn" (*i.e.* "Eight"), after the name of
the eight souls who had gone forth from the Ark. And Noah built an
altar, and offered up upon it an offering of beasts that were clean and
feathered <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> fowl. And God was appeased
by the offering of Noah, and he established with him an everlasting
covenant, and swore an oath, saying, "I will never again make a Flood."
He took away the arrow of wrath from the bow which is in the clouds, and
he stripped from it the string of anger, and spread it out (*i.e.*
unbent it) in the clouds. For formerly, when the bow was bent in the
firmament against that generation of the children of Cain, the murderer,
they used to see the arrow of wrath placed in position on the string of
anger, but after the Flood they did not see the arrow on the string.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--According to the *Book of Adam* (iii. 11), the waters
dried up in the 607th year of the life of Noah. The altar on which Noah
sacrificed was that on which Adam, Cain, and Abel had laid their
offerings; it had been damaged by the Flood, but Noah rebuilt it. The
city of Themânôn is îdentified with Sûbhâ (*i.e.* Ni<u>s</u>îbis) in the
*Book of the Bee* ([chapter xx](../bb/bb20).md), but this is a false
identification. The "City of Eight," Themânôn, is not to be identified
with the τὸ Θομάνων {Greek: *tò Ðománwn*} of Theophylact Simocatta (vol.
ii. chap. 10, p. 86), which lay on the right bank of the Tigris near
<u>H</u>i<u>s</u>n Kêfâ, but with the Sûk Thamânîn of the Arab
geographers, which lay at a distance of one day's journey <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> from Jazîrat ibn \`Umar. It was situated
high up in the mountains, and Khusraw Anôsharwân used to encamp there
during the heats of summer. Near Burzmihrân, and between Jazîrat ibn
\`Umar and Thamânôn was Dêr Abbûn, which, according to Yâ<u>k</u>ût,
contained the tomb of Noah. It is interesting to note that the Arabs
call Noah's city Sû<u>k</u> Thamânîn (*i.e.* "Market of the Eighty") and
not "Market of the Eight." For further details see Hoffmann, G.,
*Auszüge aus syrischen Akten*, page 174.**\]**

 

\[The Vineyard of Noah.\]

   And when they had gone forth from the Ark, they sowed seed and
planted a vineyard; and they pressed out new wine. And Noah drew nigh,
and drank some of it, and immediately he had drunk of it \[<span
id="fol_19a1"></span>Fol. 19*a*, col. 1\] he became drunk. And having
fallen asleep, his shame was seen, and his son Ham saw the nakedness of
his father, and did not cover it; but he laughed at him and made a mock
of him, and he ran and called his brethren that they also might make a
mock of their father. And when Shem and Japhet heard of it they were
dismayed exceedingly. And they rose up, and took a cloak, and walked
backwards with their faces turned away that they might not see the
nakedness of their father. And they cast the cloak over him and <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> covered him. And when Noah woke up from the
sleep of his wine, his wife told him about everything that had happened,
and he also within himself knew what had happened to him. And Noah was
exceedingly angry with his son Ham, and he said, "Cursed be Canaan; he
shall be a servant of servants to his brethren."

   Why, since the whole of the folly was Ham's, was Canaan cursed,
except that, when the youth grew up \[<span id="fol_19a2"></span>Fol.
19*a*, col. 2\], and attained the full measure of his understanding,
Satan entered into him, and became to him a teacher of sin? And he
renewed the work of the house of Cain, the murderer. He constructed and
made reed instruments and harps, and the fiends and the devils went unto
them and dwelt therein. And immediately wind was blown through them (the
reeds), the devils sang inside them, and sent forth loud sounds; and
when men struck the harps the devils became operative inside them. And
when Noah heard that Canaan had done this, he was grieved sorely,
because the work of error, through which the fall of the children of
Seth had taken place, was renewed. For by means of singing, and lewd
play, and the mad lasciviousness of the children of Cain, Satan had cast
down the mighty men, the "sons of God," into fornication. And through
the music <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> of reed pipes and harps sin
had multiplied \[<span id="fol_19b1"></span>Fol. 19*b*, col. 1\] among
the former generations until, at length, God became wroth and made the
Flood. And Canaan was cursed because he had dared to do this, and his
seed became a servant of servants, that is to say, to the Egyptians, and
the Cushites, and the Mûsâyê (Mysians), \[and the Indians, and all the
Ethiopians, whose skins are black\]. And because Ham had dared to make a
mock of his father he was called "vile" (or "lascivious") all the days
of his life.

   Now Noah in his lying down in sleep, having drunk wine, symbolizeth
the Cross of Christ, as the blessed man David singeth in his Psalm
concerning him, saying, "Wake up, Lord, like a sleeping man, and like a
man whom wine hath overcome." \[Compare Psalm xlv. 23 {*sic*, [Psalm
xliv. 23](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#44:23.md)}; [lxxviii.
65](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#78:65.md).\] Let the heretics who say "God was
crucified" hold their peace. Here David calleth him "Lord," even as
Peter the Apostle said, "This Jesus, whom ye crucified, hath God made
Lord and Messiah (Christ)." (Compare [Acts v.
30](../../bib/kjv/act.htm#5:30), 31.\] He did not say "God" (Allâhâ.md),
but "Lord" (Mâryâ), thus \[<span id="fol_19b2"></span>Fol. 19*b*, col.
2\] making known concerning the unity (or oneness) of the Two Persons
who were united in one sonship. Now when Noah woke up from his sleep he
cursed Canaan, and reduced his seed to slavery, and scattered his seed
among the <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> nations. And when our Lord
rose from the dead He cursed the Jews, and scattered them among the
nations. Now the seed of Canaan, as I have already said, are the
Egyptians, and behold, they are scattered over the whole earth, and have
been made servants of servants. And of what kind is this slavery of
slavery? Behold, the Egyptians go round about all over the earth
carrying loads on their backs (literally, necks). Now, men who are not
fettered under the yoke of slavery, when despatched by their masters on
journeys, do not march on their feet and carry loads, but they ride upon
beasts in an honourable manner, like their masters. The seed of Ham are
the Egyptians who carry loads, and they march \[<span
id="fol_20a1"></span>Fol. 20*a*, col. 1\] on the roads with their backs
and necks breaking under their loads, and they wander round to the doors
of the children of their brethren. The seed of Ham was reduced, through
the folly of Canaan, to suffer this penalty, that is, to become servants
even to servants.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--The *Book of the Bee* ([chapter xx](../bb/bb20).md) says
concerning the cursing of Ham, "The reason why he (Noah) cursed Canaan,
who was not as yet born, nor had sinned, was because Ham had been saved
with him in the Ark from the waters of the Flood, and had with his
father received <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> the divine blessing,
and also because the arts of sin--I mean music and dancing and all other
hateful things--were about to be revived by his posterity, for the art
of music proceeded from the seed of Canaan." The same work adds, "After
the Flood a son was born to Noah, and he called his name Yôna<u>t</u>ôn;
and he provided him with gifts and sent him to the fire of the sun, to
the east." The *Book of Adam* (iii. 13), merely states that Noah married
another wife, who bore him seven children, and that he continued to
dwell on that mountain until the end of his days.**\]**

 

\[The Death of Noah.\]

   And Noah lived three hundred and fifty years after he came forth from
the Ark. And when he was sick unto death, Shem, and Ham, and Japhet, and
Arpakhshar (Arphaxad), and Shâla<u>h</u> (Salah) gathered together unto
him. And Noah called Shem, his firstborn, and said unto him privily,
"Take heed, my son Shem, unto what I say unto thee this day. When I am
dead, go into the Ark, wherein thou hast been saved, and bring out the
body of our father Adam, and let no man have knowledge of what thou
doest. And take with thee from this place provision for the way, bread
and wine, and take with thee Melchisedek, the son of Mâlâkh \[<span
id="fol_20a2"></span>Fol. 20*a*, col. 2\], because him hath God chosen
from <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> among all your descendants that
he may minister before Him in respect of the body of our father Adam.
And take the body and place it in the centre of the earth, and make
Melchisedek to sit down there. And the Angel of God shall go before you,
and shall show you the way wherein ye shall go, and also the place
wherein the body of Adam shall be deposited, which is, indeed, the
centre of the earth. There the four quarters of the earth embrace each
other. For when God made the earth His power went before it, and the
earth, from \[its\] four quarters, ran after it, like the winds and the
swift breezes, and there (*i.e.* in the centre of the earth) His power
stood still and was motionless. There shall redemption be made for Adam,
and for all his posterity. Now this story, or mystery, was handed down
to us from Adam in all generations \[<span id="fol_20b1"></span>Fol.
20*b*, col. 1\]. Adam commanded Seth, and Seth commanded Ânôsh (Enos),
and Ânôsh commanded <u>K</u>ainân (Cainan), and <u>K</u>ainân commanded
Mahlâlâîl, and Mahlâlâîl commanded Yârêd, and Yârêd commanded Enoch, and
Enoch commanded Methuselah, and Methuselah commanded Lamech; and behold,
I command thee this day. And take heed that this story is never
mentioned again in all your generations. Get thee up, and take the body
of Adam, and deposit it secretly in the place which God shall show thee
<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> until the day of redemption." And when
Noah had given all these commands unto his son Shem, he died, \[being\]
nine hundred and fifty years old, in the month of Îyâr (May), on the
second day thereof, at the second hour of the first day of the week
(Sunday). And Shem his son embalmed him, and buried him in the city
which he had built (*i.e.* Themânôn), and they made a mourning for him
forty days.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--According to the *Book of the Bee*, Noah died on the
fourth day of the week (Wednesday), on the second day of the month of
Nîsân (April), at the second hour of the day. The *Book of Adam* says
that he was buried on the mountain on which the Ark rested. The same
authority states (iii. chapter xiv) that the Ark was closed during the
days of Noah, but that Noah went into it every evening to light the lamp
which he had made, and which burned before the body of Adam. It is also
stated that during his dying speech Noah indicated to each of his sons
which part of the earth he was to dwell with his posterity. The
territory of Shem extended from Jerusalem eastwards as far as India, and
southwards as far as the mountains which divided Egypt from the land of
the Philistines. It included Mount Zion, Mount Sinai, and the Garden of
Eden. Ham's territory extended from <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>
Aris towards the south, as far as Fardundan and Gadariun, and also to
the borders of the west. Japhet's portion was very large, and extended
from the angle of the west to Damatha in the south, and all the north as
far as Aris. Canaan, a descendant of Ham, had seven sons, and he seized
seven of the great cities of Shem, and set these sons over them; and he
doubled the size of his own portion. Later, God gave these cities back
to the children of Shem, and blotted out Canaan's posterity, *Kebra
Nagast* (chapter xii).**\]**

 

\[The Departure of Shem with the body of Adam.\]

   And after the death of Noah Shem did as his father had commanded him.
And he went into \[<span id="fol_20b2"></span>Fol. 20*b*, col. 2\] the
Ark by night, and brought out the body of Adam therefrom, and he sealed
the Ark with his father's seal, and no man perceived \[what he had
done\]. And he called Ham and Japhet, and said unto them, "My brethren,
my father commanded me to go up and travel over the earth, even to the
sea (*i.e.* the Mediterranean), and I am to see what the rivers are
like, and then return unto you. And behold, my wife and the children of
my house are with you (*i.e.* in your care); let your eyes be upon
them." And his brethren said unto him, "Take with thee a company of men
from the camp, for the <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> land is a
desert waste, and is shorn of inhabitants, and there are wild beasts
therein." And Shem said unto them, "The Angel of the Lord shall go up
with me, and he shall save me from every evil thing"; and his brethren
said unto him, "Go in peace, and may the Lord God of our Fathers be with
thee." And Shem said unto Mâlâkh (the brother of Shâlâh (Salah), the son
of \[Cainan\] and \[grand\]son of Arphaxad), the father of Melchisedek,
and Yôzadhâ<u>k</u>, his mother, "Give ye me Melchisedek \[<span
id="fol_21a1"></span>Fol. 21*a*, col. 1\], that he may go up with me,
and be a consolation for me on the road." And Mâlâkh and
Yôzadhâ<u>k</u>, his mother, said unto Shem, "Take \[him\] and go in
peace." And Shem gave commands unto his brethren, and said unto them,
"My brethren, my father made me swear that neither I, nor any of your
descendants, should go into the Ark," and he sealed the Ark with his
seal, and said unto them, "Let no man go near it."

 

\[Shem carries the body of Adam to Golgotha.\]

   And Shem took the body of Adam and Melchisedek, and went forth by
night from among his people, and behold, the Angel of the Lord, who was
going before them, appeared unto them. And their journey was very
speedy, because the Angel of the Lord strengthened them until they
arrived at that place. And when they arrived <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> at Gâghûltâ (Golgotha), which is the centre of the earth, the
Angel of the Lord showed Shem the place \[for the body of Adam\]. And
when Shem had deposited the body of our father Adam upon that place
\[<span id="fol_21a2"></span>Fol. 21*a*, col. 2\], the four quarters
\[of the earth\] separated themselves from each other, and the earth
opened itself in the form of a cross, and Shem and Melchisedek deposited
the body of Adam there (*i.e.* in the cavity). And as soon as they had
laid it therein, the four quarters \[of the earth\] drew quickly
together, and enclosed the body of our father Adam, and the door of the
created world was shut fast. And that place was called
"<u>K</u>ar<u>k</u>aphtâ " (*i.e.* "Skull"), because the head of all the
children of men was deposited there. And it was called "Gâghûltâ,"
because it was round \[like the head\], and "Re<u>s</u>îphtâ " (*i.e.* a
trodden-down thing), because the head of the accursed serpent, that is
to say, Satan, was crushed there, and "Gefîftâ " (Gabbatha), because all
the nations were to be gathered together to it.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The *Book of the Bee* devotes a chapter
([xxi](../bb/bb21).md) to Melchisedek, and says that neither the father nor
mother of this Melchisedek were written down in the genealogies; not
that he had no natural parents, but that they were not written down. The
greater number of the <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> doctors say that
he was of the sect of Canaan, whom Noah cursed. In the Book of
Chronography, however (the author), affirms and says that he was of the
seed of Shem, the son of Noah. Shem begot Arphaxar, Arphaxar begot
Cainan, and Cainan begot Shâlâ<u>h</u> and Mâlâ<u>h</u>. Shâlâ<u>h</u>
was written down in the genealogies; but Mâlâ<u>h</u> was not, because
his affairs were not sufficiently important to be written down in the
genealogies. The *Book of Adam* (iii. 16) says that Cainan was the
father of Melchisedek, and that the Angel of the Face, or Michael,
appeared to him, and told him that he was going to send away his son
from him. This same angel also appeared to Melchisedek and told him to
go with Shem, and to minister before the body of Adam in the centre of
the earth, and also to Shem. After his interview with the angel, Shem
made a splendid coffin to hold the body of Adam, and prepared bread and
wine for the journey. When he and Melchisedek went to the Ark to take
out the body, they found that the door of it had been locked by Noah,
and they had no key to open it. As soon as Melchisedek touched the lock
the door opened of itself, and the voice of Adam was heard to address
him as the "priest of the Most High God." Melchisedek went into the Ark,
and Michael helped him to carry out Adam's body, and Shem brought out
the gold, <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> frankincense and myrrh. Shem
laid the body in the coffin which he had made, and then shut the door of
the Ark. Melchisedek was fifteen years of age when he set out with Shem.
The voice of Adam told Shem when they arrived at the centre of the
earth, and as soon as the coffin touched the rock, the rock split
asunder to receive it. On the following morning Melchisedek builded an
altar of twelve stones, and offered up upon it the bread and wine which
Shem had brought from Paradise.**\]**

 

\[Shem's commands to Melchisedek.\]

   And Shem said unto Melchisedek, "Thou shalt be the priest of the Most
High God, because thou alone hath God chosen to minister before Him in
this place. And thou shalt sit (*i.e.* dwell) here continually, and
shalt not depart from this place all the days of thy life. Thou shalt
not take a wife, thou shalt not shave thy head, and thou shalt not pour
out blood \[<span id="fol_21b1"></span>Fol. 21*b*, col. 1\] in this
place. Thou shalt not offer up wild beasts nor feathered fowl, but thou
shalt offer up bread and wine always; and thou shalt not build a
building in this place. And behold, the Angel of the Lord shall come
down to thee and visit thee continually." And Shem embraced and kissed
Melchisedek, and blessed him, and he returned to his brethren. And
Mâlâkh, the <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> father of Melchisedek, and
Yôzâdhâ<u>k</u>, his mother, said \[unto Shem\], "Where is the young
man?" And he said, "He died on the journey, and I buried him there"
(*i.e.* where he died); and they mourned for him greatly.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--A scribe's note says that in the manuscript of one
Ma<u>k</u>bal Melchisedek's father was called "Har<u>k</u>lêîm" and his
mother "Shêlâthîêl " (Budge, [*Book of the Bee*, page
34](../bb/bb21.htm#footnotes_page_34).md). Melchisedek wore a tunic of skin
and a leather girdle, and an angel dwelt with him, and protected him,
and gave him food (*Book of Adam*, iii. 21). When he was old, the kings
of the earth heard his fame, and eleven of them gathered together and
came to see him; and they entreated him to go with them, but he would
not be persuaded. And when he did not conform to their wishes, they
built a city for him there, and he called it Jerusalem; and the kings
said to one another, "This is the king of all the earth, and the father
of nations."**\]**

 

\[The Generations of Shem.\]

   And when Shem had lived six hundred years he died, and Arphakhshar,
his son, and Shâlâ<u>h</u> (Salah), and \`Abhâr (Eber), his sons, buried
him.

   And Arphakhshar was thirty and five years old when he begot
Shâlâ<u>h</u>, and all the days of his <span id="page_131">p. 131</span>
life were four hundred and thirty-eight years \[<span
id="fol_21b2"></span>Fol. 21*b*, col. 2\], and he died, and
Shâlâ<u>h</u>, his son, and \`Abhâr and Pâlâg (Peleg) buried him in
Arpakhsharath, the city which he built after his own name.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--After Shem the *Book of Adam* (iii. 22) inserts the name
of Cainan, the father of Melchisedek (*sic*), who lived 589 years.
Shem's years are given as 550.**\]**

 

   Salah was thirty years old when he begot Eber, and all the days of
his life were four hundred and thirty-three years \[Ethiopic variant,
408 years\], and he died, and Eber, his son, and Peleg, and Ar\`ô (Reu)
puried hill in Shelî<u>h</u>ôn, the city which he built after his own
name.

   Eber was thirty and four years old when he begot Peleg; and all the
days of his life were four hundred and sixty-four \[Ethiopic variant,
434\] years; and he died, and Peleg his son and Reu and Sorôgh (Serug)
buried him in \`Ebhrîn, the city which he built after his own name.

   Peleg was thirty years old when he begot Reu; and all the days of his
life were two hundred and thirty-nine years, and he died \[and they
buried him in the city of Peleg, which he had built after his own
name\].

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

 

\[The Migration to the land of Sêntar.\]

   And in the days of Peleg all the tribes and families of the children
of Noah gathered together, and went up from the East. And they found a
\[<span id="fol_22a1"></span>Fol. 22*a*, col. 1\] plain in the land of
Sên\`ar (Shinar ?), and they all sat down there; and from Adam until
this time they were all of one speech and one language. They all spake
this language, that is to say, S<span class="small">ÛRYÂYÂ</span>
(Syrian), which is Â<span class="small">RÂMÂYÂ</span> (Aramean), and
this language is the king of all languages. Now, ancient writers have
erred in that they said that Hebrew was the first \[language\], and in
this matter they have mingled an ignorant mistake with their writing.
For all the languages there are in the world are derived from Syrian,
and all the languages in books are mingled with it. In the writing of
the Syrians the left hand stretcheth out to the right hand, and all the
children of the left hand (*i.e.* the heathen) draw nigh to the right
hand of God; now with the Greeks, and Romans, and the Hebrews, the right
hand stretcheth out to the left. \[Both Hebrew and Syriac are written
from right to left, but Greek and Latin from left to right.\]

   \[<span id="fol_22a2"></span>Fol. 22*a*, col. 2.\] And in the days of
Peleg the Tower which is in Babel was built, and there the tongues of
men were confounded. \[A marginal note says, "the division of tongues
<span id="page_133">p. 133</span> took place at midnight."\] And from
that place they were scattered over the face of all the earth; and that
place was called "Babel," because tongues were confounded there.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--The name Babel or Babylon has nothing to do with the
Hebrew words "to mix, to confound." "Babel" is a transcription of the
Assyrian words "Bâb-ilu," which mean "Gate of God," and which are the
Semitic translation of the Sumerian words K<span
class="small">A-DINGIRRA-KI</span>.**\]**

 

   And after the division of tongues Peleg died in great sorrow, and
with tears in his eyes and grief in his heart, because in his days the
earth was divided. And his son Reu, and Serug, and Nâ<u>h</u>ôr buried
him in Peleghîn, the city which he had built after his own name. And
there were seventy-two tongues in the earth, and seventy-two heads of
tribes (or families), and each tribe and tongue made unto themselves a
chief like a king.

 

\[The Posterity of Japhet.\]

   And the seed of Japhet became thirty-seven nations and kingdoms; viz.
Gâmâr (Gomer), and Yâwân, and Mâdhâi, and Tûbîl, and Mâshêkh \[<span
id="fol_22b1"></span>Fol. 22*b*, col. 1\], and Tîrês, and all the
kingdoms of the Alânâyê; all these are the children of Japhet.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

 

   **\[**NOTES.--Another list gives: Gomer (Goths), Magog (Galatians),
Madai (Medes), Javan (Greeks), Tûbîl (Bithynians), Meshech (Mysians),
Tîras (Thracians), and the Ansh<u>k</u>lâyê. From Gomer sprang the
Ashkenaz (Armenians), Danphar (Cappadocians), Togarmah (Asians), and the
Isaurians. From Javan sprang Halles (Hellas), Tarshish, Cilicia, Cyprus,
Kittim, Doranim (*see* [Gen. x. 4](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:4).md), and the
Macedonians. *Book of the Bee* ([chapter xxii](../bb/bb22).md).**\]**

 

   And the sons of Hâm--Kûsh (Nubia), and Me<u>s</u>rîm (Egypt), and
Pôt, and Canaan, and all their children. And the sons of Shem--\`Îlâm
(Elamites), and Âshôr (Assyrians), and Arpakhshar (Persians ?), and Lôdh
(Lud), and Ârâm (Arameans, Damascenes, and Harranites), and all their
children. Now the children of Japhet clung to the borders of the east,
from the Mountain of Nôdh, which is on the confines of the east, to the
Tigris and the confines of the north, and from Ba<u>k</u>tôrônôs
(Bactria ?) as far as Gadhrîôn (Gadarea ?). And the children of Shem
held from Persia \[in\] the east as far as the sea of Tadhrasn<u>k</u>ôs
in the west; unto them belongeth the middle of the earth, and they held
sovereignty and dominion therein. The children of Shem occupy all the
southern and a little of the western quarter.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

   And Reu lived thirty-two years, and begot Serug. And in the days of
Reu, in his one hundred \[<span id="fol_22b2"></span>Fol. 22*b*, col.
2\] and thirtieth year, Nimrod, the mighty man, the first king on the
earth, reigned, and he reigned sixty-nine years; and the beginning of
his kingdom was Babel. This Nimrod saw the figure of a crown in the
heavens, and he called Sîsân, the weaver, who wore a crown like unto it,
and he set it on his head. And because of this men used to say that the
crown came down to him from heaven.

 

   **\[**NOTE.--Nimrod became so wicked that he thought he was God.
*Book of Adam* (iii. 23).**\]**

 

<span class="small">IN THE DAYS OF REU THE THIRD THOUSAND YEARS CAME TO
AN END</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bct07.md)
