[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pme04)  [Next](pme06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### II.

### VULGAR ERRORS.

GIBBON'S remarks upon the legislation of Constantine, Theodosius, and
Justinian supply a fair example of the way in which men of learning and
open mind have hitherto regarded what, after all, is a phenomenon worthy
of cold and calm consideration. "I touch," he says, "with reluctance,
and despatch with impatience, a more odious vice, of which modesty
rejects the name, and nature abominates the idea." After briefly
alluding to the morals of Etruria, Greece, and Rome, he proceeds to the
enactments of Constantine: Adultery was first declared to be a capital
offence the same penalties were inflicted on the passive and active
guilt of pæderasty; and all criminals, of free or servile condition,
were either drowned, or beheaded, or cast alive into the, avenging
flames." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Then, without further
comment, he observes: "The adulterers were spared by the common sympathy
of mankind; but the lovers of their own sex were pursued by general and
pious indignation." "Justinian relaxed the punishment at least

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

of female infidelity: the guilty spouse was only condemned to solitude
and penance, and at the end of two years she might be recalled to the
arms of a forgiving. husband. But the same Emperor declared himself the
implacable enemy of unmanly lust, and the cruelty of his persecution can
scarcely be excused by the purity of his motives. In defiance of every
principle of justice he stretched to past as well as future offences the
operations of his edicts, with the previous allowance of a short respite
for confession and pardon. A painful death was inflicted by the
amputation of the sinful instrument, or the insertion of sharp reeds
into the pores and tubes of most exquisite sensibility." One consequence
of such legislation may be easily foreseen. "A sentence of death and
infamy was often founded on the slight and suspicious evidence of a
child or a servant: the guilt of the green faction, of the rich, and of
the enemies of Theodora, was presumed by the judges, and pæderasty
became the crime of those to whom no crime could be imputed."

This state of things has prevailed wherever the edicts of Justinian have
been adopted into the laws of nations. The Cathari, the Paterini, the
heretics of Provence, the Templars, the Fraticelli, were all accused of
unnatural crimes, tortured into confession, and put to death. Where
nothing else could be adduced against an unpopular sect, a political
antagonist, a wealthy corporation,--a rival in literature, a powerful
party-leader, unnatural crime was insinuated, and a cry of "Down with
the pests of society" prepared the populace for a crusade.

It is the common belief that all subjects of sexual

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

inversion have originally loved women, but that, through monstrous
debauchery and superfluity of naughtiness, tiring of normal pleasure,
they have wilfully turned their appetites into other channels. This is
true about a certain number. But the sequel of this Essay will prove
that it does not meet by far the larger proportion of cases, in whom
such instincts are inborn, and a considerable percentage in whom they
are also inconvertible. Medical jurists and physicians have recently
agreed to accept this as a fact.

It is the common belief that a male who loves his own sex must be
despicable, degraded, depraved, vicious, and incapable of humane or
generous sentiments. If Greek history did not contradict this
supposition, a little patient enquiry into contemporary manners would
suffice to remove it. But people will not take this trouble about a
matter, which, like Gibbon, they "touch with reluctance and despatch
with impatience." Those who are obliged to do so find to their surprise
that "among the men who are subject to this deplorable vice there are
even quite intelligent, talented, and highly-placed persons, of
excellent and even noble character." <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
The

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

vulgar expect to discover the objects of their outraged animosity in the
scum of humanity. But these may be met with every day in drawing-rooms,
law-courts, banks, universities, mess-rooms on the bench, the throne,
the chair of the professor under the blouse of the workman, the cassock
of the priest, the epaulettes of the officer, the smock-frock of the
ploughman, the wig of the barrister, the mantle of the peer, the costume
of the actor, the tights of the athlete, the gown of the academician.

It is the common belief that one, and only one, unmentionable act is
what the lovers seek as the source of their unnatural gratification, and
that this produces spinal disease, epilepsy, consumption, dropsy, and
the like.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

Nothing can be more mistaken, as the scientifically

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

reported cases of avowed and adult sinners amply demonstrate. Neither do
they invariably or even usually prefer the *aversa Venus*; nor, when
this happens, do they exhibit peculiar signs of suffering in
health. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) Excess in any venereal
pleasure will produce diseases of nervous exhaustion and imperfect
nutrition. But the indulgence of inverted sexual instincts within due
limits, cannot be proved to be especially pernicious. Were it so, the
Dorians and Athenians, including Sophocles, Pindar, Æschines,
Epaminondas, all the Spartan kings and generals, the Theban legion,
Pheidias, Plato, would have been one nation of rickety, phthisical,
dropsical paralytics. The grain of truth contained in this vulgar error
is that, under the prevalent laws and hostilities of modern society, the
inverted passion has to be indulged furtively, spasmodically,
hysterically; that the repression of it through fear and shame
frequently leads to habits of self-abuse; and that its unconquerable
solicitations sometimes convert it from a healthy outlet of the sexual
nature into a morbid monomania. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) It is
also true that professional male

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

prostitutes, like their female counterparts, suffer from local and
constitutional disorders, as is only natural. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

It is the common belief that boys under age are specially liable to
corruption. This error need not be confuted here. Anyone who chooses to
read the cases recorded by Casper-Liman, Casper in his Novellen,
Krafft-Ebing, and Ulrichs, or to follow the developments of the present
treatise, or to watch the manners of London after dark, will be
convicted of its absurdity. Young boys are less exposed to dangers from
abnormal than young girls from normal voluptuaries.

It is the common belief that all subjects from inverted instinct carry
their lusts written in their faces; that they

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

are pale, languid, scented, effeminate, painted, timid, oblique in
expression. This vulgar error rests upon imperfect observation. A
certain class of such people are undoubtedly feminine. From their
earliest youth they have shown marked inclination for the habits and the
dress of women; and when they are adult, they do everything in their
power to obliterate their manhood. It is equally true that such unsexed
males possess a strong attraction for some abnormal individuals. But it
is a gross mistake to suppose that all the tribe betray these
attributes. The majority differ in no detail of their outward
appearance, their physique, or their dress from normal men. They are
athletic, masculine in habits, frank in manner, passing through society
year after year without arousing a suspicion of their inner temperament.
Were it not so, society would long ago have had its eyes opened to the
amount of perverted sexuality it harbours.

The upshot of this discourse on vulgar errors is that popular opinion is
made up of. a number of contradictory misconceptions and confusions.
Moreover, it has been taken for granted that "to investigate the
depraved instincts of humanity is unprofitable and disgusting."
Consequently the subject has been imperfectly studied; and individuals
belonging to radically different species are confounded in one vague
sentiment of reprobation. Assuming that they are all abominable, society
is 'Content to punish them indiscriminately. The depraved debauchee who
abuses boys receives the same treatment as the young man who loves a
comrade. The male prostitute who earns his money by extortion is
scarcely more contemned than a man of birth and breeding who has been
seen walking with soldiers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[9:1](pme05.htm#fr_0) Vindices Flammæ.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[11:1](pme05.htm#fr_1) Stieber, "Practisches
Lehrbuch der Criminal-Polizei," 1860, cap. 19, quoted by Ulrichs,
"Araxes," p. 9. It is not necessary to multiply evidences upon a point
so patent to every man of the world. But I will nevertheless translate a
striking passage from Mantegazza (*op. cit.*, p. 148). "Nor is this
infamous abomination confined to the vilest classes of our society. It
soars into the highest spheres of wealth and intelligence. Within the
narrow range of my own experience I have known among the most scandalous
sodomites a French journalist, a German poet, an Italian statesman, and
a Spanish jurist; all of these men of exquisite taste and profound
culture!" It would not he difficult to draw up a list of English kings,
bishops, deans, nobles <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> of the highest
rank, poets, historians, dramatists, officers in the army and navy,
civil servants, schoolmasters in the most fashionable schools,
physicians, members of Parliament, journalists, barristers, who in their
lifetime were, as Dante says, "d'un medesmo peccato al mondo lerci."
Many belonging to the past are notorious; and no good could come of
mentioning the names of the living.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[12:1](pme05.htm#fr_2) This accusation against
men who feel a sexual inclination fur males loses some of its
significance when we consider how common the practice of *Venus aversa*
is among libertines who love women. Parent-Duchatelet asserts that no
prostitute after a certain age has escaped it. Coffignon, in his book
on, "La Corruption à Paris" (p. 324), says: "Chaque année, il passe en
traîtement à l'hôpital de Lourcine une [certaine](errata.htm#0) de
femmes sodomistes. . . . Je suis persuadé qu'à l’hôpital de St. Lazare
la proportion des sodomistes est encore beaucoup plus grande. . . . Les
maîtresses de maison, professant cet odieux principe que la clientèle
doit être satisfaite, ne permettent pas à une fille de se refuser à une
acte de sodomie." Tardieu (Attentats, &c., p. 198) observes: "Chose
singulière! c'est principalement des rapports conjugaux que se sont
produits les faits de cette nature."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[13:1](pme05.htm#fr_3) See Casper-Liman, vol. i.,
p. 182, at the end of Case 71.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[13:2](pme05.htm#fr_4) While studying what
Germans call the *Casuistik* of this question in medical, forensic, and
anthropological works, we often meet with cases where inverted sexuality
exhibits extraordinary symptoms of apparent craziness--strange
partialities for particular kinds of dress, occupations in the beloved
object, nastinesses, and so forth. But it must be remarked first that
the same symptoms are exhibited by sexually normal natures
(Krafft-Ebing, Observations 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, and the cases recorded in footnote to page 90); and, secondly,
that if they should appear to be more frequent in the abnormal, this can
in a great measure be ascribed to the fact that these latter cases only
come under the observation of <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> medical
men and judges when the patients have already for many years been
suffering from all the pangs of a coerced and defrauded instinct. There
is nothing in the copious history of Greece and Rome upon this subject
to lead us to suppose that in a society which tolerated sexual
inversion, its subjects were more conspicuous for filthy and degrading
or insane proclivities than ordinary men and women were. Those who can
bring themselves to enquire into such matters may convince themselves by
reading Forberg's annotations to "Hermaphroditus," Rosenbaum's
"Lustseuche," the pseudo-Meursius, and the pornographical dialogues of
Aretino. It will appear conclusively that both in ancient and in modern
times the normal sexual instinct has been subject to the wildest freaks
and aberrations; not in actually diseased persons, but simply in lustful
wantons and the epicures of new sensations. The curious things we know
about flagellation and cruelty in connection with the ordinary appetite
should also be remembered. As a final note on this topic, I will refer
to a passage quoted by Tarnowsky from a work of Taxil, describing a
peculiarly repulsive class of fashionable libertines in Paris called
"les stercoraires" (*op. cit.*, p. 70). Compare what Mantegazza reports
of a "gentile ufficiale francese" (Gli amore degli uomini, vol. i. p.
117).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[14:1](pme05.htm#fr_5) See upon this point
Tardieu, "Attentats aux Mœurs," Rosenbaum, "Die Lustseuche."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Literature--Descriptive](pme06)
