[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [LGBT](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pme08)  [Next](pme10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### VI.

### LITERATURE--HISTORICAL, ANTHROPOLOGICAL.

No one has yet attempted a complete history of inverted sexuality in all
ages and in all races. This would be well worth doing. Materials, though
not extremely plentiful, lie to hand in the religious books and codes of
ancient nations, in mythology and poetry and literature, in narratives
of travel, and the reports of observant explorers.

Gibbon once suggested that a curious dissertation might be formed on the
introduction of pæderasty after the time of Homer, its progress among
the Greeks of Asia and Europe, the vehemence of their passions, and the
thin device of virtue and friendship which amused the philosophers of
Athens. But," adds the prurient prude, "Scelera ostendi oportet dum
puniuniter, abscondi flagitia."

Two scholars responded to this call. The result is that the chapter on
Greek love has been very fairly written by equally impartial, equally
learned, and independent authors, who approached the subject from
somewhat different points of view, but who arrived in the main at
similar conclusions.

The first of these histories is M. H. E. Meier's article

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

on *Pæderastie* in Ersch and Gruber's "Allgemeine Encyklopädie:"
Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1837.

The second is a treatise entitled "A Problem in Greek Ethics," composed
by an Englishman in English. The anonymous author was not acquainted
with Meier's article before he wrote, and only came across it long after
he had printed his own essay. This work is extremely rare, ten copies
only having been impressed for private use.

Enquirers into the psychology and morality of sexual inversion should
not fail to study one or other of these treatises. It will surprise many
a well-read scholar, when he sees the whole list of Greek authorities
and passages collected and co-ordinated, to find how thoroughly the
manners and the literature of that great people were penetrated with
pæderastia. The myths and heroic legends of prehistoric Hellas, the
educational institutions of the Dorian state, the dialogues of Plato,
the history of the Theban army, the biographies of innumerable eminent
citizens--lawgivers and thinkers, governors and generals, founders of
colonies and philosophers, poets and sculptors--render it impossible to
maintain that this passion was either a degraded vice or a form of
inherited neuropathy in the race to whom we owe so much of our
intellectual heritage. Having surveyed the picture, we may turn aside to
wonder whether modern European nations, imbued with the opinions I have
described above in the section on Vulgar Errors, are wise in making
Greek literature a staple of the higher education. Their motto is
*Érasez l'infâme*! Here the infamous thing clothes itself like an angel
of light, and raises its forehead unabashed to heaven

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

among the marble peristyles and olive-groves of an unrivalled
civilization.

Another book, written from a medical point of view, is valuable upon the
pathology of sexual inversion and cognate aberrations among the nations
of antiquity. It bears the title "Geschichte der Lustseuche im
Alterthume," and is composed by Dr. Julius Rosenbaum. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) Rosenbaum attempts to solve the problem of
the existence of syphilis and other venereal diseases in the remote
past. This enquiry leads him to investigate the whole of Greek and Latin
literature in its bearing upon sexual vice. Students will therefore
expect from his pages no profound psychological speculations and no
idealistic presentation of an eminently repulsive subject. One of the
most interesting chapters of his work is devoted to what Herodotus
called Νοῦσος φήλεια among the Scythians, a wide-spread effemination
prevailing in a wild warlike and nomadic race. We have already alluded
to Krafft-Ebing's remarks on this disease, which has curious points of
resemblance with some of the facts of male prostitution in modern
cities. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41)

Professed anthropologists have dealt with the subject, collecting
evidence from many quarters, and in some cases attempting to draw
general conclusions. Bastian's "Der Mensch der Geschichte " <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42) and Herbert Spencer's Tables deserve
special mention for their encyclopædic fulness of information regarding
the distribution of abnormal sexuality and the customs of savage tribes.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

In England an Essay appended to the last volume of Sir Richard Burton's
"Arabian Nights" made a considerable stir upon its first
appearance. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) The author endeavoured
to co-ordinate a large amount of miscellaneous matter, and to frame a
general theory regarding the origin and prevalence of homosexual
passions. His erudition, however, is incomplete; and though he possesses
a copious store of anthropological details, he is not at the proper
point of view for discussing the topic philosophically. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) For example, he takes for granted that
"Pederasty," as he calls it, is everywhere and always what the vulgar
think it. He seems to have no notion of the complicated psychology of
Urnings, revealed to us by their recently published confessions in
French and German medical and legal works. Still his views deserve
consideration.

Burton regards the phenomenon as "geographical and climatic, not
racial." He summarises the result of his investigations in the following
five conclusions. <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45)

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

"(1) There exists what I shall call a 'Sotadic Zone,' bounded westwards
by the northern shores of the Mediterranean (N. lat. 43°) and by the
southern (N. lat. 30°). Thus the depth would be 780 to 800 miles,
including meridional France, the Iberian Peninsula, Italy and Greece,
with the coast-regions of Africa from Morocco to Egypt.

"(2) Running eastward the Sotadic Zone narrows, embracing Asia, Minor,
Mesopotamia and Chaldæa, Afghanistan, Sind, the Punjab, and Kashmir.

"(3) In Indo-China the belt begins to broaden, enfolding China, Japan,
and Turkistan.

"(4) It then embraces the South Sea Islands and the New World, where, at
the time of its discovery, Sotadic love was, with some exceptions, an
established racial institution.

"(5) Within the Sotadic Zone the vice is popular and endemic, held at
the worst to be a mere peccadillo, whilst the races to the North and
South of the limits here defined practise it only sporadically, amid the
opprobrium of their fellows, who, as a rule, are physically incapable of
performing the operation, and look upon it with the liveliest disgust."

This is a curious and interesting generalisation, though it does not
account for what history has transmitted regarding the customs of the
Kelts, Scythians, Bulgars, Tartars, Normans, and for the acknowledged
leniency of modern Slavs to this form of vice.

Burton advances an explanation of its origin. "The only physical cause
for the practice which suggests itself to me, and that must be owned to
be purely conjectural, is that within the Sotadic Zone there is a

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

blending of the masculine and feminine temperament, a crasis which
elsewhere occurs only sporadically." <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)
So far as it goes, this suggestion rests upon ground admitted to be
empirically sound by the medical writers we have already examined, and
vehemently declared to be indisputable as a fact of physiology by
Ulrichs, whom I shall presently introduce to my readers. But Burton
makes no effort to account for the occurrence of this crasis of
masculine and feminine temperaments in the Sotadic Zone at large, and
for its sporadic appearance in other regions. Would it not be more
philosophical to conjecture that the crasis, if that exists at all,
takes place universally; but that the consequences are only tolerated in
certain parts of the globe, which he defines as the Sotadic Zone?
Ancient Greece and Rome permitted them. Modern Greece and Italy have
excluded them to the same extent as Northern European nations. North and
South America, before the Conquest, saw no harm in them. Since its
colonisation by Europeans they have been discountenanced. The phenomenon
cannot therefore be regarded as specifically geographical and climatic.
Besides, there is one fact mentioned by Button which ought to make him
doubt his geographical theory. He says that, after the conquest of
Algiers, the French troops were infected to an enormous extent by the
habits they had acquired there, and from them it spread so far and wide
into civilian society that "the vice may be said to have been
democratised in cities and large towns." <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) This surely proves that north of the
Sotadic Zone males are neither

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

physically incapable of the acts involved in abnormal passion, nor
gifted with an insuperable disgust for them. Law, and the public opinion
generated by law and religious teaching, have been, deterrent causes in
those regions. The problem is therefore not geographical and climatic,
but social. Again, may it not be suggested that the absence of "the
Vice" among the negroes and negroid races of South Africa, noticed by
Burton, <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) is due to their excellent
customs of sexual initiation and education at the age of
puberty--customs which it is the shame of modern civilisation to have
left unimitated?

However this may be, Burton regards the instinct as natural, not *contre
nature*, and says that its patients "deserve, not prosecution but the
pitiful care of the physician and the study of the psychologist." <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49)

Another distinguished anthropologist, Paolo Mantegazza, has devoted
special attention to the physiology and psychology of what he calls "I
pervertimenti dell'amore." <span id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50) Starting
with the vulgar error that all sexual inversion implies the
unmentionable act of coition (for which, by the way, he is severely
rebuked by Krafft-Ebing, Psy. Sex., p. 92), he explains anomalous
passions by supposing that the nerves of pleasurable sensation, which
ought to be carried to the genital organs, are in some cases carried to
the rectum. <span id="fr_51"></span>[4](#fn_51) This malformation makes
its subject desire *coitum per anum*. That an intimate connection exists
between the nerves of the reproductive organs and the nerves of the
rectum is known to anatomists and is felt by everybody. Probably some

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

cinædi are excited voluptuously in the mode suggested. Seneca, in his
Epistles, records such cases; and it is difficult in any other way to
account for the transports felt by male prostitutes of the Weibling
type. Finally, writers upon female prostitution mention women who are
incapable of deriving pleasure from any sexual act except *aversa
venus*.

Mantegazza's observation deserves to be remembered, and ought to be
tested by investigation. But, it is obvious, he pushes the corollary he
draws from it, as to the prevalence of sexual inversion, too far.

He distinguishes three classes of sodomy: (1) Perpheric or anatomical,
caused by an unusual distribution of the nerves passing from the spine
to the reproductive organs and the rectum; (2) psychical, which he
describes as "specific to intelligent men, cultivated, and frequently
neurotic," but which he does not attempt to elucidate, though he calls
it "not a vice, but a passion"; (3) luxurious or lustful, when the
*aversa venus* is deliberately chosen on account of what Mantegazza
terms "la desolante larghezza" of the female. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

Mantegazza winds up, like Burton, by observing that sodomy, studied with
the pitying and indulgent eye of the physician and the physiologist, is
consequently a disease which claims to be cured, and can in many cases
be cured." <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53)

After persuing what physicians, historians, and anthropologists have to
say about sexual inversion, there is good reason for us to feel uneasy
as to the present condition of our laws. And yet it might be

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

argued that anomalous desires are not always maladies, not always
congenital, not always psychical passions. In some cases they must
surely be vices deliberately adopted out of lustfulness, wanton
curiosity, and seeking after sensual refinements. The difficult question
still remains then--how to repress vice, without acting unjustly toward
the naturally abnormal, the unfortunate, and the irresponsible.

I pass now to the polemical writings of a man who maintains that
homosexual passions, even in their vicious aspects, ought not to be
punished except in the same degree and under the same conditions as the
normal passions of the majority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[77:1](pme09.htm#fr_40) Third edition. Halle a.
S., 1882.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[77:2](pme09.htm#fr_41) Psych. Sex., p. 82.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[77:3](pme09.htm#fr_42) Leipzig, Wigand, 1860.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[78:1](pme09.htm#fr_43) Arabian Nights, 1885,
vol. x., pp. 205-254.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[78:2](pme09.htm#fr_44) Burton's acquaintance
with what he called "le Vice" was principally confined to Oriental
nations. He started on his enquiries, imbued with vulgar errors; and he
never weighed the psychical theories examined by me in the foregoing
section of this Essay. Nevertheless, he was led to surmise a crasis of
the two sexes in persons subject to sexual inversion. Thus he came to
speak of "the third sex." During conversations I had with him less than
three month, before his death, he told me that he had begun a general
history of "le Vice"; and at my suggestion he studied Ulrichs and
Krafft-Ebing. It is to be lamented that life failed before he could
apply his virile and candid criticism to those theories, and compare
them with the facts and observations he had independently collected.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[78:3](pme09.htm#fr_45) I give the author's own
text, p. 206.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[80:1](pme09.htm#fr_46) p. 208.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[80:2](pme09.htm#fr_47) p. 251

<span id="fn_48"></span>[81:1](pme09.htm#fr_48) P. 222.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[81:2](pme09.htm#fr_49) Pp. 204, 209.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[81:3](pme09.htm#fr_50) Gli amori degli Uomini,
Milano, 1886, vol. i. cap, 5.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[81:4](pme09.htm#fr_51) Ibid., p. 149.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[82:1](pme09.htm#fr_52) Pp. 148-154.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[82:2](pme09.htm#fr_53) P. 154.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Literature--Polemical](pme10)
