[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/co1014)  [GNT](../gnt/co1014) 
[Vul](../vul/co1014)   
  
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1013)  [Next](co1015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> Follow after [charity](../ebd/ebd077.htm#009),
and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy.  

<span id="002">2</span> For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue
speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him;
howbeit in the [spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009) he speaketh mysteries.  

<span id="003">3</span> But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort.  

<span id="004">4</span> He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth
himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.  

<span id="005">5</span> I would that ye all spake with tongues but
rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he
that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may
receive edifying.  

<span id="006">6</span> Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with
tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by
[revelation](../ebd/ebd312.htm#002), or by knowledge, or by prophesying,
or by doctrine?  

<span id="007">7</span> And even things without life giving sound,
whether [pipe](../ebd/ebd296.htm#000) or [harp](../ebd/ebd165.htm#001),
except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what
is piped or harped?  

<span id="008">8</span> For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle?  

<span id="009">9</span> So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue
words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for
ye shall speak into the air.  

<span id="010">10</span> There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices
in the world, and none of them is without signification.  

<span id="011">11</span> Therefore if I know not the meaning of the
voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a
[barbarian](../ebd/ebd044.htm#006), and he that speaketh shall be a
[barbarian](../ebd/ebd044.htm#006) unto me.  

<span id="012">12</span> Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of
spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.  

<span id="013">13</span> Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown
tongue pray that he may interpret.  

<span id="014">14</span> For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my
[spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009) prayeth, but my understanding is
unfruitful.  

<span id="015">15</span> What is it then? I will pray with the
[spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009), and I will pray with the understanding
also: I will sing with the [spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009), and I will
sing with the understanding also.  

<span id="016">16</span> Else when thou shalt
[bless](../ebd/ebd060.htm#008) with the [spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009),
how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say
[Amen](../ebd/ebd020.htm#001) at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understandeth not what thou sayest?  

<span id="017">17</span> For thou verily givest thanks well, but the
other is not edified.  

<span id="018">18</span> I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than
ye all:  

<span id="019">19</span> Yet in the church I had rather speak five words
with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than
ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.  

<span id="020">20</span> Brethren, be not children in understanding:
howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.  

<span id="021">21</span> In the law it is written, With men of other
tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all
that will they not hear me, saith the LORD.  

<span id="022">22</span> Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them
that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not
for them that believe not, but for them which believe.  

<span id="023">23</span> If therefore the whole church be come together
into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that
are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?  

<span id="024">24</span> But if all prophesy, and there come in one that
believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of
all:  

<span id="025">25</span> And thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest; and so falling down on his face he will
[worship](../ebd/ebd384.htm#002) God, and report that God is in you of a
truth.  

<span id="026">26</span> How is it then, brethren? when ye come
together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue,
hath a [revelation](../ebd/ebd312.htm#002), hath an interpretation. Let
all things be done unto edifying.  

<span id="027">27</span> If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it
be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course; and let one
interpret.  

<span id="028">28</span> But if there be no interpreter, let him keep
silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.  

<span id="029">29</span> Let the prophets speak two or three, and let
the other [judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005).  

<span id="030">30</span> If any thing be revealed to another that
sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.  

<span id="031">31</span> For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all
may learn, and all may be comforted.  

<span id="032">32</span> And the spirits of the prophets are subject to
the prophets.  

<span id="033">33</span> For God is not the author of confusion, but of
peace, as in all churches of the saints.  

<span id="034">34</span> Let your women keep silence in the churches:
for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be
under obedience as also saith the law.  

<span id="035">35</span> And if they will learn any thing, let them ask
their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the
church.  

<span id="036">36</span> What? came the word of God out from you? or
came it unto you only?  

<span id="037">37</span> If any man think himself to be a
[prophet](../ebd/ebd300.htm#008), or spiritual, let him acknowledge that
the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord.  

<span id="038">38</span> But if any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant.  

<span id="039">39</span> Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and
forbid not to speak with tongues.  

<span id="040">40</span> Let all things be done decently and in order.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 15](co1015)
