[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/dan011)  [Sep:Dan](../sep/dan011) 
[Sep:DaT](../sep/dat011)  [Tan](../tan/dan011)  [Vul](../vul/dan011)   
  
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan010)  [Next](dan012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Daniel Chapter 11

<span id="001">1</span> Also I in the first year of
[Darius](../ebd/ebd097.htm#007) the [Mede](../ebd/ebd245.htm#009), even
I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.  

<span id="002">2</span> And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold,
there shall stand up yet three kings in [Persia](../ebd/ebd290.htm#009);
and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength
through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.  

<span id="003">3</span> And a mighty [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) shall
stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his
will.  

<span id="004">4</span> And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be
broken, and shall be divided toward the four
[winds](../ebd/ebd381.htm#009) of [heaven](../ebd/ebd170.htm#006); and
not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for
his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those.  

<span id="005">5</span> And the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the
south shall be strong, and one of his princes; and he shall be strong
above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall be a great dominion.  

<span id="006">6</span> And in the end of years they shall join
themselves together; for the king's daughter of the south shall come to
the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the north to make an agreement: but
she shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor
his arm: but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and he
that begat her, and he that strengthened her in these times.  

<span id="007">7</span> But out of a [branch](../ebd/ebd064.htm#002) of
her roots shall one stand up in his estate, which shall come with an
army, and shall enter into the fortress of the
[king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the north, and shall deal against them,
and shall prevail:  

<span id="008">8</span> And shall also carry captives into
[Egypt](../ebd/ebd113.htm#009) their gods, with their princes, and with
their precious vessels of [silver](../ebd/ebd344.htm#000) and of
[gold](../ebd/ebd152.htm#001); and he shall continue more years than the
[king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the north.  

<span id="009">9</span> So the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the
south shall come into his kingdom, and shall return into his own land.  

<span id="010">10</span> But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall
assemble a multitude of great [forces](../ebd/ebd137.htm#000): and one
shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he
return, and be stirred up, even to his fortress.  

<span id="011">11</span> And the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the
south shall be moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with
him, even with the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the north: and he
shall set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shall be given into
his hand.  

<span id="012">12</span> And when he hath taken away the multitude, his
heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down many ten
[thousands](../ebd/ebd364.htm#008): but he shall not be strengthened by
it.  

<span id="013">13</span> For the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the
north shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the
former, and shall certainly come after certain years with a great army
and with much riches.  

<span id="014">14</span> And in those times there shall many stand up
against the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the south: also the robbers
of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the
[vision](../ebd/ebd378.htm#000); but they shall fall.  

<span id="015">15</span> So the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the
north shall come, and cast up a [mount](../ebd/ebd260.htm#007), and take
the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall not withstand,
neither his [chosen](../ebd/ebd081.htm#008) people, neither shall there
be any strength to withstand.  

<span id="016">16</span> But he that cometh against him shall do
according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall
stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.  

<span id="017">17</span> He shall also set his face to enter with the
strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he
do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she
shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.  

<span id="018">18</span> After this shall he turn his face unto the
isles, and shall take many: but a [prince](../ebd/ebd300.htm#004) for
his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease; without
his own reproach he shall cause it to turn upon him.  

<span id="019">19</span> Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of
his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.  

<span id="020">20</span> Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of
[taxes](../ebd/ebd359.htm#008) in the [glory](../ebd/ebd150.htm#006) of
the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in
[anger](../ebd/ebd024.htm#002), nor in battle.  

<span id="021">21</span> And in his estate shall stand up a vile person,
to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come
in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.  

<span id="022">22</span> And with the arms of a
[flood](../ebd/ebd136.htm#000) shall they be overflown from before him,
and shall be broken; yea, also the [prince](../ebd/ebd300.htm#004) of
the [covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008).  

<span id="023">23</span> And after the [league](../ebd/ebd225.htm#005)
made with him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall
become strong with a small people.  

<span id="024">24</span> He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest
places of the province; and he shall do that which his fathers have not
done, nor his fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey,
and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices against
the strong holds, even for a time.  

<span id="025">25</span> And he shall stir up his power and his courage
against the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the south with a great
army; and the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the south shall be
stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not
stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.  

<span id="026">26</span> Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat
shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down
slain.  

<span id="027">27</span> And both of these kings' hearts shall be to do
mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not
prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.  

<span id="028">28</span> Then shall he return into his land with great
riches; and his heart shall be against the holy
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008); and he shall do exploits, and return
to his own land.  

<span id="029">29</span> At the time appointed he shall return, and come
toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.  

<span id="030">30</span> For the [ships](../ebd/ebd339.htm#003) of
[Chittim](../ebd/ebd081.htm#003) shall come against him: therefore he
shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008): so shall he do; he shall even return,
and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008).  

<span id="031">31</span> And arms shall stand on his part, and they
shall pollute the [sanctuary](../ebd/ebd321.htm#005) of strength, and
shall take away the daily [sacrifice](../ebd/ebd318.htm#002), and they
shall place the [abomination](../ebd/ebd005.htm#003) that maketh
desolate.  

<span id="032">32</span> And such as do wickedly against the
[covenant](../ebd/ebd091.htm#008) shall he corrupt by flatteries: but
the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.  

<span id="033">33</span> And they that understand among the people shall
instruct many: yet they shall fall by the
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003), and by flame, by
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002), and by spoil, many days.  

<span id="034">34</span> Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen
with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.  

<span id="035">35</span> And some of them of understanding shall fall,
to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of
the end: because it is yet for a time appointed.  

<span id="036">36</span> And the [king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) shall do
according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself
above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of
gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that
that is determined shall be done.  

<span id="037">37</span> Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers,
nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify
himself above all.  

<span id="038">38</span> But in his estate shall he honour the God of
[forces](../ebd/ebd137.htm#000): and a god whom his fathers knew not
shall he honour with [gold](../ebd/ebd152.htm#001), and
[silver](../ebd/ebd344.htm#000), and with precious stones, and pleasant
things.  

<span id="039">39</span> Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with
a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with
[glory](../ebd/ebd150.htm#006): and he shall cause them to rule over
many, and shall divide the land for gain.  

<span id="040">40</span> And at the time of the end shall the
[king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the south push at him: and the
[king](../ebd/ebd219.htm#001) of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many
[ships](../ebd/ebd339.htm#003); and he shall enter into the countries,
and shall overflow and pass over.  

<span id="041">41</span> He shall enter also into the glorious land, and
many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his
hand, even [Edom](../ebd/ebd113.htm#001), and
[Moab](../ebd/ebd258.htm#005), and the chief of the children of
[Ammon](../ebd/ebd021.htm#002).  

<span id="042">42</span> He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the
countries: and the land of [Egypt](../ebd/ebd113.htm#009) shall not
escape.  

<span id="043">43</span> But he shall have power over the treasures of
[gold](../ebd/ebd152.htm#001) and of [silver](../ebd/ebd344.htm#000),
and over all the precious things of [Egypt](../ebd/ebd113.htm#009): and
the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.  

<span id="044">44</span> But tidings out of the
[east](../ebd/ebd111.htm#000) and out of the north shall trouble him:
therefore he shall go forth with great [fury](../ebd/ebd140.htm#002) to
destroy, and utterly to make away many.  

<span id="045">45</span> And he shall plant the tabernacles of his
[palace](../ebd/ebd282.htm#008) between the seas in the glorious holy
mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 12](dan012)
