[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/deu012)  [Sep](../sep/deu012)  [Tan](../tan/deu012) 
[Vul](../vul/deu012)   
  
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu011)  [Next](deu013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Deuteronomy Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> These are the statutes and judgments, which ye
shall observe to do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers
giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.  

<span id="002">2</span> Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein
the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high
mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:  

<span id="003">3</span> And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break
their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down
the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of
that place.  

<span id="004">4</span> Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.  

<span id="005">5</span> But unto the place which the LORD your God shall
choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his
[habitation](../ebd/ebd156.htm#007) shall ye seek, and thither thou
shalt come:  

<span id="006">6</span> And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings,
and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand,
and your [vows](../ebd/ebd378.htm#001), and your freewill offerings, and
the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks:  

<span id="007">7</span> And there ye shall eat before the LORD your God,
and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your
households, wherein the LORD thy God hath blessed thee.  

<span id="008">8</span> Ye shall not do after all the things that we do
here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.  

<span id="009">9</span> For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to
the inheritance, which the LORD your God giveth you.  

<span id="010">10</span> But when ye go over
[Jordan](../ebd/ebd211.htm#004), and dwell in the land which the LORD
your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety;  

<span id="011">11</span> Then there shall be a place which the LORD your
God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither shall ye
bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices,
your tithes, and the heave [offering](../ebd/ebd277.htm#001) of your
hand, and all your choice [vows](../ebd/ebd378.htm#001) which ye vow
unto the LORD:  

<span id="012">12</span> And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God,
ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the [Levite](../ebd/ebd227.htm#009) that is within
your gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.  

<span id="013">13</span> Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy
burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:  

<span id="014">14</span> But in the place which the LORD shall choose in
one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there
thou shalt do all that I command thee.  

<span id="015">15</span> Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007) in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God which he
hath given thee: the unclean and the [clean](../ebd/ebd084.htm#005) may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the
[hart](../ebd/ebd165.htm#004).  

<span id="016">16</span> Only ye shall not eat the
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000); ye shall pour it upon the earth as
water.  

<span id="017">17</span> Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the
[tithe](../ebd/ebd368.htm#005) of thy [corn](../ebd/ebd090.htm#006), or
of thy [wine](../ebd/ebd382.htm#000), or of thy oil, or the firstlings
of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy
[vows](../ebd/ebd378.htm#001) which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave [offering](../ebd/ebd277.htm#001) of thine hand:  

<span id="018">18</span> But thou must eat them before the LORD thy God
in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the
[Levite](../ebd/ebd227.htm#009) that is within thy gates: and thou shalt
rejoice before the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands
unto.  

<span id="019">19</span> Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the
[Levite](../ebd/ebd227.htm#009) as long as thou livest upon the earth.  

<span id="020">20</span> When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy border,
as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007), because thy soul longeth to eat
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007); thou mayest eat
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007), whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.  

<span id="021">21</span> If the place which the LORD thy God hath
[chosen](../ebd/ebd081.htm#008) to put his name there be too far from
thee, then thou shalt kill of thy [herd](../ebd/ebd174.htm#009) and of
thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee, as I have commanded thee, and
thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.  

<span id="022">22</span> Even as the roebuck and the
[hart](../ebd/ebd165.htm#004) is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the
unclean and the [clean](../ebd/ebd084.htm#005) shall eat of them
alike.  

<span id="023">23</span> Only be sure that thou eat not the
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000): for the [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000)
is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007).  

<span id="024">24</span> Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon
the earth as water.  

<span id="025">25</span> Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with
thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is
right in the sight of the LORD.  

<span id="026">26</span> Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy
[vows](../ebd/ebd378.htm#001), thou shalt take, and go unto the place
which the LORD shall choose:  

<span id="027">27</span> And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the
[flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007) and the [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000),
upon the [altar](../ebd/ebd018.htm#006) of the LORD thy God: and the
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) of thy sacrifices shall be poured out
upon the [altar](../ebd/ebd018.htm#006) of the LORD thy God, and thou
shalt eat the [flesh](../ebd/ebd135.htm#007).  

<span id="028">28</span> Observe and hear all these words which I
command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after
thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the sight
of the LORD thy God.  

<span id="029">29</span> When the LORD thy God shall cut off the nations
from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou
succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;  

<span id="030">30</span> Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by
following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that
thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve
their gods? even so will I do likewise.  

<span id="031">31</span> Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for
every [abomination](../ebd/ebd005.htm#003) to the LORD, which he hateth,
have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters
they have burnt in the fire to their gods.  

<span id="032">32</span> What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 13](deu013)
