[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/eze033)  [Sep](../sep/eze033)  [Tan](../tan/eze033) 
[Vul](../vul/eze033)   
  
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze032)  [Next](eze034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Ezekiel Chapter 33

<span id="001">1</span> Again the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,  

<span id="002">2</span> Son of man, speak to the children of thy people,
and say unto them, When I bring the [sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) upon
a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set
him for their watchman:  

<span id="003">3</span> If when he seeth the
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) come upon the land, he blow the trumpet,
and warn the people;  

<span id="004">4</span> Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet,
and taketh not warning; if the [sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) come, and
take him away, his [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) shall be upon his own
head.  

<span id="005">5</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not
warning; his [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) shall be upon him. But he
that taketh warning shall deliver his soul.  

<span id="006">6</span> But if the watchman see the
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) come, and blow not the trumpet, and the
people be not warned; if the [sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003) come, and
take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but
his [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) will I require at the watchman's
hand.  

<span id="007">7</span> So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a
watchman unto the house of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000); therefore
thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.  

<span id="008">8</span> When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou
shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his
way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his
[blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000) will I require at thine hand.  

<span id="009">9</span> Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way
to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his
iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.  

<span id="010">10</span> Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the
house of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000); Thus ye speak, saying, If our
transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how
should we then live?  

<span id="011">11</span> Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why
will ye die, O house of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000)?  

<span id="012">12</span> Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the
children of thy people, The [righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004) of
the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as
for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day
that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able
to live for his [righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004) in the day that
he sinneth.  

<span id="013">13</span> When I shall say to the righteous, that he
shall surely live; if he trust to his own
[righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004), and commit iniquity, all his
righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he
hath committed, he shall die for it.  

<span id="014">14</span> Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt
surely die; if he turn from his [sin](../ebd/ebd344.htm#006), and do
that which is lawful and right;  

<span id="015">15</span> If the wicked restore the
[pledge](../ebd/ebd297.htm#005), give again that he had robbed, walk in
the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live,
he shall not die.  

<span id="016">16</span> None of his sins that he hath committed shall
be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he
shall surely live.  

<span id="017">17</span> Yet the children of thy people say, The way of
the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.  

<span id="018">18</span> When the righteous turneth from his
[righteousness](../ebd/ebd313.htm#004), and committeth iniquity, he
shall even die thereby.  

<span id="019">19</span> But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and
do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.  

<span id="020">20</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O
ye house of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000), I will
[judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005) you every one after his ways.  

<span id="021">21</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our
[captivity](../ebd/ebd072.htm#002), in the tenth month, in the fifth day
of the month, that one that had escaped out of
[Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005) came unto me, saying, The city is
smitten.  

<span id="022">22</span> Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in the
evening, afore he that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until
he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more
[dumb](../ebd/ebd109.htm#002).  

<span id="023">23</span> Then the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,  

<span id="024">24</span> Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of
the land of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) speak, saying,
[Abraham](../ebd/ebd005.htm#005) was one, and he inherited the land: but
we are many; the land is given us for inheritance.  

<span id="025">25</span> Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; Ye eat with the [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000), and lift up your
eyes toward your idols, and shed [blood](../ebd/ebd061.htm#000): and
shall ye possess the land?  

<span id="026">26</span> Ye stand upon your
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003), ye work
[abomination](../ebd/ebd005.htm#003), and ye defile every one his
neighbour's wife: and shall ye possess the land?  

<span id="027">27</span> Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the
[sword](../ebd/ebd354.htm#003), and him that is in the open field will I
give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in
the caves shall die of the pestilence.  

<span id="028">28</span> For I will lay the land most desolate, and the
pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) shall be desolate, that none shall pass
through.  

<span id="029">29</span> Then shall they know that I am the LORD, when I
have laid the land most desolate because of all their abominations which
they have committed.  

<span id="030">30</span> Also, thou son of man, the children of thy
people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the
[doors](../ebd/ebd105.htm#009) of the houses, and speak one to another,
every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the
word that cometh forth from the LORD.  

<span id="031">31</span> And they come unto thee as the people cometh,
and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they
will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their
heart goeth after their [covetousness](../ebd/ebd092.htm#000).  

<span id="032">32</span> And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely
song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not.  

<span id="033">33</span> And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will
come,) then shall they know that a [prophet](../ebd/ebd300.htm#008) hath
been among them.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 34](eze034)
