[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/eze013)  [Sep](../sep/eze013)  [Tan](../tan/eze013) 
[Vul](../vul/eze013)   
  
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze012)  [Next](eze014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Ezekiel Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,  

<span id="002">2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) that prophesy, and say thou unto them
that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the LORD;  

<span id="003">3</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe unto the foolish
prophets, that follow their own [spirit](../ebd/ebd349.htm#009), and
have seen nothing!  

<span id="004">4</span> O [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000), thy prophets
are like the foxes in the deserts.  

<span id="005">5</span> Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made
up the hedge for the house of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) to stand
in the battle in the day of the LORD.  

<span id="006">6</span> They have seen vanity and lying
[divination](../ebd/ebd104.htm#009), saying, The LORD saith: and the
LORD hath not sent them: and they have made others to hope that they
would confirm the word.  

<span id="007">7</span> Have ye not seen a vain
[vision](../ebd/ebd378.htm#000), and have ye not spoken a lying
[divination](../ebd/ebd104.htm#009), whereas ye say, The LORD saith it;
albeit I have not spoken?  

<span id="008">8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye
have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you,
saith the Lord GOD.  

<span id="009">9</span> And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that
see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of
my people, neither shall they be written in the
[writing](../ebd/ebd384.htm#005) of the house of
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000), neither shall they enter into the land
of [Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000); and ye shall know that I am the Lord
GOD.  

<span id="010">10</span> Because, even because they have seduced my
people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall,
and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter:  

<span id="011">11</span> Say unto them which daub it with untempered
morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and
ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.  

<span id="012">12</span> Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be
said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?  

<span id="013">13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even
rend it with a stormy wind in my [fury](../ebd/ebd140.htm#002); and
there shall be an overflowing shower in mine
[anger](../ebd/ebd024.htm#002), and great hailstones in my
[fury](../ebd/ebd140.htm#002) to consume it.  

<span id="014">14</span> So will I break down the wall that ye have
daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that
the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye
shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am the
LORD.  

<span id="015">15</span> Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall,
and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say
unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it;  

<span id="016">16</span> To wit, the prophets of
[Israel](../ebd/ebd191.htm#000) which prophesy concerning
[Jerusalem](../ebd/ebd204.htm#005), and which see visions of peace for
her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD.  

<span id="017">17</span> Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against
the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and
prophesy thou against them,  

<span id="018">18</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the
women that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head
of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and
will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?  

<span id="019">19</span> And will ye pollute me among my people for
handfuls of [barley](../ebd/ebd045.htm#003) and for
[pieces](../ebd/ebd295.htm#002) of [bread](../ebd/ebd064.htm#006), to
slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that
should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies?  

<span id="020">20</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am
against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them
[fly](../ebd/ebd136.htm#004), and I will tear them from your arms, and
will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them
[fly](../ebd/ebd136.htm#004).  

<span id="021">21</span> Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my
people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be
hunted; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.  

<span id="022">22</span> Because with lies ye have made the heart of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of
the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising
him life:  

<span id="023">23</span> Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor
divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and
ye shall know that I am the LORD.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 14](eze014)
