[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/luk012)  [GNT](../gnt/luk012) 
[Vul](../vul/luk012)   
  
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk011)  [Next](luk013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### King James Version: Luke Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> In the mean time, when there were gathered
together an innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode
one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all,
Beware ye of the [leaven](../ebd/ebd226.htm#000) of the
[Pharisees](../ebd/ebd292.htm#008), which is hypocrisy.  

<span id="002">2</span> For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known.  

<span id="003">3</span> Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in
[darkness](../ebd/ebd097.htm#008) shall be heard in the light; and that
which ye have spoken in the [ear](../ebd/ebd110.htm#004) in closets
shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.  

<span id="004">4</span> And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.  

<span id="005">5</span> But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear
him, which after he hath killed hath power to cast into
[hell](../ebd/ebd173.htm#003); yea, I say unto you, Fear him.  

<span id="006">6</span> Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,
and not one of them is forgotten before God?  

<span id="007">7</span> But even the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many sparrows.  

<span id="008">8</span> Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me
before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of
God:  

<span id="009">9</span> But he that denieth me before men shall be
denied before the angels of God.  

<span id="010">10</span> And whosoever shall speak a word against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth
against the Holy [Ghost](../ebd/ebd147.htm#005) it shall not be
forgiven.  

<span id="011">11</span> And when they bring you unto the synagogues,
and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing
ye shall answer, or what ye shall say:  

<span id="012">12</span> For the Holy [Ghost](../ebd/ebd147.htm#005)
shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.  

<span id="013">13</span> And one of the company said unto him, Master,
speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.  

<span id="014">14</span> And he said unto him, Man, who made me a
[judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005) or a divider over you?  

<span id="015">15</span> And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of
[covetousness](../ebd/ebd092.htm#000): for a man's life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.  

<span id="016">16</span> And he spake a [parable](../ebd/ebd284.htm#003)
unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth
plentifully:  

<span id="017">17</span> And he thought within himself, saying, What
shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?  

<span id="018">18</span> And he said, This will I do: I will pull down
my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and
my goods.  

<span id="019">19</span> And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much
goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat,
[drink](../ebd/ebd107.htm#009), and be merry.  

<span id="020">20</span> But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be,
which thou hast provided?  

<span id="021">21</span> So is he that layeth up treasure for himself,
and is not rich toward God.  

<span id="022">22</span> And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say
unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for
the body, what ye shall put on.  

<span id="023">23</span> The life is more than meat, and the body is
more than raiment.  

<span id="024">24</span> Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor
reap; which neither have storehouse nor [barn](../ebd/ebd045.htm#004);
and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better than the fowls?  

<span id="025">25</span> And which of you with taking thought can add to
his stature one [cubit](../ebd/ebd093.htm#006)?  

<span id="026">26</span> If ye then be not able to do that thing which
is least, why take ye thought for the rest?  

<span id="027">27</span> Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil
not, they spin not; and yet I say unto you, that
[Solomon](../ebd/ebd347.htm#007) in all his
[glory](../ebd/ebd150.htm#006) was not arrayed like one of these.  

<span id="028">28</span> If then God so clothe the
[grass](../ebd/ebd154.htm#005), which is to day in the field, and to
morrow is cast into the [oven](../ebd/ebd281.htm#005); how much more
will he clothe you, O ye of little faith?  

<span id="029">29</span> And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall [drink](../ebd/ebd107.htm#009), neither be ye of doubtful mind.  

<span id="030">30</span> For all these things do the nations of the
world seek after: and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these
things.  

<span id="031">31</span> But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all
these things shall be added unto you.  

<span id="032">32</span> Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's
good pleasure to give you the kingdom.  

<span id="033">33</span> Sell that ye have, and give
[alms](../ebd/ebd018.htm#002); provide yourselves bags which
[wax](../ebd/ebd380.htm#000) not old, a treasure in the heavens that
faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither
[moth](../ebd/ebd260.htm#005) corrupteth.  

<span id="034">34</span> For where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.  

<span id="035">35</span> Let your loins be girded about, and your lights
burning;  

<span id="036">36</span> And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for
their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh
and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately.  

<span id="037">37</span> Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when
he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird
himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and
serve them.  

<span id="038">38</span> And if he shall come in the second watch, or
come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.  

<span id="039">39</span> And this know, that if the goodman of the house
had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not
have suffered his house to be broken through.  

<span id="040">40</span> Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man
cometh at an hour when ye think not.  

<span id="041">41</span> Then [Peter](../ebd/ebd291.htm#002) said unto
him, Lord, speakest thou this [parable](../ebd/ebd284.htm#003) unto us,
or even to all?  

<span id="042">42</span> And the Lord said, Who then is that
[faithful](../ebd/ebd130.htm#005) and [wise](../ebd/ebd382.htm#004)
steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them
their portion of meat in due season?  

<span id="043">43</span> Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he
cometh shall find so doing.  

<span id="044">44</span> Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make
him ruler over all that he hath.  

<span id="045">45</span> But and if that servant say in his heart, My
lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and
maidens, and to eat and [drink](../ebd/ebd107.htm#009), and to be
drunken;  

<span id="046">46</span> The lord of that servant will come in a day
when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and
will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the
unbelievers.  

<span id="047">47</span> And that servant, which knew his lord's will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many [stripes](../ebd/ebd352.htm#005).  

<span id="048">48</span> But he that knew not, and did commit things
worthy of [stripes](../ebd/ebd352.htm#005), shall be beaten with few
[stripes](../ebd/ebd352.htm#005). For unto whomsoever much is given, of
him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him
they will ask the more.  

<span id="049">49</span> I am come to send fire on the earth; and what
will I, if it be already kindled?  

<span id="050">50</span> But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and
how am I straitened till it be accomplished!  

<span id="051">51</span> Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on
earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division:  

<span id="052">52</span> For from henceforth there shall be five in one
house divided, three against two, and two against three.  

<span id="053">53</span> The father shall be divided against the son,
and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the
daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in
law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.  

<span id="054">54</span> And he said also to the people, When ye see a
[cloud](../ebd/ebd085.htm#001) rise out of the west, straightway ye say,
There cometh a shower; and so it is.  

<span id="055">55</span> And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say,
There will be heat; and it cometh to pass.  

<span id="056">56</span> Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the
sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?  

<span id="057">57</span> Yea, and why even of yourselves
[judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005) ye not what is right?  

<span id="058">58</span> When thou goest with thine
[adversary](../ebd/ebd011.htm#001) to the
[magistrate](../ebd/ebd236.htm#008), as thou art in the way, give
diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to
the [judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005), and the
[judge](../ebd/ebd213.htm#005) deliver thee to the officer, and the
officer cast thee into [prison](../ebd/ebd300.htm#006).  

<span id="059">59</span> I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till
thou hast paid the very last [mite](../ebd/ebd257.htm#003).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 13](luk013)
