[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fol04)  [Next](fol06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRFBOE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Feast of Lanterns*, by L. Cranmer-Byng, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Flowers</span>

In the time of the T‘ang dynasty there lived a retired scholar whose
name was Hsuan-wei. He never married, but dwelt alone, yet his
companions were books and flowers, his little friends. If he had any
enemies, they were frost and wind and blight and mildew. Three seasons
brought him joy and one sorrow. Love to him meant the gentle opening of
rose-petals, and death their fall. The neighbours never troubled about
him, for how could there be scandal between a man and flowers? No woman
ever plundered his garden and desecrated his Temple of Abiding Peace. In
fine, he was the happiest man that ever lived.

Then something came to pass. It was "blue night," and the garden never
looked whiter underneath the moon. And every tree melted into the spirit
of a tree peering between its luminous leaves. The Wu t‘ung whispered to
the maple, and the maple passed the story round to the mountain pine of
the phoenix that augustly condescended to rest in its branches some
long-forgotten spring. Only the old willow stood apart and said nothing,
for the willow is a wizard,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

and the older he gets the more crabbed and silent he becomes.

The owner of the garden stood spell-bound in the moonlight. Suddenly a
blue shadow flitted shyly from among the flowers and a lady in a long
robe of palest blue came towards him and bowed "I live not far from
here," said she, "and in passing to visit my August Aunt I felt a
longing to rest in your beautiful garden."

The wondering philosopher stammered his consent, and instantly a band of
pretty girls appeared, some carrying flowers and some willow boughs.
According to etiquette an introduction became necessary.

Then a girl in green announced herself: "I am called Aspen," and,
pointing to a girl in white, "her name is Plum," to one in purple, "she
is called Peach," and so she went on till the last, a little maid in
crimson who was called Pomegranate. The Lady Wind, who, she explained,
was their maternal Aunt eighteen times removed, had promised them a
visit which for some reason she had delayed. As to-night's moon was
unusually bright, they had decided to visit her instead. Just at that
instant the Lady Wind was announced, and, with a great fluttering of
many-coloured silks, the girls trooped out to greet her and one and all
implored her to stay with them in the garden. Meanwhile, Mr. Hsuan-wei
had discreetly retired into the shadow. But

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

when the August Aunt asked who the owner was he stepped boldly into the
moonlight and saw a lady of surpassing grace with a certain gauzy
floating appearance like gossamer. But her words chilled him, for they
were like the cold breath stirring the leaves of a black forest, and so
he shivered. However, with the true politeness of a Chinese host, he
invited her into his contemptible Pavilion of Abiding Peace, where he
was astonished to find a magnificent banquet already prepared.

So they feasted and sang, and I am sorry to say that many cups went
round, and the Lady Wind became both critical and extravagant. She
condemned two unfortunate singers to pay forfeit by drinking a full
goblet a-piece, but her hands shook so as she held the goblets out that
they slipped from her grasp and fell with a crash to the floor. And much
wine was spilled over poor little Pomegranate, who had appeared for the
first time in her new embroidered crimson robe. Pomegranate, being a
girl of spirit, was naturally annoyed, and, telling her sisters they
could court their Aunt themselves, she blushed herself off.

The Lady Wind, in a great rage, cried out that she had been insulted,
and, though they all tried to calm her, she gathered her robe about her
and out of the door she flew off hissing to the east. Then all the girls
came before their flower philosopher

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and bowed and swayed sorrowfully and said farewell, and, floating
through the portals, vanished into the white parterres around; and when
Mr. Hsuan-wei looked, lo, the Temple of Abiding Peace was empty as all
temples of its kind should be. And he sat down to wonder if it was a
dream. For every trace of the feast was gone and yet a faint subtle
fragrance lingered as though some gracious and flowerlike presence had
been once a guest.

Next night, when strolling in his garden, he was suddenly encircled by
his little friends. They were all busy discussing the conduct of
Pomegranate and urging her to apologise to the August Aunt eighteen
times removed. It was evident that they went in fear of her since last
night's unfortunate revel. But little red Pomegranate would have no
truck with Aunt Wind, who had spoilt her nice new robe. "Here is one who
will protect us from any harm," she cried, pointing to the surrounded
form of Mr. Hsuan-wei. So they told him how each year they were injured
by spiteful gales and how Aunt Wind had to some extent protected them.

Mr. Hsuan-wei was sorely puzzled "How can this contemptible one afford
protection?" he asked. Pomegranate explained. It was such a very little
thing required of him—just to prepare a crimson flag embroidered with
sun, moon, and stars in gold and hoist it east of the garden at

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

dawn on the first morning of each new year, then all hurricanes would
pass them by. Accordingly, he promised, and the next day saw him
stitching golden stars on a crimson background. And he rose early, an
hour before the dawn on the appointed day and set his flag duly towards
the east in the breath of a light east wind. Suddenly a great storm
gathered and broke. The world rocked. The air was dark with flying
stones and whirling dust. The giants of the forest cracked, others were
overwhelmed. But in Mr. Hsuan's garden there was a deep calm. Not a
flower stirred. Then in a flash he understood. His little friends whom
he had saved from destruction were the souls of his little flowers. That
night, when the moon was midway, they came to him with garlands of peach
and plum blossom whose taste conferred the beauty of everlasting youth.
Mr. Hsuan-wei partook of the petals and straightway the lingering drift
of old sorrows from the days of his ignorance melted like snow from his
heart. And with it went all the pathetic rubbish that even a flower
philosopher allows to accumulate. He became young and divinely empty,
yet in his soul pulsed the *élan vital* of Mr. Henri Bergson. "Soon
afterwards," says the ancient chronicle, "he attained to a knowledge of
the True Way, and shared the immortality of the Genii." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

This story is typical of many. In the west it would be passed by as a
pretty if rather naïve and simple fairy-tale. Yet behind all Chinese
poetry and folk-lore, underlying all art, is the ancient philosophy of
the True Way. And this is the Way of Happiness according to Liu An:
"Most men are vexed and miserable because they do not use their hearts
in the enjoyment of outward things, but use outward things as a means of
delighting their hearts." To enjoy is to have the affinity to
understand, the persistence to enter, and finally the power to
reproduce. All that we love we reproduce, and so it is with flowers, the
best beloved of Mr. Hsuan-wei. It is that delicate sense of touch
between life and life, between soul and soul, that alone enables the
artist to give—not the imitation of a living flower, but the flower
itself, reborn within him, and therefore his own child. And what was
this immortality the Genii bequeathed to Hsuan-wei except the sense of
eternal youth that comes when kinship and affinity with the little
bright children of nature is established? And so the philosopher has
joined the immortals, and lives in the sister realms of poetry and fairy
lore, and every garden-lover sees him walking by moonlight surrounded by
his fairy flowers. Outside, Aunt Wind, that shrill hater of all things
beautiful, betrayer of woodland secrets, beats vainly at the magic
barrier, a little crimson flag.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[18:1](fol05.htm#fr_0) The full story will be
found in F. H. Balfour's *Leaves from my Chinese Scrap-book.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dragons](fol06)
