[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fol07)  [Next](fol09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRFBOE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Feast of Lanterns*, by L. Cranmer-Byng, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Chinese Verse Form</span>

In a previous book, *A Lute of Jade,* I have referred to the structure
of Chinese verse. It is necessary to remember that the Chinese language
is made up mostly of monosyllabic words expressing root-ideas. There are
also a sufficient number of diphthongs to give variety. As Sir John
Davis points out in his *Poetry of the Chinese,* such words as *sēen*
and *lēen* correspond nearly to the English *lion* and *fluid.* Chinese
is essentially a language in which vowel-sounds prevail and the few
consonants are far from being harsh. In the literary language, used by
all the great poets,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the only terminal consonant is *n,* as in Ch‘un, and its nasal *ng,* as
in Hong. The only harsh initial is *Ts,* as in *Tsin* and *Tsz.* There
are only about four hundred different sounds in Chinese, and, in order
to discriminate between words of similar sound, resort has to be made to
tones which are akin to musical notes. Of these tones only two count in
the making of Chinese poetry, namely, the *Ping,* or even tone, and
*Tsze,* or accentuated, with its three modifications known as
Shangsheng, the rising note, Khu-sheng, the entering note, and
Ruh-sheng, the sinking note. These tones, as Mr. Charles Budd points
out <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) in his interesting essay on the
Technique of Chinese Poetry, "are used to make rhythm as well as to
express meaning." Rhymes occur in the even lines of a poem. In
five-syllable verses there is a cæsura which comes after the second
syllable, and in poems of seven syllables after the fourth.

Another form of Chinese verse construction is that of parallel lines.
This particular form is well known to us in Hebrew poetry, especially
the Psalms. It does not follow that each word and line should answer its
fellow, but there must be "a marked correspondence and equality in the
construction of the lines—such as noun answering to noun, verb to verb,"
etc.

The following is an example quoted by Sir

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John Davis in his
essay on the Poetry of the Chinese:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">A hundred—a thousand, ten thousand projects are hard
to accomplish;  
Five times—six times—ten years very soon arrive.  
When you have found a day to be idle—be idle for a day;  
When you have met with three cups to drink—then drink your three
cups.</span>

</div>

Chinese poems generally consist of four, eight, twelve, or sixteen
lines. There are, indeed, longer poems, but the whole idea of a Chinese
poet is to condense and suggest. Professor Giles says: "There is no such
a thing as an epic in the language." As regards metre, the
four-character line is chiefly confined to the ancient collection of
national ballads made by Confucius and known as *The Book of Odes.* The
usual metres of the great poets of the T‘ang dynasty were five and
seven-character lines. These are called *Shih,* or regular poems. The
six or eight-character line is only to be met with alternated with
others in poems of irregular metre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[31:1](fol08.htm#fr_1) *Chinese Poems,*
translated by Charles Budd, Henry Frowde & Co.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epochs in Chinese Poetry](fol09)
