[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fol09)  [Next](fol11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRFBOE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Feast of Lanterns*, by L. Cranmer-Byng, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Conclusion</span>

The great storehouse of Chinese poetry is still untouched. Forty-eight
thousand nine hundred

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

are the collected poems of the T‘ang dynasty alone, and of these
possibly some three or four hundred have been translated into various
European languages.

As the Chinese have more than 40,000 ideographs, and a good Chinese
scholar is one who can commit to memory about eight or nine thousand,
the difficulties in the way of translation are obvious. Nor is it easy
to find one who is both a profound linguist and a poet as well. One who
is so deeply indebted as I am to the researches of the great sinologues
of the nineteenth century is conscious of treading on delicate ground
even in referring to the relations between scholarship and literature.
The fact, however, remains, that with a few rare exceptions, the scholar
has attempted too much. Poetry is poetry, whether it be written in
Chinese ideographs or European characters, and no knowledge of Chinese
will enable one to interpret the poet's message in another tongue. There
is an Italian proverb which says that to translate is to traduce, and
this is profoundly true of ninety-nine translations out of a hundred.
Before one line is placed on paper the translator from the Chinese must
have soaked himself in the traditions of the Chinese masters, their
reticence, their power of suggestion, their wonderful colour-sense, and,
above all, their affinity and identification with their subject. He
might well study the methods of the Chinese painters, who

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

never put brush to canvas before committing all essential details to
memory. He might read the story of Wu Tao-tzu, the greatest of all
Chinese masters, as told by Mr. Laurence Binyon in *The* *Flight of the
Dragon:* "He was sent by the Emperor to paint the scenery of a certain
river. On his return, to every one's surprise, he had no sketches to
show. "I have it all," he said, "in my heart."

The poems I have chosen to render belong chiefly to the school of
landscape. This does not mean that Chinese poets avoided the grim
realities of life and the ceaseless struggle for existence. Poets as far
apart as Chu Yuan in the fourth century B.C. and Li Hua in the ninth
century A.D. have given us battle pictures which have seldom been
equalled. Both these mighty panoramas deal with the pomp and panoply of
armed hosts, the shock of battle in the bleak plains of Tartary, and
finally moonlight upon the quiet faces of the innumerable dead. In the
time of the T‘angs universal conscription obtained. Tu Fu, in his famous
poem "The Recruiter," gives a wonderful description of the deserted
countryside from which all the menfolk had gone. Many soldiers were also
poets, famous generals like Yo Fei, more often than not commanders of
small military posts on the lonely caravan routes in Chinese Turkistan.

Yet, after all, the deepest feeling of the Chinese

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

poets is revealed in their word-painting of woods and mountains and
water. Kuo Hsi, the great artist of the Sung dynasty, in his essay on
painting, says:

"Mountains make water their blood; grass and trees their hair, mist and
cloud their divine colouring. Water makes of mountains its face, of
houses and fences its eyebrows and its eyes, and of fishermen its soul."

And again of water he writes:

"Water is a living thing, hence its form is deep and quiet, or soft and
smooth, or broad and ocean-like or thick like flesh, or circling like
wings, or jetting and slender, rapid and violent like an arrow, rich as
a fountain upon the sky or running down into the earth where fishermen
lie at ease. Grass and trees on the river banks look joyous, and are
like beautiful ladies under veils of mists and cloud, or sometimes
bright and gleaming as the sun shines down the valley. Such are the
living aspects of water." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

The fishermen who become the soul of water are sages like Chang Chih Ho,
and poets like Ou-Yang Hsiu of the solemn autumn dirge and moonlight
threnody. In the picture of the latter exhibited a few years back at the
British Museum the face of the poet is fixed and calm. His eyes have
taken in all beauty and externals, and his gaze

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

has swept beyond them into the beauty beyond all vision.

One with the movement of the boat, one with the mood of the glimmering
waters and the surrender of the scented woods, he grasps ten thousand
and secures One. Such were the Taoist fishermen of Kuo Hsi. Drifting
with the winds and the currents of great rivers, adventuring by unknown
streams, they attained Harmony, and their spoils are bright moments of
the eternal Mood caught in golden nets, flower fairies held in gossamer.
Never has the earth been so worshipped by man. She was at once the
unattainable mistress and goddess surrendering to mortal lover. And
never a bell of solitary convent floated across the Chinese landscape
but it brought some anchorite of ancient beauty to her shrine.

<span class="small">When the sound of a bell is withdrawn till it fails
in the green mists of twilight,  
Night and the dreamer pursuing his dream return through a myriad
leaves.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[37:1](fol10.htm#fr_2) *Epochs of Chinese and
Japanese Art,* by Ernest Fenollosa, vol. ii. pp. 14 and 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lines From the Tomb of an Unknown Woman](fol11)
