[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chtitle)  [Next](chbib) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE.

(*NOTE: The Preface and Bibliography which follow were transcribed from
the 1860 edition, titled 'English and Scottish Ballads'; the ballads
were transcribed from the much expanded 1886-98 edition, titled "The
English and Scottish Popular Ballads"--JBH.*)

THESE volumes have been compiled from the numerous collections of
Ballads printed since the beginning of the last century. They contain
all but two or three of the *ancient* ballads of England and Scotland,
and nearly all those ballads which, in either country, have been
gathered from oral tradition,--whether ancient or not. Widely different
from the true popular ballads, the spontaneous products of nature, are
the works of the professional ballad-maker, which make up the bulk of
Garlands and Broadsides. These, though sometimes not without grace, more
frequently not lacking in humor, belong to artificial literature,--of
course to an humble department. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) As

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

many ballads of this second class have been admitted as it was thought
might be wished for, perhaps I should say tolerated, by the "benevolent
reader." No words could express the dulness and inutility of a
collection which should embrace all the Roxburghe and Pepys
broadsides--a scope with which this publication was most undeservedly
credited by an English journal. But while the broadside ballads have
been and must have been gleaned, the popular ballads demand much more
liberal treatment. Many of the older ones are mutilated, many more are
miserably corrupted, but as long as any traces of their originals are
left, they are worthy of attention and have received it. When a ballad
is extant in a variety of forms, all the most important versions are
given.--Less than this would have seemed insufficient for a collection
intended as a complement to an extensive series of the British Poets. To
meet the objections of readers for pleasure, all those pieces which are
wanting in general interest are in each volume inserted in an appendix.

The ballads are grouped in eight Books, nearly corresponding to the
division of volumes. The arrangement in the several Books may be called
chronological, by which is meant, an arrangement

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

according to the probable antiquity of the story, not the age of the
actual form or language. Exceptions to this rule will be observed,
partly the result of oversight, partly of fluctuating views; the most
noticeable case is in the First Book, where the ballads that stand at
the beginning are certainly not so old as some that follow. Again, it is
very possible that some pieces might with advantage be transferred to
different Books, but it is believed that the general disposition will be
found practically convenient. It is as follows:--

BOOK I. contains Ballads involving Superstitions of various kinds,--as
of Fairies, Elves, Water-spirits, Enchantment, and Ghostly Apparitions;
and also some Legends of Popular Heroes.

BOOK II. Tragic Love-ballads.

BOOK III. other Tragic Ballads.

BOOK IV. Love-ballads not Tragic.

BOOK V. Ballads of Robin Hood, his followers, and compeers.

BOOK VI. Ballads of other Outlaws, especially Border Outlaws, of Border
Forays, Feuds, &c.

BOOK VII.Historical Ballads, or those relating to public characters or
events.

BOOK VIII. Miscellaneous Ballads, especially Humorous, Satirical,
Burlesque; also some specimens of the Moral and Scriptural, and all such
pieces as had been overlooked in arranging the earlier volumes.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

For the Texts, the rule has been to select the most authentic copies,
and to reprint them as they stand in the collections, restoring readings
that had been changed without grounds, and noting all deviations from
the originals, whether those of previous editors or of this edition, in
the margin. Interpolations acknowledged by the editors have generally
been dropped. In two instances only have previously printed texts been
superseded or greatly improved: the text of *The Horn of King Arthur*,
in the first volume, was furnished from the manuscript, by J. O.
Halliwell, Esq., and *Adam Bel*, in the fifth volume, has been amended
by a recently discovered fragment of an excellent edition, kindly
communicated by J. P. Collier, Esq.

The Introductory Notices prefixed to the several ballads may seem dry
and somewhat meagre. They will be found, it is believed, to comprise
what is most essential even for the less cursory reader to know. These
prefaces are intended to give an account of all the printed forms of
each ballad, and references to the books in which they were first
published. In many cases also, the corresponding ballads in other
languages, especially in Danish, Swedish, and German, are briefly
pointed out. But these last notices are very imperfect. Fascinating as
such investigations are, they could not be allowed to interfere with the
progress of the series of Poets of which this col

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

lection of Ballads forms a part, nor were the necessary books
immediately at hand. At a more favorable time the whole subject may be
resumed, unless some person better qualified shall take it up in the
interim.

While upon this point let me make the warmest acknowledgments for the
help received from Grundtvig's Ancient Popular Ballads of Denmark
(*Danmarics Gamle Folkeviser*), a work which has no equal in its line,
and which may in every way serve as a model for collections of National
Ballads. Such a work as Grundtvig's can only be imitated by an English
editor, never equalled, for the material is not at hand. All Denmark
seems to have combined to help on his labors; schoolmasters and
clergymen, in those retired nooks where tradition longest lingers, have
been very active in taking down ballads from the mouths of the people,
and a large number of old manuscripts have been placed at his
disposal.--We have not even the Percy Manuscript at our command, and
must be content to take the ballads as they are printed in the
*Reliques*, with all the editor's changes. This manuscript is understood
to be in the hands of a dealer who is keeping it from the public in
order to enhance its value. The greatest service that can now be done to
English Ballad-literature is to publish this precious document.
Civilization has made too great strides in the island of Great

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Britain for us to expect much more from
tradition.

Certain short romances which formerly stood in the First Book, have been
dropped from thise second Edition, in order to give the collection a
homogeneous character. One or two ballads have been added, and some of
the prefaces considerably enlarged.

F. J. C.

May, 1860.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](chpref.htm#fr_0) This distinction is not
absolute, for several of the ancient ballads have a sort of literary
character, and many broadsides were printed from oral tradition. The
only popular ballads excluded from this selection that require mention,
are *The Bonny Hynd*, *The Jolly Beggar*, *The Baffled Knight*, *The
Keach in the Creel*, and *The Earl of Errol*. These ballads, in all
their varieties, may be found by referring to the general Index at the
end of the eighth volume. To extend <span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>
the utility of this index, references are also given to many other
ballads which, though not worth reprinting, may occasionally be inquired
for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of the Principal Collections of English and Scottish Ballads
and Songs](chbib)
