[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Necronomicon](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hpl73)  [Next](hpl75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

An H.P. Lovecraft Anthology, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

So at length Carter crawled through endless burrows with three helpful
ghouls bearing the slate gravestone of Col. Nepemiah Derby, obit 1719,
from the Charter Street Burying Ground in Salem. When they came again
into open twilight they were in a forest of vast lichened monoliths
reaching nearly as high as the eye could see and forming the modest
gravestones of the Gugs. On the right of the hole out of which they
wriggled, and seen through aisles of monoliths, was a stupendous vista
of cyclopean round towers mounting up illimitable into the grey air of
inner earth. This was the great city of the Gugs, whose doorways are
thirty feet high. Ghouls come here often, for a buried Gug will feed a
community for almost a year, and even with the added peril it is better
to burrow for Gugs than to bother with the graves of men. Carter now
understood the occasional titan bones he had felt beneath him in the
vale of Pnoth.

Straight ahead, and just outside the cemetery, rose a sheer
perpendicular cliff at whose base an immense and forbidding cavern
yawned. This the ghouls told Carter to avoid as much as possible, since
it was the entrance to the unhallowed vaults of Zin where Gugs hunt
ghasts in the darkness. And truly, that warning was soon well justified;
for the moment a ghoul began to creep toward the towers to see if the
hour of the Gugs' resting had been rightly timed, there glowed in the
gloom of that great cavern's mouth first one pair of yellowish-red eyes
and then another, implying that the Gugs were one sentry less, and that
ghasts have indeed an excellent sharpness of smell. So the ghoul
returned to the burrow and motioned his companions to be silent. It was
best to leave the ghasts to their own devices, and there was a
possibility that they might soon withdraw, since they must naturally be
rather tired after coping with a Gug sentry in the black vaults. After a
moment something about the size of a small horse hopped out into the
grey twilight, and Carter turned sick at the aspect of that scabrous and
unwholesome beast, whose face is so curiously human despite the absence
of a nose, a forehead, and other important particulars.

Presently three other ghasts hopped out to join their fellow, and a
ghoul glibbered softly at Carter that their absence of battle-scars was
a bad sign. It proved that theY had not fought the Gug sentry at all,
but had merely slipped past him as he slept, so that their strength and
savagery were still unimpaired and would remain so till they had found
and disposed of a victim. It was very unpleasant to see those filthy and
disproportioned animals which soon numbered about fifteen, grubbing
about and making their kangaroo leaps in the grey twilight where titan
towers and monoliths arose, but it was still more unpleasant when they
spoke among themselves in the coughing gutturals of ghasts. And yet,
horrible as they were, they were not so horrible as what presently came
out of the cave after them with disconcerting suddenness.

It was a paw, fully two feet and a half across, and equipped with
formidable talons. Alter it came another paw, and after that a great
black-furred arm to which both of the paws were attached by short
forearms. Then two pink eyes shone, and the head of the awakened Gug
sentry, large as a barrel, wabbled into view. The eyes jutted two inches
from each side, shaded by bony protuberances overgrown with coarse
hairs. But the head was chiefly terrible because of the mouth. That
mouth had great yellow fangs and ran from the top to the bottom of the
head, opening vertically instead of horizontally.

But before that unfortunate Gug could emerge from the cave and rise to
his full twenty feet, the vindictive ghasts were upon him. Carter feared
for a moment that he would give an alarm and arouse all his kin, till a
ghoul softly glibbered that Gugs have no voice but talk by means of
facial expression. The battle which then ensued was truly a frightful
one. From all sides the venomous ghasts rushed feverishly at the
creeping Gug, nipping and tearing with their muzzles, and mauling
murderously with their hard pointed hooves. All the time they coughed
excitedly, screaming when the great vertical mouth of the Gug would
occasionally bite into one of their number, so that the noise of the
combat would surely have aroused the sleeping city had not the weakening
of the sentry begun to transfer the action farther and farther within
the cavern. As it was, the tumult soon receded altogether from sight in
the blackness, with only occasional evil echoes to mark its continuance.

Then the most alert of the ghouls gave the signal for all to advance,
and Carter followed the loping three out of the forest of monoliths and
into the dark noisome streets of that awful city whose rounded towers of
cyclopean stone soared up beyond the sight. Silently they shambled over
that rough rock pavement, hearing with disgust the abominable muffled
snortings from great black doorways which marked the slumber of the
Gugs. Apprehensive of the ending of the rest hour, the ghouls set a
somewhat rapid pace; but even so the journey was no brief one, for
distances in that town of giants are on a great scale. At last, however,
they came to a somewhat open space before a tower even vaster than the
rest; above whose colossal doorway was fixed a monstrous symbol in
bas-relief which made one shudder without knowing its meaning. This was
the central tower with the sign of Koth, and those huge stone steps just
visible through the dusk within were the beginning of the great flight
leading to upper dreamland and the enchanted wood.

There now began a climb of interminable length in utter blackness: made
almost impossible by the monstrous size of the steps, which were
fashioned for Gugs, and were therefore nearly a yard high. Of their
number Carter could form no just estimate, for he soon became so worn
out that the tireless and elastic ghouls were forced to aid him. All
through the endless climb there lurked the peril of detection and
pursuit; for though no Gug dares lift the stone door to the forest
because of the Great One's curse, there are no such restraints
concerning the tower and the steps, and escaped ghasts are often chased,
even to the very top. So sharp are the ears of Gugs, that the bare feet
and hands of the climbers might readily be heard when the city awoke;
and it would of course take but little time for the striding giants,
accustomed from their ghast-hunts in the vaults of Zin to seeing without
light, to overtake their smaller and slower quarry on those cyclopean
steps. It was very depressing to reflect that the silent pursuing Gugs
would not be heard at all, but would come very suddenly and shockingly
in the dark upon the climbers. Nor could the traditional fear of Gugs
for ghouls be depended upon in that peculiar place where the advantages
lay so heavily with the Gugs. There was also some peril from the furtive
and venomous ghasts, which frequently hopped up onto the tower during
the sleep hour of the Gugs. If the Gugs slept long, and the ghasts
returned soon from their deed in the cavern, the scent of the climbers
might easily be picked up by those loathsome and ill-disposed things; in
which case it would almost be better to be eaten by a Gug.

Then, after aeons of climbing, there came a cough from the darkness
above; and matters assumed a very grave and unexpected turn.

It was clear that a ghast, or perhaps even more, had strayed into that
tower before the coming of Carter and his guides; and it was equally
clear that this peril was very close. Alter a breathless second the
leading ghoul pushed Carter to the wall and arranged his kinfolk in the
best possible way, with the old slate tombstone raised for a crushing
blow whenever the enemy might come in sight. Ghouls can see in the dark,
so the party was not as badly off as Carter would have been alone. In
another moment the clatter of hooves revealed the downward hopping of at
least one beast, and the slab-bearing ghouls poised their weapon for a
desperate blow. Presently two yellowish-red eyes flashed into view, and
the panting of the ghast became audible above its clattering. As it
hopped down to the step above the ghouls, they wielded the ancient
gravestone with prodigious force, so that there was only a wheeze and a
choking before the victim collapsed in a noxious heap. There seemed to
be only this one animal, and after a moment of listening the ghouls
tapped Carter as a signal to proceed again. As before, they were obliged
to aid him; and he was glad to leave that place of carnage where the
ghast's uncouth remains sprawled invisible in the blackness.

At last the ghouls brought their companion to a halt; and feeling above
him, Carter realised that the great stone trap door was reached at last.
To open so vast a thing completely was not to be thought of, but the
ghouls hoped to get it up just enough to slip the gravestone under as a
prop, and permit Carter to escape through the crack. They themselves
planned to descend again and return through the city of the Gugs, since
their elusiveness was great, and they did not know the way overland to
spectral Sarkomand with its lion-guarded gate to the abyss.

Mighty was the straining of those three ghouls at the stone of the door
above them, and Carter helped push with as much strength as he had. They
judged the edge next the top of the staircase to be the right one, and
to this they bent all the force of their disreputably nourished muscles.
Alter a few moments a crack of light appeared; and Carter, to whom that
task had been entrusted, slipped the end of the old gravestone in the
aperture. There now ensued a mighty heaving; but progress was very slow,
and they had of course to return to their first position every time they
failed to turn the slab and prop the portal open.

Suddenly their desperation was magnified a thousand fold by a sound on
the steps below them. It was only the thumping and rattling of the slain
ghast's hooved body as it rolled down to lower levels; but of all the
possible causes of that body's dislodgement and rolling, none was in the
least reassuring. Therefore, knowing the ways of Gugs, the ghouls set to
with something of a frenzy; and in a surprisingly short time had the
door so high that they were able to hold it still whilst Carter turned
the slab and left a generous opening. They now helped Carter through,
letting him climb up to their rubbery shoulders and later guiding his
feet as he clutched at the blessed soil of the upper dreamland outside.
Another second and they were through themselves, knocking away the
gravestone and closing the great trap door while a panting became
audible beneath. Because of the Great One's curse no Gug might ever
emerge from that portal, so with a deep relief and sense of repose
Carter lay quietly on the thick grotesque fungi of the enchanted wood
while his guides squatted near in the manner that ghouls rest.

Weird as was that enchanted wood through which he had fared so long ago,
it was verily a haven and a delight after those gulfs he had now left
behind. There was no living denizen about, for Zoogs shun the mysterious
door in fear and Carter at once consulted with his ghouls about their
future course. To return through the tower they no longer dared, and the
waking world did not appeal to them when they learned that they must
pass the priests Nasht and Kaman-Thah in the cavern of flame. So at
length they decided to return through Sarkomand and its gate of the
abyss, though of how to get there they knew nothing. Carter recalled
that it lies in the valley below Leng, and recalled likewise that he had
seen in Dylath-Leen a sinister, slant-eyed old merchant reputed to trade
on Leng, therefore he advised the ghouls to seek out Dylath-Leen,
crossing the fields to Nir and the Skai and following the river to its
mouth. This they at once resolved to do, and lost no time in loping off,
since the thickening of the dusk promised a full night ahead for travel.
And Carter shook the paws of those repulsive beasts, thanking them for
their help and sending his gratitude to the beast which once was
Pickman; but could not help sighing with pleasure when they left. For a
ghoul is a ghoul, and at best an unpleasant companion for man. After
that Carter sought a forest pool and cleansed himself of the mud of
nether earth, thereupon reassuming the clothes he had so carefully
carried.

It was now night in that redoubtable wood of monstrous trees, but
because of the phosphorescence one might travel as well as by day;
wherefore Carter set out upon the well-known route toward Celephais, in
Ooth-Nargai beyond the Tanarian Hills. And as he went he thought of the
zebra he had left tethered to an ash-tree on Ngranek in far-away Oriab
so many aeons ago, and wondered if any lava-gatherers had fed and
released it. And he wondered, too, if he would ever return to Baharna
and pay for the zebra that was slain by night in those ancient ruins by
Yath's shore, and if the old tavernkeeper would remember him. Such were
the thoughts that came to him in the air of the regained upper
dreamland.

But presently his progress was halted by a sound from a very large
hollow tree. He had avoided the great circle of stones, since he did not
care to speak with Zoogs just now; but it appeared from the singular
fluttering in that huge tree that important councils were in session
elsewhere. Upon drawing nearer he made out the accents of a tense and
heated discussion; and before long became conscious of matters which he
viewed with the greatest concern. For a war on the cats was under debate
in that sovereign assembly of Zoogs. It all came from the loss of the
party which had sneaked after Carter to Ulthar, and which the cats had
justly punished for unsuitable intentions. The matter had long rankled;
and now, or at least within a month, the marshalled Zoogs were about to
strike the whole feline tribe in a series of surprise attacks, taking
individual cats or groups of cats unawares, and giving not even the
myriad cats of Ulthar a proper chance to drill and mobilise. This was
the plan of the Zoogs, and Carter saw that he must foil it before
leaving upon his mighty quest.

Very quietly therefore did Randolph Carter steal to the edge of the wood
and send the cry of the cat over the starlit fields. And a great
grimalkin in a nearby cottage took up the burden and relayed it across
leagues of rolling meadow to warriors large and small, black, grey,
tiger, white, yellow, and mixed, and it echoed through Nir and beyond
the Skai even into Ulthar, and Ulthar's numerous cats called in chorus
and fell into a line of march. It was fortunate that the moon was not
up, so that all the cats were on earth. Swiftly and silently leaping,
they sprang from every hearth and housetop and poured in a great furry
sea across the plains to the edge of the wood. Carter was there to greet
them, and the sight of shapely, wholesome cats was indeed good for his
eyes after the things he had seen and walked with in the abyss. He was
glad to see his venerable friend and one-time rescuer at the head of
Ulthar's detachment, a collar of rank around his sleek neck, and
whiskers bristling at a martial angle. Better still, as a sub-lieutenant
in that army was a brisk young fellow who proved to be none other than
the very little kitten at the inn to whom Carter had given a saucer of
rich cream on that long-vanished morning in Ulthar. He was a strapping
and promising cat now, and purred as he shook hands with his friend. His
grandfather said he was doing very well in the army, and that he might
well expect a captaincy after one more campaign.

Carter now outlined the peril of the cat tribe, and was rewarded by
deep-throated purrs of gratitude from all sides. Consulting with the
generals, he prepared a plan of instant action which involved marching
at once upon the Zoog council and other known strongholds of Zoogs;
forestalling their surprise attacks and forcing them to terms before the
mobilization of their army of invasion. Thereupon without a moment's
loss that great ocean of cats flooded the enchanted wood and surged
around the council tree and the great stone circle. Flutterings rose to
panic pitch as the enemy saw the newcomers and there was very little
resistance among the furtive and curious brown Zoogs. They saw that they
were beaten in advance, and turned from thoughts of vengeance to
thoughts of present self-preservation.

Half the cats now seated themselves in a circular formation with the
captured Zoogs in the centre, leaving open a lane down which were
marched the additional captives rounded up by the other cats in other
parts of the wood. Terms were discussed at length, Carter acting as
interpreter, and it was decided that the Zoogs might remain a free tribe
on condition of rendering to the cats a large tribute of grouse, quail,
and pheasants from the less fabulous parts of the forest. Twelve young
Zoogs of noble families were taken as hostages to be kept in the Temple
of Cats at Ulthar, and the victors made it plain that any disappearances
of cats on the borders of the Zoog domain would be followed by
consequences highly disastrous to Zoogs. These matters disposed of, the
assembled cats broke ranks and permitted the Zoogs to slink off one by
one to their respective homes, which they hastened to do with many a
sullen backward glance.

The old cat general now offered Carter an escort through the forest to
whatever border he wished to reach, deeming it likely that the Zoogs
would harbour dire resentment against him for the frustration of their
warlike enterprise. This offer he welcomed with gratitude; not only for
the safety it afforded, but because he liked the graceful companionship
of cats. So in the midst of a pleasant and playful regiment, relaxed
after the successful performance of its duty, Randolph Carter walked
with dignity through that enchanted and phosphorescent wood of titan
trees, talking of his quest with the old general and his grandson whilst
others of the band indulged in fantastic gambols or chased fallen leaves
that the wind drove among the fungi of that primeval floor. And the old
cat said that he had heard much of unknown Kadath in the cold waste, but
did not know where it was. As for the marvellous sunset city, he had not
even heard of that, but would gladly relay to Carter anything he might
later learn.

He gave the seeker some passwords of great value among the cats of
dreamland, and commended him especially to the old chief of the cats in
Celephais, whither he was bound. That old cat, already slightly known to
Carter, was a dignified maltese; and would prove highly influential in
any transaction. It was dawn when they came to the proper edge of the
wood, and Carter bade his friends a reluctant farewell. The young
sub-lieutenant he had met as a small kitten would have followed him had
not the old general forbidden it, but that austere patriarch insisted
that the path of duty lay with the tribe and the army. So Carter set out
alone over the golden fields that stretched mysterious beside a
willow-fringed river, and the cats went back into the wood.

Well did the traveller know those garden lands that lie betwixt the wood
of the Cerenerian Sea, and blithely did he follow the singing river
Oukianos that marked his course. The sun rose higher over gentle slopes
of grove and lawn, and heightened the colours of the thousand flowers
that starred each knoll and dangle. A blessed haze lies upon all this
region, wherein is held a little more of the sunlight than other places
hold, and a little more of the summer's humming music of birds and bees;
so that men walk through it as through a faery place, and feel greater
joy and wonder than they ever afterward remember.

By noon Carter reached the jasper terraces of Kiran which slope down to
the river's edge and bear that temple of loveliness wherein the King of
Ilek-Vad comes from his far realm on the twilight sea once a year in a
golden palanqnin to pray to the god of Oukianos, who sang to him in
youth when he dwelt in a cottage by its banks. All of jasper is that
temple, and covering an acre of ground with its walls and courts, its
seven pinnacled towers, and its inner shrine where the river enters
through hidden channels and the god sings softly in the night. Many
times the moon hears strange music as it shines on those courts and
terraces and pinnacles, but whether that music be the song of the god or
the chant of the cryptical priests, none but the King of Ilek-Vad may
say; for only he had entered the temple or seen the priests. Now, in the
drowsiness of day, that carven and delicate fane was silent, and Carter
heard only the murmur of the great stream and the hum of the birds and
bees as he walked onward under the enchanted sun.

All that afternoon the pilgrim wandered on through perfumed meadows and
in the lee of gentle riverward hills bearing peaceful thatched cottages
and the shrines of amiable gods carven from jasper or chrysoberyl.
Sometimes he walked close to the bank of Oukianos and whistled to the
sprightly and iridescent fish of that crystal stream, and at other times
he paused amidst the whispering rushes and gazed at the great dark wood
on the farther side, whose trees came down clear to the water's edge. In
former dreams he had seen quaint lumbering buopoths come shyly out of
that wood to drink, but now he could not glimpse any. Once in a while he
paused to watch a carnivorous fish catch a fishing bird, which it lured
to the water by showing its tempting scales in the sun, and grasped by
the beak with its enormous mouth as the winged hunter sought to dart
down upon it.

Toward evening he mounted a low grassy rise and saw before him flaming
in the sunset the thousand gilded spires of Thran. Lofty beyond belief
are the alabaster walls of that incredible city, sloping inward toward
the top and wrought in one solid piece by what means no man knows, for
they are more ancient than memory. Yet lofty as they are with their
hundred gates and two hundred turrets, the clustered towers within, all
white beneath their golden spires, are loftier still; so that men on the
plain around see them soaring into the sky, sometimes shining clear,
sometimes caught at the top in tangles of cloud and mist, and sometimes
clouded lower down with their utmost pinnacles blazing free above the
vapours. And where Thran's gates open on the river are great wharves of
marble, with ornate galleons of fragrant cedar and calamander riding
gently at anchor, and strange bearded sailors sitting on casks and bales
with the hieroglyphs of far places. Landward beyond the walls lies the
farm country, where small white cottages dream between little hills, and
narrow roads with many stone bridges wind gracefully among streams and
gardens.

Down through this verdant land Carter walked at evening, and saw
twilight float up from the river to the marvellous golden spires of
Thran. And just at the hour of dusk he came to the southern gate, and
was stopped by a red-robed sentry till he had told three dreams beyond
belief, and proved himself a dreamer worthy to walk up Thran's steep
mysterious streets and linger in the bazaars where the wares of the
ornate galleons were sold. Then into that incredible city he walked;
through a wall so thick that the gate was a tunnel, and thereafter
amidst curved and undulant ways winding deep and narrow between the
heavenward towers. Lights shone through grated and balconied windows,
and,the sound of lutes and pipes stole timid from inner courts where
marble fountains bubbled. Carter knew his way, and edged down through
darker streets to the river, where at an old sea tavern he found the
captains and seamen he had known in myriad other dreams. There he bought
his passage to Celephais on a great green galleon, and there he stopped
for the night after speaking gravely to the venerable cat of that inn,
who blinked dozing before an enormous hearth and dreamed of old wars and
forgotten gods.

In the morning Carter boarded the galleon bound for Celephais, and sat
in the prow as the ropes were cast off and the long sail down to the
Cerenerian Sea begun. For many leagues the banks were much as they were
above Thran, with now and then a curious temple rising on the farther
hills toward the right, and a drowsy village on the shore, with steep
red roofs and nets spread in the sun. Mindful of his search, Carter
questioned all the mariners closely about those whom they had met in the
taverns of Celephais, asking the names and ways of the strange men with
long, narrow eyes, long-lobed ears, thin noses, and pointed chins who
came in dark ships from the north and traded onyx for the carved jade
and spun gold and little red singing birds of Celephais. Of these men
the sailors knew not much, save that they talked but seldom and spread a
kind of awe about them.

Their land, very far away, was called Inquanok, and not many people
cared to go thither because it was a cold twilight land, and said to be
close to unpleasant Leng; although high impassable mountains towered on
the side where Leng was thought to lie, so that none might say whether
this evil plateau with its horrible stone villages and unmentionable
monastery were really there, or whether the rumour were only a fear that
timid people felt in the night when those formidable barrier peaks
loomed black against a rising moon. Certainly, men reached Leng from
very different oceans. Of other boundaries of Inquanok those sailors had
no notion, nor had they heard of the cold waste and unknown Kadath save
from vague unplaced report. And of the marvellous sunset city which
Carter sought they knew nothing at all. So the traveller asked no more
of far things, but bided his time till he might talk with those strange
men from cold and twilight Inquanok who are the seed of such gods as
carved their features on Ngranek.

Late in the day the galleon reached those bends of the river which
traverse the perfumed jungles of Kied. Here Carter wished he might
disembark, for in those tropic tangles sleep wondrous palaces of ivory,
lone and unbroken, where once dwelt fabulous monarchs of a land whose
name is forgotten. Spells of the Elder Ones keep those places unharmed
and undecayed, for it is written that there may one day be need of them
again; and elephant caravans have glimpsed them from afar by moonlight,
though none dares approach them closely because of the guardians to
which their wholeness is due. But the ship swept on, and dusk hushed the
hum of the day, and the first stars above blinked answers to the early
fireflies on the banks as that jungle fell far behind, leaving only its
fragrance as a memory that it had been. And all through the night that
galleon floated on past mysteries unseen and unsuspected. Once a lookout
reported fires on the hills to the east, but the sleepy captain said
they had better not be looked at too much, since it was highly uncertain
just who or what had lit them.

In the morning the river had broadened out greatly, and Carter saw by
the houses along the banks that they were close to the vast trading city
of Hlanith on the Cerenerian Sea. Here the walls are of rugged granite,
and the houses peakedly fantastic with beamed and plastered gables. The
men of Hlanith are more like those of the waking world than any others
in dreamland; so that the city is not sought except for barter, but is
prized for the solid work of its artisans. The wharves of Hlanith are of
oak, and there the galleon made fast while the captain traded in the
taverns. Carter also went ashore, and looked curiously upon the rutted
streets where wooden ox carts lumbered and feverish merchants cried
their wares vacuously in the bazaars. The sea taverns were all close to
the wharves on cobbled lanes salted with the spray of high tides, and
seemed exceedingly ancient with their low black-beamed ceilings and
casements of greenish bull's-eye panes. Ancient sailors in those taverns
talked much of distant ports, and told many stories of the curious men
from twilight Inquanok, but had little to add to what the seamen of the
galleon had told. Then at last, after much unloading and loading, the
ship set sail once more over the sunset sea, and the high walls and
gables of Hlanith grew less as the last golden light of day lent them a
wonder and beauty beyond any that men had given them.

Two nights and two days the galleon sailed over the Cerenerian Sea,
sighting no land and speaking but one other vessel. Then near sunset of
the second day there loomed up ahead the snowy peak of Aran with its
gingko-trees swaying on the lower slope, and Carter knew that they were
come to the land of Ooth-Nargai and the marvellous city of Celephais.
Swiftly there came into sight the glittering minarets of that fabulous
town, and the untarnished marble walls with their bronze statues, and
the great stone bridge where Naraxa joins the sea. Then rose the gentle
hills behind the town, with their groves and gardens of asphodels and
the small shrines and cottages upon them; and far in the background the
purple ridge of the Tanarians, potent and mystical, behind which lay
forbidden ways into the waking world and toward other regions of dream.

The harbour was full of painted galleys, some of which were from the
marble cloud-city of Serannian, that lies in ethereal space beyond where
the sea meets the sky, and some of which were from more substantial
parts of dreamland. Among these the steersman threaded his way up to the
spice-fragrant wharves, where the galleon made fast in the dusk as the
city's million lights began to twinkle out over the water. Ever new
seemed this deathless city of vision, for here time has no power to
tarnish or destroy. As it has always been is still the turquoise of
Nath-Horthath, and the eighty orchid-wreathed priests are the same who
builded it ten thousand years ago. Shining still is the bronze of the
great gates, nor are the onyx pavements ever worn or broken. And the
great bronze statues on the walls look down on merchants and camel
drivers older than fable, yet without one grey hair in their forked
beards.

Carter did not once seek out the temple or the palace or the citadel,
but stayed by the seaward wall among traders and sailors. And when it
was too late for rumours and legends he sought out an ancient tavern he
knew well, and rested with dreams of the gods on unknown Kadath whom he
sought. The next day he searched all along the quays for some of the
strange mariners of Inquanok, but was told that none were now in port,
their galley not being due from the north for full two weeks. He found,
however, one Thorabonian sailor who had been to Inquanok and had worked
in the onyx quarries of that twilight place; and this sailor said there
was certainly a descent to the north of the peopled region, which
everybody seemed to fear and shun. The Thorabonian opined that this
desert led around the utmost rim of impassable peaks into Leng's
horrible plateau, and that this was why men feared it; though he
admitted there were other vague tales of evil presences and nameless
sentinels. Whether or not this could be the fabled waste wherein unknown
Kadath stands he did not know; but it seemed unlikely that those
presences and sentinels, if indeed they existed, were stationed for
nought.

On the following day Carter walked up the Street of the Pillars to the
turquoise temple and talked with the High-Priest. Though Nath-Horthath
is chiefly worshipped in Celephais, all the Great Ones are mentioned in
diurnal prayers; and the priest was reasonably versed in their moods.
Like Atal in distant Ulthar, he strongly advised against any attempts to
see them; declaring that they are testy and capricious, and subject to
strange protection from the mindless Other Gods from Outside, whose soul
and messenger is the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep. Their jealous hiding
of the marvellous sunset city shewed clearly that they did not wish
Carter to reach it, and it was doubtful how they would regard a guest
whose object was to see them and plead before them. No man had ever
found Kadath in the past, and it might be just as well if none ever
found it in the future. Such rumours as were told about that onyx castle
of the Great Ones were not by any means reassuring.

Having thanked the orchid-crowned High-Priest, Carter left the temple
and sought out the bazaar of the sheep-butchers, where the old chief of
Celephais' cats dwelt sleek and contented. That grey and dignified being
was sunning himself on the onyx pavement, and extended a languid paw as
his caller approached. But when Carter repeated the passwords and
introductions furnished him by the old cat general of Ulthar, the furry
patriarch became very cordial and communicative; and told much of the
secret lore known to cats on the seaward slopes of Ooth-Nargai. Best of
all, he repeated several things told him furtively by the timid
waterfront cats of Celephais about the men of Inquanok, on whose dark
ships no cat will go.

It seems that these men have an aura not of earth about them, though
that is not the reason why no cat will sail on their ships. The reason
for this is that Inquanok holds shadows which no cat can endure, so that
in all that cold twilight realm there is never a cheering purr or a
homely mew. Whether it be because of things wafted over the impassable
peaks from hypothetical Leng, or because of things filtering down from
the chilly desert to the north, none may say; but it remains a fact that
in that far land there broods a hint of outer space which cats do not
like, and to which they are more sensitive than men. Therefore they will
not go on the dark ships that seek the basalt quays of Inquanok.

The old chief of the cats also told him where to find his friend King
Kuranes, who in Carter's latter dreams had reigned alternately in the
rose-crystal Palace of the Seventy Delights at Celephais and in the
turreted cloud-castle of sky-floating Serannian. It seemed that he could
no more find content in those places, but had formed a mighty longing
for the English cliffs and downlands of his boyhood; where in little
dreaming villages England's old songs hover at evening behind lattice
windows, and where grey church towers peep lovely through the verdure of
distant valleys. He could not go back to these things in the waking
world because his body was dead; but he had done the next best thing and
dreamed a small tract of such countryside in the region east of the city
where meadows roll gracefully up from the sea-cliffs to the foot of the
Tanarian Hills. There he dwelt in a grey Gothic manor-house of stone
looking on the sea, and tried to think it was ancient Trevor Towers,
where he was born and where thirteen generations of his forefathers had
first seen the light. And on the coast nearby he had built a little
Cornish fishing village with steep cobbled ways, settling therein such
people as had the most English faces, and seeking ever to teach them the
dear remembered accents of old Cornwall fishers. And in a valley not far
off he had reared a great Norman Abbey whose tower he could see from his
window, placing around it in the churchyard grey stones with the names
of his ancestors carved thereon, and with a moss somewhat like Old
England's moss. For though Kuranes was a monarch in the land of dream,
with all imagined pomps and marvels, splendours and beauties, ecstasies
and delights, novelties and excitements at his command, he would gladly
have resigned forever the whole of his power and luxury and freedom for
one blessed day as a simple boy in that pure and quiet England, that
ancient, beloved England which had moulded his being and of which he
must always be immutably a part.

So when Carter bade that old grey chief of the cats adieu, he did not
seek the terraced palace of rose crystal but walked out the eastern gate
and across the daisied fields toward a peaked gable which he glimpsed
through the oaks of a park sloping up to the sea-cliffs. And in time he
came to a great hedge and a gate with a little brick lodge, and when he
rang the bell there hobbled to admit him no robed and annointed lackey
of the palace, but a small stubby old man in a smock who spoke as best
he could in the quaint tones of far Cornwall. And Carter walked up the
shady path between trees as near as possible to England's trees, and
clumbed the terraces among gardens set out as in Queen Anne's time. At
the door, flanked by stone cats in the old way, he was met by a
whiskered butler in suitable livery; and was presently taken to the
library where Kuranes, Lord of Ooth-Nargai and the Sky around Serannian,
sat pensive in a chair by the window looking on his little seacoast
village and wishing that his old nurse would come in and scold him
because he was not ready for that hateful lawn-party at the vicar's,
with the carriage waiting and his mother nearly out of patience.

Kuranes, clad in a dressing gown of the sort favoured by London tailors
in his youth, rose eagerly to meet his guest; for the sight of an
Anglo-Saxon from the waking world was very dear to him, even if it was a
Saxon from Boston, Massachusetts, instead of from Cornwall. And for long
they talked of old times, having much to say because both were old
dreamers and well versed in the wonders of incredible places. Kuranes,
indeed, had been out beyond the stars in the ultimate void, and was said
to be the only one who had ever returned sane from such a voyage.

At length Carter brought up the subject of his quest, and asked of his
host those questions he had asked of so many others. Kuranes did not
know where Kadath was, or the marvellous sunset city; but he did know
that the Great Ones were very dangerous creatures to seek out, and that
the Other Gods had strange ways of protecting them from impertinent
curiosity. He had learned much of the Other Gods in distant parts of
space, especially in that region where form does not exist, and coloured
gases study the innermost secrets. The violet gas S'ngac had told him
terrible things of the crawling chaos Nyarlathotep, and had warned him
never to approach the central void where the daemon sultan Azathoth
gnaws hungrily in the dark.

Altogether, it was not well to meddle with the Elder Ones; and if they
persistently denied all access to the marvellous sunset city, it were
better not to seek that city.

Kuranes furthermore doubted whether his guest would profit aught by
coming to the city even were he to gain it. He himself had dreamed and
yearned long years for lovely Celephais and the land of Ooth-Nargai, and
for the freedom and colour and high experience of life devoid of its
chains, and conventions, and stupidities. But now that he was come into
that city and that land, and was the king thereof, he found the freedom
and the vividness all too soon worn out, and monotonous for want of
linkage with anything firm in his feelings and memories. He was a king
in Ooth-Nargai, but found no meaning therein, and drooped always for the
old familiar things of England that had shaped his youth. All his
kingdom would he give for the sound of Cornish church bells over the
downs, and all the thousand minarets of Celephais for the steep homely
roofs of the village near his home. So he told his guest that the
unknown sunset city might not hold quite that content he sought, and
that perhaps it had better remain a glorious and half-remembered dream.
For he had visited Carter often in the old waking days, and knew well
the lovely New England slopes that had given him birth.

At the last, he was very certain, the seeker would long only for the
early remembered scenes; the glow of Beacon Hill at evening, the tall
steeples and winding hill streets of quaint Kingsport, the hoary gambrel
roofs of ancient and witch-haunted Arkham, and the blessed meads and
valleys where stone walls rambled and white farmhouse gables peeped out
from bowers of verdure. These things he told Randolph Carter, but still
the seeker held to his purpose. And in the end they parted each with his
own conviction, and Carter went back through the bronze gate into
Celephais and down the Street of Pillars to the old sea wall, where he
talked more with the mariners of far ports and waited for the dark ship
from cold and twilight Inquanok, whose strange-faced sailors and
onyx-traders had in them the blood of the Great Ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](hpl75)
