[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Necronomicon](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hpl74)  [Next](hpl76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

An H.P. Lovecraft Anthology, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One starlit evening when the Pharos shone splendid over the harbour the
longed-for ship put in, and strange-faced sailors and traders appeared
one by one and group by group in the ancient taverns along the sea wall.
It was very exciting to see again those living faces so like the godlike
features of Ngranek, but Carter did not hasten to speak with the silent
seamen. He did not know how much of pride and secrecy and dim supernal
memory might fill those children of the Great Ones, and was sure it
would not be wise to tell them of his quest or ask too closely of that
cold desert stretching north of their twilight land. They talked little
with the other folk in those ancient sea taverns; but would gather in
groups in remote comers and sing among themselves the haunting airs of
unknown places, or chant long tales to one another in accents alien to
the rest of dreamland. And so rare and moving were those airs and tales
that one might guess their wonders from the faces of those who listened,
even though the words came to common ears only as strange cadence and
obscure melody.

For a week the strange seamen lingered in the taverns and traded in the
bazaars of Celephais, and before they sailed Carter had taken passage on
their dark ship, telling them that he was an old onyx miner and wishful
to work in their quarries. That ship was very lovey and cunningly
wrought, being of teakwood with ebony fittings and traceries of gold,
and the cabin in which the traveller lodged had hangings of silk and
velvet. One morning at the turn of the tide the sails were raised and
the anchor lilted, and as Carter stood on the high stern he saw the
sunrise-blazing walls and bronze statues and golden minarets of ageless
Celephais sink into the distance, and the snowy peak of Mount Man grow
smaller and smaller. By noon there was nothing in sight save the gentle
blue of the Cerenerian Sea, with one painted galley afar off bound for
that realm of Serannian where the sea meets the sky.

And the night came with gorgeous stars, and the dark ship steered for
Charles' Wain and the Little Bear as they swung slowly round the pole.
And the sailors sang strange songs of unknown places, and they stole off
one by one to the forecastle while the wistful watchers murmured old
chants and leaned over the rail to glimpse the luminous fish playing in
bowers beneath the sea. Carter went to sleep at midnight, and rose in
the glow of a young morning, marking that the sun seemed farther south
than was its wont. And all through that second day he made progress in
knowing the men of the ship, getting them little by little to talk of
their cold twilight land, of their exquisite onyx city, and of their
fear of the high and impassable peaks beyond which Leng was said to be.
They told him how sorry they were that no cats would stay in the land of
Inquanok, and how they thought the hidden nearness of Leng was to blame
for it. Only of the stony desert to the north they would not talk. There
was something disquieting about that desert, and it was thought
expedient not to admit its existence.

On later days they talked of the quarries in which Carter said he was
going to work. There were many of them, for all the city of Inquanok was
builded of onyx, whilst great polished blocks of it were traded in
Rinar, Ogrothan, and Celephais and at home with the merchants of Thraa,
Flarnek, and Kadatheron, for the beautiful wares of those fabulous
ports. And far to the north, almost in the cold desert whose existence
the men of Inquanok did not care to admit, there was an unused quarry
greater than all the rest; from which had been hewn in forgotten times
such prodigious lumps and blocks that the sight of their chiselled
vacancies struck terror to all who beheld. Who had mined those
incredible blocks, and whither they had been transported, no man might
say; but it was thought best not to trouble that quarry, around which
such inhuman memories might conceivably cling. So it was left all alone
in the twilight, with only the raven and the rumoured Shantak-bird to
brood on its immensities. when Carter heard of this quarry he was moved
to deep thought, for he knew from old tales that the Great Ones' castle
atop unknown Kadath is of onyx.

Each day the sun wheeled lower and lower in the sky, and the mists
overhead grew thicker and thicker. And in two weeks there was not any
sunlight at all, but only a weird grey twilight shining through a dome
of eternal cloud by day, and a cold starless phosphorescence from the
under side of that cloud by night. On the twentieth day a great jagged
rock in the sea was sighted from afar, the first land glimpsed since
Man's snowy peak had dwindled behind the ship. Carter asked the captain
the name of that rock, but was told that it had no name and had never
been sought by any vessel because of the sounds that came from it at
night. And when, after dark, a dull and ceaseless howling arose from
that jagged granite place, the traveller was glad that no stop had been
made, and that the rock had no name. The seamen prayed and chanted till
the noise was out of earshot, and Carter dreamed terrible dreams within
dreams in the small hours.

Two mornings after that there loomed far ahead and to the east a line of
great grey peaks whose tops were lost in the changeless clouds of that
twilight world. And at the sight of them the sailors sang glad songs,
and some knelt down on the deck to pray, so that Carter knew they were
come to the land of Inquanok and would soon be moored to the basalt
quays of the great town bearing that land's name. Toward noon a dark
coastline appeared, and before three o'clock there stood out against the
north the bulbous domes and fantastic spires of the onyx city. Rare and
curious did that archaic city rise above its walls and quays, all of
delicate black with scrolls, flutings, and arabesques of inlaid gold.
Tall and many-windowed were the houses, and carved on every side with
flowers and patterns whose dark symmetries dazzled the eye with a beauty
more poignant than light. Some ended in swelling domes that tapered to a
point, others in terraced pyramids whereon rose clustered minarets
displaying every phase of strangeness and imagination. The walls were
low, and pierced by frequent gates, each under a great arch rising high
above the general level and capped by the head of a god chiselled with
that same skill displayed in the monstrous face on distant Ngranek. On a
hill in the centre rose a sixteen-angled tower greater than all the rest
and bearing a high pinnacled belfry resting on a flattened dome. This,
the seamen said, was the Temple of the Elder Ones, and was ruled by an
old High-Priest sad with inner secrets.

At intervals the clang of a strange bell shivered over the onyx city,
answered each time by a peal of mystic music made up of horns, viols,
and chanting voices. And from a row of tripods on a galley round the
high dome of the temple there burst flares of flame at certain moments;
for the priests and people of that city were wise in the primal
mysteries, and faithful in keeping the rhythms of the Great Ones as set
forth in scrolls older than the Pnakotic Manuscripts. As the ship rode
past the great basalt breakwater into the harbour the lesser noises of
the city grew manifest, and Carter saw the slaves, sailors, and
merchants on the docks. The sailors and merchants were of the
strange-faced race of the gods, but the slaves were squat, slant-eyed
folk said by rumour to have drifted somehow across or around the
impassable peaks from the valleys beyond Leng. The wharves reached wide
outside the city wall and bore upon them all manner of merchandise from
the galleys anchored there, while at one end were great piles of onyx
both carved and uncarved awaiting shipment to the far markets of Rinar,
Ograthan and Celephais.

It was not yet evening when the dark ship anchored beside a jutting quay
of stone, and all the sailors and traders filed ashore and through the
arched gate into the city. The streets of that city were paved with onyx
and some of them were wide and straight whilst others were crooked and
narrow. The houses near the water were lower than the rest, and bore
above their curiously arched doorways certain signs of gold said to be
in honour of the respective small gods that favoured each. The captain
of the ship took Carter to an old sea tavern where flocked the mariners
of quaint countries, and promised that he would next day shew him the
wonders of the twilight city, and lead him to the taverns of the
onyx-miners by the northern wall. And evening fell, and little bronze
lamps were lighted, and the sailors in that tavern sang songs of remote
places. But when from its high tower the great bell shivered over the
city, and the peal of the horns and viols and voices rose cryptical in
answer thereto, all ceased their songs or tales and bowed silent till
the. last echo died away. For there is a wonder and a strangeness on the
twilight city of Inquanok, and men fear to be lax in its rites lest a
doom and a vengeance lurk unsuspectedly close.

Far in the shadows of that tavern Carter saw a squat form he did not
like, for it was unmistakably that of the old slant-eyed merchant he had
seen so long before in the taverns of Dylath-Leen, who was reputed to
trade with the horrible stone villages of Leng which no healthy folk
visit and whose evil fires are seen at night from afar, and even to have
dealt with that High-Priest Not To Be Described, which wears a yellow
silken mask over its face and dwells all alone in a prehistoric stone
monastery. This man had seemed to shew a queer gleam of knowing when
Carter asked the traders of DylathLeen about the cold waste and Kadath;
and somehow his presence in dark and haunted Inquanok, so close to the
wonders of the north, was not a reassuring thing. He slipped wholly out
of sight before Carter could speak to him, and sailors later said that
he had come with a yak caravan from some point not well determined,
bearing the colossal and rich-flavoured eggs of the rumoured
Shantak-bird to trade for the dextrous jade goblets that merchants
brought from Ilarnek.

On the following morning the ship-captain led Carter through the onyx
streets of Inquanok, dark under their twilight sky. The inlaid doors and
figured house-fronts, carven balconies and crystal-paned oriels all
gleamed with a sombre and polished loveliness; and now and then a plaza
would open out with black pillars, colonades, and the statues of curious
beings both human and fabulous. Some of the vistas down long and
unbending streets, or through side alleys and over bulbous domes,
spires, and arabesqued roofs, were weird and beautiful beyond words; and
nothing was more splendid than the massive heights of the great central
Temple of the Elder Ones with its sixteen carven sides, its flattened
dome, and its lofty pinnacled belfry, overtopping all else, and majestic
whatever its foreground. And always to the east, far beyond the city
walls and the leagues of pasture land, rose the gaunt grey sides of
those topless and impassable peaks across which hideous Leng was said to
lie.

The captain took Carter to the mighty temple, which is set with its
walled garden in a great round plaza whence the streets go as spokes
from a wheel's hub. The seven arched gates of that garden, each having
over it a carven face like those on the city's gates, are always open,
and the people roam reverently at will down the tiled paths and through
the little lanes lined with grotesque termini and the shrines of modest
gods. And there are fountains, pools, and basins there to reflect the
frequent blaze of the tripods on the high balcony, all of onyx and
having in them small luminous fish taken by divers from the lower bowers
of ocean. When the deep clang from the temple belfry shivers over the
garden and the city, and the answer of the horns and viols and voices
peals out from the seven lodges by the garden gates, there issue from
the seven doors of the temple long columns of masked and hooded priests
in black, bearing at arm's length before them great golden bowls from
which a curious steam rises. And all the seven columns strut peculiarly
in single file, legs thrown far forward without bending the knees, down
the walks that lead to the seven lodges, wherein they disappear and do
not appear again. It is said that subterrene paths connect the lodges
with the temple, and that the long files of priests return through them;
nor is it unwhispered that deep flights of onyx steps go down to
mysteries that are never told. But only a few are those who hint that
the priests in the masked and hooded columns are not human beings.

Carter did not enter the temple, because none but the Veiled King is
permitted to do that. But before he left the garden the hour of the bell
came, and he heard the shivering clang deafening above him, and the
wailing of the horns and viols and voices loud from the lodges by the
gates. And down the seven great walks stalked the long files of
bowl-bearing priests in their singular way, giving to the traveller a
fear which human priests do not often give. When the last of them had
vanished he left that garden, noting as he did so a spot on the pavement
over which the bowls had passed. Even the ship-captain did not like that
spot, and hurried him on toward the hill whereon the Veiled King's
palace rises many-domed and marvellous.

The ways to the onyx palace are steep and narrow, all but the broad
curving one where the king and his companions ride on yaks or in
yak-drawn chariots. Carter and his guide climbed up an alley that was
all steps, between inlaid walls hearing strange signs in gold, and under
balconies and oriels whence sometimes floated soft strains of music or
breaths of exotic fragrance. Always ahead loomed those titan walls,
mighty buttresses, and clustered and bulbous domes for which the Veiled
King's palace is famous; and at length they passed under a great black
arch and emerged in the gardens of the monarch's pleasure. There Carter
paused in faintness at so much beauty, for the onyx terraces and
colonnaded walks, the gay porterres and delicate flowering trees
espaliered to golden lattices, the brazen urns and tripods with cunning
bas-reliefs, the pedestalled and almost breathing statues of veined
black marble, the basalt-bottomed lagoon's tiled fountains with luminous
fish, the tiny temples of iridescent singing birds atop carven columns,
the marvellous scrollwork of the great bronze gates, and the blossoming
vines trained along every inch of the polished walls all joined to form
a sight whose loveliness was beyond reality, and half-fabulous even in
the land of dreams. There it shimmered like a vision under that grey
twilight sky, with the domed and fretted magnificence of the palace
ahead, and the fantastic silhouette of the distant impassable peaks on
the right. And ever the small birds and the fountains sang, while the
perfume of rare blossoms spread like a veil over that incredible garden.
No other human presence was there, and Carter was glad it was so. Then
they turned and descended again the onyx alley of steps, for the palace
itself no visitor may enter; and it is not well to look too long and
steadily at the great central dome, since it is said to house the
archaic father of all the rumoured Shantak-birds, and to send out queer
dreams to the curious.

After that the captain took Carter to the north quarter of the town,
near the Gate of the Caravans, where are the taverns of the
yak-merchants and the onyx-miners. And there, in a low-ceiled inn of
quarrymen, they said farewell; for business called the captain whilst
Carter was eager to talk with miners about the north. There were many
men in that inn, and the traveller was not long in speaking to some of
them; saying that he was an old miner of onyx, and anxious to know
somewhat of Inquanok's quarries. But all that he learned was not much
more than he knew before, for the miners were timid and evasive about
the cold desert to the north and the quarry that no man visits. They had
fears of fabled emissaries from around the mountains where Leng is said
to lie, and of evil presences and nameless sentinels far north among the
scattered rocks. And they whispered also that the rumoured Shantak-birds
are no wholesome things; it being. indeed for the best that no man has
ever truly seen one (for that fabled father of Shantaks in the king's
dome is fed in the dark).

The next day, saying that he wished to look over all the various mines
for himself and to visit the scattered farms and quaint onyx villages of
Inquanok, Carter hired a yak and stuffed great leathern saddle-bags for
a journey. Beyond the Gate of the Caravans the road lay straight betwixt
tilled fields, with many odd farmhouses crowned by low domes. At some of
these houses the seeker stopped to ask questions; once finding a host so
austere and reticent, and so full of an unplaced majesty like to that in
the huge features on Ngranek, that he felt certain he had come at last
upon one of the Great Ones themselves, or upon one with full nine-tenths
of their blood, dwelling amongst men. And to that austere and reticent
cotter he was careful to speak very well of the gods, and to praise all
the blessings they had ever accorded him.

That night Carter camped in a roadside meadow beneath a great
lygath-tree to which he tied his yak, and in the morning resumed his
northward pilgrimage. At about ten o'clock he reached the small-domed
village of Urg, where traders rest and miners tell their tales, and
paused in its taverns till noon. It is here that the great caravan road
turns west toward Selarn, but Carter kept on north by the quarry road.
All the afternoon he followed that rising road, which was somewhat
narrower than the great highway, and which now led through a region with
more rocks than tilled fields. And by evening the low hills on his left
had risen into sizable black cliffs, so that he knew he was close to the
mining country. All the while the great gaunt sides of the impassable
mountains towered afar off at his right, and the farther he went, the
worse tales he heard of them from the scattered farmers and traders and
drivers of lumbering onyx-carts along the way.

On the second night he camped in the shadow of a large black crag,
tethering his yak to a stake driven in the ground. He observed the
greater phosphorescence of the clouds at his northerly point, and more
than once thought he saw dark shapes outlined against them. And on the
third morning he came in sight of the first onyx quarry, and greeted the
men who there laboured with picks and chisels. Before evening he had
passed eleven quarries; the land being here given over altogether to
onyx cliffs and boulders, with no vegetation at all, but only great
rocky fragments scattered about a floor of black earth, with the grey
impassable peaks always rising gaunt and sinister on his right. The
third night he spent in a camp of quarry men whose flickering fires cast
weird reflections on the polished cliffs to the west. And they sang many
songs and told many tales, shewing such strange knowledge of the olden
days and the habits of gods that Carter could see they held many latent
memories of their sires the Great Ones. They asked him whither he went,
and cautioned him not to go too far to the north; but he replied that he
was seeking new cliffs of onyx, and would take no more risks than were
common among prospectors. In the morning he bade them adieu and rode on
into the darkening north, where they had warned him he would find the
feared and unvisited quarry whence hands older than men's hands had
wrenched prodigious blocks. But he did not like it when, turning back to
wave a last farewell, he thought he saw approaching the camp that squat
and evasive old merchant with slanting eyes, whose conjectured traffick
with Leng was the gossip of distant Dylath-Leen.

After two more quarries the inhabited part of Inquanok seemed to end,
and the road narrowed to a steeply rising yak-path among forbidding
black cliffs. Always on the right towered the gaunt and distant peaks,
and as Carter climbed farther and farther into this untraversed realm he
found it grew darker and colder. Soon he perceived that there were no
prints of feet or hooves on the black path beneath, and realised that he
was indeed come into strange and deserted ways of elder time. Once in a
while a raven would croak far overhead, and now and then a flapping
behind some vast rock would make him think uncomfortably of the rumoured
Shantak-bird. But in the main he was alone with his shaggy steed, and it
troubled him to observe that this excellent yak became more and more
reluctant to advance, and more and more disposed to snort affrightedly
at any small noise along the route.

The path now contracted between sable and glistening walls, and began to
display an even greater steepness than before. It was a bad footing, and
the yak often slipped on the stony fragments strewn thickly about. In
two hours Carter saw ahead a definite crest, beyond which was nothing
but dull grey sky, and blessed the prospect of a level or downward
course. To reach this crest, however, was no easy task; for the way had
grown nearly perpendicular, and was perilous with loose black gravel and
small stones. Eventually Carter dismounted and led his dubious yak;
pulling very hard when the animal balked or stumbled, and keeping his
own footing as best he might. Then suddenly he came to the top and saw
beyond, and gasped at what he saw.

The path indeed led straight ahead and slightly down, with the same
lines of high natural walls as before; but on the left hand there opened
out a monstrous space, vast acres in extent, where some archaic power
had riven and rent the native cliffs of onyx in the form of a giant's
quarry. Far back into the solid precipice ran that cyclopean gouge, and
deep down within earth's bowels its lower delvings yawned. It was no
quarry of man, and the concave sides were scarred with great squares,
yards wide, which told of the size of the blocks once hewn by nameless
hands and chisels. High over its jagged rim huge ravens flapped and
croaked, and vague whirrings in the unseen depths told of bats or urhags
or less mentionable presences haunting the endless blackness. There
Carter stood in the narrow way amidst the twilight with the rocky path
sloping down before him; tall onyx cliffs on his right that led on as
far as he could see and tall cliffs on the left chopped off just ahead
to make that terrible and unearthly quarry.

All at once the yak uttered a cry and burst from his control, leaping
past him and darting on in a panic till it vanished down the narrow
slope toward the north. Stones kicked by its flying hooves fell over the
brink of the quarry and lost themselves in the dark without any sound of
striking bottom; but Carter ignored the perils of that scanty path as he
raced breathlessly after the flying steed. Soon the left-behind cliffs
resumed their course, making the way once more a narrow lane; and still
the traveller leaped on after the yak whose great wide prints told of
its desperate flight.

Once he thought he heard the hoofbeats of the frightened beast, and
doubled his speed from this encouragement. He was covering miles, and
little by little the way was broadening in front till he knew he must
soon emerge on the cold and dreaded desert to the north. The gaunt grey
flanks of the distant impassable peaks were again visible above the
right-hand crags, and ahead were the rocks and boulders of an open space
which was clearly a foretaste of the dark arid limitless plain. And once
more those hoofbeats sounded in his ears, plainer than before, but this
time giving terror instead of encouragement because he realised that
they were not the frightened hoofbeats of his fleeing yak. The beats
were ruthless and purposeful, and they were behind him.

Carter's pursuit of the yak became now a flight from an unseen thing,
for though he dared not glance over his shoulder he felt that the
presence behind him could be nothing wholesome or mentionable. His yak
must have heard or felt it first, and he did not like to ask himself
whether it had followed him from the haunts of men or had floundered up
out of that black quarry pit. Meanwhile the cliffs had been left behind,
so that the oncoming night fell over a great waste of sand and spectral
rocks wherein all paths were lost. He could not see the hoofprints of
his yak, but always from behind him there came that detestable clopping;
mingled now and then with what he fancied were titanic flappings and
whirrings. That he was losing ground seemed unhappily clear to him, and
he knew he was hopelessly lost in this broken and blasted desert of
meaningless rocks and untravelled sands. Only those remote and
impassable peaks on the right gave him any sense of direction, and even
they were less clear as the grey twilight waned and the sickly
phosphorescence of the clouds took its place.

Then dim and misty in the darkling north before him he glimpsed a
terrible thing. He had thought it for some moments a range of black
mountains, but now he saw it was something more. The phosphorescence of
the brooding clouds shewed it plainly, and even silhouetted parts of it
as vapours glowed behind. How distant it was he could not tell, but it
must have been very far. It was thousands of feet high, stretching in a
great concave arc from the grey impassable peaks to the unimagined
westward spaces, and had once indeed been a ridge of mighty onyx hills.
But now these hills were hills no more, for some hand greater than man's
had touched them. Silent they squatted there atop the world like wolves
or ghouls, crowned with clouds and mists and guarding the secrets of the
north forever. All in a great half circle they squatted, those dog-like
mountains carven into monstrous watching statues, and their right hands
were raised in menace against mankind.

It was only the flickering light of the clouds that made their mitred
double heads seem to move, but as Carter stumbled on he saw arise from
their shadowy caps great forms whose motions were no delusion. Winged
and whirring, those forms grew larger each moment, and the traveller
knew his stumbling was at an end. They were not any birds or bats known
elsewhere on earth or in dreamland, for they were larger than elephants
and had heads like a horse's. Carter knew that they must be the
Shantak-birds of ill rumour, and wondered no more what evil guardians
and nameless sentinels made men avoid the boreal rock desert. And as he
stopped in final resignation he dared at last to look behind him, where
indeed was trotting the squat slant-eyed trader of evil legend, grinning
astride a lean yak and leading on a noxious horde of leering Shantaks to
whose wings still clung the rime and nitre of the nether pits.

Trapped though he was by fabulous and hippocephalic winged nightmares
that pressed around in great unholy circles, Randolph Carter did not
lose consciousness. Lofty and horrible those titan gargoyles towered
above him, while the slant-eyed merchant leaped down from his yak and
stood grinning before the captive. Then the man motioned Carter to mount
one of the repugnant Shantaks, helping him up as his judgement struggled
with his loathing. It was hard work ascending, for the Shantak-bird has
scales instead of feathers, and those scales are very slippery. Once he
was seated, the slant-eyed man hopped up behind him, leaving the lean
yak to be led away northward toward the ring of carven mountains by one
of the incredible bird colossi.

There now followed a hideous whirl through frigid space, endlessly up
and eastward toward the gaunt grey flanks of those impassable mountains
beyond which Leng was said to be. Far above the clouds they flew, till
at last there lay beneath them those fabled summits which the folk of
Inquanok have never seen, and which lie always in high vortices of
gleaming mist. Carter beheld them very plainly as they passed below, and
saw upon their topmost peaks strange caves which made him think of those
on Ngranek; but he did not question his captor about these things when
he noticed that both the man and the horse-headed Shantak appeared oddly
fearful of them, hurrying past nervously and shewing great tension until
they were left far in the rear.

The Shantak now flew lower, revealing beneath the canopy of cloud a grey
barren plain whereon at great distances shone little feeble fires. As
they descended there appeared at intervals lone huts of granite and
bleak stone villages whose tiny windows glowed with pallid light. And
there came from those huts and villages a shrill droning of pipes and a
nauseous rattle of crotala which proved at once that Inquanok's people
are right in their geographic rumours. For travellers have heard such
sounds before, and know that they float only from the cold desert
plateau which healthy folk never visit; that haunted place of evil and
mystery which is Leng.

Around the feeble fires dark forms were dancing, and Carter was curious
as to what manner of beings they might be; for no healthy folk have ever
been to Leng, and the place is known only by its fires and stone huts as
seen from afar. Very slowly and awkwardly did those forms leap, and with
an insane twisting and bending not good to behold; so that Carter did
not wonder at the monstrous evil imputed to them by vague legend, or the
fear in which all dreamland holds their abhorrent frozen plateau. As the
Shantak flew lower, the repulsiveness of the dancers became tinged with
a certain hellish familiarity; and the prisoner kept straining his eyes
and racking his memory for clues to where he had seen such creatures
before.

They leaped as though they had hooves instead of feet, and seemed to
wear a sort of wig or headpiece with small horns. Of other clothing they
had none, but most of them were quite furry. Behind they had dwarfish
tails, and when they glanced upward he saw the excessive width of their
mouths. Then he knew what they were, and that they did not wear any wigs
or headpieces after all. For the cryptic folk of Leng were of one race
with the uncomfortable merchants of the black galleys that traded rubies
at Dylath-Leen; those not quite human merchants who are the slaves of
the monstrous moon-things! They were indeed the same dark folk who had
shanghaied Carter on their noisome galley so long ago, and whose kith he
had seen driven in herds about the unclean wharves of that accursed
lunar city, with the leaner ones toiling and the fatter ones taken away
in crates for other needs of their polypous and amorphous masters. Now
he saw where such ambiguous creatures came from, and shuddered at the
thought that Leng must be known to these formless abominations from the
moon.

But the Shantak flew on past the fires and the stone huts and the less
than human dancers, and soared over sterile hills of grey granite and
dim wastes of rock and ice and snow. Day came, and the phosphorescence
of low clouds gave place to the misty twilight of that northern world,
and still the vile bird winged meaningly through the cold and silence.
At times the slant-eyed man talked with his steed in a hateful and
guttural language, and the Shantak would answer with tittering tones
that rasped like the scratching of ground glass. AlI this while the land
was getting higher, and finally they came to a wind-swept table-land
which seemed the very roof of a blasted and tenantless world. There, all
alone in the hush and the dusk and the cold, rose the uncouth stones of
a squat windowless building, around which a circle of crude monoliths
stood. In all this arrangement there was nothing human, and Carter
surmised from old tales that he was indeed come to that most dreadful
and legendary of all places, the remote and prehistoric monastery
wherein dwells uncompanioned the High-Priest Not To Be Described, which
wears a yellow silken mask over its face and prays to the Other Gods and
their crawling chaos Nyarlathotep.

The loathsome bird now settled to the ground, and the slant-eyed man
hopped down and helped his captive alight. Of the purpose of his seizure
Carter now felt very sure; for clearly the slant-eyed merchant was an
agent of the darker powers, eager to drag before his masters a mortal
whose presumption had aimed at the finding of unknown Kadath and the
saying of a prayer before the faces of the Great Ones in their onyx
castle. It seemed likely that this merchant had caused his former
capture by the slaves of the moon-things in Dylath-Leen, and that he now
meant to do what the rescuing cats had baffled; taking the victim to
some dread rendezvous with monstrous Nyarlathotep and telling with what
boldness the seeking of unknown Kadath had been tried. Leng and the cold
waste north of Inquanok must be close to the Other Gods, and there the
passes to Kadath are well guarded.

The slant-eyed man was small, but the great hippocephalic bird was there
to see he was obeyed; so Carter followed where he led, and passed within
the circle of standing rocks and into the low arched doorway of that
windowless stone monastery. There were no lights inside, but the evil
merchant lit a small clay lamp bearing morbid bas-reliefs and prodded
his prisoner on through mazes of narrow winding corridors. On the walls
of the corridors were printed frightful scenes older than history, and
in a style unknown to the archaeologists of earth. After countless aeons
their pigments were brilliant still, for the cold and dryness of hideous
Leng keep alive many primal things. Carter saw them fleetingly in the
rays of that dim and moving lamp, and shuddered at the tale they told.

Through those archaic frescoes Leng's annals stalked; and the horned,
hooved, and wide-mouthed almost-humans danced evilly amidst forgotten
cities. There were scenes of old wars, wherein Leng's almost-humans
fought with the bloated purple spiders of the neighbouring vales; and
there were scenes also of the coming of the black galleys from the moon,
and of the submission of Leng's people to the polypous and amorphous
blasphemies that hopped and floundered and wriggled out of them. Those
slippery greyish-white blasphemies they worshipped as gods, nor ever
complained when scores of their best and fatted males were taken away in
the black galleys. The monstrous moon-beasts made their camp on a jagged
isle in the sea, and Carter could tell from the frescoes that this was
none other than the lone nameless rock he had seen when sailing to
Inquanok; that grey accursed rock which Inquanok's seamen shun, and from
which vile howlings reverberate all through the night.

And in those frescoes was shewn the great seaport and capital of the
almost-humans; proud and pillared betwixt the cliffs and the basalt
wharves, and wondrous with high fanes and carven places. Great gardens
and columned streets led from the cliffs and from each of the six
sphinx-crowned gates to a vast central plaza, and in that plaza was a
pair of winged colossal lions guarding the top of a subterrene
staircase. Again and again were those huge winged lions shewn, their
mighty flanks of diarite glistening in the grey twilight of the day and
the cloudy phosphorescence of the night. And as Carter stumbled past
their frequent and repeated pictures it came to him at last what indeed
they were, and what city it was that the almost-humans had ruled so
anciently before the coming of the black galleys. There could be no
mistake, for the legends of dreamland are generous and profuse.
Indubitably that primal city was no less a place than storied Sarkomand,
whose ruins had bleached for a million years before the first true human
saw the light, and whose twin titan lions guard eternally the steps that
lead down from dreamland to the Great Abyss.

Other views shewed the gaunt grey peaks dividing Leng from Inquanok, and
the monstrous Shantak-birds that build nests on the ledges half way up.
And they shewed likewise the curious caves near the very topmost
pinnacles, and how even the boldest of the Shantaks fly screaming away
from them. Carter had seen those caves when he passed over them, and had
noticed their likeness to the caves on Ngranek. Now he knew that the
likeness was more than a chance one, for in these pictures were shewn
their fearsome denizens; and those bat-wings, curving horns, barbed
tails, prehensile paws and rubbery bodies were not strange to him. He
had met those silent, flitting and clutching creatures before; those
mindless guardians of the Great Abyss whom even the Great Ones fear, and
who own not Nyarlathotep but hoary Nodens as their lord. For they were
the dreaded night-gaunts, who never laugh or smile because they have no
faces, and who flop unendingly in the dark betwixt the Vale of Pnath and
the passes to the outer world.

The slant-eyed merchant had now prodded Carter into a great domed space
whose walls were carved in shocking bas-reliefs, and whose centre held a
gaping circular pit surrounded by six malignly stained stone altars in a
ring. There was no light in this vast evil-smelling crypt, and the small
lamp of the sinister merchant shone so feebly that one could grasp
details only little by little. At the farther end was a high stone dais
reached by five steps; and there on a golden throne sat a lumpish figure
robed in yellow silk figured with red and having a yellow silken mask
over its face. To this being the slant-eyed man made certain signs with
his hands, and the lurker in the dark replied by raising a disgustingly
carven flute of ivory in silk-covered paws and blowing certain loathsome
sounds from beneath its flowing yellow mask. This colloquy went on for
some time, and to Carter there was something sickeningly familiar in the
sound of that flute and the stench of the malodorous place. It made him
think of a frightful red-litten city and of the revolting procession
that once filed through it; of that, and of an awful climb through lunar
countryside beyond, before the rescuing rush of earth's friendly cats.
He knew that the creature on the dais was without doubt the High-Priest
Not To Be Described, of which legend whispers such fiendish and abnormal
possibilities, but he feared to think just what that abhorred
High-Priest might be.

Then the figured silk slipped a trifle from one of the greyish-white
paws, and Carter knew what the noisome High-Priest was. And in that
hideous second, stark fear drove him to something his reason would never
have dared to attempt, for in all his shaken consciousness there was
room only for one frantic will to escape from what squatted on that
golden throne. He knew that hopeless labyrinths of stone lay betwixt him
and the cold table-land outside, and that even on that table-land the
noxious Shantek still waited; yet in spite of all this there was in his
mind only the instant need to get away from that wriggling, silk-robed
monstrosity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](hpl76)
