[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw04)  [Next](sahw06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter III</span>.

### *Shinran, the Founder of Shinshu*.

(§§ 18, 19, 20.)

Shinran Shōnin, to give him the name by which he was called during the
greater part of his life, and by which he is still mostly known, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) was born in the year 1173 A.D., in the
third year of Shōan, on the first day of the fourth month, a date not to
be confounded with the first of April of our reformed, Western,
calendar. Through his father, Hino Arinori, a high official in the court
of the Emperor Takakura (A.D. 1169–1180), one of the puppet-rulers whose
fate lay in the hands of the all-powerful Taira family, he was connected
with the Fujiwara family, being a descendant of the famous Fujiwara
Kamatari (A.D. 614–669), better known as Nakatomi no Kamako, the
faithful minister of the Emperors Kotoku, Saimei, and Tenchi, who had
overthrown the ambitious family of the Soga, had placed his own equally
ambitious but more fortunate family in their place at the right

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

hand of the reigning sovereigns, and had had a leading part in the
so-called Taikwa reforms, (645–701). The founder of the Fujiwara family
had brought himself to power by confronting and browbeating the Buddhism
which centred in Nara, which was an exotic from India, and which had
given many indications of a proneness to intriguing interference in the
domestic policy of Japan. He had opposed to it the Confucian doctrines
of China, which, under the splendid administrators of the early Tang
period, had made the Celestial Empire a model for the world to copy; his
successors, keeping their hold on the Imperial policy, had introduced
new forms of Buddhism, administered from the new capital of Kyoto, which
had been more ready to acknowledge state supremacy than had been the
more "High Church" monks of Nara and the South, and which ended by being
themselves enervated by the artistic, cultured, but withal, worldly,
school which took its inspiration from the great Tendai monasteries of
Hieizan and Miidera. By the twelfth century, the Fujiwaras, nay, even
their Imperial puppet-masters themselves, were groaning under the
tyranny of the Hieizan and Kyoto monks, but the spiritual tyrants seemed
lastingly secure in what was at the time, practically, a religious
monopoly over Japan.

Through his mother, Shinran was connected with the Minamoto family, the
great opponents of the Taira, who were then supreme in the councils of
the Empire. Her name was Kikkōjo, she was the daughter of Minamoto
Yoshichika, the second son of Yoshiie (1041–1108), better known as
*Hachiman* 

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

*tarō*. Yoshiie had taken part in many of the wars and campaigns of the
troubled times in which he lived: Yoshichika had been appointed Governor
of Tsukushi (Kyushu), had been recalled for maladministration, but,
refusing to accept his recall, had murdered an Imperial envoy and set up
a rebellion, which was, after some time, put down with a strong hand by
Taira Masanori. After his defeat, he fled to the north, where he became
a monk, but, coming back once more as a rebel into the wicked world, was
captured and put to death (1187). <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20)

Thus, on both sides, Shinran was connected with traditions hostile to
the Taira family, and more so, perhaps, to the predominating Tendai
influences in religion. His father died when he was four years old, when
he was eight he lost his mother. It is quite possible that the daughter
of Yoshichika had her own version of her father's life to pour into the
receptive ear of her young son. The orphan was taken up by his
relatives. "He was adopted and nourished by his father's elder brother
Noritsuna," says a Japanese biographer, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[†](#fn_21)" and he learned [the](errata.htm#0)
Confucian doctrines from his father's younger brother Munenari … From an
early age he entertained a desire of leaving the world and seeking the
priesthood."

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

It would seem that his uncles soon tired of their charge, for the boy
entered a monastery at the age of nine, and the Confucian studies, if
continued at all, must thenceforward have been pursued under the
guidance of clerical tutors. The temple he chose (should we not rather
say, chosen for him by his guardians?) was the *Shōren-in*, one of the
numerous priests’ residences on Hiyeizan, the head of which was a
certain Hangen, who had at one time been Archbishop of the whole
community, and who also held the court office of Shōnagon. Hiyeizan was
the central monastery of the Tendai sect, and enjoyed all the spiritual
(and worldly) privileges supposed to be attached to an Established
Church.

The political unrest of Japan during the eleventh and twelfth centuries
found its counterpart in the religious world, and there were already
movements afoot against the worldliness, as well as against the complex
errors, of the Tendai system. In the miseries of the time, men were
looking for a simpler creed, and a more spiritual devotion. Already in
971 Kūya had died, who, Prince of the Blood though he was, had become an
itinerant preacher in order that he might win men to trust in, and
invocation of Amida's name. Already in 1017, the gentle Genshin, whom
the Shinshu revere as one of the great Patriarchs of Amidaism, <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22) had retired from Hieizan to Yokogawa,
where he had taught the Faith in the Buddhist Saviour to a select band
of disciples. A civil war of monks broke out in 1041, which must have
made spiritual or religious

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

life a sheer impossibility in any of the great barrack-monasteries (it
is the only name for them) on Hieizan, at Mii, at Nara, at Negoro, and
which drew from the Emperor Shirakawa (1073–86) the plaintive sigh that
he could control the monks of Hieizan no more than he could restrain the
turbulent waters of the Kamo river, or regulate the cast of the dice. In
1124, Ryonen Shōnin had his vision of Amida, which told him to clear out
of Hieizan as a den of thieves, and found a sect which should have but
one ceremony for all men,—the Invocation of Amida's name. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) Fifty years later, in 1174, Genkū, better
known as Hōnen Shōnin, the Japanese St. Francis, had founded a sect now
known as the *Jōdo*, which was a revolt against the complexity of Tendai
doctrine and the unspirituality of the Tendai life. Mongaku Shōnin
(1186) can scarcely be reckoned among religious reformers, but the first
year of the thirteenth century saw the foundation in Japan of the Zen
sects which, like the Jōdo, carne out from Hieizan. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[†](#fn_24) The orphan Shinran fell into the midst of
a whirlwind of unrest, and was caught by it.

Shinran's progress, whilst he remained in the Tendai fold, seems to have
been fairly satisfactory, for we presently find him, whilst still a
young man, Rector of one of the Hieizan temples. His undoubted piety,
the organizing and administrative powers which he afterwards so
strikingly displayed

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

in the direction of the great religious movement of which he was the
originator, perhaps also the family influence which he could command for
the benefit of the clergy, all marked him out as a man destined for
promotion, just as a few years previously the self-same qualities had
directed the favourable attention of the authorities to the saintly
Genkū.

But, like Genkū, Shinran found himself bewildered by the extraordinary
comprehensiveness and multiplicity of the Tendai system. The Tendai may
de described as a brave attempt, but one hopeless of success, to unite
into one comprehensive system all the various religious influences and
streams of teachings which had come into China since the first
introduction of Buddhism and other Indian and Central Asian beliefs,
and, in Japan, particularly, to harmonize all these with the native
tenets of the ancient Shinto, in such a way as to assure the supremacy
of the Crown over all causes within the bounds of the Empire. But the
Tendai had conspired with the Fujiwara and other ambitious Houses, and
the Crown was no longer a free agent. Shinran, we are told, "studied
widely and deeply," and found that all the doctrines he met with in the
various branches of the Tendai philosophy were "holy and pure," but that
they did not satisfy his soul. The unrest of the times had seized him,
and his whole nature clamoured for light. Study and books had failed to
give him what he wanted, and he betook himself to prayer, going from
shrine to shrine, and from idol to idol, to proffer his petitions.

At last, in the Rokkakudō, or "Hexagonal Temple," before an image of
Kwannon, he gained the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

light he wanted. Let us pause for a moment to enquire what this Kwannon
implied to Shinran, in his then state of Faith. Amida (and the Tendai
also worship Amida, though not with the exclusive devotion of the Jōdo
sects), the ideal Buddha, the Father of all, who desires that all men
should be saved, has two special qualities—Mercy and Wisdom. These two
qualities take visible forms and show themselves to men, the one in
Avalokites’vara or Kwannon <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) (his
*son*), who is the Embodiment of his Compassion, capable of
manifestation in many forms and shapes for purposes of practical
succour, the other in Seishi (Skt. Mahāsthātnaprāpta), of whom I have
never read that he was ever manifested in fleshly form, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[†](#fn_26) but who is considered to be the spiritual
manifestation of the Wisdom of God. The Three, therefore, are at once
distinct in Person, and one in Essence, and bear a striking resemblance
to the Unity of Three Persons in our Christian Trinity. There is an
Amidaist school even in Tendai, and Shinran must have known of it, when,
praying for guidance, he knelt before the Kwannon of the Hexagon Temple.

To him came the answer in the shape of a vision of Kwannon, the Lord of
Mercy after whom he was feeling, and the Vision said, "Go to Genkū,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the Holy Hermit of Kurodani, and he shall teach you." So Shinran went to
Genkū, and became his most distinguished disciple.

Genkū was then living at Kurodani, near Kyoto, in a humble cottage on
the site of the present pretentious monastery of Chion-in. He had
retired to this spot to escape from the persecutions of his Tendai
brethren, who looked upon him much as a starchy English rector of the
eighteenth century may have looked upon one of Mr. Wesley's itinerant
preachers, and there he had gathered a few disciples around him,—the
nucleus of the present Jōdo sect. Genkū based his teachings on the
so-called "Three Books," spoke of Amida as the Divine Being whom it had
been S’akyamuni's special mission to declare to the world, and exhorted
his followers to constant faith in Amida's Mercy as declared in his Vow,
and to an equally constant devotion to the faithful and devout recital
of the Holy Name. He himself would seem to have desired even more
drastic reforms for the purpose of carrying the message of salvation
through Faith more effectively home to the people, but his disciples as
a body were not, perhaps, ready to follow him. He retained therefore all
the ancient rules of the Vinaya discipline, and all the ancient
ceremonies, as far as was possible under the changed circumstances in
which he found himself. I have always thought of Genkū as of some
cautious, spiritually-minded, Anglican reformer, steering his way
carefully between the extremes of Popery and Puritanism, and losing
something of his power from his very caution. When I add that, to my
mind, Genkū is one of the most attractive

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

personages in the whole history of the Japanese Mahāyāna, it will be
seen that I have here set down nothing by way of disparagement.

Shinran became Genkū's favourite disciple, and it was the affection
which the master had for the disciple, that enabled the latter to carry
the principles of Salvation by Faith to their logical conclusion.

One day, a distinguished member of the Fujiwara family, Kanezane, came
to Genkū with a request. ''I want to find," he said, "amongst your
disciples a husband for my daughter. I wish my daughter's husband to be
a priest as well as a householder, to retain his sacred character whilst
yet living the life of the ordinary layman and mixing with the world. I
desire him, by means of a concrete example, to demonstrate that the
religion of Salvation by Faith in Amida is one which concerns the layman
as well as the monk. It will be for the good of the country if we can
show that the family and not the monastery is the true focus of
religion." Fujiwara Kanezane is one of the great men of Japan, and I am
glad to have called attention to his action in this matter. It must have
required courage, in a Buddhist country, with religion at a low ebb, (a
time when people will often cling with desperate tenacity to the
externals of religion), to propose to sweep away an ecclesiastical
discipline that has held its ground undisputed for two thousand years or
more, and Kanezane deserves credit for the courage of his convictions.

Genkū accepted Kanezane's proposition, and his choice fell on Shinran.
Shinran (always a retiring man) was at first most unwilling to undertake
the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

responsibility. But Kanezane and Genkū repeated their request with great
insistence, and at last, after more than a year of hesitation, Shinran
gave his consent. He became the son-in-law of Kanezane, by so doing
became also the Founder of a sect of Buddhism, which, while proclaiming
Salvation by Faith in Amida, also proclaimed that if a man be saved by
Faith only, and not by works at all, he must let no man judge him in the
matter of meats and drinks, of marriage or celibacy, because these
things fall at once into insignificance when compared with the far
greater principles now at stake. <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27)

But before Shinran's Sect came into definite existence, he was called
upon to suffer.

Kanezane died in 1207, and by his death Genkū and Shinran lost their
firm protector. The monks of the older schools, whether at Kyoto or at
Nara, alarmed by the radical character of the changes advocated by the
two friends, lost no time in trying to compass their ruin. Kyoto and
Nara represented, as a rule, two hostile camps of Buddhism; but their
common hatred for Genkū's doctrines united them against his person, and
a few weeks only remained for Kanezane to live when the intriguing monks
procured Genkū's degradation and banishment, first to Tosa, and then to
Sanuki. Shinran shared his

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

teacher's fate, being banished to Echigo, and for the moment it seemed
that the Jōdo movement had been entirely suppressed. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28)

In 1211, on the accession of Juntoku, Shinran was recalled and pardoned.
Genkū was also recalled, but he was an old man now and worn out by his
sufferings, and he returned only to die the following year. Shinran
remained the most prominent person connected with the Salvation-by-Faith
School.

After Genkū's death, his older disciples, who had been first shocked by
Shinran's marriage and his setting aside of the rules of discipline,
even with Genkū's sanction, and were then scared by the ill-feeling and
persecution which had arisen out of this action, determined to refrain
from these drastic changes, and constituted themselves a sect of Jōdo
priests retaining the Discipline. Shinran could not draw back, nor did
he wish so to do. Separating himself from his brethren of the Jōdo, he
resolved on the formation of a fresh body of disciples. Genkū's original
followers had called themselves the *Jōdo Shū*, or sect of the Pure
Land: the name which Shinran gave to his own disciples was that of the
*Jōdo Shinshū*, or True Sect of Jōdo, claiming thereby to be true
successor and representative of Genkū's doctrine. The sect is called
*Shinshū*, "true sect", for short. Other names in frequent use are the
*Monto* and *lkkōshū*.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

For the next few years we find him constantly itinerating for the
propagation of his doctrines. Thus, in 1212, after a short visit to
Kyoto, to return thanks to the Court for his recal from exile, we find
him at Yamashina, a village hard by the capital, founding the Kōshōji
Temple.

Some time afterwards (1227) we find him at Inada in Hitachi, writing and
preaching: the next year he is laying the foundations of his faith in
[the](errata.htm#1) modern prefectures of Nagano and Niigata, still the
great strong-holds of his followers. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) We next find him at Takata in Shimotsuke,
founding a Temple for which the Emperor Go-Horikawa gives him an
autograph inscription on a wooden tablet. In 1232, he is at Kamakura
examining a newly made edition of the voluminous library of the Mahāyāna
Scriptures. Three years later, he is at Kibe in Ōmi, founding a temple
which is still of considerable importance. About 1240, he returns to
Kyoto, residing first in one place and then in another, and gathering
round him an ever-increasing number of devoted adherents. In November
1262, he is taken ill, and after short sufferings falls gently asleep,
at the age of ninety, on November 28 of the same year. His character can
best be estimated by the examination of his teachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[15:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_19) Shinran's name was
originally Zenshin. When about 28 years of age he changed his name to
Shakhū, but after a year or two went back to his original name. His name
of Shinran was assumed when he formally began his Apostolate. He
sometimes wrote under the pen-name of Gutoku. In 1876, an Imperial
Decree conferred on him the posthumous title of Kenshin Daishi (the
Great Teacher who had the Vision of Truth), and this is still his
official designation.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[17:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_20) There is another
account which says that Kikkōjo, who was married at the age of fifteen,
was the daughter of Michichika Minamoto, the Rokujō Kurando, 1149–1202,
an active minister under seven consecutive Emperors, whose daughter was
the wife of the Emperor of Go-Toba and mother of the Emperor
Tsuchimikado.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[17:†](sahw05.htm#fr_21) Bukkyō Kakuha Kōyō,
vol. v.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[18:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_22) See my translation of
*Shōshinge* in chapter V.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[19:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_23) This is the
*Yūzūnembutsu* sect, still extant.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[19:†](sahw05.htm#fr_24) I have taken these
dates from Haas, *Annalen d. japanischen Buddhism's*, vol. xi. p. 3. of
Transactions of German As. Society of Japan.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[21:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_25) It is a mistake to
speak of *Kwannon* as a female deity. Kwannon is the son of Amitābha,
capable of appearing in many forms, male or female, human or animal,
according to circumstances. But he is never manifested except as a means
of practically demonstrating the Divine compassion for a suffering
creation.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[21:†](sahw05.htm#fr_26) Certain apparent
exceptions to this statement will be considered later.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[24:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_27) We can also see the
grounds on which the Shinshu theologians take their stand, when they say
that they, and not the Jōdo, are the true followers of Genkū. For,
apparently, in overthrowing the compulsory celibacy of priests and the
disciplinary laws against meat-eating, Shinran was acting in perfect
conformity with the instructions of his teacher. Genkū, at Kanezane's
instigation, set forth his doctrines in a book entitled Senjakushu.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_28) Kanezane had by this
time himself entered the Order of monks. He joined the Zen sect, with
the introduction of which he had a great deal to do. (Others say he
joined the Tendai.)

<span id="fn_29"></span>[26:\*](sahw05.htm#fr_29) In one Dr. Murakami's
magazines I have seen a series of articles horn his pen, describing his
childhood in a "parsonage" in one of the Shinshu villages in Echigo.
Allowing for the differences in the surroundings, these papers reveal an
atmosphere not unlike that of country parsonages in remote parts of
England or Germany, where social life is simple and where the parson is
not above working with his own hands at the cultivation of the glebe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Shinshu after Shinran's death.](sahw06)
