[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw26)  [Next](sahw28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### APPENDIX I.

### *KŌMYŌJI* (\#).

In the year 614 A.D. a boy was born in China. By what precise name his
parents first knew him I do not know. Judging from the analogy of other
men similarly situated, he had many names at different periods of his
life. The name by which he was last known was Zendō (\#), but that was
almost certainly not the name of his childhood. His family name was Shu
(\#) and he was born in the district of Shishū (\#).

When he was born the Sui <span id="fr_118"></span>[\*](#fn_118) dynasty
was tottering to its fall, and had in fact only four years more of life.
Already, we may believe, was the Duke of Tang, on the extreme north-west
boundaries of the Empire, conspiring with Turkish and other chieftains,
and meditating that great *coup d’état*, which put his

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

master at his mercy, and seated himself firmly on the Celestial Throne,
as the founder of a Dynasty, the most magnificent China had ever yet
seen, and which was to continue for well-nigh three centuries. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[\*](#fn_119) The miseries of the people, heavily
burdened and harrassed to support the luxurious and ostentatious
extravagance of the Sui monarchs, tended to encourage his hopes, and
with the practised eye of the statesman he could see that it only needed
a strong man at the helm to make China a world-power with very widely
extending influence. For the inland states on the Western frontiers were
already looking to China for aid against the terror of the Arab, shortly
to be kindled to victory by the enthusiasm of the new faith inspired by
Mahomet, and only a few years were destined to elapse before Persia, at
war with Constantinople, and overrun by the Arabs, should come to China
in the vain hopes of an alliance against the new foe. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[†](#fn_120) To give another

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

note of time, Shōtoku Taishi, <span id="fr_121"></span>[\*](#fn_121) the
greatest of Japan's early statesmen, and as great in the religious world
as he was in the political, was already busy with his celebrated
reforms. The Constitution of the 17 Articles had already been in force
some ten years when Zendō was born, the ruler of Japan had already given
offence to the vainglorious Sovereign of the Sui by the letter in which
the "Eastern Emperor" sent his greeting, as an equal in rank, to his
brother the "Emperor of the West," and Korea, which had already done so
much for Japan in the way of religious and civilizing influences, was
giving Japanese statesmen a good deal of political anxiety. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[†](#fn_122)

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

In matters of religion,. Confucianists and Taoists were apparently going
on much as usual; but the Buddhist world, distracted partly by the
immense volume and bulk of its own religious books, and partly by the
multiplicity of the new ideas which the growing commercial activity of
the people was importing from foreign countries, was in a state of
apparently fermenting chaos. <span id="fr_123"></span>[\*](#fn_123)
Bodhidharma's attempts at reform (A.D. 520) <span
id="fr_124"></span>[†](#fn_124) were already a century old and his way
had already lost some of its prestige: new sects, <span
id="fr_125"></span>[‡](#fn_125) *e.g.* the Sanron, Jōjitsu,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and Tendai, were already in process of formation, if not actually
formed, and Hiouen Thsang had already (A.D. 611) entered the order of
monks, and was now preparing for the celebrated journey to India for the
purpose of studying at first hand the doctrines of his faith.

Some reform was certainly needed. In the year 618, the Duke of Tang
deposed his master, and took his seat on the Imperial throne as Kaotsu,
the Founder of the Tang dynasty. One of the most striking incidents of
his reign was the presentation of a petition to the throne against
Buddhism, It was presented by leading men among the *literati* and
Confucianists, and was strongly worded. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[\*](#fn_126) Kaotsu accepted the petition and acted
upon it. He ordered a general dissolution and suppression of Buddhist
monasteries and sent 100,000 monks and nuns back into lay life. It was
probably a necessary measure. The monks were very numerous and very
powerful, and they claimed exception from State control. Abuses of many
kinds are apt to spring up in institutions the members of which claim
not to be placed on the same footing with ordinary citizens.

Zendō entered the Buddhist order at a very early age. I cannot find
whether it was before or after the suppression of the Monasteries by
Kaotsu; but it was most probably before that event, and his teacher was
a certain Shōshō (\#) of Misshu (\#), a prominent person in the then
newly-formed Sanron sect. This sect, which is also called the
*Ichi-dai-kyōshu*, or "Sect of the Teachings of Buddha's

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

whole life," made it a feature of its teachings that it professed to
accept every one of the many thousand volumes of the Mahāyāna Canon, as
of equal authority, without assigning to any single one a pre-eminent
place among its compeers. It aimed at the most complete and glorious
comprehensiveness (a comprehensiveness which, I fear, can only be
attained by the sacrifice of the critical faculty). Zendō's Buddhist
biographer <span id="fr_127"></span>[\*](#fn_127) adds that he also
studied the Vinaya discipline (a fact which may be taken as showing
traces of a somewhat practical turn of mind), and notices further that,
during these student days, he was continually restless, that he sighed
for greater definiteness, and expressed a longing for that simpler
doctrine of Salvation by Faith in Amida, which has always had its
exponents in China as well as in Japan.

At last, weary of the confusion, he went into the Library, prayed for
guidance, closed his eyes, and put out his hand for the book which was
to simplify his Creed. The same story is told of others in .Chinese
Buddhism: in Zendō's case, his hand fell upon the volume of the Kwangyō
(the Amitayurdhyāni Sutra), <span id="fr_128"></span>[†](#fn_128) which
relates how Sakyamuni

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

comforted Queen Vaidehi in her distress by reminding her of the mercies
of Amitabha, "who is ever near thee." Zendō read and received comfort;
but he could not understand all he read, and where he was there was none
to explain it.

But he heard that, south of the Yangtze, at Rozan (\#), there were
traditions and books which might explain what he wanted. It was here
that Eon (\#), who died A.D. 416, had worked for thirty years, and had
founded, in connection with a body of friends known as the "eighteen
sages of Rozan," a guild known as the White Lotus Society, which was the
first association of Buddhist monks and laymen for the joint adoration
of Amida Butsu. Zendō learned all that he could at Rozan, and then
recommenced his travels, consulting as many religious teachers as he
found likely to be able to give him helpful advice and

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

counsel. What he learned from these teachers induced him to adopt a rule
of life, known as *han shu sammai* (\#), which reads almost like the
stern rule of some Christian ascetic, still more so, perhaps, of that of
some Manichean fanatic. *Mi tsune ni butsu wo raishi, kuchi tsune ni
butsu wo tonae, kokoro tsune ni butsu wo omou*. "His body ceaselessly
engaged in the worship of Buddha, his mouth ceaselessly engaged in the
recital of Buddha's praises, his heart ceaselessly meditating Buddha."
With this in mind he retired to the Temple of Goshinji (\#) in Shunnan,
where, amidst beautiful mountain scenery, and In the solitude of
retirement, he "beat out his music." It is quite evident that this
retirement, which lasted for some years, was of great value in the
formation of his religious ideas. The name of the temple signifies, not
inaptly, the "Temple for the Instruction of Truth." He remained here
until his 29th year, returning to Singanfu in the year A.D. 643. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[\*](#fn_129)

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

His stay however, was for a short time only. Ever since his first
conversion to Amidaism in the library, he had evidently been searching
for any traces he could find of Amida followers in China. He had been to
Rozan to examine Eon's literary remains and to get into touch with the
White Lotus [Society](errata.htm#18). We may presume that the Goshinji
to which he retired was a place at which he would find persons in
sympathy with his religious sentiments. Now he heard that Dōshaku (\#),
the monk who is reckoned as Zendō's predecessor in the list of Shinshu
patriarchs, was teaching in the district of Shinyō (\#, Chinyang in
Kiangsi) and he set off at once to visit the aged man.

Dōshaku, who is reckoned by the Jōdo Buddhist as the fourth patriarch of
the Amida Doctrines, and therefore as Zendō's immediate predecessor, was
born in Heishū (\#) in the year A.D. 553, and died in 636. He had
experienced the persecution which the Buddhists had undergone during the
reign of Wu-ti of the Chow (\#) Dynasty <span
id="fr_130"></span>[\*](#fn_130) and he was one of the few brave ones
who remained faithful in spite of the violence of the storm. His
predecessor, the third patriarch, Donran, <span
id="fr_131"></span>[†](#fn_131) had taught

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

with considerable effect in the district in which Dōshaku was born, and
though he had been dead twenty years when Dōshaku came into the world,
his influence was still felt in the neighbourhood. It was kneeling
before the stone pillar erected to Donran's memory that Dōshaku made his
vow to propagate the Doctrine of Salvation by Faith in Amida. Dōshaku
was 48 years of age when he thus enrolled himself as a posthumous pupil
of Donran's; but he is said to have developed the doctrine beyond what
Donran had done. Donran had been drawn by the hope of eternal life, and
it was this hope, set before him by the Indian monk Bodhiruci, that had
made him burn his Taoist books of magic and set himself to the study of
Amidaism. In Dōshaku's hands the Amida doctrine had developed in the
direction of personality. He taught (if we may believe his latest
biographer, Mr. Tada) <span id="fr_132"></span>[\*](#fn_132) that Amida
must be considered to be a personal Being and not a mere abstract ideal,
and the book which he placed in Zendō's hands was the larger Sukhāvati
Vyūha, the book which gives the account of Amida's

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

life, of His Incarnation in the person of Hōzō Biku, His labours
undertaken for the Salvation of men, the successful accomplishment of
His Great Vow, and His return to glory as King of His Western Paradise.
This doctrine Zendō accepted and preached. He may be said to have
carried the doctrine a stage further. The followers of Hōnen Shōnin
(otherwise known as Genkū) form three communities, (i) the Shinshu,
founded by Shinran, and (ii and iii) the two sub-sects of the older Jōdo
sect, the Chinsei-ha and the Seizan-ha. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[\*](#fn_133) The Chinsei-ha, agreeing in this
respect with the Shinshu, differ from the Seizan-ha in the matter of
reciting the Nembutsu. The latter community treat the Nembutsu as an act
of adoration addressed to all the Buddhas, the Chinsei-ha and Shinshu
treat it as addressed to Amida alone, as being the only Buddha, and the
one to whom everything else is subordinate and subservient; and this
practice, according to Murakami, <span id="fr_134"></span>[†](#fn_134)
is due to the teachings of Zendō. To Zendō, therefore, the doctrine of
faith became a doctrine involving a belief in a single Being, without
beginning of days or end of life, unbounded in every respect, who, for
man's salvation, had become a man, had accomplished a scheme of
salvation, and had returned to his original glory.

Zendō's biographers relate how, when the patriarch was on the way to
visit Dōshaku, his road

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

lay through forests and mountains, so rough and impassable that, at
last, worn out with fatigue, he had to lie down to rest in a cave. He
was fainting with hunger and weariness, and it was two days before he
could raise himself. Then it seemed to him that a voice sounded in his
ears: "Pull yourself together, and struggle on: your difficulties will
disappear." We may perhaps enquire what these difficulties were and how
they disappeared.

Dōshaku is said to have died in the year A.D. 637. The date cannot be
implicitly trusted, for it is also said that Zendō was 29 years old when
he visited Dōshaku and accepted Amidaism, an impossible age if Zendō was
born in A.D. 614. The explanation probably will be found in another
statement to the effect that Dōshaku died five years after the visit of
Zendō. That would make Zendō 23 years old when he visited Dōshaku, and
we may easily believe that the conversion to Amidaism, as he came to
learn it, may have been a slow process, not fully accomplished for
several years. But, whichever way we look at it, the conversion of Zendō
to the full faith in Amida must have taken place about the year A.D. 636
(if anything a little later than that year), and in, or near, the
capital city of Singanfu. From that date and in that city, he began his
preaching activity.

China under the Tang dynasty had many dealings with Central Asia. The
ruling family, as Dukes of the dependent principality of Tang, had been
much mixed up with Tartar and Turkish tribes, and it was apparently by
their help that the family had been seated on the throne of China. From
the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

moment, therefore, that the Dynasty was established, the new Empire
became the cynosure of Central Asian eyes. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[\*](#fn_135) A Persian Mission was sent by Chosroes
II, praying for an alliance, and in 621 the first Zoroastrian Temple was
erected in Singanfu. The leader of this Mission seems to have been a
Magian of the name of Holu ("le fils du feu," as P. Gaubil calls him)
who was very active in stirring up China against the Mahometans. Of
Manichaeans in China proper, there seems to be no mention for many years
to come <span id="fr_136"></span>[†](#fn_136) but in 636, almost
synchronizing with the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

commencement of Zendō's preaching activity, arrived the Nestorian
Mission under Olopen, which has left behind it an enduring memorial in
stone. Is it possible that the "difficulties" with which Zendō was
troubled, when he lay wearied in the cave on his way to Dōshaku, were
difficulties connected with the relations between the Buddhist Faith and
the Faith which the Nestorians preached?

We can trace the development of Zendō's thought. Confused by the
multiplexity of the popular Buddhism of his day, he turns to the
scripture in which Sakyamuni is represented as comforting Vaidehi with
the proximity and tender watchfulness of Amida. Then he goes south to
Rozan, to the remnants of Eon and his White Lotus Guild, after which, in
the solitude of the Goshinji Temple, he works out his problem. In the
meantime he hears of Christianity (by no means an impossibility if we
remember the story of the introduction of silkworms into Europe a
century before). What is he to do or say? He goes to Dōshaku to resolve
his doubts, and Dōshaku tells hire of "Eternal Life," and gives him the
Sukhāvati Vyuha, which tells of Amida as a Person, who came down upon
Earth, who.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

opened the door of salvation, and has gone to, the place He has prepared
for us. <span id="fr_137"></span>[\*](#fn_137)

After 636, then, we find, in Singanfu, two men preaching almost similar
doctrines, the one preaching them in connection with Christ, the other
in

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

connection with Amida. It is further said of Zendō's activity that he
was constantly helped by a mysterious priest who came to visit him every
evening and helped him with his commentaries (see Tada, Shoshingekōwa,
p. 359.) This mysterious collaborator may have been a Christian, and if
so, the strange coincidences, the almost Pauline echoes, which are
constantly to be found in Zendō's writings, would be amply accounted
for. Nor is the supposition a baseless one; for we have one clear
instance of such collaboration between a Buddhist and Nestorian about a
century later, when the Nestorian priest King Tsing (or Adam, as he is
called on the Singanfu monument) collaborated with the Indian monk
Prajna in the translation of a book on the Six Cardinal Virtues (*Shat
Parāmitā Sūtra*). <span id="fr_138"></span>[\*](#fn_138) The original
was not in Sanskrit but in the Hu (\#), i. e. the Persian, or more
probably, the Uigur language. At any rate, not much came of this
attempted collaboration, which probably caused much jealousy and
opposition. It was after a while forbidden by. the Emperor Taitsung,
who, in a published decree, ordered the Nestorian King Tsing to confine
himself to the teachings of *Mishiho*, and to leave the followers of
Sakyamuni to propagate the teachings of their master. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[†](#fn_139)

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

The suggestion of opposition raised against such collaboration, on the
part of friendly-disposed believers of the two religions, by more
strait-laced partisans, brings me to another point of contact between
Zendō and the Nestorians. It is said (my authority again is Mr. Tada)
that great opposition was made against Zendō for his preaching. A
butcher, whose customers had left him to turn Buddhists, tried to murder
the persuasive <span id="fr_140"></span>[\*](#fn_140) monk who injured
his trade. And not only did persons of low degree set themselves against
him. The *literati* persecuted him and his followers, as did also the
priests of the other Buddhist sects. When the Emperor Kaotsung died in
684, the reins of Government fell into the hands of the Empress-Dowager
Wu-hu, who was under the influence of a Buddhist monk named Hwai-yi, a
monk of one of the sects opposed to Zendō's teaching, and Hwai-yi in 694
caused much popular discontent among the lower

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

classes by burning a favourite Temple, which may have been Zendō's. For
the common people heard Zendō gladly, and it was his preaching of a
Gospel to the poor and outcast that annoyed the literati and the "
Salvation-by-[knowledge](errata.htm#20)" Schools of Buddhists.

Strange to say, the Nestorians, well received and honourably treated by
Taitsung and Kaotsung, fall into disgrace, and are persecuted, as soon
as Kaotsung's death leaves the supreme power in the hands of the
Empress-Dowager Wu-hu, and her adviser Hwai-yi. The persecution of the
Nestorians is instigated by the sane people as that against the
followers of "Zendō, and much the same pretexts are alleged. Moreover,
the persecution of the two bodies goes on for the same time, and relief
comes to them simultaneously. Of the Nestorians we read that Huantsung
(723–756), succeeding Wu-hu, rebuilds the "Temple of Felicity," as the
Nestorian Church is called, that Huantsung's succeessor, Sutsung
(756–763), coming into a disordered inheritance recovers Singanfu which
was in the hands of rebels, and erects "luminous" temples in various
parts of his Empire, and finally that the Emperor Taitsung (763–780),
the same who discouraged the collaboration of King Tsing and Prajna, not
only celebrated the Bon Festival with the Buddhists in the 7th month,
but kept Christmas in the 12th with the Nestorians, "burning incense" in
a "luminous temple" with the "luminous multitude." As to Zendō's
followers, we find them gathering round a teacher named Ekan, not very
long after the master's death. Ninety years after that event, a monk
named Hossō is mentioned as acquiring great

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

fame, and in 793 Shōkō makes Uryūsan (\#) the headquarters of the
teachings promulgated by Zendō. But by that time the Emperor Taitsung
was already dead (*ob*. 780), and the collaboration between Amidaist and
Christian had already been prohibited.

When the Nestorian mission first arrived in China in A.D. 636. they
procured from the Emperor Teitsung a decree authorizing the erection of
a *Tatsin* (*i.e.* a Syrian) Temple. This name, however, may have led to
confusion, for both Zoroastrians and Manichaeans might conceivably have
claimed the title (loosely construed), and in fact, did so. When
Huantsung, soon after 713, rebuilds the Nestorian Church, it is called a
"Temple of Felicity." When Sutsung, in 756, recovers Singanfu, the
Nestorian Churches are "luminous (\#) temples," and this name has come
to be identified with Nestorianism ever since, both in China and Japan.

When Zendō died, the Emperor Kaotsung (650–683) granted to the Temple in
which he resided the honorific title of Kōmyōji (\#), which is only
another form of "luminous temple." The popular explanation of this name
is obviously a fanciful one. Bright rays of light do not come out of the
mouths of even the most eloquent preachers of any faith, nor do books,
however holy and mouldy, glow with a phosphorescent light. Yet that was
what Shōkō is said to have seen issuing from the works of Zendō
preserved in the library at the White Horse Monastery. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[\*](#fn_141) Kaotsung was an enlightened monarch,
and

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

if he gave the title of Kōmyōji, it must have been for the quality of
the doctrine and not by reason of any doubtful miracle. But it is quite
probable that "luminous temple" and *Kōmyōji* may have been used as
alternative titles to describe the Faith in One Saviour as taught, both
by the Nestorians and the children of Zendō, during the period of
collaboration, and that later, when Taitsung ordered the two to keep
apart, the name of Kōmyōji was taken by the Buddhist section of the
"movement" as their own specific designation, the Manichaeans
distinguishing their temple by the title *Dai-un-kōmyōji*.

This view receives considerable support form Japanese history. Shōtoku
Taishi, whom the Shinshu honor as the first of their *Zenchishiki* or
Saints, died in 621, shortly after the commencement of the Tang dynasty.
Buddhism was, therefore, in full swing in Japan when, in 636, the
Nestorian Mission arrived at Singanfu, and Zendō began his preaching,
and there were many Japanese students being sent yearly to China for
purposes of study. <span id="fr_142"></span>[\*](#fn_142) Not only so,
but there were malty Chinese families residing in Japan and naturalized
there (*ayabito*), and it has been noticed that most of Kōtoku Tennō's
Taikwa Reforms (A.D. 645–654) were worked out for him by these
*ayabito*. <span id="fr_143"></span>[†](#fn_143) The whole of the Nara
period was an age in which Japan was peculiarly

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

sensitive to Chinese influences, and especially to the influences of
Chinese Buddhism.

This influence seems to have reached its maximum during the reign of
Shōmu Tennō (724–748) and his Consort Kōmyō Kōgō (the very name, a
posthumous one, is in itself significant. Shōmu Tennō was a very zealous
Buddhist. He founded hospitals and charitable institutions, and his
Empress distinguished herself by personally undertaking the nursing of
lepers <span id="fr_144"></span>[\*](#fn_144)—a truly Christian work.
Japan was in no position at the time to undertake hospital work unaided.
Foreign doctors had to be employed, and the industry of Japanese
students has recently shown us the presence in Japan, at the Court, of a
Nestorian Christian (the Nestorian Christians were famous all over the
East for their skill in medicine). <span id="fr_145"></span>[†](#fn_145)
Here,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

therefore, we have possibly, two instances of simultaneous
collaboration, Buddhist and Christian uniting in the production of books
in China, and in works of charity in Japan.

In 781, the Singanfu monument is erected, and, shortly before, or
afterwards, the Chinese Emperor finds reason for prohibiting the
collaboration. In 782 the Emperor Kwammu comes to the throne of Japan.
The Buddhists have been giving themselves airs for some time, and the
ambitious priest Dōkyō, intriguing with the Empress Shōtoku (765–769),
has assumed the title of Hō Ō, or "religious emperor," a kind of pope!
Kwammu determines to put an end to the political intrigues of the Nara
clergy, removes his capital to Kyoto, and sends Kōbō and Dengyo to China
to investigate religion. They come

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

back, the one with the Shingon, the other with the Tendai. Again it is
significant that these sects, and especially the Tendai, which became
practically the State religion of Japan for many centuries, were the
very sects which had organized the persecution against Zendō, when he
first began to preach his doctrine of Salvation by Faith in Amida.

But the light still shone, in spite of the opposition of the Tendai.
Zendō's books came over to Japan, Mr. Tada tells us, at different times
between 996 and 858, and several monks, such as Kūya and Eikwan, kept
alive the faith in Amida, invoking His Name on Hieizan, or wandering,
disguised as travelling priests or horse dealers (*umakata*), from
province to province, preaching a simple faith to country
peasants. <span id="fr_146"></span>[\*](#fn_146) And finally, the great
Hōnen (Genkū), breaking with the Tendai, as so many others had

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

done, in order to return to the teaching of Zendō, founds at Kurodani a
temple, still known as *Konkai Kōmyōji*, "the Illustrious Temple of the
Golden Precept," which is to this day one of the chief seats of the
Chinsei sub-division of the Jōdo Sect. And it is this Chinsei-ha which
preserves Zendō's rule of making the Nembutsu an invocation of the Great
Amida alone, to the exclusion of all the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[154:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_118) The Sui dynasty
ruled in China from 589–659. A.D. They came to power at the close of a
long period of division, the Empire having been previously divided into
many small Kingdoms, with Chinese rulers south of the Yangtse, and
Tartar or Turkish chieftains in the northern districts. Such were the
Wei (Tartars), the Hsia (Hun), the Northern Yen (Tartar), the Western
Liang (Turkish), and the Western Tsin (Tibetan). These smaller Kingdoms
are of great importance in the History of Buddhism, for it was in them
rather than in China proper that Buddhism flourished before the Tang
period. The Sui family had but two Sovereigns, Wenti (589–606), who
united China and carried the Chinese name far among the Turks in the N.
and East, and Yangti (605–617), a man of violent temper, prone to
debauchery and extravagance, who brought the Empire to the verge of
ruin. He was overthrown by Li-yüan of the Tang family, who ascended the
throne in A.D. 618, as Kaotsu.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[155:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_119) It will be well to
remember that under the earlier Tang Emperors, Chinese Viceroyalties
extended as far as the frontiers of the Persian Empire, and that even
monarchs like Siladitya Harsha of Kanauj acknowledged Chinese influence.
It must also be remembered that Kaotsu suppressed Buddhist monasteries,
sending 100,000 bonzes and nuns about their business, being stimulated
thereto by petitions from Chinese literati. Buddhism had many enemies;
e.g. in India, where Harsha's predecessor had likewise (in 601)
dissolved the [Buddhist](errata.htm#15) monasteries, and even uprooted
the famous Bodhi-tree. V. A. Smith, Early History of India.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[155:†](sahw27.htm#fr_120) It will be well to
keep a few dates in mind. The first Persian Temple (whether Zoroastrian
or Manichaean is not quite clear) was erected at Singanfu, in 621, three
years after Kaotsu's accession. The Persian Empire, under Chosroes, II,
was at the time at war with Rome (or rather Constantinople), a Persian
army was on the Bosphorus. This war was a great strain on <span
id="page_156">p. 156</span> the Persian dominions, and there were other
causes for anxiety. Mahomet, born 570, had announced himself as a
prophet in 610, and the Hegira, from which all Mahometans date their
years, took place in 672. Siladitya Harsha, whose Indian Empire extended
over the whole basin of the Ganges, and who began as a warlike monarch,
came to the throne A.D. 606. He, too, received an Embassy from the
Persians, which he housed in a Monastery near Multan, and massacred
after entertaining them liberally. This must have been before his
conversion to Buddhism which seems to have been about 645. (V. A. Smith,
Early History of India). The Persians were evidently looking everywhere
for helpful allies.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[156:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_121) Shotoku Taishi's
political activity may be said to have begun with the battle of Shikisen
in 587, when the Shinto supporters were crushed. He became Crown Prince
in 593, proclaimed Buddhism in 595, promulgated his Constitution of 17
Articles in 604, rent his celebrated letter to the "Emperor of the West"
(Yangti of Sui) in 609 and died in 621. With him may be said to end the
Korean period of Japanese Buddhism.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[156:†](sahw27.htm#fr_122) Korea, divided into
several small states, was fluctuating in allegiance between China and
Japan. Yangti of Sui sent an expedition to Korea (A.D. 615), and Shotoku
was much concerned to preserve Japanese influence in the peninsula.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[157:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_123) With a few
exception, the early books translated by the Buddhist missionaries of
the Han period (ended A.D. 220) and of the era of confusion which
followed, were so badly done as to be practically unintelligible.
Kumarajiva, a native of Kushe, with apparently both Chinese and Indian
blood in his veins, arrived at Changan in A.D. 406, and inaugurated a
new era of translation. Amongst the hooks of which he provided fresh
translations were the Sukhāvati Vyūhas and the Hokekyō. Kum. therefore
marks a new period in the history of the Chinese Buddhism.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[157:†](sahw27.htm#fr_124) Not even with
Kumarajiva's efforts could Buddhism in China be brought into a
satisfactory condition. Bodhidharma's efforts were devoted to
introducing a form of Buddhism which should not depend upon books, but
teach men by contemplation to get straight to the heart of Buddha.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[157:‡](sahw27.htm#fr_125) Hiouen Thsang, born
A.D. 602, enters the Order 622; about the time of Kaotsu's edict against
the monasteries: unable to satisfy his mind, starts for India 629, meets
Silabhadra in India, and enters the Nalanda monastery in 638, returns to
China 645, The Emperor Teitsung writes a preface for his translation in
648. Hiouen Thsang is regarded as the founder of the Hosso sect, and it
shows how close was the connection [between](errata.htm#16) Japan and
China that the same sect appears in Japan 653, having been brought over
by Dōshō, a student under Hiouen Thsang. It is noteworthy that H. T. did
not bring Amidaism of the Zendō type back from India. Perhaps he did not
find it there.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[158:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_126) Kaeuffer Geschichte
Ostasiens. vol. ii, p 659.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[159:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_127) Tada,
Shōshingekōwa, p. 347.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[159:†](sahw27.htm#fr_128) The Kwangyō, which
is the second longest of the three Jōdo books, was not translated into
Chinese until A.D. 424, its translator being Kalayasas a contemporary of
Kumārajiva. The Larger Sukhāvati Vyūha was translated as early as A.D.
147, by Anshikao and also by one of his companions, there being two
later translations, one in 2?2 by Sanghavarman, and one of the Smaller
Sukh. Vy. by Kumarajiva about 420. This would seem to point to the fact
that Eon's teaching must have been based entirely on the earlier
translations of the Larger Sukhāvati Vyūha. Also, if Takakusu's date for
Vasuhandhu is correct <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> (A.D. 440), Eon
cannot have used any of his books either Eon's spiritual father was Dōan
(d. 390), a native of Ch’angshan in Chekiang, who moved to Jōyō (\#)
where he was besieged and taken prisoner by a King named Fu Ken (\#) who
ruled over one of the Central Asian principalities. During Man's life
time, the Tsin Emperor Hiao-wu-ti was converted to Buddhism, chiefly
owing to Tangut influences. Dōan professed to have the aid of Pindola
(Jap. Bindzuru), and was devoted to all the Buddhas, though perhaps
especially to Amida, as, may be inferred from his nickname *Miten no
Dōan*. Eon, who followed him, seems to have been entirely devoted to
Amida, as was also the Society which he founded and which, there is some
reason to suppose, was Manichaean. In the life-time of Eon and Doan,
began the streams of Chinese pilgrims to India, Fahian being the first.
It is noteworthy that none of these pilgrims seem to have brought back
anything definite about Amida from India. This is especially noticeable
in the case of Hiouen [Thsang](errata.htm#17), and it seems to point to
the Central Asian origin of the Amida cult.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[161:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_129) It is said of Eon
that he was so strict in his observance of Buddhist discipline that
when, on his deathbed, he was ordered to take honey, he first set his
pupils to find out whether the Buddhist rule permitted it. While they
were still examining, he died. Once he broke his rule of retirement by
mistake, being so engrossed in conversation that he inadvertently went
outside the bounds of his hermitage. This is a favourite theme for
artists. It is interesting to remember that the Goths and other
barbarians from Central Asia were at this time (circ. A.D. 575) invading
the Roman Empire. There is a passage in the Byzantine historian Eunapius
(Hist. p. 83) which represents them as bringing their Buddhist clergy
with them and introducing them to the Roman authorities, because they
had noticed that the Romans laid much stress on religion, and they
wanted to show that they, too, had a religion of which they need not be
ashamed. It is barely possible that these clergy may have been <span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> Arians: but the Goths were not concerted to
Christianity by Ulphilas before A.D. 350, and it would scarcely be
conceivable that twenty five years later the Arian clergy should be
described as one of the "ancestral" institutions of the Goths. It is
from about the middle of the 4th century that the *Kaidan* or grades of
ministry, with ordinations, are said by Japanese writers to begin.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[162:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_130) The Chow (circ.
560) were a northern Kingdom, a rival, of the *Wei*, whose territories
and powers they gradually usurped.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[162:†](sahw27.htm#fr_131) Donran died in 533.
Like all the Amidaists, he was not a pure Chinaman, but a subject, of
one of the small northern <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> kingdoms.
Wuti, of the Liang, circ. A.D. 528, was a great admirer of Donran's. It
is interesting, to note that shortly, after Donran's death, within the
life time both of Dōshaku and Zendō, an attempt was made (the
fore-runner of the Ryobu Shinto in Japan) to amalgamate Buddhism with
Taoism. I quote it to show that this was an age of syncretic
aspirations. Donran may almost have been a contemporary of
[Vasubandhu](errata.htm#19). Some trace of the tendency to make common
cause with Taoism may be perhaps found in the syllable Dō (\#) in the
assumed names of *Dōan*, or *Dōshaku*. Donran was certainly a Taoist
before becoming a Buddhist. The *Dō* in Zendō's name is slightly
different (\#), as though to emphasize sane new principle that had come
into his teaching.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[163:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_132) Tada. Shōshinge
Kōwa. p. 349.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[164:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_133) This is Mr.
Murakami's division in *Bukkyo Hyakkwa Hōten*. But there are other
disciples of Zendō in Japan, who do not trace their descent through
Genkū and Shinran, notably the *Yūdzūnembutsu* and *Ji* sects,
concerning whom a note will be given later on in this chapter.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[164:†](sahw27.htm#fr_134) Murakami. Bukkyo
Hyakkwa Hoten, p. 493.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[166:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_135) P. Gaubil. Mém. des
Chinois. xv. p 399.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[166:†](sahw27.htm#fr_136) Acc. to the authors
of *Mem. Conc. la Chine* (See xvi, 227. also Kaeuffer. ii. 653) the
first mention of *Moni* or Manichaean monks among the Tartar tribes
occurs in 786. I am indebted to my friend Mr. S. Tachibana for the
following data concerning the Manichaeans, which somewhat modify these
statements. In the 5th. year of the Jōkwan (Chih Kwan) period of the
Tang dynasty, i. e. A.D. 632. a Manichaean named Boku-goka-roku,
obtained from the Emperor Taitsung permission to erect a Tatsin Temple
(Jap. *Taishinji*) at Singanfu. Tatsin was a generic name for Persia and
Syria and the name Taishinji was at first applied indifferently to all
temples, Christian, Manichaean, or Zoroastrian, devoted to the
propagation of faiths cooling from those regions. In 734, the Emperor
Hiüan Tsung ordered the destruction of all Manichaean Temples (probably
of all Tatsin Temples), and forbade the promulgation of Manichaeanism.
In 740, the same Emperor removed the prohibition and ordered that all
Temples belonging to religions of Persian nationality should be called
Taishinji, whether in the two capitals or in the neighbouring country
districts. In the 3d year of Daiseki (Chin. Ta-li), i. e. 763, Taitsung
authorized Persian subjects to erect *Dai Un Kōmyōji* (\#) evidently as
something distinct from the Taishinji, also as-distinct from Buddhism.
Again in the 3d. year of the Emperor Wutsung, A.D. 843, all Manichaean
Temples were closed; and many of their priests, nuns, and laity, put to
death or sent into exile. In .the meantime the Kōmyō doctrine had
reached Japan. It had been brought to China in the reign of the <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> Empress Wu, in the 1st. year of Yen Tsai, in
694 by a Persian. of the name of *Pu-ta-tan* (\#). The Empress Jito was
then on the throne. She was a zealous Buddhist. In the year 692, she
received from the Chinese Ambassador a statue of Amida, and copies of a
Sūtra called *Kon Kōmyō Kyō*, which she caused to be preached throughout
her Empire. It is difficult not to connect this with the Faith that
Zendō had preached. (Mr. Tachibana quotes from *Bussōtōki*, fasc. 35–42.
See also Haas; Annalen des Japanischen Buddhismus. p. 318 and Dévéria in
Journal Asiatique ix. x. p 445).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[168:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_137) I would like to
call attention to an excellent article entitled the "Mystery of Fulin"
by Dr. Hirth, of Columbia which has just appeared in vol. xxx. pt 1 of
the Journal of the Am. Oriental Society. Dr. Hirth has long maintained
(and gives reasons for so doing) that this embassy came from the
Patriarch of Antioch as head of the Nestorian Church. There is also a
great deal of information in Mrs. Cordon's recent work on the Messiah, a
book which, despite its superabundant mysticism, is full of valuable
information and most suggestive in the many hints and indications it
gives for further investigation and research. It is interesting to
observe that Olopen and his missionaries emphasize the fact that they
come, not from the King of Persia, or any political power, but from the
Patriarch of Antioch, a purely spiritual personage with no political
influence at all. Perhaps they did this on purpose to avoid being mixed
up with Manichaeans and Zoroastrians, who were more closely connected
with the Persian State. Dr. Grierson, in his article on Bhakti-marga, in
vol. ii of Hasting's Encyclopaedia of Religions, shows us the same
Olopen, three years later, in India, at the Court of Siladitya Marsha,
where he is well received. This will show us how Nestorianism was at
work, quietly and unobtrusively, in India as in China. We know that
there were Christians in China before Olopen, for the Emperor Justinian
(527–565) received a present of silkworms brought to him by monks who
had been living for some years either in Singanfu or in Nanking. These
missionaries can scarcely have been Nestorians, seeing that Justinian
had a great dislike to that body of Christians. On the Singanfu
monument, erected 781, Olopen is described as Daitoku (\#). In the year
771, the Emperor Taitsung, appointed ten Daitoku, men of recognized
virtue and merit. The erectors of the monument would scarcely have
ventured to give Olopen this title unless it had been (posthumously
perhaps) conferred on him by the Emperor. (See Murakami. op. cit. p.
804, & E. A. Packer, Notes on the Nestorians, J. R. A. S. North China
Branch, vol. xxiv p. 297.)

<span id="fn_138"></span>[169:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_138) It is to be found
in the Buddhist Canon. See Nanjo's Catalogue. No. 1004

<span id="fn_139"></span>[169:†](sahw27.htm#fr_139) Prof. Takakusu
called attention to Prajna in his Translation of I-Tsing's Record of the
Buddhist Religion Oxf. 1896. *Mishiho* is Messiah. Among the Jews in
Kaifongfu, in Ronan, are preserved portions of the prophets Zechariah
and Malachi. A phrase which Zendō uses mere than once is *Fushi Sōgō*,
"the turning of the hearts of parents and children to one <span
id="page_170">p. 170</span> another," a phrase which at once suggests
Malachi to the mind. Zendō's phrase was later made the title of the well
known Japanese Jōdo book the *Fushi Sōgō*. I am much indebted to Dr.
Haas, of Heidelberg, for calling my attention to this matter.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[170:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_140) Tada says that
Zendō's preaching was so persuasive that many of his hearers committed
suicide by burning themselves alive. Mr. T. rightly feels called upon to
apologize for this; but no student of the Hokekyō will need to be
reminded that to make a holocaust of oneself is set forth in the Hokekyō
is the highest form of grateful adoration. But the word 'holocaust' is
also a good Christian expression, spiritually interpreted, and I venture
to suggest that the holocausts in Zendō's time may have been of this
kind. I am encouraged to think this by the fact that in the short
biography of Zendō which appears in *Shin hu Seikun*, the word *nyūjō*
(\#) is used to describe the occurrence. *Nyūjō* literally means "to
enter into the state of determination," though Hepburn in his
Dictionary, explains it as meaning voluntary suicide by fire.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[172:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_141) See Nanjo, Short
History of the XII. Buddhist sects, p. 107.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[173:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_142) See Haas, op. cit.
I am much indebted to this work. I have already shown, in notes on
Hiouen Tsuang and the Manichees, how quickly Japan, at this particular
period, was moved by any new religious movement in the capital of the
Tangs.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[173:†](sahw27.htm#fr_143) See Melanges
Japonais. vol. iii. p. 287.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[174:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_144) Murakami. op. cit.
p. 145–6. A little point, worthy of remark, is the following. In 639,
Olopen, having established his missionaries at Singanfu, goes on to
India and visits the Court of Siladitya Harsha, at Kanauj. Shortly after
this, we read of Harsha's zeal for works of charity, leper hospitals &c,
institutions which Buddhism had scarcely known since the days of Asoka,
but which have constantly been a conspicuous element in all Christian
work. in Japan, what I may call the *Kōmyō* doctrines find their way
into the country under Jitō and Mommu (627–647). Here also they are
followed by a period of enthusiasm for works of charity which continues
for a while, until the tares spring up and choke the good seed, and the
Tendai, the ancient enemies of Zendō get the upper hand.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[174:†](sahw27.htm#fr_145) The following are
the data known about the Nestorian Doctor, Rimitsu. In the year A.D. 739
there arrived from China a ship-load of distinguished persons. 1. Kibi
Mabi who had been studying in China since 716, and who brought back with
him the art of embroidery, the game of *go*, the *biwa*, and the
Katakana alphabet. 2. Dōsen, the founder is Japan of the Kegon (or
Avatamsaka) sect. 3 A Brahmin priest, Bodhisena, from India. 4. A
musician named Fat Triet (Buttetsu) from Cambodia, and 5, a Nestorian
physician of Persian nationality named <span id="page_175">p. 175</span>
Rimitsu. The party were received on behalf of the Government by Gyogi,
at Naniwa, and Gyogi was able to display his learning by conversing with
the Indian Brahmin in Sanskrit. A month later, a member of the Japanese
Embassy in China returned to Japan with 3 Chinese and another Persian.
The whole party were taken to court and the Emperor conferred official
rank upon them, especial mention being made of Ritōho, a Chinaman, and
Rimitsu. In 736 Shōmu was in the midst of his hospital schemes, and
Rimitsu was evidently a distinguished physician. The Japanese must have
been very different from what they are now if they neglected the
opportunity of sucking his brains! Mr. Tachibana, who has furnished me
with the materials for this note, bases his information on an article by
Dr. Takakusu in Shigakuzasshi vol. iii. No. 7, and on Dr. Kume's History
of the Nara Epoch. That Rimitsu was a Christian was shown some time ago
by Mr. Saeki. He could not have been a Manichaean seeing that the M.
discouraged doctors.

Gyogi Bosatsu was the spiritual director of Shōmu and his Empress Kōmyō.
He was an advocate of Kōmyō doctrines, very practical, very charitable.
He was a syncretist, and first originated the Ryōbu doctrine in Japan,
stimulated thereto by the example of the Buddhists and Taoists in China.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[176:\*](sahw27.htm#fr_146) It is said of Zendō
that he and his disciples were much given to itinerant preaching. So
were the Nestorians. The Greek merchant Cosmas Indicopleustes, who was
in India A.D. 535, mentions a Nestorian order of itinerant preachers
named periodeutae or wanderers, who were busy in his days evangelizing
in N. W. India Olopen himself may have been one: we find him in China
and then in India. It is possible that Kūya, and Eikwan, may have been
itinerant preachers after this type, having learned the value of it from
Zendō. So also may have been the mysterious personage who in 1095,
appeared to Ryonin, the founder of the Yūdzūnembutsu, and told him of
the "One man that stood for all men, and the one religious act that
embraced all others." Ippen, (1239–1289) the founder of the Ji Sect,
wandered in his allegiance from the Tendai to the Seizanha of the Jōdo,
and finally founded a sect of his own. He was a great student of Zendō,
both as a teacher and as an artist, and his sect was intended to be a
reproduction of Zendō's teachings. His nickname [was](errata.htm#21)
Yūgyō Shōnin, "the itinerating preacher," and to this day, the heart of
the Ji sect is supposed to be always travelling about the country
preaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. Manichaean influences in the Shinshu](sahw28)
