[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw08)  [Next](sahw10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter VII.</span>

### *Shintai and Zokutai*.

§§ 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.

In the romantic history of Shinran's life, to which I have already made
allusion, there is a very pretty little story about his courtship. I
will not vouch for its historical accuracy, but I think it will serve my
purpose well enough to quote it here.

It was in Shinran's early days, before he had: begun to be troubled with
doubts touching the infallibility of the Tendai system, and when he was
still a rising and promising young monk at Hieizan.

He had been on business of the monastery to Kyoto, and was on his way
home. Near the foot of the mountain he overtook a young maiden, who
accosted him. She was desirous, she said, of going to worship at the
famous shrine on the mountain: would he be kind enough to act as her
guide and  take her with him?

Shinran was greatly shocked. "You are a woman," he said, "and no foot of
woman may tread the holy mountain. I cannot take you with me."

But the young woman would take no refusal. "I am a woman," she said,
"but I have a human heart, and my human heart longs for salvation. Am I
to be denied that which my soul longs for?"

Shinran suggested a nunnery, but the suggestion was not welcomed. "Your
nunneries," she said,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "are like your
monasteries, places where women get together to pore over books and heap
up knowledge, and think they shall be saved by what they know. I am not
a learned woman, and if I were, what good would my learning, immersed in
a convent, do to my suffering sisters? I desire to be saved in order
that I may save others, I want some simple faith suitable for simple
souls; for whilst monks and nuns are poring over Sūtras of doubtful
meaning in the selfish quiet of the monasteries, there are thousands of
men and women in Japan perishing for lack of a few satisfying mouthfuls
of Saving Doctrine."

Shinran was not a man of ready words. Some years later, when he had
joined Hōnen, his master sent him, in his own stead, to be the champion
of the Jōdo cause in a public disputation. He went, announced his
arrival, took his seat modestly near the door; listened to all that the
adversary had to say, and then brought shame on his Master and himself
by slipping out of the room, without making a speech in defence of his
own position. We should not therefore be surprised to be told that he
remained silent under the attacks of his fair fellow-traveller.

But the maiden went on with her attack. Producing from her pocket a
crystal burning glass, such as we may often see in Japan, she said:
"Please take this and keep it. It has the power to collect the sun's
rays and focus them on one point, on which it shines with burning heat.
Do the same for religion: collect and focus into one point the whole
system of the faith, and let that one point

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

be made burning and bright, so that it may kindle. into zeal even the
simplest and most ignorant soul."

Then she left him, and it was not for some years that he discovered that
he had been conversing with the daughter of Fujiwara Kanezane, the lady
who afterwards became his wife. <span id="fr_69"></span>[\*](#fn_69)

I have told this story because it seems to it illustrate one or two of
the questions brought before us in our consideration of the Shinshu
Catechism.

For what period in the world's history, we are asked, and for what
persons are the Shinshu doctrines of Salvation by Faith in Amida
specially suitable? They are suited especially for the "last days," is
the answer, for the *matsudai*, <span id="fr_70"></span>[†](#fn_70) the
*sue no yo*, in which we live. And they are suited for sinners, for
weak, vacillating, helpless, persons like ourselves, who have not the
moral and spiritual strength necessary for the working out of our own
salvation. What does not St. Paul tell us of the last days, and of the
mercy of God revealed to sinful man in them? And what sign of Christ's
truth is there greater than this,—that the "poor have the Gospel
preached unto them?"

St. Paul has focussed the whole of Christianity for us into a single
point. "I determined to know

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

nothing among you save Christ Jesus and Him crucified," and the focussed
rays of light, coming through that burning glass, have always been
bright and powerful. "Christ and Him crucified" has always been a simple
formula, well within the intellectual grasp of the most ignorant and the
most unlearned. And Christians have at times been charged with almost
wilful ignorance.

So has it been with Shinshuism. *Tama Hi no Miya's* gift to her future
husband bore its fruit, when he became a disciple of Hōnen, and preached
that simple faith which Hōnen first formulated into a system, but which
a constant succession of pious monks had held and taught throughout all
the years since the commencement of the Mahāyāna. Faith in Amida has
always been in Japan a burning glass, quickening certain souls into
spiritual life, and giving hope to the ignorant, the unhappy, the
sinful. And, like Christians, the holders of this faith have at times
been charged with ignorance. *Monto mono wo shirazu*,—the "Monto know
nothing,"—has passed into a proverb.

But as there were occasions when St. Paul could "speak wisdom," so the
Shinshu has its philosophies for the perfect, the spiritual, the wise
man. It does not reject knowledge, it only assigns it to a secondary
[place](errata.htm#5), instead of making it the end-all of religion.
"Had Christ said, 'He that hath *known* me hath known the Father, he
would have been but a man," said to me a disciple of Hōnen. "But he said
'He that hath *seen* me,' and that word <span
class="smallcaps">seen</span> showed Him to be God."

There is a simple summary of the Shinshu faith

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

which our Catechism proceeds to discuss (§§ 33–37). Its composition is
ascribed to Rennyo Shōnin, the great renovator of the Shinshu in the
fifteenth century, and the Faith is therein treated of as consisting of
two portions,—the *shintai*, or "true position," and the *zoku-tai* or
"ordinary position." I have been unable to satisfy myself in the choice
of a term with which to render these expressions into English. They
correspond roughly speaking to the "duty towards God" and the "duty
towards one's neighbour" in the English Church Catechism, but they are
more than that. They imply grounds of belief as well as duty based on
belief, and so may be looked upon as half-creed, half-duty. In another
light, *shintai* may be spoken of as our justification, *zokutai* as the
gradual sanctification of the heart and life.

The *shintai* is the short-cut (*keiro*) of the believing heart which
intuitively sees what it does not yet possess or understand, and which
apprehends the fruits of Amida's Enlightenment through faith in him. The
*shintai* is especially the faith of those who make a special profession
of religion. It is *shusseken no hō*. The *zokutai*, on the contrary, is
the position of the man who is in the world and who has to do his duty
in that position. All sects of Buddhism make the same distinction, but
the Shinshu, which is especially the religion of the layman, lays
especial stress on the *zokutai*, considering it of more importance
among Shinran's followers than anywhere else in Buddhism. The
distinction is also found in the *Larger Sukhāvati Vyūha*. It is claimed

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

that the Eighteenth Section of Amida's Great Vow contains both. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[\*](#fn_71)

I will end this chapter by giving a translation (taken from Satow and
Hawes’ Guidebook to Japan. Introd. p. 92) of this Shinshu Creed.

*Shintai*.—"Rejecting all religious austerities and other action, giving
up all idea of self-power, we rely upon Amida Buddha with the whole
heart for our salvation in the future life, which is the most important
thing; believing that at the moment of putting our faith in Amida Buddha
our fate is settled. From that moment, invocation of His Name is
observed as an expression of gratitude and thankfulness for Buddha's
mercy. Moreover, we bear in thankful remembrance our reception of this
doctrine from the Founder, and succeeding chief priests, whose

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

teachings have been as benevolent and as welcome as light shining in a
dark place."

*Zokutai*.—"Furthermore, we must, during our whole life, observe the
laws which are appointed for our duty."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="smallcaps">Note on Shintai and Zokutai.</span>

Dr. Nanjo in his Short History of the Twelve Buddhist Sects, page 128,
defines *Zokutai* as being equivalent to the Sanskrit *Samvritisatya*,
or "truth by general consent." It is, he says, that "part of the
doctrine of this sect, which has reference to the distinction of good
and evil in conduct in this world."

"Those who belong to this sect are recommended to keep to their
occupation properly, and to discharge their duty, so as to be able to
live in harmony. They should also cultivate their persons and regulate
their families. They should keep order and obey the laws of the
government, and do their best for the sake of the country. Buddha says
in the Great Sūtra, (i.e. the Larger Sukhāvati Vyūha): "you should
separate yourselves from all evil, and select and practise what is good,
thinking and considering well:"

*Shintai* Dr. Nanjo defines as *Paramārtha satya* "true truth." The term
"refers to the distinction between belief and doubt in the mind." By
putting their belief in Buddha Amitābha, the faithful become members of
the *Shōjōjū* (Skt. *Samyaktva ras’i*) or "mass of absolute truth,"—a
term which may be considered as being analogous o the Communion of
Saints in certain of its aspects, or to what some Roman Catholic
Theologians would call the "Soul of the Church."

*Shōjōjū* represents that to "that class of beings who will certainly be
born in the Pure Land of Amitābha Buddha, and attain to Nirvana there in
the next life. They are taken hold of within the light of Amitābha
Buddha, joyful in heart, practising always the great compassion of
Buddha, and suffer transmigration no more. Therefore they are called
*Avaivartikas* (Jap. *Futaiten*), or 'those who never return again.'
They derive this benefit at the moment of their putting faith in
Buddha."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

By Nirvana is meant "the state of enlightenment of Amitābha Buddha." In
other sects, it is held that the soul, after reaching Paradise, must
still, in that Paradise, practise good works for a long time, before
reaching to that state of light. But the Shinshu have a phrase
*ōjō-sokujōbutsu* which means that the state of *ōjō*, 'going to be born
in the Land of Bliss,' is itself to become Buddha. This implies that at
the moment of death, the perfection of the Believer is accomplished.

As for the *Zokutai*, in other sects it is used as a means of working
out salvation. In the Shinshu it is merely the expression of gratitude
for a salvation already received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[65:\*](sahw09.htm#fr_69) In Shinshu books,
Shinran's wife is always spoken of as Tama [Hi](errata.htm#4) no Miya,
"Princess Burning-Crystal."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[65:†](sahw09.htm#fr_70) The Shinshu arrangement
of the ages to come after the death: of S’akyamuni is somewhat different
from that which we find in the Nichiren system (see my *Japanese
Mahāyāna*). In the Shinshu, it is 500 years of Upright Law, 1030 years
of Image Law, and 10,000 years (instead of 1000 only) of corrupted Law,
at the end of which the knowledge of the Law will perish.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[68:\*](sahw09.htm#fr_71) The eighteenth section
of Amida Vow, as given in vol. XLIX of the *Sacred Books of the East*
(Description of Sukhāvati, p. 73), is as follows:—

"When I have obtained Buddhahood, if those beings who are in the ten
quarters should believe in me with serene thoughts, and should wish to
be born in my country (Paradise), and should, say, ten times have
thought of me (or repeated my named—if they should not be born there,
may I not obtain the perfect knowledge; (*shintaimon*)—barring only
those beings who have committed the five deadly sins, and who have
spoken evil of the good law" (*zokutaimon*).

There is a certain amount of discrepancy, as to the arrangement of the
different sections of the Vow between the Sanskrit and the Chinese. It
is interesting to notice that Buddhism too has no unforgivable sin. For
such sinners, as, e.g. Ajātas’atru, there is still hope in Amida's
Mercy. Still, after Faith has been received and accepted, there comes
the obligation to keep the laws of the *Zokutaimon*. Failure to observe
this, or sinning against the light involves forfeiture of the grace for
a while at least.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Amida Nyorai.](sahw10)
