[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sahw11)  [Next](sahw13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428600353/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shinran and His Work*, by Arthur Lloyd, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter X.</span>

### *Shinnyo Hōshō*.

(§§ 47, 48, 49, 50, 51)

I read some months ago, in the *Guardian*, a short review of a small
treatise on God by an author hitherto unknown to me. The author's
argument was that God may, for practical purposes, be divided into two,
the God whom we know, and the God whom we do not know. The God we know
is God as we observe Him in the works of Nature, and as we learn of Him
in the Revelation which He has been pleased to make to us. Rut when we
have searched all the realms of scientific and metaphysical
investigation, when we have mastered all theological Truth, when we have
seen God reflected in the Face of Christ Jesus and have learned that he
is a Trinity, there still remains, behind all, an immense area (if we
may so call it) of the Godhead, about which we have no knowledge, and
never can have. It is a region into which we have no means of entering
and about which we can predicate nothing.

Had the author of the treatise in question had the advantage of an
education in Japanese Buddhist thought, he would have called the
"Unknown Area" of God *Shinnyo Hōshō* (\#), a term which I will now
proceed to explain.

*Shinnyo Hōshō* is the Real Substance (*hontai*) of the Universe, the
*acmè* (*gokuchi*) of the Truth. It is the one true Substance
(*ichinyo*) which permeates

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

the two Essences (*ni-sha*) of Matter and Mind in such a manner that
Matter and Mind may be said to be the two forms or modes of its Being,
if this terminology does not savour too strongly of Spinoza. It is
unbounded in space, infinite in time. It is the warp and woof that form
the texture of the Universe: as the one, it runs like a thread through
Past, Present, and Future, as the other, under innumerable combinations
and metamorphoses, it permeates the whole of Creation and is to be found
in everything great and small. As an abstract Reality it is one, but it
has two aspects. There is matter (*butsu*) and there is Mind (*shin*):
there is no Third Thing such as the Reason (*Ri*) which some systems
postulate. There is nothing But Matter and Mind, joined together in one
primordial, everlasting, Substance, about which we are not in a position
to predicate any thing whatever.

Hut Mind means movement (the very character by which the Japanese denote
Mind, \#, signifies and symbolizes movement), and the primordial
movement of the primordial Mind in the primordial Substance of *Shinnyo*
or *Ichi-nyo*, produces, from the very beginning, a distinction between
the one and the other. Without losing its immanent character, Mind
gradually distinguishes itself from Matter and assumes a personal form,
which is, roughly speaking, what we should call God. In Japanese it is
*Hōshin* (\#), the Dharmakaya, or 'spiritual body,' assumed by the Mind
of the Universe in the process of distinguishing itself from Matter. It
is called the Body (\# *shin*) of the Law (*hō*); the Law

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

which produced that spiritual Body is the same as that which operates
constantly and uniformly in Matter,—the Law of Cause and Effect,—which
commenced its operations from the moment when, in an unthinkable
Eternity long ago, the primordial Mind began to stir itself in the
primordial Matter in which it was immanent. It has produced, on the one
hand, the phenomena of Nature, or Creation, <span
id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84) on the other, the gradual Revelation, to
man, of God, as the Shinshuist knows Him.

The *Hōshin* is of two sorts. It is, in the first place, *Hōshō Hōshin*,
the Spiritual Body of the Buddha, as He is, which is still considered as
an integral part of *Shinnyo Hōshō*. This is formless, and incapable of
description, and answers more or less exactly to God, as He is hinted
at, rather than described, in certain passages in the Old Testament. But
it is impossible for men, with their finite thoughts and still more
finite language, to speak of God, except under some form with which they
themselves are familiar. Hence we get, in the Old Testament, the
anthropomorphic language about God,—his holy arm, his feet, finger, eye,
ear, face. Such language a Japanese would call *hōben*, an accommodation
of the Truth to the capacity of the hearer, and Buddhist Theology speaks
not only of a *Hōshō Hōshin*, which it is

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

beyond the Power of Man to describe or comprehend, but also of a *Hōben
Hōshin*, a Spiritual Body of God, accommodated to the capacity of Finite
Man, and spoken of under a Human Shape.

Amitābha in the Shinshu Theology is conceived of as having been
originally an integral and co-eternal factor in *Shinnyo*. In process of
time (to adapt my language to the necessities of the case) he became
*Hōshō Hōshin* and *Hōben Hōshin*, and it was as the latter, as God
*personified*, that He built up His Paradise and residing there,
attracts all those that believe in Him. According to Shinshu
Theology <span id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_85), Hōzō Biku must be looked
upon as the Incarnation of *Hōshin*, of Dharmakaya, of the highest Form
that the personified Mind of the Universe can take, as an Incarnation in
other words, of God.

But the Incarnations of the One Buddha are of two sorts. I will mention
the lower kind first. It is known in Japanese as *Ojin* (\#) or *Keshin*
(\#), in Sanskrit, as *Nirmanakaya*. This is the material body assumed
when Buddha is manifested upon earth for the salvation or help of man.
Some Gnostic sects held (this is especially true of the particular sect
from which I consider the Shinshu to have descended) that the Deity had
often been incarnated in fleshly form, the Incarnation

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of Jesus Christ "in the days of King Herod" being the last and most
perfect one. Similarly, the Buddhists will tell us that there have been
many Incarnations of Buddha in the Nirmanakaya, and they will instance
Sakyamuni as the most perfect instance of this. The Shinshu believer
will add another instance of an incarnation, which he holds to have been
more perfect than that of Sakyamuni, the Incarnation of Buddha as 'very
man' in the person of Hōzō Biku <span id="fr_86"></span>[\*](#fn_86),
such as He was in the days of His humiliation, before He had attained to
that glory which became His when He had fulfilled His Vow for the
Salvation of Mankind and became *Namu Amida Butsu*.

Between the *Dharmakaya*, the *Hōben Hōsshin*, of Amida the Supreme, and
the *Nirmanakaya* or *Ojin* of Hōzō Biku, is placed *Sambhoga
Kaya*—*Hōshin* (\#), the so-called "Body of Compensation." It is the
Body in which Amida-Butsu, the glorified Saviour, who has worked out
man's salvation, is now set forth as the personal object of worship for
the Shinshu believer. It is, as it were, a counterpart
[of](errata.htm#8) that glorified Humanity in which we believe that Our
Risen Saviour Jesus Christ, having passed into the heavens, is sitting
in His Mediatiorial Kingdom

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "at the right hand
of God," (this term being evidently a *hōben*, a figurative expression
intended to be an "accommodation" of a great truth to our finite human
language). <span id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87)

Thus we may see that Amida is conceived of, in one aspect, as a Being
whose Substance is absolute and unconditioned (*zettaisha*), in another,
as an idealized, glorified, Being (*ri-butsu*), in another, as an actual
tangible, material, Buddha, in that Incarnation which the Shinshu
consider to be historical. He has three bodies, the one, absolute,
invisible, intangible, only to be seen by the eye of Faith; another,
fleshly, human, the body of Hōzō Biku whilst on earth, the third,
spiritualized matter, glorified and exalted. The Body of Hōzō Biku was
material, but it has passed away, the Compensation Body of Amida Butsu
is localized in Paradise, and definitely distinct, though immaterial.
The Dharmakaya of the Absolute is invisible, intangible, formless, and
can only be apprehended when it veils itself under material substances
behind which it dwells among us with a real but purely spiritual
Presence. It requires but little ingenuity to see the important bearing
which all this has on some of the most vital beliefs of Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85:\*](sahw12.htm#fr_84) Of course, Creation is
a word the Buddhist cannot use in its strictest sense. To him, as to the
ancient Gnostic, there is no Creation, but rather a Development and
gradual manifestation of God and of Material Phenomena. In writing this
section I have made much use of the passages from older writers given in
*Shinshu Seikun* pp. 390–400.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86:\*](sahw12.htm#fr_85) It must be remembered
that other Buddhist Sects do not accept this. According to the
*Shingon*, Amida does not represent the *Dharmakaya* at all, but only
the *Sambhogakaya*—*Hoshin*—the next lower forms of Manifestation. For
them *Vairocana*, the Abraxas of the Gnostics, the Supreme God of the
Manichaeans, is the Highest Manifestation of God.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87:\*](sahw12.htm#fr_86) It was the *Hōben
Hōsshin* which became man in Hōzō Biku. Hōzō therefore stands on a
higher plane than Sakyamuni, who was merely *Ojin* or *Keshin* (Nirmana
Kaya). To say that a man was a *Keshin*, of Amida, Kwannon, or Seishi,
meant no more than what we say of a man, "The Spirit of God is in
him"—It is in this lower sense that the term Keshin is used of men like
Genkū, Shinran or Shōtoku Taishi. And according to the Shinshu there
has, never been more than one Incarnation like that of Hōzō.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88:\*](sahw12.htm#fr_87) The parallelism is so
striking that I need not comment on it. I will content myself with
quoting the exact words of *Shinshu Hyakuwa* § 49. *Hōshin Butsu* (i e.
the Sambhogakaya). *Kore we Shinshu* (*Jōdo mon*) *ni hanzon to suru
Amida butsu no gotoki, in-i ni oite shutoku gyō dō no kō ni mukuite,
arawaretaru kekkwa no Buddha wo sashite in no de arimasu*. Dr. Anezaki,
who has been kind enough to read these pages for me suggests that the
Sambhogakaya of Buddha corresponds rather to the Holy Spirit in
Christian theology. But the above quotation is very clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Salvation of Sentient Beings.](sahw13)
