[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico078) 
[Next](nico080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 12.

#### Discussion of the view that pleasure is not a good.

These are pretty much the things that are said. That it does not follow
from these grounds that pleasure is not a good, or even the chief good,
is plain from the following considerations. (A) (a) First, since that
which is good may be so in either of two senses (one thing good simply
and another good for a particular person), natural constitutions and
states of being, and therefore also the corresponding movements and
processes, will be correspondingly divisible. Of those which are thought
to be bad some will be bad if taken without qualification but not bad
for a particular person, but worthy of his choice, and some will not be
worthy of choice even for a particular person, but only at a particular
time and for a short period, though not without qualification; while
others are not even pleasures, but seem to be so, viz. all those which
involve pain and whose end is curative, e.g. the processes that go on in
sick persons.

\(b\) Further, one kind of good being activity and another being state,
the processes that restore us to our natural state are only incidentally
pleasant; for that matter the activity at work in the appetites for them
is the activity of so much of our state and nature as has remained
unimpaired; for there are actually pleasures that involve no pain or
appetite (e.g. those of contemplation), the nature in such a case not
being defective at all. That the others are incidental is indicated by
the fact that men do not enjoy the same pleasant objects when their
nature is in its settled state as they do when it is being replenished,
but in the former case they enjoy the things that are pleasant without
qualification, in the latter the contraries of these as well; for then
they enjoy even sharp and bitter things, none of which is pleasant
either by nature or without qualification. The states they produce,
therefore, are not pleasures naturally or without qualification; for as
pleasant things differ, so do the pleasures arising from them.

\(c\) Again, it is not necessary that there should be something else
better than pleasure, as some say the end is better than the process;
for leasures are not processes nor do they all involve process--they are
activities and ends; nor do they arise when we are becoming something,
but when we are exercising some faculty; and not all pleasures have an
end different from themselves, but only the pleasures of persons who are
being led to the perfecting of their nature. This is why it is not right
to say that pleasure is perceptible process, but it should rather be
called activity of the natural state, and instead of 'perceptible'
'unimpeded'. It is thought by some people to be process just because
they think it is in the strict sense good; for they think that activity
is process, which it is not.

\(B\) The view that pleasures are bad because some pleasant things are
unhealthy is like saying that healthy things are bad because some
healthy things are bad for money-making; both are bad in the respect
mentioned, but they are not bad for that reason--indeed, thinking itself
is sometimes injurious to health.

Neither practical wisdom nor any state of being is impeded by the
pleasure arising from it; it is foreign pleasures that impede, for the
pleasures arising from thinking and learning will make us think and
learn all the more.

\(C\) The fact that no pleasure is the product of any art arises
naturally enough; there is no art of any other activity either, but only
of the corresponding faculty; though for that matter the arts of the
perfumer and the cook are thought to be arts of pleasure.

\(D\) The arguments based on the grounds that the temperate man avoids
pleasure and that the man of practical wisdom pursues the painless life,
and that children and the brutes pursue pleasure, are all refuted by the
same consideration. We have pointed out in what sense pleasures are good
without qualification and in what sense some are not good; now both the
brutes and children pursue pleasures of the latter kind (and the man of
practical wisdom pursues tranquil freedom from that kind), viz. those
which imply appetite and pain, i.e. the bodily pleasures (for it is
these that are of this nature) and the excesses of them, in respect of
which the self-indulgent man is self-indulent. This is why the temperate
man avoids these pleasures; for even he has pleasures of his own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13. Discussion of the view that pleasure is not the chief
good](nico080)
