[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico082) 
[Next](nico084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 2.

#### Three objects of love: implications of friendship.

The kinds of friendship may perhaps be cleared up if we first come to
know the object of love. For not everything seems to be loved but only
the lovable, and this is good, pleasant, or useful; but it would seem to
be that by which some good or pleasure is produced that is useful, so
that it is the good and the useful that are lovable as ends. Do men
love, then, the good, or what is good for them? These sometimes clash.
So too with regard to the pleasant. Now it is thought that each loves
what is good for himself, and that the good is without qualification
lovable, and what is good for each man is lovable for him; but each man
loves not what is good for him but what seems good. This however will
make no difference; we shall just have to say that this is 'that which
seems lovable'. Now there are three grounds on which people love; of the
love of lifeless objects we do not use the word 'friendship'; for it is
not mutual love, nor is there a wishing of good to the other (for it
would surely be ridiculous to wish wine well; if one wishes anything for
it, it is that it may keep, so that one may have it oneself); but to a
friend we say we ought to wish what is good for his sake. But to those
who thus wish good we ascribe only goodwill, if the wish is not
reciprocated; goodwill when it is reciprocal being friendship. Or must
we add 'when it is recognized'? For many people have goodwill to those
whom they have not seen but judge to be good or useful; and one of these
might return this feeling. These people seem to bear goodwill to each
other; but how could one call them friends when they do not know their
mutual feelings? To be friends, then, the must be mutually recognized as
bearing goodwill and wishing well to each other for one of the aforesaid
reasons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. Three corresponding kinds of friendship: superiority
of friendship whose motive is the good](nico084)
