[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico063.md) 
[Next](nico065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 10.

#### Understanding--the critical quality answering to the imperative quality practical wisdom.

Understanding, also, and goodness of understanding, in virtue of which
men are said to be men of understanding or of good understanding, are
neither entirely the same as opinion or scientific knowledge (for at
that rate all men would have been men of understanding), nor are they
one of the particular sciences, such as medicine, the science of things
connected with health, or geometry, the science of spatial magnitudes.
For understanding is neither about things that are always and are
unchangeable, nor about any and every one of the things that come into
being, but about things which may become subjects of questioning and
deliberation. Hence it is about the same objects as practical wisdom;
but understanding and practical wisdom are not the same. For practical
wisdom issues commands, since its end is what ought to be done or not to
be done; but understanding only judges. (Understanding is identical with
goodness of understanding, men of understanding with men of good
understanding.) Now understanding is neither the having nor the
acquiring of practical wisdom; but as learning is called understanding
when it means the exercise of the faculty of knowledge, so
'understanding' is applicable to the exercise of the faculty of opinion
for the purpose of judging of what some one else says about matters with
which practical wisdom is concerned--and of judging soundly; for 'well'
and 'soundly' are the same thing. And from this has come the use of the
name 'understanding' in virtue of which men are said to be 'of good
understanding', viz. from the application of the word to the grasping of
scientific truth; for we often call such grasping understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. Judgement--right discrimination of the equitable: the
place of intuition in morals](nico065.md)
