[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico053) 
[Next](nico055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 11.

#### Can a man treat himself unjustly?

Whether a man can treat himself unjustly or not, is evident from what
has been said. For (a) one class of just acts are those acts in
accordance with any virtue which are prescribed by the law; e.g. the law
does not expressly permit suicide, and what it does not expressly permit
it forbids. Again, when a man in violation of the law harms another
(otherwise than in retaliation) voluntarily, he acts unjustly, and a
voluntary agent is one who knows both the person he is affecting by his
action and the instrument he is using; and he who through anger
voluntarily stabs himself does this contrary to the right rule of life,
and this the law does not allow; therefore he is acting unjustly. But
towards whom? Surely towards the state, not towards himself. For he
suffers voluntarily, but no one is voluntarily treated unjustly. This is
also the reason why the state punishes; a certain loss of civil rights
attaches to the man who destroys himself, on the ground that he is
treating the state unjustly.

Further (b) in that sense of 'acting unjustly' in which the man who
'acts unjustly' is unjust only and not bad all round, it is not possible
to treat oneself unjustly (this is different from the former sense; the
unjust man in one sense of the term is wicked in a particularized way
just as the coward is, not in the sense of being wicked all round, so
that his 'unjust act' does not manifest wickedness in general). For (i)
that would imply the possibility of the same thing's having been
subtracted from and added to the same thing at the same time; but this
is impossible--the just and the unjust always involve more than one
person. Further, (ii) unjust action is voluntary and done by choice, and
takes the initiative (for the man who because he has suffered does the
same in return is not thought to act unjustly); but if a man harms
himself he suffers and does the same things at the same time. Further,
(iii) if a man could treat himself unjustly, he could be voluntarily
treated unjustly. Besides, (iv) no one acts unjustly without committing
particular acts of injustice; but no one can commit adultery with his
own wife or housebreaking on his own house or theft on his own property,

In general, the question 'can a man treat himself unjustly?' is solved
also by the distinction we applied to the question 'can a man be
voluntarily treated unjustly?'

(It is evident too that both are bad, being unjustly treated and acting
unjustly; for the one means having less and the other having more than
the intermediate amount, which plays the part here that the healthy does
in the medical art, and that good condition does in the art of bodily
training. But still acting unjustly is the worse, for it involves vice
and is blameworthy--involves vice which is either of the complete and
unqualified kind or almost so (we must admit the latter alternative,
because not all voluntary unjust action implies injustice as a state of
character), while being unjustly treated does not involve vice and
injustice in oneself. In itself, then, being unjustly treated is less
bad, but there is nothing to prevent its being incidentally a greater
evil. But theory cares nothing for this; it calls pleurisy a more
serious mischief than a stumble; yet the latter may become incidentally
the more serious, if the fall due to it leads to your being taken
prisoner or put to death the enemy.)

Metaphorically and in virtue of a certain resemblance there is a
justice, not indeed between a man and himself, but between certain parts
of him; yet not every kind of justice but that of master and servant or
that of husband and wife. For these are the ratios in which the part of
the soul that has a rational principle stands to the irrational part;
and it is with a view to these parts that people also think a man can be
unjust to himself, viz. because these parts are liable to suffer
something contrary to their respective desires; there is therefore
thought to be a mutual justice between them as between ruler and ruled.

Let this be taken as our account of justice and the other, i.e. the
other moral, virtues.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. Reasons for studying intellectual virtue: intellect
divided into the contemplative and the calculative](nico055)
