[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico065.md) 
[Next](nico067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 12.

#### What is the use of philosophic and of practical wisdom? Philosophic wisdom is the formal cause of happiness; practical wisdom is what ensures the taking of proper means to the proper ends desired by moral virtue.

Difficulties might be raised as to the utility of these qualities of
mind. For (1) philosophic wisdom will contemplate none of the things
that will make a man happy (for it is not concerned with any coming into
being), and though practical wisdom has this merit, for what purpose do
we need it? Practical wisdom is the quality of mind concerned with
things just and noble and good for man, but these are the things which
it is the mark of a good man to do, and we are none the more able to act
for knowing them if the virtues are states of character, just as we are
none the better able to act for knowing the things that are healthy and
sound, in the sense not of producing but of issuing from the state of
health; for we are none the more able to act for having the art of
medicine or of gymnastics. But (2) if we are to say that a man should
have practical wisdom not for the sake of knowing moral truths but for
the sake of becoming good, practical wisdom will be of no use to those
who are good; again it is of no use to those who have not virtue; for it
will make no difference whether they have practical wisdom themselves or
obey others who have it, and it would be enough for us to do what we do
in the case of health; though we wish to become healthy, yet we do not
learn the art of medicine. (3) Besides this, it would be thought strange
if practical wisdom, being inferior to philosophic wisdom, is to be put
in authority over it, as seems to be implied by the fact that the art
which produces anything rules and issues commands about that thing.

These, then, are the questions we must discuss; so far we have only
stated the difficulties.

\(1\) Now first let us say that in themselves these states must be
worthy of choice because they are the virtues of the two parts of the
soul respectively, even if neither of them produce anything.

\(2\) Secondly, they do produce something, not as the art of medicine
produces health, however, but as health produces health; so does
philosophic wisdom produce happiness; for, being a part of virtue
entire, by being possessed and by actualizing itself it makes a man
happy.

\(3\) Again, the work of man is achieved only in accordance with
practical wisdom as well as with moral virtue; for virtue makes us aim
at the right mark, and practical wisdom makes us take the right means.
(Of the fourth part of the soul--the nutritive--there is no such virtue;
for there is nothing which it is in its power to do or not to do.)

\(4\) With regard to our being none the more able to do because of our
practical wisdom what is noble and just, let us begin a little further
back, starting with the following principle. As we say that some people
who do just acts are not necessarily just, i.e. those who do the acts
ordained by the laws either unwillingly or owing to ignorance or for
some other reason and not for the sake of the acts themselves (though,
to be sure, they do what they should and all the things that the good
man ought), so is it, it seems, that in order to be good one must be in
a certain state when one does the several acts, i.e. one must do them as
a result of choice and for the sake of the acts themselves. Now virtue
makes the choice right, but the question of the things which should
naturally be done to carry out our choice belongs not to virtue but to
another faculty. We must devote our attention to these matters and give
a clearer statement about them. There is a faculty which is called
cleverness; and this is such as to be able to do the things that tend
towards the mark we have set before ourselves, and to hit it. Now if the
mark be noble, the cleverness is laudable, but if the mark be bad, the
cleverness is mere smartness; hence we call even men of practical wisdom
clever or smart. Practical wisdom is not the faculty, but it does not
exist without this faculty. And this eye of the soul acquires its formed
state not without the aid of virtue, as has been said and is plain; for
the syllogisms which deal with acts to be done are things which involve
a starting-point, viz. 'since the end, i.e. what is best, is of such and
such a nature', whatever it may be (let it for the sake of argument be
what we please); and this is not evident except to the good man; for
wickedness perverts us and causes us to be deceived about the
starting-points of action. Therefore it is evident that it is impossible
to be practically wise without being good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13. Relation of practical wisdom to natural virtue, moral
virtue, and the right rule](nico067.md)
