[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico116.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 9.

#### Legislation is needed if the end is to be attained: transition to Politics.

If these matters and the virtues, and also friendship and pleasure, have
been dealt with sufficiently in outline, are we to suppose that our
programme has reached its end? Surely, as the saying goes, where there
are things to be done the end is not to survey and recognize the various
things, but rather to do them; with regard to virtue, then, it is not
enough to know, but we must try to have and use it, or try any other way
there may be of becoming good. Now if arguments were in themselves
enough to make men good, they would justly, as Theognis says, have won
very great rewards, and such rewards should have been provided; but as
things are, while they seem to have power to encourage and stimulate the
generous-minded among our youth, and to make a character which is gently
born, and a true lover of what is noble, ready to be possessed by
virtue, they are not able to encourage the many to nobility and
goodness. For these do not by nature obey the sense of shame, but only
fear, and do not abstain from bad acts because of their baseness but
through fear of punishment; living by passion they pursue their own
pleasures and the means to them, and and the opposite pains, and have
not even a conception of what is noble and truly pleasant, since they
have never tasted it. What argument would remould such people? It is
hard, if not impossible, to remove by argument the traits that have long
since been incorporated in the character; and perhaps we must be content
if, when all the influences by which we are thought to become good are
present, we get some tincture of virtue.

Now some think that we are made good by nature, others by habituation,
others by teaching. Nature's part evidently does not depend on us, but
as a result of some divine causes is present in those who are truly
fortunate; while argument and teaching, we may suspect, are not powerful
with all men, but the soul of the student must first have been
cultivated by means of habits for noble joy and noble hatred, like earth
which is to nourish the seed. For he who lives as passion directs will
not hear argument that dissuades him, nor understand it if he does; and
how can we persuade one in such a state to change his ways? And in
general passion seems to yield not to argument but to force. The
character, then, must somehow be there already with a kinship to virtue,
loving what is noble and hating what is base.

But it is difficult to get from youth up a right training for virtue if
one has not been brought up under right laws; for to live temperately
and hardily is not pleasant to most people, especially when they are
young. For this reason their nurture and occupations should be fixed by
law; for they will not be painful when they have become customary. But
it is surely not enough that when they are young they should get the
right nurture and attention; since they must, even when they are grown
up, practise and be habituated to them, we shall need laws for this as
well, and generally speaking to cover the whole of life; for most people
obey necessity rather than argument, and punishments rather than the
sense of what is noble.

This is why some think that legislators ought to stimulate men to virtue
and urge them forward by the motive of the noble, on the assumption that
those who have been well advanced by the formation of habits will attend
to such influences; and that punishments and penalties should be imposed
on those who disobey and are of inferior nature, while the incurably bad
should be completely banished. A good man (they think), since he lives
with his mind fixed on what is noble, will submit to argument, while a
bad man, whose desire is for pleasure, is corrected by pain like a beast
of burden. This is, too, why they say the pains inflicted should be
those that are most opposed to the pleasures such men love.

However that may be, if (as we have said) the man who is to be good must
be well trained and habituated, and go on to spend his time in worthy
occupations and neither willingly nor unwillingly do bad actions, and if
this can be brought about if men live in accordance with a sort of
reason and right order, provided this has force,--if this be so, the
paternal command indeed has not the required force or compulsive power
(nor in general has the command of one man, unless he be a king or
something similar), but the law has compulsive power, while it is at the
same time a rule proceeding from a sort of practical wisdom and reason.
And while people hate men who oppose their impulses, even if they oppose
them rightly, the law in its ordaining of what is good is not
burdensome.

In the Spartan state alone, or almost alone, the legislator seems to
have paid attention to questions of nurture and occupations; in most
states such matters have been neglected, and each man lives as he
pleases, Cyclops-fashion, 'to his own wife and children dealing law'.
Now it is best that there should be a public and proper care for such
matters; but if they are neglected by the community it would seem right
for each man to help his children and friends towards virtue, and that
they should have the power, or at least the will, to do this.

It would seem from what has been said that he can do this better if he
makes himself capable of legislating. For public control is plainly
effected by laws, and good control by good laws; whether written or
unwritten would seem to make no difference, nor whether they are laws
providing for the education of individuals or of groups--any more than
it does in the case of music or gymnastics and other such pursuits. For
as in cities laws and prevailing types of character have force, so in
households do the injunctions and the habits of the father, and these
have even more because of the tie of blood and the benefits he confers;
for the children start with a natural affection and disposition to obey.
Further, private education has an advantage over public, as private
medical treatment has; for while in general rest and abstinence from
food are good for a man in a fever, for a particular man they may not
be; and a boxer presumably does not prescribe the same style of fighting
to all his pupils. It would seem, then, that the detail is worked out
with more precision if the control is private; for each person is more
likely to get what suits his case.

But the details can be best looked after, one by one, by a doctor or
gymnastic instructor or any one else who has the general knowledge of
what is good for every one or for people of a certain kind (for the
sciences both are said to be, and are, concerned with what is
universal); not but what some particular detail may perhaps be well
looked after by an unscientific person, if he has studied accurately in
the light of experience what happens in each case, just as some people
seem to be their own best doctors, though they could give no help to any
one else. None the less, it will perhaps be agreed that if a man does
wish to become master of an art or science he must go to the universal,
and come to know it as well as possible; for, as we have said, it is
with this that the sciences are concerned.

And surely he who wants to make men, whether many or few, better by his
care must try to become capable of legislating, if it is through laws
that we can become good. For to get any one whatever--any one who is put
before us--into the right condition is not for the first chance comer;
if any one can do it, it is the man who knows, just as in medicine and
all other matters which give scope for care and prudence.

Must we not, then, next examine whence or how one can learn how to
legislate? Is it, as in all other cases, from statesmen? Certainly it
was thought to be a part of statesmanship. Or is a difference apparent
between statesmanship and the other sciences and arts? In the others the
same people are found offering to teach the arts and practising them,
e.g. doctors or painters; but while the sophists profess to teach
politics, it is practised not by any of them but by the politicians, who
would seem to do so by dint of a certain skill and experience rather
than of thought; for they are not found either writing or speaking about
such matters (though it were a nobler occupation perhaps than composing
speeches for the law-courts and the assembly), nor again are they found
to have made statesmen of their own sons or any other of their friends.
But it was to be expected that they should if they could; for there is
nothing better than such a skill that they could have left to their
cities, or could prefer to have for themselves, or, therefore, for those
dearest to them. Still, experience seems to contribute not a little;
else they could not have become politicians by familiarity with
politics; and so it seems that those who aim at knowing about the art of
politics need experience as well.

But those of the sophists who profess the art seem to be very far from
teaching it. For, to put the matter generally, they do not even know
what kind of thing it is nor what kinds of things it is about; otherwise
they would not have classed it as identical with rhetoric or even
inferior to it, nor have thought it easy to legislate by collecting the
laws that are thought well of; they say it is possible to select the
best laws, as though even the selection did not demand intelligence and
as though right judgement were not the greatest thing, as in matters of
music. For while people experienced in any department judge rightly the
works produced in it, and understand by what means or how they are
achieved, and what harmonizes with what, the inexperienced must be
content if they do not fail to see whether the work has been well or ill
made--as in the case of painting. Now laws are as it were the' works' of
the political art; how then can one learn from them to be a legislator,
or judge which are best? Even medical men do not seem to be made by a
study of text-books. Yet people try, at any rate, to state not only the
treatments, but also how particular classes of people can be cured and
should be treated--distinguishing the various habits of body; but while
this seems useful to experienced people, to the inexperienced it is
valueless. Surely, then, while collections of laws, and of constitutions
also, may be serviceable to those who can study them and judge what is
good or bad and what enactments suit what circumstances, those who go
through such collections without a practised faculty will not have right
judgement (unless it be as a spontaneous gift of nature), though they
may perhaps become more intelligent in such matters.

Now our predecessors have left the subject of legislation to us
unexamined; it is perhaps best, therefore, that we should ourselves
study it, and in general study the question of the constitution, in
order to complete to the best of our ability our philosophy of human
nature. First, then, if anything has been said well in detail by earlier
thinkers, let us try to review it; then in the light of the
constitutions we have collected let us study what sorts of influence
preserve and destroy states, and what sorts preserve or destroy the
particular kinds of constitution, and to what causes it is due that some
are well and others ill administered. When these have been studied we
shall perhaps be more likely to see with a comprehensive view, which
constitution is best, and how each must be ordered, and what laws and
customs it must use, if it is to be at its best. Let us make a beginning
of our discussion.

  
