[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico077.md) 
[Next](nico079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 11.

#### Three views hostile to pleasure, and the arguments for them.

The study of pleasure and pain belongs to the province of the political
philosopher; for he is the architect of the end, with a view to which we
call one thing bad and another good without qualification. Further, it
is one of our necessary tasks to consider them; for not only did we lay
it down that moral virtue and vice are concerned with pains and
pleasures, but most people say that happiness involves pleasure; this is
why the blessed man is called by a name derived from a word meaning
enjoyment.

Now (1) some people think that no pleasure is a good, either in itself
or incidentally, since the good and pleasure are not the same; (2)
others think that some pleasures are good but that most are bad. (3)
Again there is a third view, that even if all pleasures are good, yet
the best thing in the world cannot be pleasure. (1) The reasons given
for the view that pleasure is not a good at all are (a) that every
pleasure is a perceptible process to a natural state, and that no
process is of the same kind as its end, e.g. no process of building of
the same kind as a house. (b) A temperate man avoids pleasures. (c) A
man of practical wisdom pursues what is free from pain, not what is
pleasant. (d) The pleasures are a hindrance to thought, and the more so
the more one delights in them, e.g. in sexual pleasure; for no one could
think of anything while absorbed in this. (e) There is no art of
pleasure; but every good is the product of some art. (f) Children and
the brutes pursue pleasures. (2) The reasons for the view that not all
pleasures are good are that (a) there are pleasures that are actually
base and objects of reproach, and (b) there are harmful pleasures; for
some pleasant things are unhealthy. (3) The reason for the view that the
best thing in the world is not pleasure is that pleasure is not an end
but a process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12. Discussion of the view that pleasure is not a
good](nico079.md)
