[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico024.md) 
[Next](nico026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 3.

#### The nature of deliberation and its objects: choice is the deliberate desire of things in our own power.

Do we deliberate about everything, and is everything a possible subject
of deliberation, or is deliberation impossible about some things? We
ought presumably to call not what a fool or a madman would deliberate
about, but what a sensible man would deliberate about, a subject of
deliberation. Now about eternal things no one deliberates, e.g. about
the material universe or the incommensurability of the diagonal and the
side of a square. But no more do we deliberate about the things that
involve movement but always happen in the same way, whether of necessity
or by nature or from any other cause, e.g. the solstices and the risings
of the stars; nor about things that happen now in one way, now in
another, e.g. droughts and rains; nor about chance events, like the
finding of treasure. But we do not deliberate even about all human
affairs; for instance, no Spartan deliberates about the best
constitution for the Scythians. For none of these things can be brought
about by our own efforts.

We deliberate about things that are in our power and can be done; and
these are in fact what is left. For nature, necessity, and chance are
thought to be causes, and also reason and everything that depends on
man. Now every class of men deliberates about the things that can be
done by their own efforts. And in the case of exact and self-contained
sciences there is no deliberation, e.g. about the letters of the
alphabet (for we have no doubt how they should be written); but the
things that are brought about by our own efforts, but not always in the
same way, are the things about which we deliberate, e.g. questions of
medical treatment or of money-making. And we do so more in the case of
the art of navigation than in that of gymnastics, inasmuch as it has
been less exactly worked out, and again about other things in the same
ratio, and more also in the case of the arts than in that of the
sciences; for we have more doubt about the former. Deliberation is
concerned with things that happen in a certain way for the most part,
but in which the event is obscure, and with things in which it is
indeterminate. We call in others to aid us in deliberation on important
questions, distrusting ourselves as not being equal to deciding.

We deliberate not about ends but about means. For a doctor does not
deliberate whether he shall heal, nor an orator whether he shall
persuade, nor a statesman whether he shall produce law and order, nor
does any one else deliberate about his end. They assume the end and
consider how and by what means it is to be attained; and if it seems to
be produced by several means they consider by which it is most easily
and best produced, while if it is achieved by one only they consider how
it will be achieved by this and by what means this will be achieved,
till they come to the first cause, which in the order of discovery is
last. For the person who deliberates seems to investigate and analyse in
the way described as though he were analysing a geometrical construction
(not all investigation appears to be deliberation--for instance
mathematical investigations--but all deliberation is investigation), and
what is last in the order of analysis seems to be first in the order of
becoming. And if we come on an impossibility, we give up the search,
e.g. if we need money and this cannot be got; but if a thing appears
possible we try to do it. By 'possible' things I mean things that might
be brought about by our own efforts; and these in a sense include things
that can be brought about by the efforts of our friends, since the
moving principle is in ourselves. The subject of investigation is
sometimes the instruments, sometimes the use of them; and similarly in
the other cases--sometimes the means, sometimes the mode of using it or
the means of bringing it about. It seems, then, as has been said, that
man is a moving principle of actions; now deliberation is about the
things to be done by the agent himself, and actions are for the sake of
things other than themselves. For the end cannot be a subject of
deliberation, but only the means; nor indeed can the particular facts be
a subject of it, as whether this is bread or has been baked as it
should; for these are matters of perception. If we are to be always
deliberating, we shall have to go on to infinity.

The same thing is deliberated upon and is chosen, except that the object
of choice is already determinate, since it is that which has been
decided upon as a result of deliberation that is the object of choice.
For every one ceases to inquire how he is to act when he has brought the
moving principle back to himself and to the ruling part of himself; for
this is what chooses. This is plain also from the ancient constitutions,
which Homer represented; for the kings announced their choices to the
people. The object of choice being one of the things in our own power
which is desired after deliberation, choice will be deliberate desire of
things in our own power; for when we have decided as a result of
deliberation, we desire in accordance with our deliberation.

We may take it, then, that we have described choice in outline, and
stated the nature of its objects and the fact that it is concerned with
means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4. The object of rational wish is the end, i.e. the good
or the apparent good](nico026.md)
