[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico072) 
[Next](nico074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 6.

#### Incontinence in respect of anger less disgraceful than incontinence proper.

That incontinence in respect of anger is less disgraceful than that in
respect of the appetites is what we will now proceed to see. (1) Anger
seems to listen to argument to some extent, but to mishear it, as do
hasty servants who run out before they have heard the whole of what one
says, and then muddle the order, or as dogs bark if there is but a knock
at the door, before looking to see if it is a friend; so anger by reason
of the warmth and hastiness of its nature, though it hears, does not
hear an order, and springs to take revenge. For argument or imagination
informs us that we have been insulted or slighted, and anger, reasoning
as it were that anything like this must be fought against, boils up
straightway; while appetite, if argument or perception merely says that
an object is pleasant, springs to the enjoyment of it. Therefore anger
obeys the argument in a sense, but appetite does not. It is therefore
more disgraceful; for the man who is incontinent in respect of anger is
in a sense conquered by argument, while the other is conquered by
appetite and not by argument.

\(2\) Further, we pardon people more easily for following natural
desires, since we pardon them more easily for following such appetites
as are common to all men, and in so far as they are common; now anger
and bad temper are more natural than the appetites for excess, i.e. for
unnecessary objects. Take for instance the man who defended himself on
the charge of striking his father by saying 'yes, but he struck his
father, and he struck his, and' (pointing to his child) 'this boy will
strike me when he is a man; it runs in the family'; or the man who when
he was being dragged along by his son bade him stop at the doorway,
since he himself had dragged his father only as far as that.

\(3\) Further, those who are more given to plotting against others are
more criminal. Now a passionate man is not given to plotting, nor is
anger itself--it is open; but the nature of appetite is illustrated by
what the poets call Aphrodite, 'guile-weaving daughter of Cyprus', and
by Homer's words about her 'embroidered girdle':

And the whisper of wooing is there,  
Whose subtlety stealeth the wits of the wise, how prudent soe'er.

Therefore if this form of incontinence is more criminal and disgraceful
than that in respect of anger, it is both incontinence without
qualification and in a sense vice.

\(4\) Further, no one commits wanton outrage with a feeling of pain, but
every one who acts in anger acts with pain, while the man who commits
outrage acts with pleasure. If, then, those acts at which it is most
just to be angry are more criminal than others, the incontinence which
is due to appetite is the more criminal; for there is no wanton outrage
involved in anger.

Plainly, then, the incontinence concerned with appetite is more
disgraceful than that concerned with anger, and continence and
incontinence are concerned with bodily appetites and pleasures; but we
must grasp the differences among the latter themselves. For, as has been
said at the beginning, some are human and natural both in kind and in
magnitude, others are brutish, and others are due to organic injuries
and diseases. Only with the first of these are temperance and
self-indulgence concerned; this is why we call the lower animals neither
temperate nor self-indulgent except by a metaphor, and only if some one
race of animals exceeds another as a whole in wantonness,
destructiveness, and omnivorous greed; these have no power of choice or
calculation, but they are departures from the natural norm, as, among
men, madmen are. Now brutishness is a less evil than vice, though more
alarming; for it is not that the better part has been perverted, as in
man,--they have no better part. Thus it is like comparing a lifeless
thing with a living in respect of badness; for the badness of that which
has no originative source of movement is always less hurtful, and reason
is an originative source. Thus it is like comparing injustice in the
abstract with an unjust man. Each is in some sense worse; for a bad man
will do ten thousand times as much evil as a brute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. Softness and endurance: two forms of
incontinence--weakness and impetuosity](nico074)
