[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico090) 
[Next](nico092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 10.

#### Classification of constitutions: analogies with family relations.

There are three kinds of constitution, and an equal number of
deviation-forms--perversions, as it were, of them. The constitutions are
monarchy, aristocracy, and thirdly that which is based on a property
qualification, which it seems appropriate to call timocratic, though
most people are wont to call it polity. The best of these is monarchy,
the worst timocracy. The deviation from monarchy is tyrany; for both are
forms of one-man rule, but there is the greatest difference between
them; the tyrant looks to his own advantage, the king to that of his
subjects. For a man is not a king unless he is sufficient to himself and
excels his subjects in all good things; and such a man needs nothing
further; therefore he will not look to his own interests but to those of
his subjects; for a king who is not like that would be a mere titular
king. Now tyranny is the very contrary of this; the tyrant pursues his
own good. And it is clearer in the case of tyranny that it is the worst
deviation-form; but it is the contrary of the best that is worst.
Monarchy passes over into tyranny; for tyranny is the evil form of
one-man rule and the bad king becomes a tyrant. Aristocracy passes over
into oligarchy by the badness of the rulers, who distribute contrary to
equity what belongs to the city--all or most of the good things to
themselves, and office always to the same people, paying most regard to
wealth; thus the rulers are few and are bad men instead of the most
worthy. Timocracy passes over into democracy; for these are coterminous,
since it is the ideal even of timocracy to be the rule of the majority,
and all who have the property qualification count as equal. Democracy is
the least bad of the deviations; for in its case the form of
constitution is but a slight deviation. These then are the changes to
which constitutions are most subject; for these are the smallest and
easiest transitions.

One may find resemblances to the constitutions and, as it were, patterns
of them even in households. For the association of a father with his
sons bears the form of monarchy, since the father cares for his
children; and this is why Homer calls Zeus 'father'; it is the ideal of
monarchy to be paternal rule. But among the Persians the rule of the
father is tyrannical; they use their sons as slaves. Tyrannical too is
the rule of a master over slaves; for it is the advantage of the master
that is brought about in it. Now this seems to be a correct form of
government, but the Persian type is perverted; for the modes of rule
appropriate to different relations are diverse. The association of man
and wife seems to be aristocratic; for the man rules in accordance with
his worth, and in those matters in which a man should rule, but the
matters that befit a woman he hands over to her. If the man rules in
everything the relation passes over into oligarchy; for in doing so he
is not acting in accordance with their respective worth, and not ruling
in virtue of his superiority. Sometimes, however, women rule, because
they are heiresses; so their rule is not in virtue of excellence but due
to wealth and power, as in oligarchies. The association of brothers is
like timocracy; for they are equal, except in so far as they differ in
age; hence if they differ much in age, the friendship is no longer of
the fraternal type. Democracy is found chiefly in masterless dwellings
(for here every one is on an equality), and in those in which the ruler
is weak and every one has licence to do as he pleases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. Corresponding forms of friendship, and of
justice](nico092)
