[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico030) 
[Next](nico032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 9.

#### Relation of courage to pain and pleasure.

Though courage is concerned with feelings of confidence and of fear, it
is not concerned with both alike, but more with the things that inspire
fear; for he who is undisturbed in face of these and bears himself as he
should towards these is more truly brave than the man who does so
towards the things that inspire confidence. It is for facing what is
painful, then, as has been said, that men are called brave. Hence also
courage involves pain, and is justly praised; for it is harder to face
what is painful than to abstain from what is pleasant.

Yet the end which courage sets before it would seem to be pleasant, but
to be concealed by the attending circumstances, as happens also in
athletic contests; for the end at which boxers aim is pleasant--the
crown and the honours--but the blows they take are distressing to flesh
and blood, and painful, and so is their whole exertion; and because the
blows and the exertions are many the end, which is but small, appears to
have nothing pleasant in it. And so, if the case of courage is similar,
death and wounds will be painful to the brave man and against his will,
but he will face them because it is noble to do so or because it is base
not to do so. And the more he is possessed of virtue in its entirety and
the happier he is, the more he will be pained at the thought of death;
for life is best worth living for such a man, and he is knowingly losing
the greatest goods, and this is painful. But he is none the less brave,
and perhaps all the more so, because he chooses noble deeds of war at
that cost. It is not the case, then, with all the virtues that the
exercise of them is pleasant, except in so far as it reaches its end.
But it is quite possible that the best soldiers may be not men of this
sort but those who are less brave but have no other good; for these are
ready to face danger, and they sell their life for trifling gains.

So much, then, for courage; it is not difficult to grasp its nature in
outline, at any rate, from what has been said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. Temperance is limited to certain pleasures of
touch](nico032)
