[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico044.md) 
[Next](nico046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 2.

#### The latter considered: divided into distributive and rectificatory justice.

But at all events what we are investigating is the justice which is a
part of virtue; for there is a justice of this kind, as we maintain.
Similarly it is with injustice in the particular sense that we are
concerned.

That there is such a thing is indicated by the fact that while the man
who exhibits in action the other forms of wickedness acts wrongly
indeed, but not graspingly (e.g. the man who throws away his shield
through cowardice or speaks harshly through bad temper or fails to help
a friend with money through meanness), when a man acts graspingly he
often exhibits none of these vices,--no, nor all together, but certainly
wickedness of some kind (for we blame him) and injustice. There is,
then, another kind of injustice which is a part of injustice in the wide
sense, and a use of the word 'unjust' which answers to a part of what is
unjust in the wide sense of 'contrary to the law'. Again if one man
commits adultery for the sake of gain and makes money by it, while
another does so at the bidding of appetite though he loses money and is
penalized for it, the latter would be held to be self-indulgent rather
than grasping, but the former is unjust, but not self-indulgent;
evidently, therefore, he is unjust by reason of his making gain by his
act. Again, all other unjust acts are ascribed invariably to some
particular kind of wickedness, e.g. adultery to self-indulgence, the
desertion of a comrade in battle to cowardice, physical violence to
anger; but if a man makes gain, his action is ascribed to no form of
wickedness but injustice. Evidently, therefore, there is apart from
injustice in the wide sense another, 'particular', injustice which
shares the name and nature of the first, because its definition falls
within the same genus; for the significance of both consists in a
relation to one's neighbour, but the one is concerned with honour or
money or safety--or that which includes all these, if we had a single
name for it--and its motive is the pleasure that arises from gain; while
the other is concerned with all the objects with which the good man is
concerned.

It is clear, then, that there is more than one kind of justice, and that
there is one which is distinct from virtue entire; we must try to grasp
its genus and differentia.

The unjust has been divided into the unlawful and the unfair, and the
just into the lawful and the fair. To the unlawful answers the
afore-mentioned sense of injustice. But since unfair and the unlawful
are not the same, but are different as a part is from its whole (for all
that is unfair is unlawful, but not all that is unlawful is unfair), the
unjust and injustice in the sense of the unfair are not the same as but
different from the former kind, as part from whole; for injustice in
this sense is a part of injustice in the wide sense, and similarly
justice in the one sense of justice in the other. Therefore we must
speak also about particular justice and particular and similarly about
the just and the unjust. The justice, then, which answers to the whole
of virtue, and the corresponding injustice, one being the exercise of
virtue as a whole, and the other that of vice as a whole, towards one's
neighbour, we may leave on one side. And how the meanings of 'just' and
'unjust' which answer to these are to be distinguished is evident; for
practically the majority of the acts commanded by the law are those
which are prescribed from the point of view of virtue taken as a whole;
for the law bids us practise every virtue and forbids us to practise any
vice. And the things that tend to produce virtue taken as a whole are
those of the acts prescribed by the law which have been prescribed with
a view to education for the common good. But with regard to the
education of the individual as such, which makes him without
qualification a good man, we must determine later whether this is the
function of the political art or of another; for perhaps it is not the
same to be a good man and a good citizen of any state taken at random.

Of particular justice and that which is just in the corresponding sense,
(A) one kind is that which is manifested in distributions of honour or
money or the other things that fall to be divided among those who have a
share in the constitution (for in these it is possible for one man to
have a share either unequal or equal to that of another), and (B) one is
that which plays a rectifying part in transactions between man and man.
Of this there are two divisions; of transactions (1) some are voluntary
and (2) others involuntary--voluntary such transactions as sale,
purchase, loan for consumption, pledging, loan for use, depositing,
letting (they are called voluntary because the origin of these
transactions is voluntary), while of the involuntary (a) some are
clandestine, such as theft, adultery, poisoning, procuring, enticement
of slaves, assassination, false witness, and (b) others are violent,
such as assault, imprisonment, murder, robbery with violence,
mutilation, abuse, insult.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. Distributive justice, in accordance with geometrical
proportion](nico046.md)
