[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico106) 
[Next](nico108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 12.

#### The essence of friendship is living together.

Does it not follow, then, that, as for lovers the sight of the beloved
is the thing they love most, and they prefer this sense to the others
because on it love depends most for its being and for its origin, so for
friends the most desirable thing is living together? For friendship is a
partnership, and as a man is to himself, so is he to his friend; now in
his own case the consciousness of his being is desirable, and so
therefore is the consciousness of his friend's being, and the activity
of this consciousness is produced when they live together, so that it is
natural that they aim at this. And whatever existence means for each
class of men, whatever it is for whose sake they value life, in that
they wish to occupy themselves with their friends; and so some drink
together, others dice together, others join in athletic exercises and
hunting, or in the study of philosophy, each class spending their days
together in whatever they love most in life; for since they wish to live
with their friends, they do and share in those things which give them
the sense of living together. Thus the friendship of bad men turns out
an evil thing (for because of their instability they unite in bad
pursuits, and besides they become evil by becoming like each other),
while the friendship of good men is good, being augmented by their
companionship; and they are thought to become better too by their
activities and by improving each other; for from each other they take
the mould of the characteristics they approve--whence the saying 'noble
deeds from noble men'.--So much, then, for friendship; our next task
must be to discuss pleasure.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X. Pleasure. Happiness.](nico108)
