[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico014) 
[Next](nico016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 2.

#### These acts cannot be prescribed exactly, but must avoid excess and defect.

Since, then, the present inquiry does not aim at theoretical knowledge
like the others (for we are inquiring not in order to know what virtue
is, but in order to become good, since otherwise our inquiry would have
been of no use), we must examine the nature of actions, namely how we
ought to do them; for these determine also the nature of the states of
character that are produced, as we have said. Now, that we must act
according to the right rule is a common principle and must be
assumed--it will be discussed later, i.e. both what the right rule is,
and how it is related to the other virtues. But this must be agreed upon
beforehand, that the whole account of matters of conduct must be given
in outline and not precisely, as we said at the very beginning that the
accounts we demand must be in accordance with the subject-matter;
matters concerned with conduct and questions of what is good for us have
no fixity, any more than matters of health. The general account being of
this nature, the account of particular cases is yet more lacking in
exactness; for they do not fall under any art or precept but the agents
themselves must in each case consider what is appropriate to the
occasion, as happens also in the art of medicine or of navigation.

But though our present account is of this nature we must give what help
we can. First, then, let us consider this, that it is the nature of such
things to be destroyed by defect and excess, as we see in the case of
strength and of health (for to gain light on things imperceptible we
must use the evidence of sensible things); both excessive and defective
exercise destroys the strength, and similarly drink or food which is
above or below a certain amount destroys the health, while that which is
proportionate both produces and increases and preserves it. So too is
it, then, in the case of temperance and courage and the other virtues.
For the man who flies from and fears everything and does not stand his
ground against anything becomes a coward, and the man who fears nothing
at all but goes to meet every danger becomes rash; and similarly the man
who indulges in every pleasure and abstains from none becomes
self-indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure, as boors do,
becomes in a way insensible; temperance and courage, then, are destroyed
by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean.

But not only are the sources and causes of their origination and growth
the same as those of their destruction, but also the sphere of their
actualization will be the same; for this is also true of the things
which are more evident to sense, e.g. of strength; it is produced by
taking much food and undergoing much exertion, and it is the strong man
that will be most able to do these things. So too is it with the
virtues; by abstaining from pleasures we become temperate, and it is
when we have become so that we are most able to abstain from them; and
similarly too in the case of courage; for by being habituated to despise
things that are terrible and to stand our ground against them we become
brave, and it is when we have become so that we shall be most able to
stand our ground against them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. Pleasure in doing virtuous acts is a sign that the
virtuous disposition has been acquired: a variety of considerations show
the essential connexion of moral virtue with pleasure and pain](nico016)
