[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico052.md) 
[Next](nico054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 10.

#### Equity, a corrective of legal justice.

Our next subject is equity and the equitable (to epiekes), and their
respective relations to justice and the just. For on examination they
appear to be neither absolutely the same nor generically different; and
while we sometime praise what is equitable and the equitable man (so
that we apply the name by way of praise even to instances of the other
virtues, instead of 'good' meaning by epieikestebon that a thing is
better), at other times, when we reason it out, it seems strange if the
equitable, being something different from the just, is yet praiseworthy;
for either the just or the equitable is not good, if they are different;
or, if both are good, they are the same.

These, then, are pretty much the considerations that give rise to the
problem about the equitable; they are all in a sense correct and not
opposed to one another; for the equitable, though it is better than one
kind of justice, yet is just, and it is not as being a different class
of thing that it is better than the just. The same thing, then, is just
and equitable, and while both are good the equitable is superior. What
creates the problem is that the equitable is just, but not the legally
just but a correction of legal justice. The reason is that all law is
universal but about some things it is not possible to make a universal
statement which shall be correct. In those cases, then, in which it is
necessary to speak universally, but not possible to do so correctly, the
law takes the usual case, though it is not ignorant of the possibility
of error. And it is none the less correct; for the error is in the law
nor in the legislator but in the nature of the thing, since the matter
of practical affairs is of this kind from the start. When the law speaks
universally, then, and a case arises on it which is not covered by the
universal statement, then it is right, where the legislator fails us and
has erred by oversimplicity, to correct the omission--to say what the
legislator himself would have said had he been present, and would have
put into his law if he had known. Hence the equitable is just, and
better than one kind of justice--not better than absolute justice but
better than the error that arises from the absoluteness of the
statement. And this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law
where it is defective owing to its universality. In fact this is the
reason why all things are not determined by law, that about some things
it is impossible to lay down a law, so that a decree is needed. For when
the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden
rule used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the
shape of the stone and is not rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to
the facts.

It is plain, then, what the equitable is, and that it is just and is
better than one kind of justice. It is evident also from this who the
equitable man is; the man who chooses and does such acts, and is no
stickler for his rights in a bad sense but tends to take less than his
share though he has the law oft his side, is equitable, and this state
of character is equity, which is a sort of justice and not a different
state of character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. Can a man treat himself unjustly](nico054.md)
