[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico100) 
[Next](nico102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 6.

#### Relation of friendship to unanimity.

Unanimity also seems to be a friendly relation. For this reason it is
not identity of opinion; for that might occur even with people who do
not know each other; nor do we say that people who have the same views
on any and every subject are unanimous, e.g. those who agree about the
heavenly bodies (for unanimity about these is not a friendly relation),
but we do say that a city is unanimous when men have the same opinion
about what is to their interest, and choose the same actions, and do
what they have resolved in common. It is about things to be done,
therefore, that people are said to be unanimous, and, among these, about
matters of consequence and in which it is possible for both or all
parties to get what they want; e.g. a city is unanimous when all its
citizens think that the offices in it should be elective, or that they
should form an alliance with Sparta, or that Pittacus should be their
ruler--at a time when he himself was also willing to rule. But when each
of two people wishes himself to have the thing in question, like the
captains in the Phoenissae, they are in a state of faction; for it is
not unanimity when each of two parties thinks of the same thing,
whatever that may be, but only when they think of the same thing in the
same hands, e.g. when both the common people and those of the better
class wish the best men to rule; for thus and thus alone do all get what
they aim at. Unanimity seems, then, to be political friendship, as
indeed it is commonly said to be; for it is concerned with things that
are to our interest and have an influence on our life.

Now such unanimity is found among good men; for they are unanimous both
in themselves and with one another, being, so to say, of one mind (for
the wishes of such men are constant and not at the mercy of opposing
currents like a strait of the sea), and they wish for what is just and
what is advantageous, and these are the objects of their common
endeavour as well. But bad men cannot be unanimous except to a small
extent, any more than they can be friends, since they aim at getting
more than their share of advantages, while in labour and public service
they fall short of their share; and each man wishing for advantage to
himself criticizes his neighbour and stands in his way; for if people do
not watch it carefully the common weal is soon destroyed. The result is
that they are in a state of faction, putting compulsion on each other
but unwilling themselves to do what is just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. The pleasure of beneficence](nico102)
