[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico039.md) 
[Next](nico041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 6.

#### Friendliness, obsequiousness, churlishness.

In gatherings of men, in social life and the interchange of words and
deeds, some men are thought to be obsequious, viz. those who to give
pleasure praise everything and never oppose, but think it their duty 'to
give no pain to the people they meet'; while those who, on the contrary,
oppose everything and care not a whit about giving pain are called
churlish and contentious. That the states we have named are culpable is
plain enough, and that the middle state is laudable--that in virtue of
which a man will put up with, and will resent, the right things and in
the right way; but no name has been assigned to it, though it most
resembles friendship. For the man who corresponds to this middle state
is very much what, with affection added, we call a good friend. But the
state in question differs from friendship in that it implies no passion
or affection for one's associates; since it is not by reason of loving
or hating that such a man takes everything in the right way, but by
being a man of a certain kind. For he will behave so alike towards those
he knows and those he does not know, towards intimates and those who are
not so, except that in each of these cases he will behave as is
befitting; for it is not proper to have the same care for intimates and
for strangers, nor again is it the same conditions that make it right to
give pain to them. Now we have said generally that he will associate
with people in the right way; but it is by reference to what is
honourable and expedient that he will aim at not giving pain or at
contributing pleasure. For he seems to be concerned with the pleasures
and pains of social life; and wherever it is not honourable, or is
harmful, for him to contribute pleasure, he will refuse, and will choose
rather to give pain; also if his acquiescence in another's action would
bring disgrace, and that in a high degree, or injury, on that other,
while his opposition brings a little pain, he will not acquiesce but
will decline. He will associate differently with people in high station
and with ordinary people, with closer and more distant acquaintances,
and so too with regard to all other differences, rendering to each class
what is befitting, and while for its own sake he chooses to contribute
pleasure, and avoids the giving of pain, he will be guided by the
consequences, if these are greater, i.e. honour and expediency. For the
sake of a great future pleasure, too, he will inflict small pains.

The man who attains the mean, then, is such as we have described, but
has not received a name; of those who contribute pleasure, the man who
aims at being pleasant with no ulterior object is obsequious, but the
man who does so in order that he may get some advantage in the direction
of money or the things that money buys is a flatterer; while the man who
quarrels with everything is, as has been said, churlish and contentious.
And the extremes seem to be contradictory to each other because the mean
is without a name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. Truthfulness, boastfulness, mock-modesty](nico041.md)
