[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico023.md) 
[Next](nico025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 2.

#### Moral virtue implies that the action is done (3) by choice; the object of choice is the result of previous deliberation.

Both the voluntary and the involuntary having been delimited, we must
next discuss choice; for it is thought to be most closely bound up with
virtue and to discriminate characters better than actions do.

Choice, then, seems to be voluntary, but not the same thing as the
voluntary; the latter extends more widely. For both children and the
lower animals share in voluntary action, but not in choice, and acts
done on the spur of the moment we describe as voluntary, but not as
chosen.

Those who say it is appetite or anger or wish or a kind of opinion do
not seem to be right. For choice is not common to irrational creatures
as well, but appetite and anger are. Again, the incontinent man acts
with appetite, but not with choice; while the continent man on the
contrary acts with choice, but not with appetite. Again, appetite is
contrary to choice, but not appetite to appetite. Again, appetite
relates to the pleasant and the painful, choice neither to the painful
nor to the pleasant.

Still less is it anger; for acts due to anger are thought to be less
than any others objects of choice.

But neither is it wish, though it seems near to it; for choice cannot
relate to impossibles, and if any one said he chose them he would be
thought silly; but there may be a wish even for impossibles, e.g. for
immortality. And wish may relate to things that could in no way be
brought about by one's own efforts, e.g. that a particular actor or
athlete should win in a competition; but no one chooses such things, but
only the things that he thinks could be brought about by his own
efforts. Again, wish relates rather to the end, choice to the means; for
instance, we wish to be healthy, but we choose the acts which will make
us healthy, and we wish to be happy and say we do, but we cannot well
say we choose to be so; for, in general, choice seems to relate to the
things that are in our own power.

For this reason, too, it cannot be opinion; for opinion is thought to
relate to all kinds of things, no less to eternal things and impossible
things than to things in our own power; and it is distinguished by its
falsity or truth, not by its badness or goodness, while choice is
distinguished rather by these.

Now with opinion in general perhaps no one even says it is identical.
But it is not identical even with any kind of opinion; for by choosing
what is good or bad we are men of a certain character, which we are not
by holding certain opinions. And we choose to get or avoid something
good or bad, but we have opinions about what a thing is or whom it is
good for or how it is good for him; we can hardly be said to opine to
get or avoid anything. And choice is praised for being related to the
right object rather than for being rightly related to it, opinion for
being truly related to its object. And we choose what we best know to be
good, but we opine what we do not quite know; and it is not the same
people that are thought to make the best choices and to have the best
opinions, but some are thought to have fairly good opinions, but by
reason of vice to choose what they should not. If opinion precedes
choice or accompanies it, that makes no difference; for it is not this
that we are considering, but whether it is identical with some kind of
opinion.

What, then, or what kind of thing is it, since it is none of the things
we have mentioned? It seems to be voluntary, but not all that is
voluntary to be an object of choice. Is it, then, what has been decided
on by previous deliberation? At any rate choice involves a rational
principle and thought. Even the name seems to suggest that it is what is
chosen before other things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. The nature of deliberation and its objects: choice is
the deliberate desire of things in our own power](nico025.md)
