[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico081.md) 
[Next](nico083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Book VIII: Friendship

### Chapter 1.

#### Friendship both necessary and noble: main questions about it.

AFTER what we have said, a discussion of friendship would naturally
follow, since it is a virtue or implies virtue, and is besides most
necessary with a view to living. For without friends no one would choose
to live, though he had all other goods; even rich men and those in
possession of office and of dominating power are thought to need friends
most of all; for what is the use of such prosperity without the
opportunity of beneficence, which is exercised chiefly and in its most
laudable form towards friends? Or how can prosperity be guarded and
preserved without friends? The greater it is, the more exposed is it to
risk. And in poverty and in other misfortunes men think friends are the
only refuge. It helps the young, too, to keep from error; it aids older
people by ministering to their needs and supplementing the activities
that are failing from weakness; those in the prime of life it stimulates
to noble actions--'two going together'--for with friends men are more
able both to think and to act. Again, parent seems by nature to feel it
for offspring and offspring for parent, not only among men but among
birds and among most animals; it is felt mutually by members of the same
race, and especially by men, whence we praise lovers of their fellowmen.
We may even in our travels how near and dear every man is to every
other. Friendship seems too to hold states together, and lawgivers to
care more for it than for justice; for unanimity seems to be something
like friendship, and this they aim at most of all, and expel faction as
their worst enemy; and when men are friends they have no need of
justice, while when they are just they need friendship as well, and the
truest form of justice is thought to be a friendly quality.

But it is not only necessary but also noble; for we praise those who
love their friends, and it is thought to be a fine thing to have many
friends; and again we think it is the same people that are good men and
are friends.

Not a few things about friendship are matters of debate. Some define it
as a kind of likeness and say like people are friends, whence come the
sayings 'like to like', 'birds of a feather flock together', and so on;
others on the contrary say 'two of a trade never agree'. On this very
question they inquire for deeper and more physical causes, Euripides
saying that 'parched earth loves the rain, and stately heaven when
filled with rain loves to fall to earth', and Heraclitus that 'it is
what opposes that helps' and 'from different tones comes the fairest
tune' and 'all things are produced through strife'; while Empedocles, as
well as others, expresses the opposite view that like aims at like. The
physical problems we may leave alone (for they do not belong to the
present inquiry); let us examine those which are human and involve
character and feeling, e.g. whether friendship can arise between any two
people or people cannot be friends if they are wicked, and whether there
is one species of friendship or more than one. Those who think there is
only one because it admits of degrees have relied on an inadequate
indication; for even things different in species admit of degree. We
have discussed this matter previously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Three objects of love: implications of
friendship](nico083.md)
