[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico042) 
[Next](nico044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 9.

#### Shame, bashfulness, shamelessness.

Shame should not be described as a virtue; for it is more like a feeling
than a state of character. It is defined, at any rate, as a kind of fear
of dishonour, and produces an effect similar to that produced by fear of
danger; for people who feel disgraced blush, and those who fear death
turn pale. Both, therefore, seem to be in a sense bodily conditions,
which is thought to be characteristic of feeling rather than of a state
of character.

The feeling is not becoming to every age, but only to youth. For we
think young people should be prone to the feeling of shame because they
live by feeling and therefore commit many errors, but are restrained by
shame; and we praise young people who are prone to this feeling, but an
older person no one would praise for being prone to the sense of
disgrace, since we think he should not do anything that need cause this
sense. For the sense of disgrace is not even characteristic of a good
man, since it is consequent on bad actions (for such actions should not
be done; and if some actions are disgraceful in very truth and others
only according to common opinion, this makes no difference; for neither
class of actions should be done, so that no disgrace should be felt);
and it is a mark of a bad man even to be such as to do any disgraceful
action. To be so constituted as to feel disgraced if one does such an
action, and for this reason to think oneself good, is absurd; for it is
for voluntary actions that shame is felt, and the good man will never
voluntarily do bad actions. But shame may be said to be conditionally a
good thing; if a good man does such actions, he will feel disgraced; but
the virtues are not subject to such a qualification. And if
shamelessness--not to be ashamed of doing base actions--is bad, that
does not make it good to be ashamed of doing such actions. Continence
too is not virtue, but a mixed sort of state; this will be shown later.
Now, however, let us discuss justice.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. The just as the lawful (universal justice) and the
just as the fair and equal (particular justice): the former
considered](nico044)
