[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico003.md) 
[Next](nico005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### It \[the good\] is generally agreed to be happiness, but there are various views as to what happiness is. What is required at the start is an unreasoned conviction about the facts, such as is produced by a good upbringing.

Let us resume our inquiry and state, in view of the fact that all
knowledge and every pursuit aims at some good, what it is that we say
political science aims at and what is the highest of all goods
achievable by action. Verbally there is very general agreement; for both
the general run of men and people of superior refinement say that it is
happiness, and identify living well and doing well with being happy; but
with regard to what happiness is they differ, and the many do not give
the same account as the wise. For the former think it is some plain and
obvious thing, like pleasure, wealth, or honour; they differ, however,
from one another--and often even the same man identifies it with
different things, with health when he is ill, with wealth when he is
poor; but, conscious of their ignorance, they admire those who proclaim
some great ideal that is above their comprehension. Now some thought
that apart from these many goods there is another which is
self-subsistent and causes the goodness of all these as well. To examine
all the opinions that have been held were perhaps somewhat fruitless;
enough to examine those that are most prevalent or that seem to be
arguable.

Let us not fail to notice, however, that there is a difference between
arguments from and those to the first principles. For Plato, too, was
right in raising this question and asking, as he used to do, 'are we on
the way from or to the first principles?' There is a difference, as
there is in a race-course between the course from the judges to the
turning-point and the way back. For, while we must begin with what is
known, things are objects of knowledge in two senses -- some to us, some
without qualification. Presumably, then, we must begin with things known
to us. Hence any one who is to listen intelligently to lectures about
what is noble and just, and generally, about the subjects of political
science must have been brought up in good habits. For the fact is the
starting-point, and if this is sufficiently plain to him, he will not at
the start need the reason as well; and the man who has been well brought
up has or can easily get startingpoints. And as for him who neither has
nor can get them, let him hear the words of Hesiod:

Far best is he who knows all things himself;  
Good, he that hearkens when men counsel right;  
But he who neither knows, nor lays to heart  
Another's wisdom, is a useless wight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Discussion of the popular views that the good is
pleasure, honour, wealth; a fourth kind of life, that of contemplation,
deferred for future discussion](nico005.md)
