[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico066) 
[Next](nico068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 13.

#### Relation of practical wisdom to natural virtue, moral virtue, and the right rule.

We must therefore consider virtue also once more; for virtue too is
similarly related; as practical wisdom is to cleverness--not the same,
but like it--so is natural virtue to virtue in the strict sense. For all
men think that each type of character belongs to its possessors in some
sense by nature; for from the very moment of birth we are just or fitted
for selfcontrol or brave or have the other moral qualities; but yet we
seek something else as that which is good in the strict sense--we seek
for the presence of such qualities in another way. For both children and
brutes have the natural dispositions to these qualities, but without
reason these are evidently hurtful. Only we seem to see this much, that,
while one may be led astray by them, as a strong body which moves
without sight may stumble badly because of its lack of sight, still, if
a man once acquires reason, that makes a difference in action; and his
state, while still like what it was, will then be virtue in the strict
sense. Therefore, as in the part of us which forms opinions there are
two types, cleverness and practical wisdom, so too in the moral part
there are two types, natural virtue and virtue in the strict sense, and
of these the latter involves practical wisdom. This is why some say that
all the virtues are forms of practical wisdom, and why Socrates in one
respect was on the right track while in another he went astray; in
thinking that all the virtues were forms of practical wisdom he was
wrong, but in saying they implied practical wisdom he was right. This is
confirmed by the fact that even now all men, when they define virtue,
after naming the state of character and its objects add 'that (state)
which is in accordance with the right rule'; now the right rule is that
which is in accordance with practical wisdom. All men, then, seem
somehow to divine that this kind of state is virtue, viz. that which is
in accordance with practical wisdom. But we must go a little further.
For it is not merely the state in accordance with the right rule, but
the state that implies the presence of the right rule, that is virtue;
and practical wisdom is a right rule about such matters. Socrates, then,
thought the virtues were rules or rational principles (for he thought
they were, all of them, forms of scientific knowledge), while we think
they involve a rational principle.

It is clear, then, from what has been said, that it is not possible to
be good in the strict sense without practical wisdom, nor practically
wise without moral virtue. But in this way we may also refute the
dialectical argument whereby it might be contended that the virtues
exist in separation from each other; the same man, it might be said, is
not best equipped by nature for all the virtues, so that he will have
already acquired one when he has not yet acquired another. This is
possible in respect of the natural virtues, but not in respect of those
in respect of which a man is called without qualification good; for with
the presence of the one quality, practical wisdom, will be given all the
virtues. And it is plain that, even if it were of no practical value, we
should have needed it because it is the virtue of the part of us in
question; plain too that the choice will not be right without practical
wisdom any more than without virtue; for the one deter, mines the end
and the other makes us do the things that lead to the end.

But again it is not supreme over philosophic wisdom, i.e. over the
superior part of us, any more than the art of medicine is over health;
for it does not use it but provides for its coming into being; it issues
orders, then, for its sake, but not to it. Further, to maintain its
supremacy would be like saying that the art of politics rules the gods
because it issues orders about all the affairs of the state.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. Six varieties of character: method of treatment:
current opinions](nico068)
