[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico004.md) 
[Next](nico006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 5.

#### Discussion of the popular views that the good is pleasure, honour, wealth; a fourth kind of life, that of contemplation, deferred for future discussion.

Let us, however, resume our discussion from the point at which we
digressed. To judge from the lives that men lead, most men, and men of
the most vulgar type, seem (not without some ground) to identify the
good, or happiness, with pleasure; which is the reason why they love the
life of enjoyment. For there are, we may say, three prominent types of
life--that just mentioned, the political, and thirdly the contemplative
life. Now the mass of mankind are evidently quite slavish in their
tastes, preferring a life suitable to beasts, but they get some ground
for their view from the fact that many of those in high places share the
tastes of Sardanapallus. A consideration of the prominent types of life
shows that people of superior refinement and of active disposition
identify happiness with honour; for this is, roughly speaking, the end
of the political life. But it seems too superficial to be what we are
looking for, since it is thought to depend on those who bestow honour
rather than on him who receives it, but the good we divine to be
something proper to a man and not easily taken from him. Further, men
seem to pursue honour in order that they may be assured of their
goodness; at least it is by men of practical wisdom that they seek to be
honoured, and among those who know them, and on the ground of their
virtue; clearly, then, according to them, at any rate, virtue is better.
And perhaps one might even suppose this to be, rather than honour, the
end of the political life. But even this appears somewhat incomplete;
for possession of virtue seems actually compatible with being asleep, or
with lifelong inactivity, and, further, with the greatest sufferings and
misfortunes; but a man who was living so no one would call happy, unless
he were maintaining a thesis at all costs. But enough of this; for the
subject has been sufficiently treated even in the current discussions.
Third comes the contemplative life, which we shall consider later.

The life of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion, and wealth
is evidently not the good we are seeking; for it is merely useful and
for the sake of something else. And so one might rather take the
aforenamed objects to be ends; for they are loved for themselves. But it
is evident that not even these are ends; yet many arguments have been
thrown away in support of them. Let us leave this subject, then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. Discussion of the philosophical view that there is an
Idea of good](nico006.md)
