[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico061) 
[Next](nico063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 8.

#### Relations between practical wisdom and political science.

Political wisdom and practical wisdom are the same state of mind, but
their essence is not the same. Of the wisdom concerned with the city,
the practical wisdom which plays a controlling part is legislative
wisdom, while that which is related to this as particulars to their
universal is known by the general name 'political wisdom'; this has to
do with action and deliberation, for a decree is a thing to be carried
out in the form of an individual act. This is why the exponents of this
art are alone said to 'take part in politics'; for these alone 'do
things' as manual labourers 'do things'.

Practical wisdom also is identified especially with that form of it
which is concerned with a man himself--with the individual; and this is
known by the general name 'practical wisdom'; of the other kinds one is
called household management, another legislation, the third politics,
and of the latter one part is called deliberative and the other
judicial. Now knowing what is good for oneself will be one kind of
knowledge, but it is very different from the other kinds; and the man
who knows and concerns himself with his own interests is thought to have
practical wisdom, while politicians are thought to be busybodies; hence
the word of Euripides,

But how could I be wise, who might at ease,  
Numbered among the army's multitude,  
Have had an equal share?  
For those who aim too high and do too much.

Those who think thus seek their own good, and consider that one ought to
do so. From this opinion, then, has come the view that such men have
practical wisdom; yet perhaps one's own good cannot exist without
household management, nor without a form of government. Further, how one
should order one's own affairs is not clear and needs inquiry.

What has been said is confirmed by the fact that while young men become
geometricians and mathematicians and wise in matters like these, it is
thought that a young man of practical wisdom cannot be found. The cause
is that such wisdom is concerned not only with universals but with
particulars, which become familiar from experience, but a young man has
no experience, for it is length of time that gives experience; indeed
one might ask this question too, why a boy may become a mathematician,
but not a philosopher or a physicist. It is because the objects of
mathematics exist by abstraction, while the first principles of these
other subjects come from experience, and because young men have no
conviction about the latter but merely use the proper language, while
the essence of mathematical objects is plain enough to them?

Further, error in deliberation may be either about the universal or
about the particular; we may fall to know either that all water that
weighs heavy is bad, or that this particular water weighs heavy.

That practical wisdom is not scientific knowledge is evident; for it is,
as has been said, concerned with the ultimate particular fact, since the
thing to be done is of this nature. It is opposed, then, to intuitive
reason; for intuitive reason is of the limiting premisses, for which no
reason can be given, while practical wisdom is concerned with the
ultimate particular, which is the object not of scientific knowledge but
of perception--not the perception of qualities peculiar to one sense but
a perception akin to that by which we perceive that the particular
figure before us is a triangle; for in that direction as well as in that
of the major premiss there will be a limit. But this is rather
perception than practical wisdom, though it is another kind of
perception than that of the qualities peculiar to each sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9. Goodness in deliberation, how related to practical
wisdom](nico063)
