[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico101) 
[Next](nico103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 7.

#### The pleasure of beneficence.

Benefactors are thought to love those they have benefited, more than
those who have been well treated love those that have treated them well,
and this is discussed as though it were paradoxical. Most people think
it is because the latter are in the position of debtors and the former
of creditors; and therefore as, in the case of loans, debtors wish their
creditors did not exist, while creditors actually take care of the
safety of their debtors, so it is thought that benefactors wish the
objects of their action to exist since they will then get their
gratitude, while the beneficiaries take no interest in making this
return. Epicharmus would perhaps declare that they say this because they
'look at things on their bad side', but it is quite like human nature;
for most people are forgetful, and are more anxious to be well treated
than to treat others well. But the cause would seem to be more deeply
rooted in the nature of things; the case of those who have lent money is
not even analogous. For they have no friendly feeling to their debtors,
but only a wish that they may kept safe with a view to what is to be got
from them; while those who have done a service to others feel friendship
and love for those they have served even if these are not of any use to
them and never will be. This is what happens with craftsmen too; every
man loves his own handiwork better than he would be loved by it if it
came alive; and this happens perhaps most of all with poets; for they
have an excessive love for their own poems, doting on them as if they
were their children. This is what the position of benefactors is like;
for that which they have treated well is their handiwork, and therefore
they love this more than the handiwork does its maker. The cause of this
is that existence is to all men a thing to be chosen and loved, and that
we exist by virtue of activity (i.e. by living and acting), and that the
handiwork is in a sense, the producer in activity; he loves his
handiwork, therefore, because he loves existence. And this is rooted in
the nature of things; for what he is in potentiality, his handiwork
manifests in activity.

At the same time to the benefactor that is noble which depends on his
action, so that he delights in the object of his action, whereas to the
patient there is nothing noble in the agent, but at most something
advantageous, and this is less pleasant and lovable. What is pleasant is
the activity of the present, the hope of the future, the memory of the
past; but most pleasant is that which depends on activity, and similarly
this is most lovable. Now for a man who has made something his work
remains (for the noble is lasting), but for the person acted on the
utility passes away. And the memory of noble things is pleasant, but
that of useful things is not likely to be pleasant, or is less so;
though the reverse seems true of expectation.

Further, love is like activity, being loved like passivity; and loving
and its concomitants are attributes of those who are the more active.

Again, all men love more what they have won by labour; e.g. those who
have made their money love it more than those who have inherited it; and
to be well treated seems to involve no labour, while to treat others
well is a laborious task. These are the reasons, too, why mothers are
fonder of their children than fathers; bringing them into the world
costs them more pains, and they know better that the children are their
own. This last point, too, would seem to apply to benefactors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. The nature of true self-love](nico103)
