[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico114) 
[Next](nico116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 7.

#### Happiness in the highest sense is the contemplative life.

If happiness is activity in accordance with virtue, it is reasonable
that it should be in accordance with the highest virtue; and this will
be that of the best thing in us. Whether it be reason or something else
that is this element which is thought to be our natural ruler and guide
and to take thought of things noble and divine, whether it be itself
also divine or only the most divine element in us, the activity of this
in accordance with its proper virtue will be perfect happiness. That
this activity is contemplative we have already said.

Now this would seem to be in agreement both with what we said before and
with the truth. For, firstly, this activity is the best (since not only
is reason the best thing in us, but the objects of reason are the best
of knowable objects); and secondly, it is the most continuous, since we
can contemplate truth more continuously than we can do anything. And we
think happiness has pleasure mingled with it, but the activity of
philosophic wisdom is admittedly the pleasantest of virtuous activities;
at all events the pursuit of it is thought to offer pleasures marvellous
for their purity and their enduringness, and it is to be expected that
those who know will pass their time more pleasantly than those who
inquire. And the self-sufficiency that is spoken of must belong most to
the contemplative activity. For while a philosopher, as well as a just
man or one possessing any other virtue, needs the necessaries of life,
when they are sufficiently equipped with things of that sort the just
man needs people towards whom and with whom he shall act justly, and the
temperate man, the brave man, and each of the others is in the same
case, but the philosopher, even when by himself, can contemplate truth,
and the better the wiser he is; he can perhaps do so better if he has
fellow-workers, but still he is the most self-sufficient. And this
activity alone would seem to be loved for its own sake; for nothing
arises from it apart from the contemplating, while from practical
activities we gain more or less apart from the action. And happiness is
thought to depend on leisure; for we are busy that we may have leisure,
and make war that we may live in peace. Now the activity of the
practical virtues is exhibited in political or military affairs, but the
actions concerned with these seem to be unleisurely. Warlike actions are
completely so (for no one chooses to be at war, or provokes war, for the
sake of being at war; any one would seem absolutely murderous if he were
to make enemies of his friends in order to bring about battle and
slaughter); but the action of the statesman is also unleisurely,
and--apart from the political action itself--aims at despotic power and
honours, or at all events happiness, for him and his fellow citizens--a
happiness different from political action, and evidently sought as being
different. So if among virtuous actions political and military actions
are distinguished by nobility and greatness, and these are unleisurely
and aim at an end and are not desirable for their own sake, but the
activity of reason, which is contemplative, seems both to be superior in
serious worth and to aim at no end beyond itself, and to have its
pleasure proper to itself (and this augments the activity), and the
self-sufficiency, leisureliness, unweariedness (so far as this is
possible for man), and all the other attributes ascribed to the
supremely happy man are evidently those connected with this activity, it
follows that this will be the complete happiness of man, if it be
allowed a complete term of life (for none of the attributes of happiness
is incomplete).

But such a life would be too high for man; for it is not in so far as he
is man that he will live so, but in so far as something divine is
present in him; and by so much as this is superior to our composite
nature is its activity superior to that which is the exercise of the
other kind of virtue. If reason is divine, then, in comparison with man,
the life according to it is divine in comparison with human life. But we
must not follow those who advise us, being men, to think of human
things, and, being mortal, of mortal things, but must, so far as we can,
make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live in accordance
with the best thing in us; for even if it be small in bulk, much more
does it in power and worth surpass everything. This would seem, too, to
be each man himself, since it is the authoritative and better part of
him. It would be strange, then, if he were to choose not the life of his
self but that of something else. And what we said before' will apply
now; that which is proper to each thing is by nature best and most
pleasant for each thing; for man, therefore, the life according to
reason is best and pleasantest, since reason more than anything else is
man. This life therefore is also the happiest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. Superiority of the contemplative life further
considered](nico116)
