[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico094) 
[Next](nico096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 14.

#### (b) In friendship between unequals.

Differences arise also in friendships based on superiority; for each
expects to get more out of them, but when this happens the friendship is
dissolved. Not only does the better man think he ought to get more,
since more should be assigned to a good man, but the more useful
similarly expects this; they say a useless man should not get as much as
they should, since it becomes an act of public service and not a
friendship if the proceeds of the friendship do not answer to the worth
of the benefits conferred. For they think that, as in a commercial
partnership those who put more in get more out, so it should be in
friendship. But the man who is in a state of need and inferiority makes
the opposite claim; they think it is the part of a good friend to help
those who are in need; what, they say, is the use of being the friend of
a good man or a powerful man, if one is to get nothing out of it?

At all events it seems that each party is justified in his claim, and
that each should get more out of the friendship than the other--not more
of the same thing, however, but the superior more honour and the
inferior more gain; for honour is the prize of virtue and of
beneficence, while gain is the assistance required by inferiority.

It seems to be so in constitutional arrangements also; the man who
contributes nothing good to the common stock is not honoured; for what
belongs to the public is given to the man who benefits the public, and
honour does belong to the public. It is not possible to get wealth from
the common stock and at the same time honour. For no one puts up with
the smaller share in all things; therefore to the man who loses in
wealth they assign honour and to the man who is willing to be paid,
wealth, since the proportion to merit equalizes the parties and
preserves the friendship, as we have said. This then is also the way in
which we should associate with unequals; the man who is benefited in
respect of wealth or virtue must give honour in return, repaying what he
can. For friendship asks a man to do what he can, not what is
proportional to the merits of the case; since that cannot always be
done, e.g. in honours paid to the gods or to parents; for no one could
ever return to them the equivalent of what he gets, but the man who
serves them to the utmost of his power is thought to be a good man. This
is why it would not seem open to a man to disown his father (though a
father may disown his son); being in debt, he should repay, but there is
nothing by doing which a son will have done the equivalent of what he
has received, so that he is always in debt. But creditors can remit a
debt; and a father can therefore do so too. At the same time it is
thought that presumably no one would repudiate a son who was not far
gone in wickedness; for apart from the natural friendship of father and
son it is human nature not to reject a son's assistance. But the son, if
he is wicked, will naturally avoid aiding his father, or not be zealous
about it; for most people wish to get benefits, but avoid doing them, as
a thing unprofitable.--So much for these questions.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. (c) In friendship in which the motives on the two
sides are different](nico096)
