[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico083) 
[Next](nico085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 3.

#### Three corresponding kinds of friendship: superiority of friendship whose motive is the good.

Now these reasons differ from each other in kind; so, therefore, do the
corresponding forms of love and friendship. There are therefore three
kinds of friendship, equal in number to the things that are lovable; for
with respect to each there is a mutual and recognized love, and those
who love each other wish well to each other in that respect in which
they love one another. Now those who love each other for their utility
do not love each other for themselves but in virtue of some good which
they get from each other. So too with those who love for the sake of
pleasure; it is not for their character that men love ready-witted
people, but because they find them pleasant. Therefore those who love
for the sake of utility love for the sake of what is good for
themselves, and those who love for the sake of pleasure do so for the
sake of what is pleasant to themselves, and not in so far as the other
is the person loved but in so far as he is useful or pleasant. And thus
these friendships are only incidental; for it is not as being the man he
is that the loved person is loved, but as providing some good or
pleasure. Such friendships, then, are easily dissolved, if the parties
do not remain like themselves; for if the one party is no longer
pleasant or useful the other ceases to love him.

Now the useful is not permanent but is always changing. Thus when the
motive of the friendship is done away, the friendship is dissolved,
inasmuch as it existed only for the ends in question. This kind of
friendship seems to exist chiefly between old people (for at that age
people pursue not the pleasant but the useful) and, of those who are in
their prime or young, between those who pursue utility. And such people
do not live much with each other either; for sometimes they do not even
find each other pleasant; therefore they do not need such companionship
unless they are useful to each other; for they are pleasant to each
other only in so far as they rouse in each other hopes of something good
to come. Among such friendships people also class the friendship of a
host and guest. On the other hand the friendship of young people seems
to aim at pleasure; for they live under the guidance of emotion, and
pursue above all what is pleasant to themselves and what is immediately
before them; but with increasing age their pleasures become different.
This is why they quickly become friends and quickly cease to be so;
their friendship changes with the object that is found pleasant, and
such pleasure alters quickly. Young people are amorous too; for the
greater part of the friendship of love depends on emotion and aims at
pleasure; this is why they fall in love and quickly fall out of love,
changing often within a single day. But these people do wish to spend
their days and lives together; for it is thus that they attain the
purpose of their friendship.

Perfect friendship is the friendship of men who are good, and alike in
virtue; for these wish well alike to each other qua good, and they are
good themselves. Now those who wish well to their friends for their sake
are most truly friends; for they do this by reason of own nature and not
incidentally; therefore their friendship lasts as long as they are
good--and goodness is an enduring thing. And each is good without
qualification and to his friend, for the good are both good without
qualification and useful to each other. So too they are pleasant; for
the good are pleasant both without qualification and to each other,
since to each his own activities and others like them are pleasurable,
and the actions of the good are the same or like. And such a friendship
is as might be expected permanent, since there meet in it all the
qualities that friends should have. For all friendship is for the sake
of good or of pleasure--good or pleasure either in the abstract or such
as will be enjoyed by him who has the friendly feeling--and is based on
a certain resemblance; and to a friendship of good men all the qualities
we have named belong in virtue of the nature of the friends themselves;
for in the case of this kind of friendship the other qualities also are
alike in both friends, and that which is good without qualification is
also without qualification pleasant, and these are the most lovable
qualities. Love and friendship therefore are found most and in their
best form between such men.

But it is natural that such friendships should be infrequent; for such
men are rare. Further, such friendship requires time and familiarity; as
the proverb says, men cannot know each other till they have 'eaten salt
together'; nor can they admit each other to friendship or be friends
till each has been found lovable and been trusted by each. Those who
quickly show the marks of friendship to each other wish to be friends,
but are not friends unless they both are lovable and know the fact; for
a wish for friendship may arise quickly, but friendship does not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4. Contrast between the best and the inferior
kinds](nico085)
