[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico057) 
[Next](nico059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### Art--knowledge of how to make things.

In the variable are included both things made and things done; making
and acting are different (for their nature we treat even the discussions
outside our school as reliable); so that the reasoned state of capacity
to act is different from the reasoned state of capacity to make. Hence
too they are not included one in the other; for neither is acting making
nor is making acting. Now since architecture is an art and is
essentially a reasoned state of capacity to make, and there is neither
any art that is not such a state nor any such state that is not an art,
art is identical with a state of capacity to make, involving a true
course of reasoning. All art is concerned with coming into being, i.e.
with contriving and considering how something may come into being which
is capable of either being or not being, and whose origin is in the
maker and not in the thing made; for art is concerned neither with
things that are, or come into being, by necessity, nor with things that
do so in accordance with nature (since these have their origin in
themselves). Making and acting being different, art must be a matter of
making, not of acting. And in a sense chance and art are concerned with
the same objects; as Agathon says, 'art loves chance and chance loves
art'. Art, then, as has been is a state concerned with making, involving
a true course of reasoning, and lack of art on the contrary is a state
concerned with making, involving a false course of reasoning; both are
concerned with the variable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Practical wisdom--knowledge of how to secure the ends
of human life](nico059)
