[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico099) 
[Next](nico101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 5.

#### Relation of friendship to goodwill.

Goodwill is a friendly sort of relation, but is not identical with
friendship; for one may have goodwill both towards people whom one does
not know, and without their knowing it, but not friendship. This has
indeed been said already.' But goodwill is not even friendly feeling.
For it does not involve intensity or desire, whereas these accompany
friendly feeling; and friendly feeling implies intimacy while goodwill
may arise of a sudden, as it does towards competitors in a contest; we
come to feel goodwill for them and to share in their wishes, but we
would not do anything with them; for, as we said, we feel goodwill
suddenly and love them only superficially.

Goodwill seems, then, to be a beginning of friendship, as the pleasure
of the eye is the beginning of love. For no one loves if he has not
first been delighted by the form of the beloved, but he who delights in
the form of another does not, for all that, love him, but only does so
when he also longs for him when absent and craves for his presence; so
too it is not possible for people to be friends if they have not come to
feel goodwill for each other, but those who feel goodwill are not for
all that friends; for they only wish well to those for whom they feel
goodwill, and would not do anything with them nor take trouble for them.
And so one might by an extension of the term friendship say that
goodwill is inactive friendship, though when it is prolonged and reaches
the point of intimacy it becomes friendship--not the friendship based on
utility nor that based on pleasure; for goodwill too does not arise on
those terms. The man who has received a benefit bestows goodwill in
return for what has been done to him, but in doing so is only doing what
is just; while he who wishes some one to prosper because he hopes for
enrichment through him seems to have goodwill not to him but rather to
himself, just as a man is not a friend to another if he cherishes him
for the sake of some use to be made of him. In general, goodwill arises
on account of some excellence and worth, when one man seems to another
beautiful or brave or something of the sort, as we pointed out in the
case of competitors in a contest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. Relation of friendship to unanimity](nico101)
