[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico092.md) 
[Next](nico094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 12.

#### Various forms of friendship between relations.

Every form of friendship, then, involves association, as has been said.
One might, however, mark off from the rest both the friendship of
kindred and that of comrades. Those of fellow-citizens,
fellow-tribesmen, fellow-voyagers, and the like are more like mere
friendships of association; for they seem to rest on a sort of compact.
With them we might class the friendship of host and guest. The
friendship of kinsmen itself, while it seems to be of many kinds,
appears to depend in every case on parental friendship; for parents love
their children as being a part of themselves, and children their parents
as being something originating from them. Now (1) arents know their
offspring better than there children know that they are their children,
and (2) the originator feels his offspring to be his own more than the
offspring do their begetter; for the product belongs to the producer
(e.g. a tooth or hair or anything else to him whose it is), but the
producer does not belong to the product, or belongs in a less degree.
And (3) the length of time produces the same result; parents love their
children as soon as these are born, but children love their parents only
after time has elapsed and they have acquired understanding or the power
of discrimination by the senses. From these considerations it is also
plain why mothers love more than fathers do. Parents, then, love their
children as themselves (for their issue are by virtue of their separate
existence a sort of other selves), while children love their parents as
being born of them, and brothers love each other as being born of the
same parents; for their identity with them makes them identical with
each other (which is the reason why people talk of 'the same blood',
'the same stock', and so on). They are, therefore, in a sense the same
thing, though in separate individuals. Two things that contribute
greatly to friendship are a common upbringing and similarity of age; for
'two of an age take to each other', and people brought up together tend
to be comrades; whence the friendship of brothers is akin to that of
comrades. And cousins and other kinsmen are bound up together by
derivation from brothers, viz. by being derived from the same parents.
They come to be closer together or farther apart by virtue of the
nearness or distance of the original ancestor.

The friendship of children to parents, and of men to gods, is a relation
to them as to something good and superior; for they have conferred the
greatest benefits, since they are the causes of their being and of their
nourishment, and of their education from their birth; and this kind of
friendship possesses pleasantness and utility also, more than that of
strangers, inasmuch as their life is lived more in common. The
friendship of brothers has the characteristics found in that of comrades
(and especially when these are good), and in general between people who
are like each other, inasmuch as they belong more to each other and
start with a love for each other from their very birth, and inasmuch as
those born of the same parents and brought up together and similarly
educated are more akin in character; and the test of time has been
applied most fully and convincingly in their case.

Between other kinsmen friendly relations are found in due proportion.
Between man and wife friendship seems to exist by nature; for man is
naturally inclined to form couples--even more than to form cities,
inasmuch as the household is earlier and more necessary than the city,
and reproduction is more common to man with the animals. With the other
animals the union extends only to this point, but human beings live
together not only for the sake of reproduction but also for the various
purposes of life; for from the start the functions are divided, and
those of man and woman are different; so they help each other by
throwing their peculiar gifts into the common stock. It is for these
reasons that both utility and pleasure seem to be found in this kind of
friendship. But this friendship may be based also on virtue, if the
parties are good; for each has its own virtue and they will delight in
the fact. And children seem to be a bond of union (which is the reason
why childless people part more easily); for children are a good common
to both and what is common holds them together.

How man and wife and in general friend and friend ought mutually to
behave seems to be the same question as how it is just for them to
behave; for a man does not seem to have the same duties to a friend, a
stranger, a comrade, and a schoolfellow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13. Principles of interchange of services (a) in
friendship between equals](nico094.md)
