[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico010) 
[Next](nico012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 11.

#### Do the fortunes of the living affect the dead?

That the fortunes of descendants and of all a man's friends should not
affect his happiness at all seems a very unfriendly doctrine, and one
opposed to the opinions men hold; but since the events that happen are
numerous and admit of all sorts of difference, and some come more near
to us and others less so, it seems a long--nay, an infinite--task to
discuss each in detail; a general outline will perhaps suffice. If,
then, as some of a man's own misadventures have a certain weight and
influence on life while others are, as it were, lighter, so too there
are differences among the misadventures of our friends taken as a whole,
and it makes a difference whether the various suffering befall the
living or the dead (much more even than whether lawless and terrible
deeds are presupposed in a tragedy or done on the stage), this
difference also must be taken into account; or rather, perhaps, the fact
that doubt is felt whether the dead share in any good or evil. For it
seems, from these considerations, that even if anything whether good or
evil penetrates to them, it must be something weak and negligible,
either in itself or for them, or if not, at least it must be such in
degree and kind as not to make happy those who are not happy nor to take
away their blessedness from those who are. The good or bad fortunes of
friends, then, seem to have some effects on the dead, but effects of
such a kind and degree as neither to make the happy unhappy nor to
produce any other change of the kind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12. Virtue is praiseworthy, but happiness is above
praise](nico012)
