[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coo07)  [Next](coo09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZFM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Children of Odin*, by Padraic Colum, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="img_05100"></span> ![](img/05100.jpg)

### 7. HOW FREY WON GERDA, THE GIANT MAIDEN, AND HOW HE LOST HIS MAGIC SWORD

FREY, chief of the Vanir, longed to have sight of his sister who had
been from Asgard for so long. (You must know that this happened during
the time when Freya was wandering through the world, seeking her
husband, the lost Odur.) Now there was in Asgard a place from which one
could overlook the world and have a glimpse of all who wandered there.
That place was Hlidskjalf, Odin's lofty Watch-Tower.

High up into the blue of the air that Tower went. Frey came to it and he
knew that Odin All-Father was not upon

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hlidskjalf. Only
the two wolves, Geri and Freki, that crouched beside Odin's seat at the
banquet, were there, and they stood in the way of Frey's entrance to the
Tower. But Frey spoke to Geri and Freki in the language of the Gods, and
Odin's wolves had to let him pass.

But, as he went up the steps within the Tower, Frey, chief of the Vanir,
knew that he was doing a fateful thing. For none of the High Gods, not
even Thor, the Defender of Asgard, nor Baldur, the Best-Beloved of the
Gods, had ever climbed to the top of that Tower and seated themselves
upon the All-Father's seat. "But if I could see my sister once I should
be contented," said Frey to himself, and no harm can come to me if I
look out on the world."

He came to the top of Hlidskjalf. He seated himself on Odin's lofty
seat. He looked out on the world. He saw Midgard, the World of Men, with
its houses and towns, its farms and people. Beyond Midgard he saw
Jötunheim, the Realm of the Giants, terrible with its dark mountains and
its masses of snow and ice. He saw Freya as she went upon her
wanderings, and he marked that her face was turned toward Asgard and
that her steps were leading toward the City of the Gods. "I have
contented myself by looking from Hlidskjalf," said Frey to himself, "and
no harm has come to me."

But even as he spoke his gaze was drawn to a dwelling that stood in the
middle of the ice and snow of Jötunheim. Long he gazed upon that
dwelling without knowing why he looked that way. Then the door of the
house was opened and a Giant maiden stood within the doorway. Frey gazed
and gazed on her. So great was the beauty of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

her face that it was like starlight in that dark land. She looked from
the doorway of the house, and then turned and went within, shutting the
door.

Frey sat on Odin's high seat for long. Then he went down the steps of
the Tower and passed by the two wolves, Geri and Freki, that looked
threateningly upon him. He went through Asgard, but he found no one to
please him in the City of the Gods. That night sleep did not come to
him, for his thoughts were fixed upon the loveliness of the Giant maid
he had looked upon. And when morning came he was filled with loneliness
because he thought himself so far from her. He went to Hlidskjalf again,
thinking to climb the Tower and have sight of her once more. But now the
two wolves, Geri and Freki, bared their teeth at him and would not let
him pass, although he spoke to them again in the language of the Gods.

He went and spoke to wise Niörd, his father. "She whom you have seen, my
son," said Niörd, "is Gerda, the daughter of the Giant Gymer. You must
give over thinking of her. Your love for her would be an ill thing for
you."

"Why should it be an ill thing for me?" Frey asked.

"Because you would have to give that which you prize most for the sake
of coming to her."

"That which I prize most," said Frey, "is my magic sword."

"You will have to give your magic sword," said his father, the wise
Niörd.

"I will give it," said Frey, loosening his magic sword from his belt.

"Bethink thee, my son," said Niörd. "If thou givest

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

thy sword, what weapon wilt thou have on the day of Ragnarök, when the
Giants will make war upon the Gods?"

Frey did not speak, but he thought the day of Ragnarök was far off. "I
cannot live without Gerda," he said, as he turned away.

There was one in Asgard who was called Skirnir. He was a venturesome
being who never cared what he said or did. To no one else but Skirnir
could Frey bring himself to tell of the trouble that had fallen on
him--the trouble that was the punishment for his placing himself on the
seat of the All-Father.

Skirnir laughed when he heard Frey's tale. "Thou, a Van, in love with a
maid of Jötunheim! This is fun indeed! Will ye make a marriage of it?"

"Would that I might even speak to her or send a message of love to her,"
said Frey. "But I may not leave my watch over the Elves."

"And if I should take a message to Gerda," said Skirnir the Venturesome,
"what would my reward be?"

"My boat Skidbladnir or my boar Golden Bristle," said Frey.

"No, no," said Skirnir. "I want something to go by my side. I want
something to use in my hand. Give me the magic sword you own."

Frey thought upon what his father said, that he would be left weaponless
on the day of Ragnarök, when the Giants would make war upon the Gods and
when Asgard would be endangered. He thought upon this, and drew

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

back from Skirnir, and for a while he remained in thought. And all the
time thick-set Skirnir was laughing at him out of his wide mouth and his
blue eyes. Then Frey said to himself, "The day of Ragnarök is far off,
and I cannot live without Gerda."

He drew the magic sword from his belt and he placed it in Skirnir's
hand. "I give you my sword, Skirnir," he said. "Take my message to
Gerda, Gymer's daughter. Show her this gold and these precious jewels,
and say I love her, and that I claim her love."

"I shall bring the maid to you," said Skirnir the Venturesome.

"But how wilt thou get to Jötunheim?" said Frey, suddenly remembering
how dark the Giants' land was and how terrible were the approaches to
it.

"Oh, with a good horse and a good sword one can get anywhere," said
Skirnir. "My horse is a mighty horse, and you have given me your sword
of magic. Tomorrow I shall make the journey."

Skirnir rode across Bifröst, the Rainbow Bridge, laughing out of his
wide mouth and his blue eyes at Heimdall, the Warder of the Bridge to
Asgard. His mighty horse trod the earth of Midgard, and swam the river
that divides Midgard, the World of Men, from Jötunheim, the Realm of the
Giants. He rode on heedlessly and recklessly, as he did all things. Then
out of the iron forests came the monstrous wolves of Jötunheim, to tear
and devour him and his mighty horse. It was well for Skirnir that he had
in his belt Frey's magic sword. Its edge slew and its gleam

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

frighted the monstrous beasts. On and on Skirnir rode on his mighty
horse. Then he came to a wall of fire. No other horse but his mighty
horse could go through it. Skirnir rode through the fire and came to the
dale in which was Gymer's dwelling.

And now he was before the house that Frey had seen Gerda enter on the
day when he had climbed Hlidskjalf, Odin's Watch-Tower. The mighty
hounds that guarded Gymer's dwelling came and bayed around him. But the
gleam of the magic sword kept them away. Skirnir backed his horse to the
door, and made his horse's hooves strike against it.

Gymer was in the feast hall drinking with his Giant friends, and he did
not hear the baying of the hounds nor the clatter that Skirnir made
before the door. But Gerda sat spinning with her maidens in the hall.
"Who comes to Gymer's door?" she said.

"A warrior upon a mighty horse," said one of the maidens.

"Even though he be an enemy and one who slew my brother, yet shall we
open the door to him and give him a cup of Gymer's mead," said Gerda.

One of the maidens opened the door and Skirnir entered Gymer's dwelling.
He knew Gerda amongst her maidens. He went to her and showed her the
rich gold and the precious jewels that he had brought from Frey. "These
are for you, fairest Gerda," he said, "if you will give your love to
Frey, the Chief of the Vanir."

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

"Show your gold and jewels to other maidens," said Gerda. "Gold and
jewels will never bring me to give my love."

Then Skirnir the Venturesome, the heedless of his words, drew the magic
sword from his belt and held it above her. "Give your love to Frey, who
has given me this sword," he said, "or meet your death by the edge of
it."

Gerda, Gymer's daughter, only laughed at the reckless Skirnir. "Make the
daughters of men fearful by the sharpness of Frey's sword," she said,
''but do not try to frighten a Giant's daughter with it."

Then Skirnir the Reckless, the heedless of his words, made the magic
sword flash before her eyes, while he cried out in a terrible voice,
saying a spell over her:

\#dir\#Gerda, I will curse thee;  
Yes, with this magic  
Blade I shall touch thee;  
Such is its power  
That, like a thistle,  
Withered 'twill leave thee,  
Like a thistle the wind  
Strips from the roof.\#/dir\#

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hearing these
terrible words and the strange hissings of the magic sword, Gerda threw
herself on the ground, crying out for pity. But Skirnir stood above her,
and the magic sword flashed and hissed over her. Skirnir sang:

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\#dir\#More ugly I'll leave thee  
Than maid ever was;  
Thou wilt be mocked at  
By men and by Giants;  
A Dwarf only will wed thee;  
Now on this instant  
With this blade I shall touch thee,  
And leave thee bespelled.\#/dir\#

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She lifted herself
on her knees and cried out to Skirnir to spare her from the spell of the
magic sword.

"Only if thou wilt give thy love to Frey," said Skirnir.

"I will give my love to him," said Gerda. "Now put up thy magic sword
and drink a cup of mead and depart from Gymer's dwelling."

"I will not drink a cup of your mead nor shall I depart from Gymer's
dwelling until you yourself say that you will meet and speak with Frey."

"I will meet and speak with him," said Gerda.

"When will you meet and speak with him?" asked Skirnir.

"In the wood of Barri nine nights from this. Let him come and meet me
there."

Then Skirnir put up his magic sword and drank the cup of mead that Gerda
gave him. He rode from Gymer's house, laughing aloud at having won Gerda
for Frey, and so making the magic sword his own for ever.

Skirnir the Venturesome, the heedless of his Words, riding across
Bifröst on his mighty horse, found Frey standing

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

waiting for him beside Heimdall, the Warder of the Bridge to Asgard.

"What news dost thou bring me?" cried Frey. "Speak, Skirnir, before thou
dost dismount from thine horse."

"In nine nights from this thou mayst meet Gerda in Barri Wood," said
Skirnir. He looked at him, laughing out of his wide mouth and his blue
eyes. But Frey turned away, saying to himself:

\#dir\#Long is one day;  
Long, long two.  
Can I live through  
Nine long days?\#/dir\#

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Long indeed were
these days for Frey. But the ninth day came, and in the evening Frey
went to Barri Wood. And there he met Gerda, the Giant maid. She was as
fair as when he had seen her before the door of Gymer's house. And when
she saw Frey, so tall and noble looking, the Giant's daughter was glad
that Skirnir the Venturesome had made her promise to come to Barri Wood.
They gave each other rings of gold. It was settled that the Giant maid
should come as a bride to Asgard.

Gerda came, but another Giant maid came also. This is how that came to
be:

All the Dwellers in Asgard were standing before the great gate, waiting
to welcome the bride of Frey. There appeared a Giant maid who was not
Gerda; all in armor was she.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

"I am Skadi," she said, "the daughter of Thiassi. My father met his
death at the hands of the Dwellers in Asgard. I claim a recompense."

"What recompense would you have, maiden?" asked Odin, smiling to see a
Giant maid standing so boldly in Asgard.

"A husband from amongst you, even as Gerda. And I myself must be let
choose him."

All laughed aloud at the words of Skadi. Then said Odin, laughing, "We
will let you choose a husband from amongst us, but you must choose him
by his feet."

"I will choose him whatever way you will," said Skadi, fixing her eyes
on Baldur, the most beautiful of all the Dwellers in Asgard.

They put a bandage round her eyes, and the Æsir and the Vanir seat in a
half circle around, As she went by she stooped over each and laid hands
upon their feet. At last she came to one whose feet were so finely
formed that she felt sure it was Baldur. She stood up and said:

"This is the one that Skadi chooses for her husband."

Then the Æsir and the Vanir laughed more and more. They took the bandage
off her eyes and she saw, not Baldur the Beautiful, but Niörd, the
father of Frey. But as Skadi looked more and more on Niörd she became
more and more contented with her choice; for Niörd was strong, and he
was noble looking.

These two, Niörd and Skadi, went first to live in Niörd's palace by the
sea; but the coming of the sea mew would waken Skadi too early in the
morning, and she

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

drew her husband to the mountaintop where she was more at home. He would
not live long away from the sound of the sea. Back and forward, between
the mountain and the sea, Skadi and Niörd went. But Gerda stayed in
Asgard with Frey, her husband, and the Æsir and the Vanir came to love
greatly Gerda, the Giant maid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Heimdall and Little Hnossa: How All Things Came to Be](coo09)
