[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coo13)  [Next](coo15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZFM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Children of Odin*, by Padraic Colum, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span id="img_09900"></span> ![](img/09900.jpg)

### 4. ODIN TELLS TO VIDAR, HIS SILENT SON, THE SECRET OF HIS DOINGS

IT was not only to Giants and Men that Odin showed himself in the days
when he went through Jötunheim and Midgard as Vegtam the Wanderer. He
met and he spoke with the Gods also, with one who lived far away from
Asgard and with others who came to Midgard and to Jötunheim.

The one who lived far away from Asgard. was Vidar, Odin's silent son.
Far within a wilderness, with branches and tall grass growing around
him, Vidar sat. And near by him a horse grazed with a saddle upon it, a
horse that was ever ready for the speedy journey.

And Odin, now Vegtam the Wanderer, came into that silent place and spoke
to Vidar, the Silent God.

"O Vidar," he said, "strangest of all my sons; God who

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

will live when all of us have passed away; God who will bring the memory
of the Dwellers of Asgard into a world that will know not their power; O
Vidar, well do I know why there grazes near by thee the horse ever ready
for the speedy journey: it is that thou mayst spring upon it and ride
unchecked, a son speeding to avenge his father.

"To you only, O Vidar the Silent One, will I speak of the secrets of my
doings. Who but you can know why I, Odin, the Eldest of the Gods, hung
on the tree Ygdrassil nine days and nine nights, mine own spear
transfixing me? I hung upon that windy tree that I might learn the
wisdom that would give me power in the nine worlds. On the ninth night
the Runes of Wisdom appeared before mine eyes, and slipping down from
the tree I took them to myself.

"And I shall tell why my ravens fly to thee, carrying in their beaks
scraps of leather. It is that thou mayst make for thyself a sandal; with
that sandal on thou mayst put thy foot on the lower jaw of a mighty wolf
and rend him. All the shoemakers of the earth throw on the ground scraps
of the leather they use so that thou mayst be able to make the sandal
for thy wolf-rending foot.

"And I have counseled the dwellers on earth to cut off the fingernails
and the toenails of their dead, lest from those fingernails and toenails
the Giants make for themselves the ship Naglfar in which they will sail
from the North on the day of Ragnarök, the Twilight of the Gods.

"More, Vidar, I will tell to thee. I, living amongst men, have wed the
daughter of a hero. My son shall live as a

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

mortal amongst mortals. Sigi his name shall be. From him shall spring
heroes who will fill Valhalla, my own hall in Asgard, with heroes
against the day of our strife with the Giants and with Surtur of the
Flaming Sword."

For long Odin stayed in that silent place communing with his silent son,
with Vidar, who with his brother would live beyond the lives of the
Dwellers of Asgard and who would bring into another day and another
world the memory of the Æsir and the Vanir. For long Odin spoke with
him, and then he went across the wilderness where the grass and the
bushes grew and where that horse grazed in readiness for the sudden
journey. He went toward the seashore where the Æsir and the Vanir were
now gathered for the feast that old Ægir, the Giant King of the Sea, had
offered them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Thor and Loki in the Giants' City](coo15)
