[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Darwin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dom12)  [Next](dom14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0140436316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Descent of Man*, by Charles Darwin, 2nd ed. \[1874\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

### SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS OF INSECTS.

Diversified structures possessed by the males for seizing the females--
Differences between the sexes, of which the meaning is not understood--
Difference in size between the sexes--Thysanura--Diptera--Hemiptera--
Homoptera, musical powers possessed by the males alone--Orthoptera,
musical instruments of the males, much diversified in structure;
pugnacity; colours--Neuroptera, sexual differences in
colour--Hymenoptera, pugnacity and odours--Coleoptera, colours;
furnished with great horns, apparently as an ornament; battles,
stridulating organs generally common to both sexes.

In the immense class of insects the sexes sometimes differ in their
locomotive-organs, and often in their sense-organs, as in the pectinated
and beautifully plumose antennae of the males of many species. In
Chloeon, one of the Ephemerae, the male has great pillared eyes, of
which the female is entirely destitute. (1. Sir J. Lubbock, 'Transact.
Linnean Soc.' vol. xxv, 1866, p. 484. With respect to the Mutillidae see
Westwood, 'Modern Class. of Insects,' vol. ii. p. 213.) The ocelli are
absent in the females of certain insects, as in the Mutillidae; and here
the females are likewise wingless. But we are chiefly concerned with
structures by which one male is enabled to conquer another, either in
battle or courtship, through his strength, pugnacity, ornaments, or
music. The innumerable contrivances, therefore, by which the male is
able to seize the female, may be briefly passed over. Besides the
complex structures at the apex of the abdomen, which ought perhaps to be
ranked as primary organs (2. These organs in the male often differ in
closely-allied species, and afford excellent specific characters. But
their importance, from a functional point of view, as Mr. R. MacLachlan
has remarked to me, has probably been overrated. It has been suggested,
that slight differences in these organs would suffice to prevent the
intercrossing of well-marked varieties or incipient species, and would
thus aid in their development. That this can hardly be the case, we may
infer from the many recorded cases (see, for instance, Bronn,
'Geschichte der Natur,' B. ii. 1843, s. 164; and Westwood, 'Transact.
Ent. Soc.' vol. iii. 1842, p. 195) of distinct species having been
observed in union. Mr. MacLachlan informs me (vide 'Stett. Ent.
Zeitung,' 1867, s. 155) that when several species of Phryganidae, which
present strongly-pronounced differences of this kind, were confined
together by Dr. Aug. Meyer, THEY COUPLED, and one pair produced fertile
ova.), "it is astonishing," as Mr. B.D. Walsh (3. 'The Practical
Entomologist,' Philadelphia, vol. ii. May 1867, p 88.) has remarked,
"how many different organs are worked in by nature for the seemingly
insignificant object of enabling the male to grasp the female firmly."
The mandibles or jaws are sometimes used for this purpose; thus the male
Corydalis cornutus (a neuropterous insect in some degree allied to the
Dragon flies, etc.) has immense curved jaws, many times longer than
those of the female; and they are smooth instead of being toothed, so
that he is thus enabled to seize her without injury. (4. Mr. Walsh,
ibid. p. 107.) One of the stag-beetles of North America (Lucanus
elaphus) uses his jaws, which are much larger than those of the female,
for the same purpose, but probably likewise for fighting. In one of the
sand- wasps (Ammophila) the jaws in the two sexes are closely alike, but
are used for widely different purposes: the males, as Professor Westwood
observes, "are exceedingly ardent, seizing their partners round the neck
with their sickle-shaped jaws" (5. 'Modern Classification of Insects,'
vol. ii. 1840, pp. 205, 206. Mr. Walsh, who called my attention to the
double use of the jaws, says that he has repeatedly observed this
fact.); whilst the females use these organs for burrowing in sand-banks
and making their nests.

\[Fig. 9. Crabro cribrarius. Upper figure, male; lower figure, female.\]

The tarsi of the front-legs are dilated in many male beetles, or are
furnished with broad cushions of hairs; and in many genera of
water-beetles they are armed with a round flat sucker, so that the male
may adhere to the slippery body of the female. It is a much more unusual
circumstance that the females of some water-beetles (Dytiscus) have
their elytra deeply grooved, and in Acilius sulcatus thickly set with
hairs, as an aid to the male. The females of some other water-beetles
(Hydroporus) have their elytra punctured for the same purpose. (6. We
have here a curious and inexplicable case of dimorphism, for some of the
females of four European species of Dytiscus, and of certain species of
Hydroporus, have their elytra smooth; and no intermediate gradations
between the sulcated or punctured, and the quite smooth elytra have been
observed. See Dr. H. Schaum, as quoted in the 'Zoologist,' vols. v.-vi.
1847-48, p. 1896. Also Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,'
vol. iii. 1826, p. 305.) In the male of Crabro cribrarius (Fig. 9), it
is the tibia which is dilated into a broad horny plate, with minute
membraneous dots, giving to it a singular appearance like that of a
riddle. (7. Westwood, 'Modern Class.' vol. ii. p. 193. The following
statement about Penthe, and others in inverted commas, are taken from
Mr. Walsh, 'Practical Entomologist,' Philadelphia, vol. iii. p. 88.) In
the male of Penthe (a genus of beetles) a few of the middle joints of
the antennae are dilated and furnished on the inferior surface with
cushions of hair, exactly like those on the tarsi of the Carabidae, "and
obviously for the same end." In male dragon-flies, "the appendages at
the tip of the tail are modified in an almost infinite variety of
curious patterns to enable them to embrace the neck of the female."
Lastly, in the males of many insects, the legs are furnished with
peculiar spines, knobs or spurs; or the whole leg is bowed or thickened,
but this is by no means invariably a sexual character; or one pair, or
all three pairs are elongated, sometimes to an extravagant length. (8.
Kirby and Spence, 'Introduct.' etc., vol. iii. pp. 332-336.)

\[Fig. 10. Taphroderes distortus (much enlarged). Upper figure, male;
lower figure, female.\]

The sexes of many species in all the orders present differences, of
which the meaning is not understood. One curious case is that of a
beetle (Fig. 10), the male of which has left mandible much enlarged; so
that the mouth is greatly distorted. In another Carabidous beetle,
Eurygnathus (9. 'Insecta Maderensia,' 1854, page 20.), we have the case,
unique as far as known to Mr. Wollaston, of the head of the female being
much broader and larger, though in a variable degree, than that of the
male. Any number of such cases could be given. They abound in the
Lepidoptera: one of the most extraordinary is that certain male
butterflies have their fore-legs more or less atrophied, with the tibiae
and tarsi reduced to mere rudimentary knobs. The wings, also, in the two
sexes often differ in neuration (10. E. Doubleday, 'Annals and Mag. of
Nat. Hist.' vol. i. 1848, p. 379. I may add that the wings in certain
Hymenoptera (see Shuckard, 'Fossorial Hymenoptera,' 1837, pp. 39-43)
differ in neuration according to sex.), and sometimes considerably in
outline, as in the Aricoris epitus, which was shewn to me in the British
Museum by Mr. A. Butler. The males of certain South American butterflies
have tufts of hair on the margins of the wings, and horny excrescences
on the discs of the posterior pair. (11. H.W. Bates, in 'Journal of
Proc. Linn. Soc.' vol. vi. 1862, p. 74. Mr. Wonfor's observations are
quoted in 'Popular Science Review,' 1868, p. 343.) In several British
butterflies, as shewn by Mr. Wonfor, the males alone are in parts
clothed with peculiar scales.

The use of the bright light of the female glow-worm has been subject to
much discussion. The male is feebly luminous, as are the larvae and even
the eggs. It has been supposed by some authors that the light serves to
frighten away enemies, and by others to guide the male to the female. At
last, Mr. Belt (12. 'The Naturalist in Nicaragua,' 1874, pp. 316-320. On
the phosphorescence of the eggs, see 'Annals and Magazine of Natural
History,' Nov. 1871, p. 372.) appears to have solved the difficulty: he
finds that all the Lampyridae which he has tried are highly distasteful
to insectivorous mammals and birds. Hence it is in accordance with Mr.
Bates' view, hereafter to be explained, that many insects mimic the
Lampyridae closely, in order to be mistaken for them, and thus to escape
destruction. He further believes that the luminous species profit by
being at once recognised as unpalatable. It is probable that the same
explanation may be extended to the Elaters, both sexes of which are
highly luminous. It is not known why the wings of the female glow-worm
have not been developed; but in her present state she closely resembles
a larva, and as larvae are so largely preyed on by many animals, we can
understand why she has been rendered so much more luminous and
conspicuous than the male; and why the larvae themselves are likewise
luminous.

DIFFERENCE IN SIZE BETWEEN THE SEXES.

With insects of all kinds the males are commonly smaller than the
females; and this difference can often be detected even in the larval
state. So considerable is the difference between the male and female
cocoons of the silk-moth (Bombyx mori), that in France they are
separated by a particular mode of weighing. (13. Robinet, 'Vers a Soie,'
1848, p. 207.) In the lower classes of the animal kingdom, the greater
size of the females seems generally to depend on their developing an
enormous number of ova; and this may to a certain extent hold good with
insects. But Dr. Wallace has suggested a much more probable explanation.
He finds, after carefully attending to the development of the
caterpillars of Bombyx cynthia and yamamai, and especially to that of
some dwarfed caterpillars reared from a second brood on unnatural food,
"that in proportion as the individual moth is finer, so is the time
required for its metamorphosis longer; and for this reason the female,
which is the larger and heavier insect, from having to carry her
numerous eggs, will be preceded by the male, which is smaller and has
less to mature." (14. 'Transact. Ent. Soc.' 3rd series, vol. v. p. 486.)
Now as most insects are short-lived, and as they are exposed to many
dangers, it would manifestly be advantageous to the female to be
impregnated as soon as possible. This end would be gained by the males
being first matured in large numbers ready for the advent of the
females; and this again would naturally follow, as Mr. A.R. Wallace has
remarked (15. 'Journal of Proc. Ent. Soc.' Feb. 4, 1867, p. lxxi.),
through natural selection; for the smaller males would be first matured,
and thus would procreate a large number of offspring which would inherit
the reduced size of their male parents, whilst the larger males from
being matured later would leave fewer offspring.

There are, however, exceptions to the rule of male insects being smaller
than the females: and some of these exceptions are intelligible. Size
and strength would be an advantage to the males, which fight for the
possession of the females; and in these cases, as with the stag-beetle
(Lucanus), the males are larger than the females. There are, however,
other beetles which are not known to fight together, of which the males
exceed the females in size; and the meaning of this fact is not known;
but in some of these cases, as with the huge Dynastes and Megasoma, we
can at least see that there would be no necessity for the males to be
smaller than the females, in order to be matured before them, for these
beetles are not short-lived, and there would be ample time for the
pairing of the sexes. So again, male dragon-flies (Libellulidae) are
sometimes sensibly larger, and never smaller, than the females (16. For
this and other statements on the size of the sexes, see Kirby and
Spence, ibid. vol. iii. p. 300; on the duration of life in insects, see
p. 344.); and as Mr. MacLachlan believes, they do not generally pair
with the females until a week or fortnight has elapsed, and until they
have assumed their proper masculine colours. But the most curious case,
shewing on what complex and easily-overlooked relations, so trifling a
character as difference in size between the sexes may depend, is that of
the aculeate Hymenoptera; for Mr. F. Smith informs me that throughout
nearly the whole of this large group, the males, in accordance with the
general rule, are smaller than the females, and emerge about a week
before them; but amongst the Bees, the males of Apis mellifica,
Anthidium manicatum, and Anthophora acervorum, and amongst the Fossores,
the males of the Methoca ichneumonides, are larger than the females. The
explanation of this anomaly is that a marriage flight is absolutely
necessary with these species, and the male requires great strength and
size in order to carry the female through the air. Increased size has
here been acquired in opposition to the usual relation between size and
the period of development, for the males, though larger, emerge before
the smaller females.

We will now review the several Orders, selecting such facts as more
particularly concern us. The Lepidoptera (Butterflies and Moths) will be
retained for a separate chapter.

ORDER, THYSANURA.

The members of this lowly organised order are wingless, dull-coloured,
minute insects, with ugly, almost misshapen heads and bodies. Their
sexes do not differ, but they are interesting as shewing us that the
males pay sedulous court to the females even low down in the animal
scale. Sir J. Lubbock (17. 'Transact. Linnean Soc.' vol. xxvi. 1868, p.
296.) says: "it is very amusing to see these little creatures
(Smynthurus luteus) coquetting together. The male, which is much smaller
than the female, runs round her, and they butt one another, standing
face to face and moving backward and forward like two playful lambs.
Then the female pretends to run away and the male runs after her with a
queer appearance of anger, gets in front and stands facing her again;
then she turns coyly round, but he, quicker and more active, scuttles
round too, and seems to whip her with his antennae; then for a bit they
stand face to face, play with their antennae, and seem to be all in all
to one another."

ORDER, DIPTERA (FLIES).

The sexes differ little in colour. The greatest difference, known to Mr.
F. Walker, is in the genus Bibio, in which the males are blackish or
quite black, and the females obscure brownish-orange. The genus
Elaphomyia, discovered by Mr. Wallace (18. 'The Malay Archipelago,' vol.
ii. 1869, p. 313.) in New Guinea, is highly remarkable, as the males are
furnished with horns, of which the females are quite destitute. The
horns spring from beneath the eyes, and curiously resemble those of a
stag, being either branched or palmated. In one of the species, they
equal the whole body in length. They might be thought to be adapted for
fighting, but as in one species they are of a beautiful pink colour,
edged with black, with a pale central stripe, and as these insects have
altogether a very elegant appearance, it is perhaps more probable that
they serve as ornaments. That the males of some Diptera fight together
is certain; Prof. Westwood (19. 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol.
ii. 1840, p. 526.) has several times seen this with the Tipulae. The
males of other Diptera apparently try to win the females by their music:
H. Muller (20. 'Anwendung,' etc., 'Verh. d. n. V. Jahrg.' xxix. p. 80.
Mayer, in 'American Naturalist,' 1874, p. 236.) watched for some time
two males of an Eristalis courting a female; they hovered above her, and
flew from side to side, making a high humming noise at the same time.
Gnats and mosquitoes (Culicidae) also seem to attract each other by
humming; and Prof. Mayer has recently ascertained that the hairs on the
antennae of the male vibrate in unison with the notes of a tuning-fork,
within the range of the sounds emitted by the female. The longer hairs
vibrate sympathetically with the graver notes, and the shorter hairs
with the higher ones. Landois also asserts that he has repeatedly drawn
down a whole swarm of gnats by uttering a particular note. It may be
added that the mental faculties of the Diptera are probably higher than
in most other insects, in accordance with their highly- developed
nervous system. (21. See Mr. B.T. Lowne's interesting work, 'On the
Anatomy of the Blow-fly, Musca vomitoria,' 1870, p. 14. He remarks (p.
33) that, "the captured flies utter a peculiar plaintive note, and that
this sound causes other flies to disappear.")

ORDER, HEMIPTERA (FIELD-BUGS).

Mr. J.W. Douglas, who has particularly attended to the British species,
has kindly given me an account of their sexual differences. The males of
some species are furnished with wings, whilst the females are wingless;
the sexes differ in the form of their bodies, elytra, antennae and
tarsi; but as the signification of these differences are unknown, they
may be here passed over. The females are generally larger and more
robust than the males. With British, and, as far as Mr. Douglas knows,
with exotic species, the sexes do not commonly differ much in colour;
but in about six British species the male is considerably darker than
the female, and in about four other species the female is darker than
the male. Both sexes of some species are beautifully coloured; and as
these insects emit an extremely nauseous odour, their conspicuous
colours may serve as a signal that they are unpalatable to insectivorous
animals. In some few cases their colours appear to be directly
protective: thus Prof. Hoffmann informs me that he could hardly
distinguish a small pink and green species from the buds on the trunks
of lime-trees, which this insect frequents.

Some species of Reduvidae make a stridulating noise; and, in the case of
Pirates stridulus, this is said (22. Westwood, 'Modern Classification of
Insects,' vol. ii. p. 473.) to be effected by the movement of the neck
within the pro-thoracic cavity. According to Westring, Reduvius
personatus also stridulates. But I have no reason to suppose that this
is a sexual character, excepting that with non-social insects there
seems to be no use for sound-producing organs, unless it be as a sexual
call.

ORDER: HOMOPTERA.

Every one who has wandered in a tropical forest must have been
astonished at the din made by the male Cicadae. The females are mute; as
the Grecian poet Xenarchus says, "Happy the Cicadas live, since they all
have voiceless wives." The noise thus made could be plainly heard on
board the "Beagle," when anchored at a quarter of a mile from the shore
of Brazil; and Captain Hancock says it can be heard at the distance of a
mile. The Greeks formerly kept, and the Chinese now keep these insects
in cages for the sake of their song, so that it must be pleasing to the
ears of some men. (23. These particulars are taken from Westwood's
'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol. ii. 1840, p. 422. See, also, on
the Fulgoridae, Kirby and Spence, 'Introduct.' vol. ii. p. 401.) The
Cicadidae usually sing during the day, whilst the Fulgoridae appear to
be night-songsters. The sound, according to Landois (24. 'Zeitschrift
fur wissenschaft Zoolog.' B. xvii. 1867, ss. 152-158.), is produced by
the vibration of the lips of the spiracles, which are set into motion by
a current of air emitted from the tracheae; but this view has lately
been disputed. Dr. Powell appears to have proved (25. 'Transactions of
the New Zealand Institute,' vol. v. 1873, p. 286.) that it is produced
by the vibration of a membrane, set into action by a special muscle. In
the living insect, whilst stridulating, this membrane can be seen to
vibrate; and in the dead insect the proper sound is heard, if the
muscle, when a little dried and hardened, is pulled with the point of a
pin. In the female the whole complex musical apparatus is present, but
is much less developed than in the male, and is never used for producing
sound.

With respect to the object of the music, Dr. Hartman, in speaking of the
Cicada septemdecim of the United States, says (26. I am indebted to Mr.
Walsh for having sent me this extract from 'A Journal of the Doings of
Cicada septemdecim,' by Dr. Hartman.), "the drums are now (June 6th and
7th, 1851) heard in all directions. This I believe to be the marital
summons from the males. Standing in thick chestnut sprouts about as high
as my head, where hundreds were around me, I observed the females coming
around the drumming males." He adds, "this season (Aug. 1868) a dwarf
pear-tree in my garden produced about fifty larvae of Cic. pruinosa; and
I several times noticed the females to alight near a male while he was
uttering his clanging notes." Fritz Muller writes to me from S. Brazil
that he has often listened to a musical contest between two or three
males of a species with a particularly loud voice, seated at a
considerable distance from each other: as soon as one had finished his
song, another immediately began, and then another. As there is so much
rivalry between the males, it is probable that the females not only find
them by their sounds, but that, like female birds, they are excited or
allured by the male with the most attractive voice.

I have not heard of any well-marked cases of ornamental differences
between the sexes of the Homoptera. Mr. Douglas informs me that there
are three British species, in which the male is black or marked with
black bands, whilst the females are pale-coloured or obscure.

ORDER, ORTHOPTERA (CRICKETS AND GRASSHOPPERS).

The males in the three saltatorial families in this Order are remarkable
for their musical powers, namely the Achetidae or crickets, the
Locustidae for which there is no equivalent English name, and the
Acridiidae or grasshoppers. The stridulation produced by some of the
Locustidae is so loud that it can be heard during the night at the
distance of a mile (27. L. Guilding, 'Transactions of the Linnean
Society,' vol. xv. p. 154.); and that made by certain species is not
unmusical even to the human ear, so that the Indians on the Amazons keep
them in wicker cages. All observers agree that the sounds serve either
to call or excite the mute females. With respect to the migratory
locusts of Russia, Korte has given (28. I state this on the authority of
Koppen, 'Uber die Heuschrecken in Sudrussland,' 1866, p. 32, for I have
in vain endeavoured to procure Korte's work.) an interesting case of
selection by the female of a male. The males of this species (Pachytylus
migratorius) whilst coupled with the female stridulate from anger or
jealousy, if approached by other males. The house-cricket when surprised
at night uses its voice to warn its fellows. (29. Gilbert White,
'Natural History of Selborne,' vol. ii. 1825, p. 262.) In North America
the Katy-did (Platyphyllum concavum, one of the Locustidae) is described
(30. Harris, 'Insects of New England,' 1842, p. 128.) as mounting on the
upper branches of a tree, and in the evening beginning "his noisy
babble, while rival notes issue from the neighbouring trees, and the
groves resound with the call of Katy-did-she- did the live-long night."
Mr. Bates, in speaking of the European field- cricket (one of the
Achetidae), says "the male has been observed to place himself in the
evening at the entrance of his burrow, and stridulate until a female
approaches, when the louder notes are succeeded by a more subdued tone,
whilst the successful musician caresses with his antennae the mate he
has won." (31. 'The Naturalist on the Amazons,' vol. i. 1863, p. 252.
Mr. Bates gives a very interesting discussion on the gradations in the
musical apparatus of the three families. See also Westwood, 'Modern
Classification of Insects,' vol. ii. pp. 445 and 453.) Dr. Scudder was
able to excite one of these insects to answer him, by rubbing on a file
with a quill. (32. 'Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural
History,' vol. xi. April 1868.) In both sexes a remarkable auditory
apparatus has been discovered by Von Siebold, situated in the front
legs. (33. 'Nouveau Manuel d'Anat. Comp.' (French translat.), tom. 1,
1850, p. 567.)

\[Fig.11. Gryllus campestris (from Landois). Right-hand figure, under
side of part of a wing-nervure, much magnified, showing the teeth, st.
Left-hand figure, upper surface of wing-cover, with the projecting,
smooth nervure, r, across which the teeth (st) are scraped.

Fig.12. Teeth of Nervure of Gryllus domesticus (from Landois).\]

In the three Families the sounds are differently produced. In the males
of the Achetidae both wing-covers have the same apparatus; and this in
the field-cricket (see Gryllus campestris, Fig. 11) consists, as
described by Landois (34. 'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft. Zoolog.' B.
xvii. 1867, s. 117.), of from 131 to 138 sharp, transverse ridges or
teeth (st) on the under side of one of the nervures of the wing-cover.
This toothed nervure is rapidly scraped across a projecting, smooth,
hard nervure (r) on the upper surface of the opposite wing. First one
wing is rubbed over the other, and then the movement is reversed. Both
wings are raised a little at the same time, so as to increase the
resonance. In some species the wing-covers of the males are furnished at
the base with a talc-like plate. (35. Westwood, 'Modern Classification
of Insects,' vol. i. p. 440.) I here give a drawing (Fig. 12) of the
teeth on the under side of the nervure of another species of Gryllus,
viz., G. domesticus. With respect to the formation of these teeth, Dr.
Gruber has shewn (36. 'Ueber der Tonapparat der Locustiden, ein Beitrag
zum Darwinismus,' 'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft. Zoolog.' B. xxii. 1872,
p. 100.) that they have been developed by the aid of selection, from the
minute scales and hairs with which the wings and body are covered, and I
came to the same conclusion with respect to those of the Coleoptera. But
Dr. Gruber further shews that their development is in part directly due
to the stimulus from the friction of one wing over the other.

\[Fig.13. Chlorocoelus Tanana (from Bates). a,b. Lobes of opposite
wing-covers.\]

In the Locustidae the opposite wing-covers differ from each other in
structure (Fig. 13), and the action cannot, as in the last family, be
reversed. The left wing, which acts as the bow, lies over the right wing
which serves as the fiddle. One of the nervures (a) on the under surface
of the former is finely serrated, and is scraped across the prominent
nervures on the upper surface of the opposite or right wing. In our
British Phasgonura viridissima it appeared to me that the serrated
nervure is rubbed against the rounded hind-corner of the opposite wing,
the edge of which is thickened, coloured brown, and very sharp. In the
right wing, but not in the left, there is a little plate, as transparent
as talc, surrounded by nervures, and called the speculum. In Ephippiger
vitium, a member of this same family, we have a curious subordinate
modification; for the wing-covers are greatly reduced in size, but "the
posterior part of the pro-thorax is elevated into a kind of dome over
the wing-covers, and which has probably the effect of increasing the
sound." (37. Westwood 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol. i. p.
453.)

We thus see that the musical apparatus is more differentiated or
specialised in the Locustidae (which include, I believe, the most
powerful performers in the Order), than in the Achetidae, in which both
wing-covers have the same structure and the same function. (38. Landois,
'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft Zoolog.' B. xvii. 1867, ss. 121, 122.)
Landois, however, detected in one of the Locustidae, namely in Decticus,
a short and narrow row of small teeth, mere rudiments, on the inferior
surface of the right wing-cover, which underlies the other and is never
used as the bow. I observed the same rudimentary structure on the under
side of the right wing-cover in Phasgonura viridissima. Hence we may
infer with confidence that the Locustidae are descended from a form, in
which, as in the existing Achetidae, both wing-covers had serrated
nervures on the under surface, and could be indifferently used as the
bow; but that in the Locustidae the two wing-covers gradually became
differentiated and perfected, on the principle of the division of
labour, the one to act exclusively as the bow, and the other as the
fiddle. Dr. Gruber takes the same view, and has shewn that rudimentary
teeth are commonly found on the inferior surface of the right wing. By
what steps the more simple apparatus in the Achetidae originated, we do
not know, but it is probable that the basal portions of the wing- covers
originally overlapped each other as they do at present; and that the
friction of the nervures produced a grating sound, as is now the case
with the wing-covers of the females. (39. Mr. Walsh also informs me that
he has noticed that the female of the Platyphyllum concavum, "when
captured makes a feeble grating noise by shuffling her wing-covers
together.") A grating sound thus occasionally and accidentally made by
the males, if it served them ever so little as a love-call to the
females, might readily have been intensified through sexual selection,
by variations in the roughness of the nervures having been continually
preserved.

\[Fig.14. Hind-leg of Stenobothrus pratorum: r, the stridulating ridge;
lower figure, the teeth forming the ridge, much magnified (from
Landois).

Fig.15. Pneumora (from specimens in the British Museum). Upper figure,
male; lower figure, female.\]

In the last and third family, namely the Acridiidae or grasshoppers, the
stridulation is produced in a very different manner, and according to
Dr. Scudder, is not so shrill as in the preceding Families. The inner
surface of the femur (Fig. 14, r) is furnished with a longitudinal row
of minute, elegant, lancet-shaped, elastic teeth, from 85 to 93 in
number (40. Landois, ibid. s. 113.); and these are scraped across the
sharp, projecting nervures on the wing-covers, which are thus made to
vibrate and resound. Harris (41. 'Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
133.) says that when one of the males begins to play, he first "bends
the shank of the hind-leg beneath the thigh, where it is lodged in a
furrow designed to receive it, and then draws the leg briskly up and
down. He does not play both fiddles together, but alternately, first
upon one and then on the other." In many species, the base of the
abdomen is hollowed out into a great cavity which is believed to act as
a resounding board. In Pneumora (Fig. 15), a S. African genus belonging
to the same family, we meet with a new and remarkable modification; in
the males a small notched ridge projects obliquely from each side of the
abdomen, against which the hind femora are rubbed. (42. Westwood,
'Modern Classification,' vol i. p. 462.) As the male is furnished with
wings (the female being wingless), it is remarkable that the thighs are
not rubbed in the usual manner against the wing-covers; but this may
perhaps be accounted for by the unusually small size of the hind-legs. I
have not been able to examine the inner surface of the thighs, which,
judging from analogy, would be finely serrated. The species of Pneumora
have been more profoundly modified for the sake of stridulation than any
other orthopterous insect; for in the male the whole body has been
converted into a musical instrument, being distended with air, like a
great pellucid bladder, so as to increase the resonance. Mr. Trimen
informs me that at the Cape of Good Hope these insects make a wonderful
noise during the night.

In the three foregoing families, the females are almost always destitute
of an efficient musical apparatus. But there are a few exceptions to
this rule, for Dr. Gruber has shewn that both sexes of Ephippiger vitium
are thus provided; though the organs differ in the male and female to a
certain extent. Hence we cannot suppose that they have been transferred
from the male to the female, as appears to have been the case with the
secondary sexual characters of many other animals. They must have been
independently developed in the two sexes, which no doubt mutually call
to each other during the season of love. In most other Locustidae (but
not according to Landois in Decticus) the females have rudiments of the
stridulatory organs proper to the male; from whom it is probable that
these have been transferred. Landois also found such rudiments on the
under surface of the wing-covers of the female Achetidae, and on the
femora of the female Acridiidae. In the Homoptera, also, the females
have the proper musical apparatus in a functionless state; and we shall
hereafter meet in other divisions of the animal kingdom with many
instances of structures proper to the male being present in a
rudimentary condition of the female.

Landois has observed another important fact, namely, that in the females
of the Acridiidae, the stridulating teeth on the femora remain
throughout life in the same condition in which they first appear during
the larval state in both sexes. In the males, on the other hand, they
become further developed, and acquire their perfect structure at the
last moult, when the insect is mature and ready to breed.

From the facts now given, we see that the means by which the males of
the Orthoptera produce their sounds are extremely diversified, and are
altogether different from those employed by the Homoptera. (43. Landois
has recently found in certain Orthoptera rudimentary structures closely
similar to the sound-producing organs in the Homoptera; and this is a
surprising fact. See 'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft Zoolog.' B. xxii.
Heft 3, 1871, p. 348.) But throughout the animal kingdom we often find
the same object gained by the most diversified means; this seems due to
the whole organisation having undergone multifarious changes in the
course of ages, and as part after part varied different variations were
taken advantage of for the same general purpose. The diversity of means
for producing sound in the three families of the Orthoptera and in the
Homoptera, impresses the mind with the high importance of these
structures to the males, for the sake of calling or alluring the
females. We need feel no surprise at the amount of modification which
the Orthoptera have undergone in this respect, as we now know, from Dr.
Scudder's remarkable discovery (44. 'Transactions, Entomological
Society,' 3rd series, vol. ii. ('Journal of Proceedings,' p. 117).),
that there has been more than ample time. This naturalist has lately
found a fossil insect in the Devonian formation of New Brunswick, which
is furnished with "the well-known tympanum or stridulating apparatus of
the male Locustidae." The insect, though in most respects related to the
Neuroptera, appears, as is so often the case with very ancient forms, to
connect the two related Orders of the Neuroptera and Orthoptera.

I have but little more to say on the Orthoptera. Some of the species are
very pugnacious: when two male field-crickets (Gryllus campestris) are
confined together, they fight till one kills the other; and the species
of Mantis are described as manoeuvring with their sword-like
front-limbs, like hussars with their sabres. The Chinese keep these
insects in little bamboo cages, and match them like game-cocks. (45.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol. i. p. 427; for
crickets, p. 445.) With respect to colour, some exotic locusts are
beautifully ornamented; the posterior wings being marked with red, blue,
and black; but as throughout the Order the sexes rarely differ much in
colour, it is not probable that they owe their bright tints to sexual
selection. Conspicuous colours may be of use to these insects, by giving
notice that they are unpalatable. Thus it has been observed (46. Mr. Ch.
Horne, in 'Proceedings of the Entomological Society,' May 3, 1869, p.
xii.) that a bright-coloured Indian locust was invariably rejected when
offered to birds and lizards. Some cases, however, are known of sexual
differences in colour in this Order. The male of an American cricket
(47. The Oecanthus nivalis, Harris, 'Insects of New England,' 1842, p.
124. The two sexes of OE. pellucidus of Europe differ, as I hear from
Victor Carus, in nearly the same manner.) is described as being as white
as ivory, whilst the female varies from almost white to greenish-yellow
or dusky. Mr. Walsh informs me that the adult male of Spectrum femoratum
(one of the Phasmidae) "is of a shining brownish-yellow colour; the
adult female being of a dull, opaque, cinereous brown; the young of both
sexes being green." Lastly, I may mention that the male of one curious
kind of cricket (48. Platyblemnus: Westwood, 'Modern Classification,'
vol. i. p. 447.) is furnished with "a long membranous appendage, which
falls over the face like a veil;" but what its use may be, is not known.

ORDER, NEUROPTERA.

Little need here be said, except as to colour. In the Ephemeridae the
sexes often differ slightly in their obscure tints (49. B.D. Walsh, the
'Pseudo-neuroptera of Illinois,' in 'Proceedings of the Entomological
Society of Philadelphia,' 1862, p. 361.); but it is not probable that
the males are thus rendered attractive to the females. The Libellulidae,
or dragon-flies, are ornamented with splendid green, blue, yellow, and
vermilion metallic tints; and the sexes often differ. Thus, as Prof.
Westwood remarks (50. 'Modern Classification,' vol. ii. p. 37.), the
males of some of the Agrionidae, "are of a rich blue with black wings,
whilst the females are fine green with colourless wings." But in Agrion
Ramburii these colours are exactly reversed in the two sexes. (51.
Walsh, ibid. p. 381. I am indebted to this naturalist for the following
facts on Hetaerina, Anax, and Gomphus.) In the extensive N. American
genus of Hetaerina, the males alone have a beautiful carmine spot at the
base of each wing. In Anax junius the basal part of the abdomen in the
male is a vivid ultramarine blue, and in the female grass-green. In the
allied genus Gomphus, on the other hand, and in some other genera, the
sexes differ but little in colour. In closely-allied forms throughout
the animal kingdom, similar cases of the sexes differing greatly, or
very little, or not at all, are of frequent occurrence. Although there
is so wide a difference in colour between the sexes of many
Libellulidae, it is often difficult to say which is the more brilliant;
and the ordinary coloration of the two sexes is reversed, as we have
just seen, in one species of Agrion. It is not probable that their
colours in any case have been gained as a protection. Mr. MacLachlan,
who has closely attended to this family, writes to me that
dragon-flies--the tyrants of the insect-world--are the least liable of
any insect to be attacked by birds or other enemies, and he believes
that their bright colours serve as a sexual attraction. Certain
dragon-flies apparently are attracted by particular colours: Mr.
Patterson observed (52. 'Transactions, Ent. Soc.' vol. i. 1836, p.
lxxxi.) that the Agrionidae, of which the males are blue, settled in
numbers on the blue float of a fishing line; whilst two other species
were attracted by shining white colours.

It is an interesting fact, first noticed by Schelver, that, in several
genera belonging to two sub-families, the males on first emergence from
the pupal state, are coloured exactly like the females; but that their
bodies in a short time assume a conspicuous milky-blue tint, owing to
the exudation of a kind of oil, soluble in ether and alcohol. Mr.
MacLachlan believes that in the male of Libellula depressa this change
of colour does not occur until nearly a fortnight after the
metamorphosis, when the sexes are ready to pair.

Certain species of Neurothemis present, according to Brauer (53. See
abstract in the 'Zoological Record' for 1867, p. 450.), a curious case
of dimorphism, some of the females having ordinary wings, whilst others
have them "very richly netted, as in the males of the same species."
Brauer "explains the phenomenon on Darwinian principles by the
supposition that the close netting of the veins is a secondary sexual
character in the males, which has been abruptly transferred to some of
the females, instead of, as generally occurs, to all of them." Mr.
MacLachlan informs me of another instance of dimorphism in several
species of Agrion, in which some individuals are of an orange colour,
and these are invariably females. This is probably a case of reversion;
for in the true Libellulae, when the sexes differ in colour, the females
are orange or yellow; so that supposing Agrion to be descended from some
primordial form which resembled the typical Libellulae in its sexual
characters, it would not be surprising that a tendency to vary in this
manner should occur in the females alone.

Although many dragon-flies are large, powerful, and fierce insects, the
males have not been observed by Mr. MacLachlan to fight together,
excepting, as he believes, in some of the smaller species of Agrion. In
another group in this Order, namely, the Termites or white ants, both
sexes at the time of swarming may be seen running about, "the male after
the female, sometimes two chasing one female, and contending with great
eagerness who shall win the prize." (54. Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction
to Entomology,' vol. ii. 1818, p. 35.) The Atropos pulsatorius is said
to make a noise with its jaws, which is answered by other individuals.
(55. Houzeau, 'Les Facultes Mentales,' etc. Tom. i. p. 104.)

ORDER, HYMENOPTERA.

That inimitable observer, M. Fabre (56. See an interesting article, 'The
Writings of Fabre,' in 'Nat. Hist. Review,' April 1862, p. 122.), in
describing the habits of Cerceris, a wasp-like insect, remarks that
"fights frequently ensue between the males for the possession of some
particular female, who sits an apparently unconcerned beholder of the
struggle for supremacy, and when the victory is decided, quietly flies
away in company with the conqueror." Westwood (57. 'Journal of
Proceedings of Entomological Society,' Sept. 7, 1863, p. 169.) says that
the males of one of the saw-flies (Tenthredinae) "have been found
fighting together, with their mandibles locked." As M. Fabre speaks of
the males of Cerceris striving to obtain a particular female, it may be
well to bear in mind that insects belonging to this Order have the power
of recognising each other after long intervals of time, and are deeply
attached. For instance, Pierre Huber, whose accuracy no one doubts,
separated some ants, and when, after an interval of four months, they
met others which had formerly belonged to the same community, they
recognised and caressed one another with their antennae. Had they been
strangers they would have fought together. Again, when two communities
engage in a battle, the ants on the same side sometimes attack each
other in the general confusion, but they soon perceive their mistake,
and the one ant soothes the other. (58. P. Huber, 'Recherches sur les
Moeurs des Fourmis,' 1810, pp. 150, 165.)

In this Order slight differences in colour, according to sex, are
common, but conspicuous differences are rare except in the family of
Bees; yet both sexes of certain groups are so brilliantly coloured--for
instance in Chrysis, in which vermilion and metallic greens
prevail--that we are tempted to attribute the result to sexual
selection. In the Ichneumonidae, according to Mr. Walsh (59.
'Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Philadelphia,' 1866, pp.
238, 239.), the males are almost universally lighter-coloured than the
females. On the other hand, in the Tenthredinidae the males are
generally darker than the females. In the Siricidae the sexes frequently
differ; thus the male of Sirex juvencus is banded with orange, whilst
the female is dark purple; but it is difficult to say which sex is the
more ornamented. In Tremex columbae the female is much brighter coloured
than the male. I am informed by Mr. F. Smith, that the male ants of
several species are black, the females being testaceous.

In the family of Bees, especially in the solitary species, as I hear
from the same entomologist, the sexes often differ in colour. The males
are generally the brighter, and in Bombus as well as in Apathus, much
more variable in colour than the females. In Anthophora retusa the male
is of a rich fulvous-brown, whilst the female is quite black: so are the
females of several species of Xylocopa, the males being bright yellow.
On the other hand the females of some species, as of Andraena fulva, are
much brighter coloured than the males. Such differences in colour can
hardly be accounted for by the males being defenceless and thus
requiring protection, whilst the females are well defended by their
stings. H. Muller (60. 'Anwendung der Darwinschen Lehre auf Bienen,'
Verh. d. n. V. Jahrg. xxix.), who has particularly attended to the
habits of bees, attributes these differences in colour in chief part to
sexual selection. That bees have a keen perception of colour is certain.
He says that the males search eagerly and fight for the possession of
the females; and he accounts through such contests for the mandibles of
the males being in certain species larger than those of the females. In
some cases the males are far more numerous than the females, either
early in the season, or at all times and places, or locally; whereas the
females in other cases are apparently in excess. In some species the
more beautiful males appear to have been selected by the females; and in
others the more beautiful females by the males. Consequently in certain
genera (Muller, p. 42), the males of the several species differ much in
appearance, whilst the females are almost indistinguishable; in other
genera the reverse occurs. H. Muller believes (p. 82) that the colours
gained by one sex through sexual selection have often been transferred
in a variable degree to the other sex, just as the pollen-collecting
apparatus of the female has often been transferred to the male, to whom
it is absolutely useless. (61. M. Perrier in his article 'la Selection
sexuelle d'apres Darwin' ('Revue Scientifique,' Feb. 1873, p. 868),
without apparently having reflected much on the subject, objects that as
the males of social bees are known to be produced from unfertilised ova,
they could not transmit new characters to their male offspring. This is
an extraordinary objection. A female bee fertilised by a male, which
presented some character facilitating the union of the sexes, or
rendering him more attractive to the female, would lay eggs which would
produce only females; but these young females would next year produce
males; and will it be pretended that such males would not inherit the
characters of their male grandfathers? To take a case with ordinary
animals as nearly parallel as possible: if a female of any white
quadruped or bird were crossed by a male of a black breed, and the male
and female offspring were paired together, will it be pretended that the
grandchildren would not inherit a tendency to blackness from their male
grandfather? The acquirement of new characters by the sterile
worker-bees is a much more difficult case, but I have endeavoured to
shew in my 'Origin of Species,' how these sterile beings are subjected
to the power of natural selection.)

Mutilla Europaea makes a stridulating noise; and according to Goureau
(62. Quoted by Westwood, 'Modern Classification of Insects,' vol. ii. p.
214.) both sexes have this power. He attributes the sound to the
friction of the third and preceding abdominal segments, and I find that
these surfaces are marked with very fine concentric ridges; but so is
the projecting thoracic collar into which the head articulates, and this
collar, when scratched with the point of a needle, emits the proper
sound. It is rather surprising that both sexes should have the power of
stridulating, as the male is winged and the female wingless. It is
notorious that Bees express certain emotions, as of anger, by the tone
of their humming; and according to H. Muller (p. 80), the males of some
species make a peculiar singing noise whilst pursuing the females.

ORDER, COLEOPTERA (BEETLES).

Many beetles are coloured so as to resemble the surfaces which they
habitually frequent, and they thus escape detection by their enemies.
Other species, for instance diamond-beetles, are ornamented with
splendid colours, which are often arranged in stripes, spots, crosses,
and other elegant patterns. Such colours can hardly serve directly as a
protection, except in the case of certain flower-feeding species; but
they may serve as a warning or means of recognition, on the same
principle as the phosphorescence of the glow-worm. As with beetles the
colours of the two sexes are generally alike, we have no evidence that
they have been gained through sexual selection; but this is at least
possible, for they have been developed in one sex and then transferred
to the other; and this view is even in some degree probable in those
groups which possess other well- marked secondary sexual characters.
Blind beetles, which cannot of course behold each other's beauty, never,
as I hear from Mr. Waterhouse, jun., exhibit bright colours, though they
often have polished coats; but the explanation of their obscurity may be
that they generally inhabit caves and other obscure stations.

Some Longicorns, especially certain Prionidae, offer an exception to the
rule that the sexes of beetles do not differ in colour. Most of these
insects are large and splendidly coloured. The males in the genus
Pyrodes (63. Pyrodes pulcherrimus, in which the sexes differ
conspicuously, has been described by Mr. Bates in 'Transact. Ent. Soc.'
1869, p. 50. I will specify the few other cases in which I have heard of
a difference in colour between the sexes of beetles. Kirby and Spence
('Introduct. to Entomology,' vol. iii. p. 301) mention a Cantharis,
Meloe, Rhagium, and the Leptura testacea; the male of the latter being
testaceous, with a black thorax, and the female of a dull red all over.
These two latter beetles belong to the family of Longicorns. Messrs. R.
Trimen and Waterhouse, jun., inform me of two Lamellicorns, viz., a
Peritrichia and Trichius, the male of the latter being more obscurely
coloured than the female. In Tillus elongatus the male is black, and the
female always, as it is believed, of a dark blue colour, with a red
thorax. The male, also, of Orsodacna atra, as I hear from Mr. Walsh, is
black, the female (the so- called O. ruficollis) having a rufous
thorax.), which I saw in Mr. Bates's collection, are generally redder
but rather duller than the females, the latter being coloured of a more
or less splendid golden-green. On the other hand, in one species the
male is golden-green, the female being richly tinted with red and
purple. In the genus Esmeralda the sexes differ so greatly in colour
that they have been ranked as distinct species; in one species both are
of a beautiful shining green, but the male has a red thorax. On the
whole, as far as I could judge, the females of those Prionidae, in which
the sexes differ, are coloured more richly than the males, and this does
not accord with the common rule in regard to colour, when acquired
through sexual selection.

\[Fig.16. Chalcosoma atlas. Upper figure, male (reduced); lower figure,
female (nat. size).

Fig. 17. Copris isidis.

Fig. 18. Phanaeus faunus.

Fig. 19. Dipelicus cantori.

Fig. 20. Onthophagus rangifer, enlarged. (In Figs. 17 to 20 the
left-hand figures are males.)\]

A most remarkable distinction between the sexes of many beetles is
presented by the great horns which rise from the head, thorax, and
clypeus of the males; and in some few cases from the under surface of
the body. These horns, in the great family of the Lamellicorns, resemble
those of various quadrupeds, such as stags, rhinoceroses, etc., and are
wonderful both from their size and diversified shapes. Instead of
describing them, I have given figures of the males and females of some
of the more remarkable forms. (Figs. 16 to 20.) The females generally
exhibit rudiments of the horns in the form of small knobs or ridges; but
some are destitute of even the slightest rudiment. On the other hand,
the horns are nearly as well developed in the female as in the male
Phanaeus lancifer; and only a little less well developed in the females
of some other species of this genus and of Copris. I am informed by Mr.
Bates that the horns do not differ in any manner corresponding with the
more important characteristic differences between the several
subdivisions of the family: thus within the same section of the genus
Onthophagus, there are species which have a single horn, and others
which have two.

In almost all cases, the horns are remarkable from their excessive
variability; so that a graduated series can be formed, from the most
highly developed males to others so degenerate that they can barely be
distinguished from the females. Mr. Walsh (64. 'Proceedings of the
Entomological Society of Philadephia,' 1864, p. 228.) found that in
Phanaeus carnifex the horns were thrice as long in some males as in
others. Mr. Bates, after examining above a hundred males of Onthophagus
rangifer (Fig. 20), thought that he had at last discovered a species in
which the horns did not vary; but further research proved the contrary.

The extraordinary size of the horns, and their widely different
structure in closely-allied forms, indicate that they have been formed
for some purpose; but their excessive variability in the males of the
same species leads to the inference that this purpose cannot be of a
definite nature. The horns do not shew marks of friction, as if used for
any ordinary work. Some authors suppose (65. Kirby and Spence,
'Introduction to Entomology,' vol. iii. P. 300.) that as the males
wander about much more than the females, they require horns as a defence
against their enemies; but as the horns are often blunt, they do not
seem well adapted for defence. The most obvious conjecture is that they
are used by the males for fighting together; but the males have never
been observed to fight; nor could Mr. Bates, after a careful examination
of numerous species, find any sufficient evidence, in their mutilated or
broken condition, of their having been thus used. If the males had been
habitual fighters, the size of their bodies would probably have been
increased through sexual selection, so as to have exceeded that of the
females; but Mr. Bates, after comparing the two sexes in above a hundred
species of the Copridae, did not find any marked difference in this
respect amongst well-developed individuals. In Lethrus, moreover, a
beetle belonging to the same great division of the Lamellicorns, the
males are known to fight, but are not provided with horns, though their
mandibles are much larger than those of the female.

The conclusion that the horns have been acquired as ornaments is that
which best agrees with the fact of their having been so immensely, yet
not fixedly, developed,--as shewn by their extreme variability in the
same species, and by their extreme diversity in closely-allied species.
This view will at first appear extremely improbable; but we shall
hereafter find with many animals standing much higher in the scale,
namely fishes, amphibians, reptiles and birds, that various kinds of
crests, knobs, horns and combs have been developed apparently for this
sole purpose.

\[Fig.21. Onitis furcifer, male viewed from beneath.

Fig.22. Onitis furcifer. Left-hand figure, male, viewed laterally.
Right-hand figure, female. a. Rudiment of cephalic horn. b. Trace of
thoracic horn or crest.\]

The males of Onitis furcifer (Fig. 21), and of some other species of the
genus, are furnished with singular projections on their anterior femora,
and with a great fork or pair of horns on the lower surface of the
thorax. Judging from other insects, these may aid the male in clinging
to the female. Although the males have not even a trace of a horn on the
upper surface of the body, yet the females plainly exhibit a rudiment of
a single horn on the head (Fig. 22, a), and of a crest (b) on the
thorax. That the slight thoracic crest in the female is a rudiment of a
projection proper to the male, though entirely absent in the male of
this particular species, is clear: for the female of Bubas bison (a
genus which comes next to Onitis) has a similar slight crest on the
thorax, and the male bears a great projection in the same situation. So,
again, there can hardly be a doubt that the little point (a) on the head
of the female Onitis furcifer, as well as on the head of the females of
two or three allied species, is a rudimentary representative of the
cephalic horn, which is common to the males of so many Lamellicorn
beetles, as in Phanaeus (Fig. 18).

The old belief that rudiments have been created to complete the scheme
of nature is here so far from holding good, that we have a complete
inversion of the ordinary state of things in the family. We may
reasonably suspect that the males originally bore horns and transferred
them to the females in a rudimentary condition, as in so many other
Lamellicorns. Why the males subsequently lost their horns, we know not;
but this may have been caused through the principle of compensation,
owing to the development of the large horns and projections on the lower
surface; and as these are confined to the males, the rudiments of the
upper horns on the females would not have been thus obliterated.

\[Fig. 23. Bledius taurus, magnified. Left-hand figure, male; right-hand
figure, female.\]

The cases hitherto given refer to the Lamellicorns, but the males of
some few other beetles, belonging to two widely distinct groups, namely,
the Curculionidae and Staphylinidae, are furnished with horns--in the
former on the lower surface of the body (66. Kirby and Spence,
'Introduction to Entomology,' vol. iii. p. 329.), in the latter on the
upper surface of the head and thorax. In the Staphylinidae, the horns of
the males are extraordinarily variable in the same species, just as we
have seen with the Lamellicorns. In Siagonium we have a case of
dimorphism, for the males can be divided into two sets, differing
greatly in the size of their bodies and in the development of their
horns, without intermediate gradations. In a species of Bledius (Fig.
23), also belonging to the Staphylinidae, Professor Westwood states
that, "male specimens can be found in the same locality in which the
central horn of the thorax is very large, but the horns of the head
quite rudimental; and others, in which the thoracic horn is much
shorter, whilst the protuberances on the head are long." (67. 'Modern
Classification of Insects,' vol. i. p. 172: Siagonium, p. 172. In the
British Museum I noticed one male specimen of Siagonium in an
intermediate condition, so that the dimorphism is not strict.) Here we
apparently have a case of compensation, which throws light on that just
given, of the supposed loss of the upper horns by the males of Onitis.

LAW OF BATTLE.

Some male beetles, which seem ill-fitted for fighting, nevertheless
engage in conflicts for the possession of the females. Mr. Wallace (68.
'The Malay Archipelago,' vol. ii. 1869, p. 276. Riley, Sixth 'Report on
Insects of Missouri,' 1874, p. 115.) saw two males of Leptorhynchus
angustatus, a linear beetle with a much elongated rostrum, "fighting for
a female, who stood close by busy at her boring. They pushed at each
other with their rostra, and clawed and thumped, apparently in the
greatest rage." The smaller male, however, "soon ran away, acknowledging
himself vanquished." In some few cases male beetles are well adapted for
fighting, by possessing great toothed mandibles, much larger than those
of the females. This is the case with the common stag-beetle (Lucanus
cervus), the males of which emerge from the pupal state about a week
before the other sex, so that several may often be seen pursuing the
same female. At this season they engage in fierce conflicts. When Mr.
A.H. Davis (69. 'Entomological Magazine,' vol. i. 1833, p. 82. See also
on the conflicts of this species, Kirby and Spence, ibid. vol. iii. p.
314; and Westwood, ibid. vol. i. p. 187.) enclosed two males with one
female in a box, the larger male severely pinched the smaller one, until
he resigned his pretensions. A friend informs me that when a boy he
often put the males together to see them fight, and he noticed that they
were much bolder and fiercer than the females, as with the higher
animals. The males would seize hold of his finger, if held in front of
them, but not so the females, although they have stronger jaws. The
males of many of the Lucanidae, as well as of the above-mentioned
Leptorhynchus, are larger and more powerful insects than the females.
The two sexes of Lethrus cephalotes (one of the Lamellicorns) inhabit
the same burrow; and the male has larger mandibles than the female. If,
during the breeding-season, a strange male attempts to enter the burrow,
he is attacked; the female does not remain passive, but closes the mouth
of the burrow, and encourages her mate by continually pushing him on
from behind; and the battle lasts until the aggressor is killed or runs
away. (70. Quoted from Fischer, in 'Dict. Class. d'Hist. Nat.' tom. x.
p. 324.) The two sexes of another Lamellicorn beetle, the Ateuchus
cicatricosus, live in pairs, and seem much attached to each other; the
male excites the females to roll the balls of dung in which the ova are
deposited; and if she is removed, he becomes much agitated. If the male
is removed the female ceases all work, and as M. Brulerie believes,
would remain on the same spot until she died. (71. 'Ann. Soc. Entomolog.
France,' 1866, as quoted in 'Journal of Travel,' by A. Murray, 1868, p.
135.)

\[Fig. 24. Chiasognathus Grantii, reduced. Upper figure, male; lower
figure, female.\]

The great mandibles of the male Lucanidae are extremely variable both in
size and structure, and in this respect resemble the horns on the head
and thorax of many male Lamellicorns and Staphylinidae. A perfect series
can be formed from the best-provided to the worst-provided or degenerate
males. Although the mandibles of the common stag-beetle, and probably of
many other species, are used as efficient weapons for fighting, it is
doubtful whether their great size can thus be accounted for. We have
seen that they are used by the Lucanus elaphus of N. America for seizing
the female. As they are so conspicuous and so elegantly branched, and as
owing to their great length they are not well adapted for pinching, the
suspicion has crossed my mind that they may in addition serve as an
ornament, like the horns on the head and thorax of the various species
above described. The male Chiasognathus grantii of S. Chile--a splendid
beetle belonging to the same family--has enormously developed mandibles
(Fig. 24); he is bold and pugnacious; when threatened he faces round,
opens his great jaws, and at the same time stridulates loudly. But the
mandibles were not strong enough to pinch my finger so as to cause
actual pain.

Sexual selection, which implies the possession of considerable
perceptive powers and of strong passions, seems to have been more
effective with the Lamellicorns than with any other family of beetles.
With some species the males are provided with weapons for fighting; some
live in pairs and shew mutual affection; many have the power of
stridulating when excited; many are furnished with the most
extraordinary horns, apparently for the sake of ornament; and some,
which are diurnal in their habits, are gorgeously coloured. Lastly,
several of the largest beetles in the world belong to this family, which
was placed by Linnaeus and Fabricius as the head of the Order. (72.
Westwood, 'Modern Classification,' vol. i. p. 184.)

STRIDULATING ORGANS.

Beetles belonging to many and widely distinct families possess these
organs. The sound thus produced can sometimes be heard at the distance
of several feet or even yards (73. Wollaston, 'On Certain Musical
Curculionidae,' 'Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' vol. vi. 1860, p. 14.),
but it is not comparable with that made by the Orthoptera. The rasp
generally consists of a narrow, slightly-raised surface, crossed by very
fine, parallel ribs, sometimes so fine as to cause iridescent colours,
and having a very elegant appearance under the microscope. In some
cases, as with Typhoeus, minute, bristly or scale-like prominences, with
which the whole surrounding surface is covered in approximately parallel
lines, could be traced passing into the ribs of the rasp. The transition
takes place by their becoming confluent and straight, and at the same
time more prominent and smooth. A hard ridge on an adjoining part of the
body serves as the scraper for the rasp, but this scraper in some cases
has been specially modified for the purpose. It is rapidly moved across
the rasp, or conversely the rasp across the scraper.

\[Fig.25. Necrophorus (from Landois). r. The two rasps. Left-hand
figure, part of the rasp highly magnified.\]

These organs are situated in widely different positions. In the carrion-
beetles (Necrophorus) two parallel rasps (r, Fig. 25) stand on the
dorsal surface of the fifth abdominal segment, each rasp (74. Landois,
'Zeitschrift fur wissenschaft Zoolog.' B. xvii. 1867, s. 127.)
consisting of 126 to 140 fine ribs. These ribs are scraped against the
posterior margins of the elytra, a small portion of which projects
beyond the general outline. In many Crioceridae, and in Clythra
4-punctata (one of the Chrysomelidae), and in some Tenebrionidae, etc.
(75. I am greatly indebted to Mr. G.R. Crotch for having sent me many
prepared specimens of various beetles belonging to these three families
and to others, as well as for valuable information. He believes that the
power of stridulation in the Clythra has not been previously observed. I
am also much indebted to Mr. E.W. Janson, for information and specimens.
I may add that my son, Mr. F. Darwin, finds that Dermestes murinus
stridulates, but he searched in vain for the apparatus. Scolytus has
lately been described by Dr. Chapman as a stridulator, in the
'Entomologist's Monthly Magazine,' vol. vi. p. 130.), the rasp is seated
on the dorsal apex of the abdomen, on the pygidium or pro-pygidium, and
is scraped in the same manner by the elytra. In Heterocerus, which
belongs to another family, the rasps are placed on the sides of the
first abdominal segment, and are scraped by ridges on the femora. (76.
Schiodte, translated, in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol.
xx. 1867, p. 37.) In certain Curculionidae and Carabidae (77. Westring
has described (Kroyer, 'Naturhist. Tidskrift,' B. ii. 1848- 49, p. 334)
the stridulating organs in these two, as well as in other families. In
the Carabidae I have examined Elaphrus uliginosus and Blethisa
multipunctata, sent to me by Mr. Crotch. In Blethisa the transverse
ridges on the furrowed border of the abdominal segment do not, as far as
I could judge, come into play in scraping the rasps on the elytra.), the
parts are completely reversed in position, for the rasps are seated on
the inferior surface of the elytra, near their apices, or along their
outer margins, and the edges of the abdominal segments serve as the
scrapers. In Pelobius Hermanni (one of Dytiscidae or water-beetles) a
strong ridge runs parallel and near to the sutural margin of the elytra,
and is crossed by ribs, coarse in the middle part, but becoming
gradually finer at both ends, especially at the upper end; when this
insect is held under water or in the air, a stridulating noise is
produced by the extreme horny margin of the abdomen being scraped
against the rasps. In a great number of long-horned beetles
(Longicornia) the organs are situated quite otherwise, the rasp being on
the meso-thorax, which is rubbed against the pro-thorax; Landois counted
238 very fine ribs on the rasp of Cerambyx heros.

\[Fig.26. Hind-leg of Geotrupes stercorarius (from Landois). r. Rasp. c.
Coxa. f. Femur. t. Tibia. tr. Tarsi.\]

Many Lamellicorns have the power of stridulating, and the organs differ
greatly in position. Some species stridulate very loudly, so that when
Mr. F. Smith caught a Trox sabulosus, a gamekeeper, who stood by,
thought he had caught a mouse; but I failed to discover the proper
organs in this beetle. In Geotrupes and Typhoeus, a narrow ridge runs
obliquely across (r, Fig. 26) the coxa of each hind-leg (having in G.
stercorarius 84 ribs), which is scraped by a specially projecting part
of one of the abdominal segments. In the nearly allied Copris lunaris,
an excessively narrow fine rasp runs along the sutural margin of the
elytra, with another short rasp near the basal outer margin; but in some
other Coprini the rasp is seated, according to Leconte (78. I am
indebted to Mr. Walsh, of Illinois, for having sent me extracts from
Leconte's 'Introduction to Entomology,' pp. 101, 143.), on the dorsal
surface of the abdomen. In Oryctes it is seated on the pro-pygidium;
and, according to the same entomologist, in some other Dynastini, on the
under surface of the elytra. Lastly, Westring states that in Omaloplia
brunnea the rasp is placed on the pro-sternum, and the scraper on the
meta-sternum, the parts thus occupying the under surface of the body,
instead of the upper surface as in the Longicorns.

We thus see that in the different coleopterous families the stridulating
organs are wonderfully diversified in position, but not much in
structure. Within the same family some species are provided with these
organs, and others are destitute of them. This diversity is
intelligible, if we suppose that originally various beetles made a
shuffling or hissing noise by the rubbing together of any hard and rough
parts of their bodies, which happened to be in contact; and that from
the noise thus produced being in some way useful, the rough surfaces
were gradually developed into regular stridulating organs. Some beetles
as they move, now produce, either intentionally or unintentionally, a
shuffling noise, without possessing any proper organs for the purpose.
Mr. Wallace informs me that the Euchirus longimanus (a Lamellicorn, with
the anterior legs wonderfully elongated in the male) "makes, whilst
moving, a low hissing sound by the protrusion and contraction of the
abdomen; and when seized it produces a grating sound by rubbing its
hind-legs against the edges of the elytra." The hissing sound is clearly
due to a narrow rasp running along the sutural margin of each elytron;
and I could likewise make the grating sound by rubbing the shagreened
surface of the femur against the granulated margin of the corresponding
elytron; but I could not here detect any proper rasp; nor is it likely
that I could have overlooked it in so large an insect. After examining
Cychrus, and reading what Westring has written about this beetle, it
seems very doubtful whether it possesses any true rasp, though it has
the power of emitting a sound.

From the analogy of the Orthoptera and Homoptera, I expected to find the
stridulating organs in the Coleoptera differing according to sex; but
Landois, who has carefully examined several species, observed no such
difference; nor did Westring; nor did Mr. G.R. Crotch in preparing the
many specimens which he had the kindness to send me. Any difference in
these organs, if slight, would, however, be difficult to detect, on
account of their great variability. Thus, in the first pair of specimens
of Necrophorus humator and of Pelobius which I examined, the rasp was
considerably larger in the male than in the female; but not so with
succeeding specimens. In Geotrupes stercorarius the rasp appeared to me
thicker, opaquer, and more prominent in three males than in the same
number of females; in order, therefore, to discover whether the sexes
differed in their power of stridulating, my son, Mr. F. Darwin,
collected fifty-seven living specimens, which he separated into two
lots, according as they made a greater or lesser noise, when held in the
same manner. He then examined all these specimens, and found that the
males were very nearly in the same proportion to the females in both the
lots. Mr. F. Smith has kept alive numerous specimens of Monoynchus
pseudacori (Curculionidae), and is convinced that both sexes stridulate,
and apparently in an equal degree.

Nevertheless, the power of stridulating is certainly a sexual character
in some few Coleoptera. Mr. Crotch discovered that the males alone of
two species of Heliopathes (Tenebrionidae) possess stridulating organs.
I examined five males of H. gibbus, and in all these there was a well-
developed rasp, partially divided into two, on the dorsal surface of the
terminal abdominal segment; whilst in the same number of females there
was not even a rudiment of the rasp, the membrane of this segment being
transparent, and much thinner than in the male. In H. cribratostriatus
the male has a similar rasp, excepting that it is not partially divided
into two portions, and the female is completely destitute of this organ;
the male in addition has on the apical margins of the elytra, on each
side of the suture, three or four short longitudinal ridges, which are
crossed by extremely fine ribs, parallel to and resembling those on the
abdominal rasp; whether these ridges serve as an independent rasp, or as
a scraper for the abdominal rasp, I could not decide: the female
exhibits no trace of this latter structure.

Again, in three species of the Lamellicorn genus Oryctes, we have a
nearly parallel case. In the females of O. gryphus and nasicornis the
ribs on the rasp of the pro-pygidium are less continuous and less
distinct than in the males; but the chief difference is that the whole
upper surface of this segment, when held in the proper light, is seen to
be clothed with hairs, which are absent or are represented by
excessively fine down in the males. It should be noticed that in all
Coleoptera the effective part of the rasp is destitute of hairs. In O.
senegalensis the difference between the sexes is more strongly marked,
and this is best seen when the proper abdominal segment is cleaned and
viewed as a transparent object. In the female the whole surface is
covered with little separate crests, bearing spines; whilst in the male
these crests in proceeding towards the apex, become more and more
confluent, regular, and naked; so that three-fourths of the segment is
covered with extremely fine parallel ribs, which are quite absent in the
female. In the females, however, of all three species of Oryctes, a
slight grating or stridulating sound is produced, when the abdomen of a
softened specimen is pushed backwards and forwards.

In the case of the Heliopathes and Oryctes there can hardly be a doubt
that the males stridulate in order to call or to excite the females; but
with most beetles the stridulation apparently serves both sexes as a
mutual call. Beetles stridulate under various emotions, in the same
manner as birds use their voices for many purposes besides singing to
their mates. The great Chiasognathus stridulates in anger or defiance;
many species do the same from distress or fear, if held so that they
cannot escape; by striking the hollow stems of trees in the Canary
Islands, Messrs. Wollaston and Crotch were able to discover the presence
of beetles belonging to the genus Acalles by their stridulation. Lastly,
the male Ateuchus stridulates to encourage the female in her work, and
from distress when she is removed. (79. M. P. de la Brulerie, as quoted
in 'Journal of Travel,' A. Murray, vol. i. 1868, p. 135.) Some
naturalists believe that beetles make this noise to frighten away their
enemies; but I cannot think that a quadruped or bird, able to devour a
large beetle, would be frightened by so slight a sound. The belief that
the stridulation serves as a sexual call is supported by the fact that
death-ticks (Anobium tessellatum) are well known to answer each other's
ticking, and, as I have myself observed, a tapping noise artificially
made. Mr. Doubleday also informs me that he has sometimes observed a
female ticking (80. According to Mr. Doubleday, "the noise is produced
by the insect raising itself on its legs as high as it can, and then
striking its thorax five or six times, in rapid succession, against the
substance upon which it is sitting." For references on this subject see
Landois, 'Zeitschrift fur wissen. Zoolog.' B. xvii. s. 131. Olivier says
(as quoted by Kirby and Spence, 'Introduction to Entomology,' vol. ii.
p. 395) that the female of Pimelia striata produces a rather loud sound
by striking her abdomen against any hard substance, "and that the male,
obedient to this call, soon attends her, and they pair."), and in an
hour or two afterwards has found her united with a male, and on one
occasion surrounded by several males. Finally, it is probable that the
two sexes of many kinds of beetles were at first enabled to find each
other by the slight shuffling noise produced by the rubbing together of
the adjoining hard parts of their bodies; and that as those males or
females which made the greatest noise succeeded best in finding
partners, rugosities on various parts of their bodies were gradually
developed by means of sexual selection into true stridulating organs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Insects, continued](dom14)
