[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Darwin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](dom24)  [Next](dom26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0140436316/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Descent of Man*, by Charles Darwin, 2nd ed. \[1874\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SUPPLEMENTAL NOTE.

### ON SEXUAL SELECTION IN RELATION TO MONKEYS.

Reprinted from NATURE, November 2, 1876, p. 18.

In the discussion on Sexual Selection in my 'Descent of Man,' no case
interested and perplexed me so much as the brightly-coloured hinder ends
and adjoining parts of certain monkeys. As these parts are more brightly
coloured in one sex than the other, and as they become more brilliant
during the season of love, I concluded that the colours had been gained
as a sexual attraction. I was well aware that I thus laid myself open to
ridicule; though in fact it is not more surprising that a monkey should
display his bright-red hinder end than that a peacock should display his
magnificent tail. I had, however, at that time no evidence of monkeys
exhibiting this part of their bodies during their courtship; and such
display in the case of birds affords the best evidence that the
ornaments of the males are of service to them by attracting or exciting
the females. I have lately read an article by Joh. von Fischer, of
Gotha, published in 'Der Zoologische Garten,' April 1876, on the
expression of monkeys under various emotions, which is well worthy of
study by any one interested in the subject, and which shews that the
author is a careful and acute observer. In this article there is an
account of the behaviour of a young male mandrill when he first beheld
himself in a looking-glass, and it is added, that after a time he turned
round and presented his red hinder end to the glass. Accordingly I wrote
to Herr J. von Fischer to ask what he supposed was the meaning of this
strange action, and he has sent me two long letters full of new and
curious details, which will, I hope, be hereafter published. He says
that he was himself at first perplexed by the above action, and was thus
led carefully to observe several individuals of various other species of
monkeys, which he has long kept in his house. He finds that not only the
mandrill (Cynocephalus mormon) but the drill (C. leucophaeus) and three
other kinds of baboons (C. hamadryas, sphinx, and babouin), also
Cynopithecus niger, and Macacus rhesus and nemestrinus, turn this part
of their bodies, which in all these species is more or less brightly
coloured, to him when they are pleased, and to other persons as a sort
of greeting. He took pains to cure a Macacus rhesus, which he had kept
for five years, of this indecorous habit, and at last succeeded. These
monkeys are particularly apt to act in this manner, grinning at the same
time, when first introduced to a new monkey, but often also to their old
monkey friends; and after this mutual display they begin to play
together. The young mandrill ceased spontaneously after a time to act in
this manner towards his master, von Fischer, but continued to do so
towards persons who were strangers and to new monkeys. A young
Cynopithecus niger never acted, excepting on one occasion, in this way
towards his master, but frequently towards strangers, and continues to
do so up to the present time. From these facts Von Fischer concludes
that the monkeys which behaved in this manner before a looking-glass
(viz., the mandrill, drill, Cynopithecus niger, Macacus rhesus and
nemestrinus) acted as if their reflection were a new acquaintance. The
mandrill and drill, which have their hinder ends especially ornamented,
display it even whilst quite young, more frequently and more
ostentatiously than do the other kinds. Next in order comes Cynocephalus
hamadryas, whilst the other species act in this manner seldomer. The
individuals, however, of the same species vary in this respect, and some
which were very shy never displayed their hinder ends. It deserves
especial attention that Von Fischer has never seen any species purposely
exhibit the hinder part of its body, if not at all coloured. This remark
applies to many individuals of Macacus cynomolgus and Cercocebus
radiatus (which is closely allied to M. rhesus), to three species of
Cercopithecus and several American monkeys. The habit of turning the
hinder ends as a greeting to an old friend or new acquaintance, which
seems to us so odd, is not really more so than the habits of many
savages, for instance that of rubbing their bellies with their hands, or
rubbing noses together. The habit with the mandrill and drill seems to
be instinctive or inherited, as it was followed by very young animals;
but it is modified or guided, like so many other instincts, by
observation, for Von Fischer says that they take pains to make their
display fully; and if made before two observers, they turn to him who
seems to pay the most attention.

With respect to the origin of the habit, Von Fischer remarks that his
monkeys like to have their naked hinder ends patted or stroked, and that
they then grunt with pleasure. They often also turn this part of their
bodies to other monkeys to have bits of dirt picked off, and so no doubt
it would be with respect to thorns. But the habit with adult animals is
connected to a certain extent with sexual feelings, for Von Fischer
watched through a glass door a female Cynopithecus niger, and she during
several days, "umdrehte und dem Mannchen mit gurgelnden Tonen die stark
gerothete Sitzflache zeigte, was ich fruher nie an diesem Thier bemerkt
hatte. Beim Anblick dieses Gegenstandes erregte sich das Mannchen
sichtlich, denn es polterte heftig an den Staben, ebenfalls gurgelnde
Laute ausstossend." As all the monkeys which have the hinder parts of
their bodies more or less brightly coloured live, according to Von
Fischer, in open rocky places, he thinks that these colours serve to
render one sex conspicuous at a distance to the other; but, as monkeys
are such gregarious animals, I should have thought that there was no
need for the sexes to recognise each other at a distance. It seems to me
more probable that the bright colours, whether on the face or hinder
end, or, as in the mandrill, on both, serve as a sexual ornament and
attraction. Anyhow, as we now know that monkeys have the habit of
turning their hinder ends towards other monkeys, it ceases to be at all
surprising that it should have been this part of their bodies which has
been more or less decorated. The fact that it is only the monkeys thus
characterised which, as far as at present known, act in this manner as a
greeting towards other monkeys renders it doubtful whether the habit was
first acquired from some independent cause, and that afterwards the
parts in question were coloured as a sexual ornament; or whether the
colouring and the habit of turning round were first acquired through
variation and sexual selection, and that afterwards the habit was
retained as a sign of pleasure or as a greeting, through the principle
of inherited association. This principle apparently comes into play on
many occasions: thus it is generally admitted that the songs of birds
serve mainly as an attraction during the season of love, and that the
leks, or great congregations of the black-grouse, are connected with
their courtship; but the habit of singing has been retained by some
birds when they feel happy, for instance by the common robin, and the
habit of congregating has been retained by the black- grouse during
other seasons of the year.

I beg leave to refer to one other point in relation to sexual selection.
It has been objected that this form of selection, as far as the
ornaments of the males are concerned, implies that all females within
the same district must possess and exercise exactly the same taste. It
should, however, be observed, in the first place, that although the
range of variation of a species may be very large, it is by no means
indefinite. I have elsewhere given a good instance of this fact in the
pigeon, of which there are at least a hundred varieties differing widely
in their colours, and at least a score of varieties of the fowl
differing in the same kind of way; but the range of colour in these two
species is extremely distinct. Therefore the females of natural species
cannot have an unlimited scope for their taste. In the second place, I
presume that no supporter of the principle of sexual selection believes
that the females select particular points of beauty in the males; they
are merely excited or attracted in a greater degree by one male than by
another, and this seems often to depend, especially with birds, on
brilliant colouring. Even man, excepting perhaps an artist, does not
analyse the slight differences in the features of the woman whom he may
admire, on which her beauty depends. The male mandrill has not only the
hinder end of his body, but his face gorgeously coloured and marked with
oblique ridges, a yellow beard, and other ornaments. We may infer from
what we see of the variation of animals under domestication, that the
above several ornaments of the mandrill were gradually acquired by one
individual varying a little in one way, and another individual in
another way. The males which were the handsomest or the most attractive
in any manner to the females would pair oftenest, and would leave rather
more offspring than other males. The offspring of the former, although
variously intercrossed, would either inherit the peculiarities of their
fathers or transmit an increased tendency to vary in the same manner.
Consequently the whole body of males inhabiting the same country would
tend from the effects of constant intercrossing to become modified
almost uniformly, but sometimes a little more in one character and
sometimes in another, though at an extremely slow rate; all ultimately
being thus rendered more attractive to the females. The process is like
that which I have called unconscious selection by man, and of which I
have given several instances. In one country the inhabitants value a
fleet or light dog or horse, and in another country a heavier and more
powerful one; in neither country is there any selection of individual
animals with lighter or stronger bodies and limbs; nevertheless after a
considerable lapse of time the individuals are found to have been
modified in the desired manner almost uniformly, though differently in
each country. In two absolutely distinct countries inhabited by the same
species, the individuals of which can never during long ages have
intermigrated and intercrossed, and where, moreover, the variations will
probably not have been identically the same, sexual selection might
cause the males to differ. Nor does the belief appear to me altogether
fanciful that two sets of females, surrounded by a very different
environment, would be apt to acquire somewhat different tastes with
respect to form, sound, or colour. However this may be, I have given in
my 'Descent of Man' instances of closely-allied birds inhabiting
distinct countries, of which the young and the females cannot be
distinguished, whilst the adult males differ considerably, and this may
be attributed with much probability to the action of sexual selection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index.](dom26)
