[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tu00)  [Next](tu02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766185303/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Unicorn, a Mythological Investigation*, by Robert Brown, \[1881\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### FOREWORD.

THIS little brochure is a contribution, however humble, to the science
of psychology; not merely a notice of curious, still less of idle,
fancies. The study of man to be successful must commence with his
earlier, that is to say, simpler, phases. The 'solar myth,' vaguely so
called, is often ridiculed but never by anyone who has carefully
examined it; and the history of the Lion and the Unicorn exhibits one
aspect of the ideas of Time and Kosmic Order as shown in the most
obvious divisions of period—Day and Night. The indirect influence of our
present civilization and the repetition of phenomena produce a sadly
deadening effect upon the vast majority of minds as regards appreciation
of the external world, and render it extremely difficult for us to place
ourselves near the mental standpoint of primitive, or even of archaic,
man. We do not wonder at the sun, or at the genius which has contrived
by the use of only ten signs to express any number, or indeed at
anything which, though marvellous in itself, is somewhat

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

familiar to the senses and ordinary apprehension. Even scientific
research often resolves itself into an anatomical dissection, which is
equivalent to the knowledge of the way about a cathedral, combined with
an appreciation of the principles of masonry, but accompanied by total
ignorance of, or utter indifference to, the real forces which produced
the building.

With respect to the evidence adduced in the particular case, its
*combined* weight is specially to be considered; the various points are
not links in a chain, the failure in any one of which is fatal, but
items in a description.

As, according to Prof. Ludwig Noiré, the discovery of the axe assured
the triumph of the kingdom of man upon earth, so the idea of Time, solar
(day), lunar (week-month), and sidereal (year), was a mighty mental axe
with which Thought hewed its way to noble victories. I treat here merely
of the Day and of that which by division makes it—the Night, and of but
one mythic phase of these; yet, be it remembered, the idea of Day
contained the germ of the idea of Eternity, so far as such a concept is
possible to man; for Time is Division, a Day the primary division, and
Eternity merely infinitely reduplicated Time.

BARTON-UPON-HUMBER:  
         *Oct*. 1, 1881.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tu02)
