[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tu04)  [Next](tu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766185303/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Unicorn, a Mythological Investigation*, by Robert Brown, \[1881\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### SECTION III.

#### THE UNICORN IN ARCHAIC ART.

A UNICORNIC animal frequently appears in archaic art, but whilst
asserting that all non-natural animal-figures or partly human figures
when used in a religious connexion are symbolical, I do not for a moment
contend that all unicornic animal-figures represent the moon; but merely
that the creature whose form is familiar to us in heraldry, a kind of
horse-stag or antelope, is a lunar emblem. Thus on a Babylonian
Cylinder <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) representing Bel
encountering Tiamat, who, whatever else she may represent, is the Dragon
of Chaos, the monster who rises on her hind legs, has a beak, crest,
wings and a single horn; and is altogether very similar to one of the
Seven Wicked Spirits that make war against the Moon-god Sin, as the
representative of kosmic order. <span id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) This
latter

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

creature, a reduplication of the drakontic Tiamat, rises similarly on
its hind legs, and has a crest, wings, and single horn. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) Tiamat herself is elsewhere represented as
two-horned. <span id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) The horn has various
meanings in symbolism, <span id="fr_54"></span>[3](#fn_54) the majority
of which are not of a lunar character. But the following examples of the
Unicorn, its allies, and opponents, are, in my opinion, certainly more
or less connected with lunar symbolism;—

I. On an Assyrian sardonyx Seal in the Louvre Museum, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[4](#fn_55) is represented a crowned personage, behind
whom is a serpent erect on its tail; his right hand grasps a dagger, and
his left the horn of a Unicorn-goat, standing on its hind legs with the
fore legs bent and head turned from him, the mouth touching the
conventional Tree; above the animal, the crescent moon. The King (?) is
about to slay the Unicorn, beneath the fore legs of which is a lozenge.
With this design must be considered;—

II\. Another Babylonian Gem figured by Lajard, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[5](#fn_56) on which is shown the king in the same
attitude,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

grasping by the head a crowned and apparently human-headed and winged
goat, in the same attitude as the Unicorn-goat. Beneath the fore legs of
the crowned goat is a representation, apparently the yoni, the
equivalent of the lozenge; and above the creature the crescent moon and
behind it the conventional Tree, on the other side of which is a Goat in
the same attitude as the crowned anima\] except that its head is
regardant <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) towards the Tree, as in
No. I. The goat's two horns are close together so as to form but one,
and beneath its fore legs is a figure composed of two crescent moons
addorsed and fastened together. All the animals are salient. With both
these designs let us consider;—

III\. An Assyrian Cylinder <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58) of great
interest, said to portray 'Merodach, or Bel, armed for the conflict with
the Dragon;' but which I prefer to call 'The Sun-god and the Moon-god
arranging the preservation of Kosmic Order.' On each side of the
representation is a palm-tree; in front of the one on the right hand
Merodach ('the Brilliance-of-the-Sun') stands fully armed, on a
leopard-like animal, <span id="fr_59"></span>[3](#fn_59) and

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

above his crowned head is the solar star, the key to the symbolism.
Merodach's right hand is raised as if in oath on a treaty, as is the
right hand of a human figure in another long garment, in front of and
apparently conversing with him. Behind this second figure are two
Unicorn-goats, counter-salient, with heads regardant as in the last
example. Above the Unicorns and the second figure, which I believe
represents the Moon-god, is a crescent moon, curiously divided into
three parts, <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) by what seem to be
handles. Beyond the Unicorns is a second Palm-tree. The unarmed Moon
commissions the warrior Sun to go forth to the great contest.

In all three instances we find the Unicorn, the Crescent-moon, and the
Tree. <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61) In the first two
representations the Unicorn is being attacked and overcome by a
personage whose crown and attire are very similar to those of Merodach.
The type is evidently a familiar one; the Unicorn's horn in each case
almost touches the Tree, to which its head always turns. In No. II. the
Man-goat strives with the Man; the Goat, the reduplication of the
former, does not: there is sometimes peace between the Unicorn and its
assailant, and sometimes war. In No. III. the Leopard, which, as it
could be trained to hunt, was a fit type of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the Hunter-sun, is at peace with the Unicorns; whilst Sun and Moon
consult together against darkness and chaos. The remarkable position of
the two Unicorns indicates, I think, the monthly cycling progress of the
moon, 'there and back' (counter-salient). Reduplication is a noted
feature in symbolism; and we have here (1) the Moon-god, (2) the
crescent moon, (3) the young moon, and (4) the old moon.

The next type to be noticed in this connexion consists of a divine
personage between two other symbolical beings, whose hands or arms he
grasps in a friendly manner;—

IV\. Divine four-winged personage, with round cap on head, and long
fringed robe reaching to the ankles, but leaving the right leg exposed
as ready for action as in the case of Merodach. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) His right hand grasps the wrist of an
androkephalik winged animal rampant, with human hands but lion's feet;
his left hand grasps the right fore foot of a winged Unicorn, rampant,
with hoofs. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63)

V. Variant phase. <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64) A similar
personage, but without wings, stands in the same attitude between two
semi-human, Dagonic (semi-piscine) figures, one of which has a large
eye, the other has apparently its cap drawn down over the eye. To the
right is the winged circle (not solar), the familiar type of the head of
the Assyrian Pantheon. <span id="fr_65"></span>[4](#fn_65)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

VI\. Third variant phase. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) A similar
personage between two androkephalik, winged, rampant animals. To the
right the Moon-god in his crescent boat above the Sacred Tree. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) The helmet of the creature next the
Moon-god is horned.

In this representation I think we have the Demiurge Bel, whose eldest
son in the formal Pantheon is Sin, the Moon-god, making a covenant
between the Sun and Moon for the preservation of kosmic order. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68) The second creature in No. VI. is a
reduplication of the Moon-god, whose introduction in his crescent <span
id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69) gives the key to the symbolism, whilst
preserving the secret of it. The Moon-god, as 'Lord of growth,' <span
id="fr_70"></span>[5](#fn_70) is stationed immediately over the Tree of
Life. Both Sun and Moon are sea divinities as in No. V. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[6](#fn_71) If this interpretation be correct we have
the lunar Unicorn (No. V.) as the equivalent of the lunar fish and the
lunar androkephalik animal.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

VII\. On a Phoenician gem found at Cnidos <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) is represented the sun radiate, a large
crescent moon, and between the two a small circle—perhaps the planet
Venus, whilst below are two rude heads of a unicorn bull and cow. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73)

VIII\. A Unicorn-bull stands near the Sacred Tree, on the other side of
which is a priest with a knife. <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74)

IX\. The well-known bas-relief at Persepolis called 'Lion devouring a
Bull,' is in reality 'Lion attacking a Unicorn.' The latter animal,
semi-rampant and regardant, and with only one large horn, is seized
behind by the lion. On this group Professor Rawlinson remarks;—

'This is a representation of a lion seizing and devouring a bull; the
latter animal is evidently powerless to offer any resistance to the
fierce beast *which has sprung upon him from behind*. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[4](#fn_75) In his agony the bull rears up his
fore-parts, and turns his head feebly towards his assailant. . . .This
favourite group, which the Persian sculptors *repeated without the
slightest change from generation to generation*.' <span
id="fr_76"></span>[5](#fn_76) The design was favourite because highly
archaic and symbolical. No man has ever seen a lion attack a unicorn,
but the contest between sun and moon, between day and night, was watched
from the first with the closest interest. Sun and moon may equally
combine

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

against darkness and chaos, or contend against each other.' <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77)

X. A Persian Cylinder <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) shows the
Unicorn-goat held in the arms of a divinity; <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79) opposite is the sun radiate.

XI\. Another Assyrian scene from Layard <span
id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80) shows a man adoring a winged Unicorn-bull,
above which appear the sun radiate, the crescent moon, and also the
seven planets. It will be remembered that the Unicorn-stag is the
creature which I regard as especially lunar; the representation shows
how familiar is the idea of a Unicorn.

XII\. 'Tree of Life, between two Gryphons.' <span
id="fr_81"></span>[5](#fn_81) This cylinder-scene represents the Sacred
Tree <span id="fr_82"></span>[6](#fn_82) between two winged Unicorns
(not Gryphons) rampant, each turned towards it. The Tree is of the
archaic palm-type. With this may be compared the two Unicorns and the
Palm in No. III.

XIII\. 'Cow <span id="fr_83"></span>[7](#fn_83) and calf before a tree;
over them the Sun and Planets. The representation of the animal presents
a striking analogy to that of the bull

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

*regardant* on the coins of Sybaris. Conical seal.' <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) The seal in question shows the Unicorn-cow
(or bull) with the usual *prominent* (lunar) *eye*, before the tree;
and, as frequently, regardant. <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85) The
horned moon it will of course be remembered, is frequently connected
with the bull or cow, indeed more frequently than with the Unicorn; and
the Bull and Cow, emblems of increase, are also connected with Night as
a period of growth. The nocturnal Sun, too, is at times bovine; in
contradistinction to the diurnal and leonine Sun. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[3](#fn_86) We must expect to find frequently a
mixture of ideas in a symbolical representation. This Unicorn-cow (if a
cow it be) seems, as shown by the calf, to be kosmogonic as well as
lunar; but the old attitude of the head, the prominent eye, the single
horn and the tree are still preserved. 'The maiden unicorn' can have no
calf; but the Old Moon is at times seen in the Young Moon's arms, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[4](#fn_87) *i.e.*, when in addition to the sun-lit
portion of the moon, the obscure portion is faintly visible on account
of the reflection of the 'earth-shine;' called *lumen incinerosum*, a
Cinderella-moon.

XIV\. It is convenient to notice next the archaic coinage of Sybaris
referred to by Mr. King. Sybaris was colonised from Achaia, B.C. 721,
and the coins in question may be placed prior to B.C. 600. Leake

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

describes the type as 'Bull standing to left, with head reverted;' and
remarks, 'This type is probably symbolical of the river Crathis.' <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) As in previous instances no attention is
paid to the circumstance that the animal, whatever else it may be, is a
unicorn, in this case a unicorn-bull. I do not absolutely assert that it
is a lunar emblem; but it is certainly a link in the chain of unicornic
representations, and has faithfully preserved the regardant attitude. As
one of a series it is quite unconnected with the river Crathis, a
circumstance also shown by the fact that this class of symbolical
river-representations were not unicornic but purely bovine with respect
to the head, such as that of the Acheloös, one of whose *horns* was
broken off in his contest with Heraklês. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89)

XV\. The demi-Unicorn-bull alone, and also the heads of the Lion and
Unicorn-bull fronting each other, as if combatant, appear on coins of
Kypros. Archaic coins of Sardis also show the Demi-lion and Demi-bull
(not Unicorn-bull), the same type, combatant. On another coin of Sardis
the demi-Unicorn-bull appears alone. <span id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90)

XVI\. Another Sardian coin shows the heads of the Lion and Unicorn-bull
addorsed and joined at the neck, a fore foot of each being added. This
type, is almost certainly borrowed from Persia; at Persepolis the double
Unicorn-bull-capital appears, the bodies of the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

bulls being joined below the neck, and a fore foot of each being
added. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) This is probably
ornamentation as distinct from symbolism.

XVII\. Unicornic monsters are also shown on Persian gems, cylinders, and
sculptures. These creatures, however, are not lunar, but reproductions
of the Akkadian and Assyrian evil-spirits, Tiamat and her brood, who
often attack the Moon-god. 'One of them has the griffin head, a
feathered crest and neck, a bird's wings, a scorpion's tail, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) and legs terminating in the claws of an
eagle.' <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93)

XVIII\. A very interesting Assyrian or Babylonian Cylinder given by
Creuzer <span id="fr_94"></span>[4](#fn_94) from Ker Porter and
Guigniaut, shows above in the centre the Supreme Divinity, having the
crescent moon and seven planets on his right hand, and the eight-rayed
radiate sun on his left. Beneath the crescent stands the Moon-god armed,
'auf ein ungeflügeltes Einhorn \[Unicorn\] tretend.' <span
id="fr_95"></span>[5](#fn_95) Before him stands the figure of a votary,
behind whom and beneath the Divinity is the Sacred Tree, beyond which
and beneath the sun is the figure of the Sun-god armed, and holding over
the Tree what is apparently a necklet. A cuneiform inscription

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

accompanies. Here, again, we have a scene of kosmic harmony; Divinity,
Sun-god, and Moon-god, sun, moon, and planets, and the Tree of Life,
which, being placed under the Divinity, is apparently a symbol of him in
his effects. The direct connexion between the Crescent-moon and the
Unicorn appears very strikingly. The Moon-god stands upon the Unicorn
exactly in the same way as in other instances <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) he stands upon his crescent.

XIX\. The Assyrian sculptures show many representations of unicornic
animals, *e.g.*:—

1\. Assurnatsirpal hunting Wild Bulls (about B.C. 884), North West
Palace, Nimrud. Two bulls are represented, each with a single large
horn.

2\. Assyrian Oxen (Koyunjik). <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97)

3\. The Ibex or Gazelle. <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98)

4\. The familiar representation of a small Fallow-deer, carried by a
branch-bearing divinity. This treatment is apparently partly
conventional, but I do not think with Sir G. Wilkinson <span
id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99) that the sculptors represented under the
form of the Unicorn-bull the Rhinoceros of which they had only heard,
since widely different animals are so portrayed. Some representations
show the two horns of the Ibex.

XX\. A Cylinder, 'found on the site of Nineveh,' <span
id="fr_100"></span>[5](#fn_100) shows above the emblem of divinity, sun,
crescent-moon, and seven planets, as in No. XVIII. Below, a

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

man on horseback is apparently pursuing a Unicorn-antelope, in attitude
almost rampant and regardant. Beyond this, another Unicorn, also
regardant, is standing suckling a young kid. A human figure, apparently
a priest, stands before a trident and another emblem. The combination is
evidently symbolical, but its signification is obscure. The regardant
attitude of the Unicorns is very noticeable.

XXI\. Amongst miscellaneous Assyrian unicornic representations may be
noticed;—

1\. A most heraldic pair of Unicorns’ heads on a clay tablet. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

2\. The head of a Unicorn-bull at the end of a chariot-pole, on which
are also carved two winged Unicorn-bulls respectant. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

3\. A Unicorn-ibex above a lotus-flower, from the royal cylinder of
Sennacherib.

XXII\. D’Hancarville <span id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) and Taylor
the Editor of Calmet's *Dictionary of the Bible*, <span
id="fr_104"></span>[4](#fn_104) give the following unicornic coin-types,
said to be Mardian;— <span id="fr_105"></span>[5](#fn_105)

1\. A coin from Hunter's collection. A composite animal with one horn, a
bull's body and legs, wings, and human head, upon which the *modius*
(corn-measure), a usual adjunct of Serapis, whose cult was introduced
into Egypt from Sinope. <span id="fr_106"></span>[6](#fn_106) Rev. The
Triquetra.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here for the first
time we meet with this purely lunar emblem, *i.e.*, three crescent moons
issuing from the full moon, in connexion with the Unicorn.

2\. Two Unicorn-bulls or Bull and Cow addorsed, after the type of the
Persepolis capitals; above, the Triquetra. Rev. The Triquetra.

3\. Unicorn-bull sinking down as if dying; above, a circle. The victory
of sun over moon, or the waning moon (?). Rev. The Triquetra; variant
phase as three legs. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)

XXIII\. Lion pulling down a Unicorn-bull. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108) Calcedony. Of this example Mr. King
remarks, 'The technique of this intaglio is altogether Assyrian, and the
subject justifies the conclusion that it is of Phoenician workmanship.'

XXIV\. 'The conjoined fore-quarters of two Winged \[Unicorn-\]
Bulls.' <span id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_109) Mr. King adds, 'Probably
to be understood as an astrological talisman, allusive to the Sign
Taurus. Sard scarabeus.' The zodiacal Taurus, however, is not unicornic,
and the type is the same as that of the Persepolitan capitals, which are
certainly not zodiacal. It is singular how rarely those who reproduce
these representations have noticed their unicornic character.

XXV\. The coins of Samos show a very interesting type;—A lion's scalp,
lion's head, or lion's head with open mouth. Rev. (of the first type)
Demi-unicorn-bull.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At Samos was a
shrine of Dionysos Kechenôs, <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110) 'the
Gaper,' a solar divinity like the Apollôn Kechenôs of Elis; <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111) the open-mouthed Lion being a type of
the raging, devouring Sun, Athamas. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[3](#fn_112) The coin-type thus represented Day and
Night, the Lion and the Unicorn, or the Sun and Moon.

XXVI\. The Unicorn-bull, in one instance regardant, appears also upon
some Kretan coins. 'The circumstance of a single horn \[as shown on
various coins\] perplexed the learned medallist Pelerin, who remarked
it, without being able to offer any explanation of it.' <span
id="fr_113"></span>[4](#fn_113) Kretan coins show various Semitic types,
*e.g.*, 'l’arbre cosmique, identique à l’arbre de vie.' <span
id="fr_114"></span>[5](#fn_114)

XXVII\. On the cup of Kourion <span id="fr_115"></span>[6](#fn_115) in
Kypros are shown, amongst other devices, two unicorn-goats, each
standing on one side of some conventional object, and with one fore foot
resting upon it. The twisted horn in each case is near the Tree, whose
type is well reproduced at the present time by the trees in toy Noah's
arks.

XXVIII\. The Unicorn also occurs in 'early \[Egyptian\] paintings;' but,
according to Sir G. Wilkinson,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'the Egyptian
unicorn, even in the early time of the twelfth dynasty, was the
rhinoceros.' <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116) Yet at the same time
we find a Unicorn-antelope depicted, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117) the animal couchant, the horn long and
straight, and the tail standing straight up in an unnatural manner, in
exactly the same way as the tail of the Kamic Gryphon is
represented, <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118) an additional
circumstance in illustration of the fact that the representation is
symbolical. The sound of the Unicorn-ideograph is given as '*St*.,
Typhon,' and that of the Gryphon as '*Baru*, Baal; *Set*, Typhon.' Now
'Set ou Soutekh personnifie l’ardeur et la force redoutable du
soleil'—Gryphon; but as the 'meurtrier d’Osiris, il est le dieu du mal
et personnifie les ténèbres,' <span id="fr_119"></span>[4](#fn_119) and
may thus be connected with the nocturnal unicorn. Sir G. Wilkinson
observes, 'Many animals are introduced in the sculptures, . . . some of
which are purely the offspring of *disordered imagination*; and the
winged quadrupeds, sphinxes, or lions, with the head of a. hawk or of a
snake, and some others equally fanciful and unnatural, *can only be
compared to the creations of heraldry*.' <span
id="fr_120"></span>[5](#fn_120) A 'disordered imagination' should be the
last thing appealed to in explanation of such creations; in the abstract
the same explanation might be given of the forms of the gods; and it is
much more probable to suppose that some reason, symbolical or otherwise,
underlies the efforts of the artist.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

XXIX\. The discoveries of Schliemann at Mykênê have revealed, as might
be expected, several instances of the Unicorn, although the author does
not notice any of them in this aspect. Thus on a gem <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121) is shown the familiar Unicorn-cow or Ox,
in duplicate, as usual regardant, and each with a calf; but, as has
sometimes been remarked on similar representations, no udder is
shown. <span id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122) The design is evidently
symbolical, though it is by no means improbable that by the time it got
as far west as Mykênê the original meaning was forgotten or unknown. But
we have already met on Assyrian ground <span
id="fr_123"></span>[3](#fn_123) with the peculiar type of two Unicorns
standing opposite each other with reverted heads, and the circumstance
is a link between the art of Mykênê and that of the non-Aryan East. We
must, in accordance with previous interpretation, regard the two calves
as representing the new moon and the full moon, which draw their
strength from the decreasing and increasing crescent moon, the animal
being represented as male in accordance with the sex of the Moon-god.

XXX\. Another remarkable gold ornament is described by Schliemann as
'two stags lying down, with long three-branched horns, leaning with the
necks against each other, and turning the head in opposite directions
\[like the Assyrian Unicorn-goats in No. III.\], but so that the horns
of both touch each other, and seem intended to form a sort of
crown.' <span id="fr_124"></span>[4](#fn_124) Here again

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the peculiar design shows a unity of origin, although very likely the
maker of the Mykenean example had no thought of lunar symbolism. The
'stags' are small spotted fallow-deer, and each has but one horn, in
which are three tines; in fact, the treatment of the horn is precisely
similar to that of the same animal in Assyrian representations. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125) The eye, too, is very prominent. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126)

XXXI\. Another example given by Schliemann <span
id="fr_127"></span>[3](#fn_127) shows two spotted, couchant, bull-like,
prominent-eyed Unicorns, the horn in each case being treated exactly as
in the last example, their necks touching, but the head of each reverted
in the usual special manner.

XXXII\. The next example from Schliemann <span
id="fr_128"></span>[4](#fn_128) shows a queer-looking animal with the
head of an ass, and bear's paws, and one long horn with several tines.
It is described as 'a Stag, of an alloy of silver and lead.'

XXXIII\. Lion and Unicorn fighting (?). <span
id="fr_129"></span>[5](#fn_129)

The above instances by no means exhaust the appearances of the Unicorn
in archaic art, and at the same time show that the idea of such a
creature was familiar in Babylonia, Assyria, Egypt, Asia Minor and
Greece. Many points in the representations will become more suggestive
in the course of the enquiry; meanwhile it may be noticed as a general
result that;—

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

I. The Monster-unicorn is not lunar.

II\. The Bovine-unicorn is more or less lunar.

III\. The Unicorn-antelope, except perhaps in Egypt, and the
Unicorn-goat, are distinctly and essentially lunar.

IV\. The Unicorn is very frequently represented as attacking or attacked
by the Lion.

Inman remarks that the Bull (whose frequent unicornic character he does
not observe), and the Lion 'amongst the Assyrians, *occupied much the
same place as the lion and the unicorn do in modern heraldry*.' <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[14:1](tu05.htm#fr_50) Smith, *C.A.G.* 109.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[14:2](tu05.htm#fr_51) For a comparison between
the Babylonian and Norse ideas on this subject, vide R. B. Jr.,
*R.M.A.*, sec. xiv. The Seven Wicked Spirits of the Babylonian myth may
be paralleled exactly with Seven Evil Personages of the Norse mythology,
thus;—

|                   |                                                                                     |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| BABYLONIAN.       | NORSE.                                                                              |
| Scorpion-of-rain. | Midhgardhsormer (the World-encircling Serpent, primarily cast from heaven as rain). |
| Thunderbolt.      | Angurbodha ('Messenger of fear'). <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>                   |
| Leopard.          | Fenrir (the nocturnal Wolf).                                                        |
| Serpent.          | Nidhoggr ('Gnawing-serpent').                                                       |
| Watch-dog.        | Garmr ('Swallower,' the hell-hound).                                                |
| Tempest.          | Beli ('Roarer')-Loki (Fire).                                                        |
| Evil-wind.        | Egdir ('Eagle.' Aquila-aquilo).                                                     |

I am unable here to pursue this very interesting subject (vide
Lenormant, *Les Origines*, 520; Smith, *C.A.G.*, 99 *et seq.*).

<span id="fn_52"></span>[15:1](tu05.htm#fr_52) Smith, *C.A.G.* 101.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[15:2](tu05.htm#fr_53) *Ibid*. 114.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[15:3](tu05.htm#fr_54) Vide R. B. Jr., *G.D.M.*,
cap. IX. sec. iii., *Taurokerôs*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[15:4](tu05.htm#fr_55) Vide Lajard, *Culte de
Mithra*, pl. xlvii.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[15:5](tu05.htm#fr_56) Apud Inman, *Ancient
Faiths*, i. 150.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[16:1](tu05.htm#fr_57) I do not always use this
term in its strictest sense, *i.e.*, looking towards the sinister.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[16:2](tu05.htm#fr_58) *C.A.G.* 112.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[16:3](tu05.htm#fr_59) This animal may be one of
the hunter-god's 'four divine dogs,' Ukkumu ('Despoiler'), Akkulu
('Devourer'), Iksuda ('Capturer'), and Iltebu ('Carrier-away'). For the
Sun-god to be dog-attended is no novelty. Vide the Vedic Yams (R. B.
Jr., *R.M.A.*, Appendix C. 5). It is to be observed that this
conventional position, standing on an animal, reappears further west,
*e.g.*, at Pterion, in Asia Minor (vide Waring, *Ceramic Art in Remote
Ages*, pl. xxxix, fig. 16), where a figure said to be the goddess
Anaitis, holding a crescent-topped staff and accompanied <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> by a salient unicornic animal, stands on the
back of a leopard-like animal, and is followed by an attendant who
stands on the back of a dog. Here, again, crescent and unicorn are seen
in close connexion.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[17:1](tu05.htm#fr_60) As to the triple aspect
of the moon, vide secs. VI., IX.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[17:2](tu05.htm#fr_61) For the connexion between
the Unicorn and the Tree, vide sec. XII., subsec. 3.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[18:1](tu05.htm#fr_62) No. III.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[18:2](tu05.htm#fr_63) *C.A.G.* 35.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[18:3](tu05.htm#fr_64) Lajard, *Culte de Vénus*,
pl. xxii. fig. 3. A. carnelian cylinder.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[18:4](tu05.htm#fr_65) Vide Prof, Rawlinson,
A.M. ii.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[19:1](tu05.htm#fr_66) A cylinder (ap. King,
*A.G.R.* vol. ii. pl. ii. fig. 6).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[19:2](tu05.htm#fr_67) Vide sec. XII. subsec. 3.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[19:3](tu05.htm#fr_68) Vide No. III.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[19:4](tu05.htm#fr_69) Vide a similar figure in
Prof. Rawlinson's *A.M.* ii. 16.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[19:5](tu05.htm#fr_70) The Akkadian Enzuna, the
waxing-moon. Cf. *Deut*. xxxiii. 14; 'The precious things put forth by
the moon.'

<span id="fn_71"></span>[19:6](tu05.htm#fr_71) Cf. the solar voyager
Kibirra-Izdubar, the golden Phoenician Chrysôr, who 'was the first man
who fared in ships;' Melqarth, the solar Tyrian hero, who sails to the
farthest regions of the West (vide *G.D.M.* cap. XI. sec. i.); the Aryan
Fish-sun (Apollôn Delphinios), Frog-sun, etc. So 'when the sun had set
Oannês used to retire again into the sea, and pass the night in the
deep' (Alexander Polyhistor, ap. Cary, *Ancient Fragments*, 56). The
Zodiacal Capricorn, which appears portrayed much as at present on a
uranographic Babylonian stone of the twelfth century B.C. now in the
British Museum (vide Professor Rawlinson, *A.M.* ii. 574), originally
represented the Fish-sun climbing goat-like up the eastern steep.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[20:1](tu05.htm#fr_72) Lajard, *Culte de Vénus*,
pl. iii. fig. 8.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[20:2](tu05.htm#fr_73) Vide No. XXII. 2.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[20:3](tu05.htm#fr_74) Layard, ap. Inman,
*Ancient Faiths*, vol. i. fig. 66.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[20:4](tu05.htm#fr_75) Vide sec. XII. subsec. 2.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[20:5](tu05.htm#fr_76) *A.M.* iii. 339-40.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[21:1](tu05.htm#fr_77) This contest between Day
and Night, is shown farther west on coins of Akanthos, where the
lion-sun seizes the bull of night which is apparently unicornic. In
later idea the design embraces the contest between the principles of
destruction and renewal (vide *G.D.M.* i. 387).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[21:2](tu05.htm#fr_78) *A.M.* 354.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[21:3](tu05.htm#fr_79) Vide No. XIX. 4.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[21:4](tu05.htm#fr_80) Ap. King, *A.G.R.* vol.
ii. pl. i. fig. 1.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[21:5](tu05.htm#fr_81) *Ibid*. fig. 7.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[21:6](tu05.htm#fr_82) Perhaps this tree may, as
Mr. King suggests, have been also originally connected with the cult of
the Vedic Soma, the Iranian Haoma, the Omomi of Plutarch, and the Horn
of Anquetil du Perron (vide R. B. Jr., *G.D.M.* cap. IX. sec. ii.
*Theoinos*).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[21:7](tu05.htm#fr_83) On the question whether a
cow or a bull is represented, and why, vide No. XXIX.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[22:1](tu05.htm#fr_84) King, *A.G.R.* vol. ii.
pl. ii. fig. 4.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[22:2](tu05.htm#fr_85) Vide Nos. II. III. IX.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[22:3](tu05.htm#fr_86) Vide *G.D.M.* cap. IX.
sec. iii. *Taurokerôs*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[22:4](tu05.htm#fr_87)

'Late late yestreen I saw the new moone  
Wi’ the auld moone in hir arme.'  
                (*Ballad of Sir Patrick Spens*, 7.)

<span id="fn_88"></span>[23:1](tu05.htm#fr_88) *Numismata Hellenica*,
ii. 144.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[23:2](tu05.htm#fr_89) Vide *G.D.M.* i. 388.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[23:3](tu05.htm#fr_90) Vide Humphrey, *Coin
Collectors’ Manual*, pl. i. figs. 2, 4, 5. He well observes, 'the type
of the bull and lion would appear to have been derived from Persia or
Assyria' (vol. i. 13).

<span id="fn_91"></span>[24:1](tu05.htm#fr_91) Vide Rawlinson, *A.M.*
iii. fig. 87, p. 305.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[24:2](tu05.htm#fr_92) This is a specially
interesting feature; the Scorpion, as I have shown elsewhere (*The
Archaic Solar-Cult of Egypt*), was originally a type of darkness. The
darkness in archaic idea first stings the Sun to death, and then when
kosmic order is realised, guards it. This is the basis of the Akkadian
myth of the giant 'Scorpion-men' found by Izdubar. 'At the rising of the
sun and the setting of the sun, they guard the sun' (*Izdubar Tablets*,
No. ix., ap. Smith, *C.A.G.* 250).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[24:3](tu05.htm#fr_93) Rawlinson, *A.M.* iii.
334.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[24:4](tu05.htm#fr_94) *Symbolik*, vol. v. fig.
8.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[24:5](tu05.htm#fr_95) Vide [p. 16](#page_16),
note [3](#fn_59).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[25:1](tu05.htm#fr_96) Vide a Cylinder (*A.M.*
ii. 16).

<span id="fn_97"></span>[25:2](tu05.htm#fr_97) *Ibid*. i. 351.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[25:3](tu05.htm#fr_98) *Ibid*. i. 521.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[25:4](tu05.htm#fr_99) Rawlinson, *Herod*. ii.
225.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[25:5](tu05.htm#fr_100) Rich, *Second Memoir on
Babylon*, fig. 11.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[26:1](tu05.htm#fr_101) Rawlinson, *A.M.* i.
265.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[26:2](tu05.htm#fr_102) *Ibid*. 408.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[26:3](tu05.htm#fr_103) *Recherches*, vol. i.
pl. xv.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[26:4](tu05.htm#fr_104) Vol. v. In voc.
*Taurus*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[26:5](tu05.htm#fr_105) Vide R. B. Jr.,
*G.D.M.* i. 390. The Mardians were a Persian tribe (Herod. i. 125),
whose name, according to Sir H. C. Rawlinson, signifies 'heroes,' and
who occupied the mountain range south of Persepolis (vide Prof.
Rawlinson, *Herod*. i. 345).

<span id="fn_106"></span>[26:6](tu05.htm#fr_106) Vide *G.D.M.* ii. 122
*et seq.* In voc. *Serapis*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[27:1](tu05.htm#fr_107) Vide sec. IX.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[27:2](tu05.htm#fr_108) *A.G.R.* vol. ii. pl.
liii, fig. 1.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[27:3](tu05.htm#fr_109) *Ib*. pl. xvi. fig. 1.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[28:1](tu05.htm#fr_110) Aelianus, *Peri Zôôn*,
vii. 48.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[28:2](tu05.htm#fr_111) Clem. Alex. *Protrept*.
ii. 38.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[28:3](tu05.htm#fr_112) As to Athamas, vide
*G.D.M.* i. 247 *et seq.* Sir G. W. Cox, whose candour is equal to his
ability, now agrees with me that Athamas is identical with Tammuz
(*Introd*. 67, note 2). M. Darmesteter connects the name with an Aryan
root *ath*, whence Athênê, etc. (*O et A*. 55, note 2). The incidents of
the myth will serve to solve philological doubts.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[28:4](tu05.htm#fr_113) Taylor, in Calmet's
*Dict*., vol. V. xxii.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[28:5](tu05.htm#fr_114) Lenormant, *Les
Origines*, 570; vide sec. XII. subsec. 3.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[28:6](tu05.htm#fr_115) Ap. Clermont-Ganneau,
*L’Imagerie Phénicienne et la Mythologie Iconologique chez les Grecs*,
1880, pl. iv.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[29:1](tu05.htm#fr_116) Vide Rawlinson,
*Herod*. ii. 225.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[29:2](tu05.htm#fr_117) Bunsen, *Egypt's
Place*, i. 526.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[29:3](tu05.htm#fr_118) *Ibid*. 568.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[29:4](tu05.htm#fr_119) Pierret, *Essai sur la
Mythologie Égyptienne*, 70.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[29:5](tu05.htm#fr_120) *Ancient Egyptians*,
edit. 1878, vol. ii. p. 93.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[30:1](tu05.htm#fr_121) *M. & T.* fig. 175, p.
112.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[30:2](tu05.htm#fr_122) Vide *Ibid*. fig. 315,
p. 202.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[30:3](tu05.htm#fr_123) Vide No. III.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[30:4](tu05.htm#fr_124) *M & T.* fig. 264, p.
170.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[31:1](tu05.htm#fr_125) Vide No. XIX.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[31:2](tu05.htm#fr_126) Vide No. XIII.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[31:3](tu05.htm#fr_127) *M. &. T.* fig. 264, p.
175.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[31:4](tu05.htm#fr_128) *Ibid*. fig. 376, p.
257.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[31:5](tu05.htm#fr_129) *Ibid*. fig. 470, p.
309; vide sec. XII., subsec. 2.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[32:1](tu05.htm#fr_130) *Ancient Faiths*, i.
376.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Deus Lunus](tu06)
