[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tu12)  [Next](tu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766185303/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Unicorn, a Mythological Investigation*, by Robert Brown, \[1881\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### SECTION XI.

#### THE CONTEST BETWEEN THE LION AND THE LEOPARD.

ERE noticing the final defeat of the nocturnal Unicorn, let us examine a
very remarkable and most interesting instance of the triumph of Night
over Day. The solar Dionysos, <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289)
Bakchos-Melqarth, <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_290) as radiate is
styled Kerasphoros, Taurokerôs, and the like; and in a solar aspect
generally Antauges, Chrysokomes, Chrysopes, Pyropos, etc. But one of his
more occult epithets is Dithyreites, 'He-of-the-two-entrances.'
According to one legend the cave in which he was concealed by Zeus from
his angry consort Hêrê, <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_291) had two
entrances; <span id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_292) and this is perfectly
correct, for the Cave is the Underworld. The Two Entrances are 'the
eastern gate Where the great sun begins his state,' <span
id="fr_293"></span>[5](#fn_293) and that which in Kamic mythology is
called 'the Gate of the West, the region of Bliss.' <span
id="fr_294"></span>[6](#fn_294) These two most important Gates or Pylons
are in the Kamic scheme

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

guarded by Seb, the time-marking earth-god who, lying on the surface of
the earth and looking up into the vault of heaven, watches sun, moon and
stars passing through his gateways, and in so doing marks solar, lunar
and sidereal time. The Sun-god Uasar-Osiris, suffering, triumphant, and
in this phase in immediate relation with the individual human soul which
in some occult manner must follow in his steps, 'the Great Soul, has
come along the noble road, making his path above,' <span
id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_295) *i.e.*, the solar track which, according
to the Vedic poet, has been prepared for the Sun by the highest gods,
Mitra <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296) and Varuna <span
id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_297) (Ouranos), and is 'free from
dust;' <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_298) and at eventide he reaches
and passes through the western gate, to reappear in due course through
the eastern gate on the next morning. Such are the two Horizon-gates of
Hades, the 'Unseen' Underworld.

The influence of Mythology upon Heraldry is a subject of great interest
and one which yet remains for scientific treatment, and the following
myth, faithfully preserved in the latter science, presents an admirable
instance of the ever-recurring contest between Astrochitôn
(Starry-night) and Dionysos Dithyreites. The heraldic Leopard is a beast
of 'unkindly procreation and double nature, being engendered between the
Lionesse and the Pardus' or male panther, and is thus 'exorbitent of
Nature's

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

general course and intendment. This mis-begotten Beast is naturally
enemy to the Lyon, and finding his own defect of courage to encounter
the Lyon in fair fight, he observeth when the Lyon makes his walk near
to his Den, which (in policy) he hath purposely wrought spacious and
wide *in the double entrance thereof*, and narrow in the midst, so as
himself being much more slender than the Lyon, may easily pass. When he
seeth the Lyon, he maketh towards him hastily, as if he would bid him
battell in the open fields; and when he seeth the Lyon prepared to
encounter him, he betaketh him to his heeles, and maketh towards his Den
with all celerity, whom the Lyon eagerly pursueth with full course,
dreaming of no danger by reason of the large entrance into the Den. At
length through the vehemency of his swift course, he becometh so
straitned in the narrow passage in the midst of the Den that he can go
neither forwards nor backwards. The Lyon being thus distressed, his
enemy passeth through his Den, and cometh behind him, and gnaweth him to
death.' <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299)

This very singular and ancient account is evidently founded on some
actual fact, but certainly on no fact connected with the habits of the
animals. The simple interpretation of the occult legend is that the
Lion, type of the hunting, radiate, diurnal Sun, <span
id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_300) speeds across heaven towards his fate
and death in the Den of the Two Entrances, the nocturnal cave tenanted
by the starry, spotted Leopard of night, and where the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

noble beast is caught whilst going down the dark passages, <span
id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_301) and perishes, although only to be reborn
in triumph at the eastern gate. The two animals, as protagonists of
night and day, are thus naturally hostile. There is a wide entrance to
the Underworld, 'facilis descensus Averni;' the darkness flies from the
light, and the Vedic poet says that 'the stars slink away, like
thieves' <span id="fr_302"></span>[2](#fn_302) from the presence of
Surya, <span id="fr_303"></span>[3](#fn_303) even as the cowardly
leopard of the myth betakes him to his heels. 'The noble Samas' <span
id="fr_304"></span>[4](#fn_304) pursues with all 'the vehemency of his
swift course,' whilst his enemy passing through the Den, appears in
heaven behind the hidden Sun, whom he thus slays; and, according to a
wild-beast simile, and one, moreover, applied to an ignoble beast, gnaws
to death.

Another phase of this spotted Leopard is Argos Panoptes, 'the Bright
All-seeing-one,' who possessed a hundred eyes, and who was appointed by
the jealous Hêrê guardian of the lunar, horned Iô, the beloved of Zeus.
Amongst other exploits Argos had slain in her sleep <span
id="fr_305"></span>[5](#fn_305) the terrible, drakontic, black-eyed,
maiden-serpent, Echidna, <span id="fr_306"></span>[6](#fn_306) 'the
Strangler,' whose dark folds were wrapped around the extinguished day,
but who whilst in the heavy repose of profound gloom was

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

suddenly annihilated by the myriad bright eyes of 'Tistar-Seirios and
his fellows. But Hermes, the Wind-power upon the Clouds, the breeze of
morning, <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_307) puts out the starry eyes
and thus becomes Argeiphontês, 'the-Slayer-of-Argos,' an ancient epithet
familiar to Homer. On a gem, representing the myth, <span
id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_308) Hermes, as in the case of Perseus the
assistant of the diurnal-power, has just decapitated Argos, an act the
exact equivalent of the Gorgotomy, and his body covered with spots, the
starry eyes, has fallen on the ground; behind is the Peacock, the bird
of Hêrê, with its spotted, starry-eyed tail. As Mr. Ruskin notes, 'We
know that this interpretation is right, from a passage in which
Euripides describes the shield of Hippomedon, which bore for its sign
"Argus the all-seeing, covered with eyes; open towards the rising of the
stars, and closed towards their setting."' <span
id="fr_309"></span>[3](#fn_309) The starry eyes of Argos become
mediaevally the eleven thousand virgins <span
id="fr_310"></span>[4](#fn_310) who accompany S. Ursula,
'Little-bright-one,' *i.e.*, the moon as opposed to the sun.
Riksha-arktos-ursus (*ursa*, dim. *ursula*) 'in the sense of bright, has
become the name of the bear, so called either from his bright eyes or
from his brilliant tawny fur' suggests Prof. Max Müller. <span
id="fr_311"></span>[5](#fn_311) Be this as it may, the root *ark* 'to be
bright,' is the sire of a whole tribe of words which have made myths,
such as Arkas, Argo, Argos, Arjunî-Argynnis, etc.; and in the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

story of the Arkadian nymph Kallistô, changed into a she-bear, 'we have
precisely that same confusion of thought which in India converted the
seven shiners \[Arkshas\] into seven sages \[Rishis\], and in the West
changed them into bears. The root, in short, furnished a name for stars,
bears, and poets alike.' <span id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_312) As the
Moon is Ursa-Ursula, so two famous constellations are Ursa Major and
Ursa Minor.

Thus in their kosmic signification Spots denote the star-spangled
heaven, Polos Ouranios, and so of the fully-attired Orphik worshipper we
read;—

'From above the head, the all-variegated skin of a wild fawn  
Thickly spotted should hang down from the right shoulder;  
A representation of the wondrously-wrought stars and of the vault of
heaven.' <span id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_313)

Such is the nocturnal Peacock-Leopard, slayer of darkness, slain by
mightier light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_289"></span>[73:1](tu13.htm#fr_289) In Assyrian Dian-nisi,
'Judge-of-men,' the Sun-god, as in Kam, being the particular divinity
appointed by divine selection to judge.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[73:2](tu13.htm#fr_290) Vide the *G.D.M.* ii.
100, for an account of the changes in the phases of this name. My view
is now accepted by Sir G. W. Cox (*Introd*. 229).

<span id="fn_291"></span>[73:3](tu13.htm#fr_291) Sk. Svar, 'the
Gleaming-heaven.'

<span id="fn_292"></span>[73:4](tu13.htm#fr_292) Euripides, *Bakchai*,
292.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[73:5](tu13.htm#fr_293) *L’Allegro*, 59-60.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[73:6](tu13.htm#fr_294) Dr. Birch in Bunsen's
*Egypt's Place*, v. 147.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[74:1](tu13.htm#fr_295) *F.R.* lxxxv.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[74:2](tu13.htm#fr_296) As to Mitra, the
Iranian Mithra and Roman Mithras, the 'Friend,' consubstantial with
Ahuramazda-Ormazd, vide R. B. Jr., *R.Z.*, secs. xv. xvi.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[74:3](tu13.htm#fr_297) *Rig-Veda*, I. xxiv. 8.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[74:4](tu13.htm#fr_298) *Ibid*. I. xxxv. 11.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[75:1](tu13.htm#fr_299) Guillim, *D.H.* 255.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[75:2](tu13.htm#fr_300) Vide sec. XII. subsec.
1.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[76:1](tu13.htm#fr_301) Ἐὐρώεντα κέλευθα (*Od*.
xxiv. 10), through which Hermes Psychopompos guides ghosts.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[76:2](tu13.htm#fr_302) *Rig-Veda*, I. l. 2.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[76:3](tu13.htm#fr_303) Helios-Sol.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[76:4](tu13.htm#fr_304) Heb. Shemesh.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[76:5](tu13.htm#fr_305) Apollod. II. i. 2. So
Medousa was slain in her sleep.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[76:6](tu13.htm#fr_306) Vedic Ahi, Gk. Echis,
Lat. Anguis. 'In Echidna we have the very name of the throttling snake
Ahi' (Sir G. W. Cox, *M.A.N.* ii. 334). *Anger*, *anguish* and *anxiety*
are similarly all derived from the root *agh*, nasalised form *angh*,
'to choke.'

<span id="fn_307"></span>[77:1](tu13.htm#fr_307) Aura-Aurora.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[77:2](tu13.htm#fr_308) Ap. Creuzer,
*Symbolik*, vol. ii. pl. viii.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[77:3](tu13.htm#fr_309) *Q.A.* i. 28.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[77:4](tu13.htm#fr_310) Vide R. B. Jr.,
*G.D.M.* ii. 80, and authorities cited.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[77:5](tu13.htm#fr_311) *L.S.L.* ii. 300.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[78:1](tu13.htm#fr_312) Sir G. W. Cox, *M.A.N.*
i. 231. Cf. 'the names Horselberg and Ercildoune. In each case we have
the berg, hill or doun of the moon-goddess Ursel, or Ursula' (*Ibid*.
Introd. 160, note 4).

<span id="fn_313"></span>[78:2](tu13.htm#fr_313) *Orphik Fragments*,
vii. Diodoros (i. 11), also, states that the spotted fawn-skin signified
the starry-vault. Dionysos Nebridepeplos = Herakles Astrochitôn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Lion and the Unicorn](tu14)
