[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jt01)  [Next](jt03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH78/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jataka Tales*, Ellen C. Babbit, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PUBLISHER’S NOTE

The Jatakas, or Birth-stories, form one of the sacred books of the
Buddhists and relate to the adventures of the Buddha in his former
existences, the best character in any story being identified with the
Master.

These legends were continually introduced into the religious discourses
of the Buddhist teachers to illustrate the doctrines of their faith or
to magnify the glory and sanctity of the Buddha, somewhat as medieval
preachers in Europe used to enliven their sermons by introducing fables
and popular tales to rouse the flagging interest of their hearers.

Sculptured scenes from the Jatakas, found upon the carved railings
around the relic shrines of Sanchi and Amaravati and of Bharhut,
indicate that the "Birth-stories" were widely known in the third century
B.C., and were then considered as part of the sacred history of the
religion. At first the tales were probably handed down orally, and it is
uncertain when they were put together in systematic form.

While some of the stories are Buddhistic and depend for their point on
some custom or idea peculiar to Buddhism, many are age-old fables, the
flotsam and jetsam of folk-lore, which have appeared under various
guises throughout the centuries, as when they were used by Boccaccio or
Poggio, merely as merry tales, or by Chaucer, who unwittingly puts a
Jataka story into the mouth of his pardoners when he tells the tale of
"the Ryotoures three."

Quaint humor and gentle earnestness distinguish these legends and they
teach many wholesome lessons, among them the duty of kindness to
animals.

Dr. Felix Adler in his "Moral Instruction of Children," says:

The Jataka Tales contain deep truths, and are calculated to impress
lessons of great moral beauty. The tale of the Merchant of Seri, who
gave up all that he had in exchange for a golden dish, embodies much the
same idea as the parable of the priceless Pearl, in the New Testament.
The tale of the Measures of Rice illustrates the importance of a true
estimate of values. The tale of the Banyan Deer, which offered its life
to save a roe and her young, illustrates self-sacrifice of the noblest
sort. The tale of the Sandy Road is one of the finest in the collection.

And he adds that these tales "are, as everyone must admit, nobly
conceived, lofty in meaning, and many a helpful sermon might be preached
from them as texts."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Monkey and the Crocodile](jt03)
