[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030427)  [Next](0030429) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Parallels from the Prophets
to Illustrate Christ’s Teaching in the Rest of This Chapter of St. Luke.
The Sterner Attributes of Christ, in His Judicial Capacity, Show Him to
Have Come from the Creator. Incidental Rebukes of Marcion’s Doctrine of
Celibacy, and of His Altering of the Text of the Gospel.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p2"></span>Who would be unwilling that we should
distress ourselves <span id="fr_4650"></span>[4651](#fn_4650) about
sustenance for our life, or clothing for our body, <span
id="fr_4651"></span>[4652](#fn_4651) but He who has provided these
things already for man; and who, therefore, while distributing them to
us, prohibits all anxiety respecting them as an outrage <span
id="fr_4652"></span>[4653](#fn_4652) against his liberality?—who has
adapted the nature of “life” itself to a condition “better than meat,”
and has fashioned the material of “the body,” so as to make it “more
than raiment;” whose “ravens, too, neither sow nor reap, nor gather into
storehouses, and are yet fed” by Himself; whose “lilies and grass also
toil not, nor spin, and yet are clothed” by Him; whose “Solomon,
moreover, was transcendent in glory, and yet was not arrayed like” the
humble flower. <span id="fr_4653"></span>[4654](#fn_4653) Besides,
nothing can be more abrupt than that one God should be distributing His
bounty, while the other should bid us take no thought about (so kindly
a) distribution—and that, too, with the intention of derogating (from
his liberality).  Whether, indeed, it is as depreciating the Creator
that he does not wish such trifles to be thought of, concerning which
neither the crows nor the lilies labour, because, forsooth, they come
spontaneously to hand <span id="fr_4654"></span>[4655](#fn_4654) by
reason of their very worthlessness, <span
id="fr_4655"></span>[4656](#fn_4655) will appear a little further on. 
Meanwhile, how is it that He chides them as being “of little
faith?” <span id="fr_4656"></span>[4657](#fn_4656) What faith?  Does He
mean that faith which they were as yet unable to manifest perfectly in a
god who has hardly yet revealed, <span
id="fr_4657"></span>[4658](#fn_4657) and whom they were in process of
learning as well as they could; or that faith which they for this
express reason owed to the Creator, because they believed that He was of
His own will supplying these wants of the human race, and therefore took
no thought about them?  Now, when He adds, “For all these things do the
nations of the world seek after,” <span
id="fr_4658"></span>[4659](#fn_4658) even by their not believing in God
as the Creator and Giver of all things, since He was unwilling that they
should be like these nations, He therefore upbraided them as being
defective of faith in the same God, in whom He remarked that the
Gentiles were quite wanting in faith.  When He further adds, “But your
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things,” <span
id="fr_4659"></span>[4660](#fn_4659) I would first ask, what Father
Christ would have to be here understood? If He points to their own
Creator, He also affirms Him to be good, who knows what His children
have need of; but if He refers to that other god, how does he know that
food and raiment are necessary to man, seeing that he has made no such
provision for him? For if he had known the want, he would have made the
provision. If, however, he knows what things man has need of, and yet
has failed to supply them, he is in the failure guilty of either
malignity or weakness. But when he confessed that these things are
necessary to man, he really affirmed that they are *good*. For nothing
that is evil is necessary. So that he will not be any longer <span
id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xxix-Page_398"></span>a
depreciator of the works and the indulgences of the Creator, that I may
here complete the answer <span id="fr_4660"></span>[4661](#fn_4660)
which I deferred giving above. Again, if it is another god who has
foreseen man’s wants, and is supplying them, how is it that *Marcion’s
Christ* himself promises them? <span
id="fr_4661"></span>[4662](#fn_4661) Is he liberal with another’s
property? <span id="fr_4662"></span>[4663](#fn_4662) “Seek ye,” says he,
“the kingdom of God, and *all* these things shall be added unto you”—by
himself, of course. But if *by himself*, what sort of being is he, who
shall bestow the things of another?  If by *the Creator*, whose all
things are, then who <span id="fr_4663"></span>[4664](#fn_4663) is he
that promises what belongs to another?  If these things are “additions”
to the kingdom, they must be placed in the second rank; <span
id="fr_4664"></span>[4665](#fn_4664) and the second rank belongs to Him
to whom the first also does; His are the food and raiment, whose is the
kingdom.  Thus to the Creator belongs the entire promise, the full
reality <span id="fr_4665"></span>[4666](#fn_4665) of its parables, the
perfect equalization <span id="fr_4666"></span>[4667](#fn_4666) of its
similitudes; for these have respect to none other than Him to whom they
have a parity of relation in every point. <span
id="fr_4667"></span>[4668](#fn_4667) We are servants because we have a
Lord in our God. We ought “to have our loins girded:” <span
id="fr_4668"></span>[4669](#fn_4668) in other words, we are to be free
from the embarrassments of a perplexed and much occupied life; “to have
our lights burning,” <span id="fr_4669"></span>[4670](#fn_4669) that is,
our minds kindled by faith, and resplendent with the works of truth. And
thus “to wait for our Lord,” <span id="fr_4670"></span>[4671](#fn_4670)
that is, Christ. Whence “returning?” If “from the wedding,” He is *the
Christ* of the Creator, for the wedding is His. If He is not the
Creator’s, not even Marcion himself would have gone to the wedding,
although invited, for in his god he discovers one who hates the nuptial
bed. The parable would therefore have failed in the person of the Lord,
if He were not a Being to whom a wedding is consistent. In the next
parable also he makes a flagrant mistake, when he assigns to the person
of the Creator that “thief, whose hour, if the father of the family had
only known, he would not have suffered his house to be broken
through.” <span id="fr_4671"></span>[4672](#fn_4671) How can the Creator
wear in any way the aspect of a thief, Lord as He is of all mankind? No
one pilfers or plunders his own property, but he <span
id="fr_4672"></span>[4673](#fn_4672) rather acts the part of one who
swoops down on the things of another, and alienates man from his
Lord. <span id="fr_4673"></span>[4674](#fn_4673) Again, when He
indicates to us that the devil is “the thief,” whose hour at the very
beginning of the world, if man had known, he would never have been
broken in upon <span id="fr_4674"></span>[4675](#fn_4674) by him, He
warns us “to be ready,” for this reason, because “we know not the hour
when the Son of man shall come” <span
id="fr_4675"></span>[4676](#fn_4675) —not as if He were Himself the
thief, but rather as being the judge of those who prepared not
themselves, and used no precaution against the thief. Since, then, He is
the Son of man, I hold Him to be the Judge, and in the Judge I
claim <span id="fr_4676"></span>[4677](#fn_4676) the Creator. If then in
this passage he displays the Creator’s Christ under the title “Son of
man,” that he may give us some presage <span
id="fr_4677"></span>[4678](#fn_4677) of the thief, of the period of
whose coming we are ignorant, you still have it ruled above, that no one
is the thief of his own property; besides which, there is our principle
also unimpaired <span id="fr_4678"></span>[4679](#fn_4678) —that in *as*
far as He insists on the Creator as an object of fear, in *so* far does
He belong to the Creator, and does the Creator’s work. When, therefore,
Peter asked whether He had spoken the parable “unto them, or even to
all,” <span id="fr_4679"></span>[4680](#fn_4679) He sets forth for them,
and for all who should bear rule in the churches, the similitude of
stewards. <span id="fr_4680"></span>[4681](#fn_4680) That steward who
should treat his fellow-servants well in his Lord’s absence, would on
his return be set as ruler over all his property; but he who should act
otherwise should be severed, and have his portion with the unbelievers,
when his lord should return on the day when he looked not for him, at
the hour when he was not aware <span
id="fr_4681"></span>[4682](#fn_4681) —even that Son of man, the
Creator’s Christ, not a thief, but a Judge. He accordingly, in this
passage, either presents to us the Lord as a Judge, and instructs us in
His character, <span id="fr_4682"></span>[4683](#fn_4682) or else as the
simply good god; if the latter, he now also affirms his judicial
attribute, although the heretic refuses to admit it. For an attempt is
made to modify this sense when it is applied to his god,—as if it were
an act of serenity and mildness simply to sever the man off, and to
assign him a portion with the unbelievers, under the idea that he was
not summoned (before the judge), but only returned to his own state! As
if this very process did not imply a judicial act!  What folly! What
will be the end of the severed ones? Will it not be the forfeiture of
salvation, since their separation will be from those who shall attain
salvation? What, again, will be the condition of the un<span
id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-Page_399"></span>believers?  Will it not be damnation?
Else, if these severed and unfaithful ones shall have nothing to suffer,
there will, on the other hand, be nothing for the accepted and the
believers to obtain. If, however, the accepted and the believers shall
attain salvation, it must needs be that the rejected and the unbelieving
should incur the opposite issue, even the loss of salvation. Now here is
a judgment, and He who holds it out before us belongs to the Creator. 
Whom else than the God of retribution can I understand by Him who shall
“beat His servants with stripes,” either “few or many,” and shall exact
from them what He had committed to them? Whom is it suitable <span
id="fr_4683"></span>[4684](#fn_4683) for me to obey, but Him who
remunerates?  Your Christ proclaims, “I am come to send fire on the
earth.” <span id="fr_4684"></span>[4685](#fn_4684) That <span
id="fr_4685"></span>[4686](#fn_4685) most lenient being, the lord who
has no hell, not long before had restrained his disciples from demanding
fire on the churlish village. Whereas *He* <span
id="fr_4686"></span>[4687](#fn_4686) burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah with a
tempest of fire. Of Him the psalmist sang, “A fire shall go out before
Him, and burn up His enemies round about.” <span
id="fr_4687"></span>[4688](#fn_4687) By Hoses He uttered the threat, “I
will send a fire upon the cities of Judah;” <span
id="fr_4688"></span>[4689](#fn_4688) and <span
id="fr_4689"></span>[4690](#fn_4689) by Isaiah, “A fire has been kindled
in mine anger.” He cannot lie. If it is not He who uttered His voice out
of even the burning bush, it can be of no importance <span
id="fr_4690"></span>[4691](#fn_4690) what fire you insist upon being
understood.  Even if it be but figurative fire, yet, from the very fact
that he takes from my element illustrations for His own sense, He is
mine, because He uses what is mine. The similitude of fire must belong
to Him who owns the reality thereof. But He will Himself best explain
the quality of that fire *which He mentioned*, when He goes on to say,
“Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but
rather division.” <span id="fr_4691"></span>[4692](#fn_4691) It is
written “*a sword*,” <span id="fr_4692"></span>[4693](#fn_4692) but
Marcion makes an emendation <span id="fr_4693"></span>[4694](#fn_4693)
of the word, just as if a *division* were not the work of the *sword*.
He, therefore, who refused to give peace, intended also the fire of
destruction.  As is the combat, so is the burning.  As is the sword, so
is the flame.  Neither is suitable for its lord.  He says at last, “The
father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father;
the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother;
the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law
against the mother-in-law.” <span id="fr_4694"></span>[4695](#fn_4694)
Since this battle among the relatives <span
id="fr_4695"></span>[4696](#fn_4695) was sung by the prophet’s trumpet
in the very words, I fear that Micah <span
id="fr_4696"></span>[4697](#fn_4696) must have predicted it to Marcion’s
Christ!  On this account He pronounced them “hypocrites,” because they
could “discern the face of the sky and the earth, but could not
distinguish this time,” <span id="fr_4697"></span>[4698](#fn_4697) when
of course He ought to have been recognised, fulfilling (as he was) all
things which had been predicted concerning them, and teaching them so.
But then who could know the times of him of whom he had no evidence to
prove his existence?  Justly also does He upbraid them for “not even of
themselves judging what is right.” <span
id="fr_4698"></span>[4699](#fn_4698) Of old does He command by
Zechariah, “Execute the judgment of truth and peace;” <span
id="fr_4699"></span>[4700](#fn_4699) by Jeremiah, “Execute judgment and
righteousness;” <span id="fr_4700"></span>[4701](#fn_4700) by Isaiah,
“Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow,” <span
id="fr_4701"></span>[4702](#fn_4701) charging it as a fault upon the
vine of Sorech, <span id="fr_4702"></span>[4703](#fn_4702) that when “He
looked for righteousness therefrom, there was only a cry” <span
id="fr_4703"></span>[4704](#fn_4703) (of oppression). The same God who
had taught them to act as He commanded them, <span
id="fr_4704"></span>[4705](#fn_4704) was now requiring that they should
act of their own accord. <span id="fr_4705"></span>[4706](#fn_4705) He
who had sown the precept, was now pressing to an abundant harvest from
it. But how absurd, that he should now be commanding them to judge
righteously, who was destroying God the righteous Judge! For the Judge,
who commits to prison, and allows no release out of it without the
payment of “the very last mite,” <span
id="fr_4706"></span>[4707](#fn_4706) they treat of in the person of the
Creator, with the view of disparaging Him. Which cavil, however, I deem
it necessary to meet with the same answer. <span
id="fr_4707"></span>[4708](#fn_4707) For as often as the Creator’s
severity is paraded before us, so often is Christ (shown to be) His, to
whom He urges submission by the motive of fear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4650"></span>[397:4651](0030428.htm#fr_4650) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p3"></span> Agere curam: take thought.—A.V.

<span id="fn_4651"></span>[397:4652](0030428.htm#fr_4651) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p4"></span> [Luke xii.
22-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4652"></span>[397:4653](0030428.htm#fr_4652) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p5"></span> Æmulam.

<span id="fn_4653"></span>[397:4654](0030428.htm#fr_4653) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p6"></span> Flosculo: see [Luke xii.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4654"></span>[397:4655](0030428.htm#fr_4654) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p7"></span> Ultro subjectis.

<span id="fn_4655"></span>[397:4656](0030428.htm#fr_4655) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p8"></span> Pro sua vilitate.

<span id="fn_4656"></span>[397:4657](0030428.htm#fr_4656) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p9"></span> [Luke xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#028)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4657"></span>[397:4658](0030428.htm#fr_4657) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p10"></span> Tantum quod revelato.

<span id="fn_4658"></span>[397:4659](0030428.htm#fr_4658) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p11"></span> [Luke xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#030)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4659"></span>[397:4660](0030428.htm#fr_4659) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p12"></span> [Luke xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#030)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4660"></span>[398:4661](0030428.htm#fr_4660) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p12.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p13"></span> Expunxerim.

<span id="fn_4661"></span>[398:4662](0030428.htm#fr_4661) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p14"></span> [Luke xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4662"></span>[398:4663](0030428.htm#fr_4662) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p15"></span> De alieno bonus.

<span id="fn_4663"></span>[398:4664](0030428.htm#fr_4663) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p16"></span> Qualis.

<span id="fn_4664"></span>[398:4665](0030428.htm#fr_4664) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p17"></span> Secundo gradu.

<span id="fn_4665"></span>[398:4666](0030428.htm#fr_4665) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p18"></span> Status.

<span id="fn_4666"></span>[398:4667](0030428.htm#fr_4666) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p19"></span> Peræquatio.

<span id="fn_4667"></span>[398:4668](0030428.htm#fr_4667) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p20"></span> Cui per omnia pariaverint.

<span id="fn_4668"></span>[398:4669](0030428.htm#fr_4668) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p21"></span> [Luke xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4669"></span>[398:4670](0030428.htm#fr_4669) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p22"></span> [Luke xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4670"></span>[398:4671](0030428.htm#fr_4670) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p23"></span> [Luke xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4671"></span>[398:4672](0030428.htm#fr_4671) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p24"></span> [Luke xii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4672"></span>[398:4673](0030428.htm#fr_4672) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p25"></span> Sed ille potius.

<span id="fn_4673"></span>[398:4674](0030428.htm#fr_4673) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p26"></span> A censure on Marcion’s Christ.

<span id="fn_4674"></span>[398:4675](0030428.htm#fr_4674) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p27"></span> Suffossus.

<span id="fn_4675"></span>[398:4676](0030428.htm#fr_4675) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p28"></span> [Luke xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#040)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4676"></span>[398:4677](0030428.htm#fr_4676) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p29"></span> Defendo.

<span id="fn_4677"></span>[398:4678](0030428.htm#fr_4677) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p30"></span> Portendat.

<span id="fn_4678"></span>[398:4679](0030428.htm#fr_4678) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p31"></span> Salvo.

<span id="fn_4679"></span>[398:4680](0030428.htm#fr_4679) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p32"></span> [Luke xii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#041)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4680"></span>[398:4681](0030428.htm#fr_4680) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p33"></span> Actorum.

<span id="fn_4681"></span>[398:4682](0030428.htm#fr_4681) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p34"></span> [Luke xii.
41-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#041)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4682"></span>[398:4683](0030428.htm#fr_4682) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p35"></span> Illi catechizat.

<span id="fn_4683"></span>[399:4684](0030428.htm#fr_4683) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p36"></span> Decet.

<span id="fn_4684"></span>[399:4685](0030428.htm#fr_4684) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p37"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4685"></span>[399:4686](0030428.htm#fr_4685) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p38"></span> Ille: Marcion’s Christ.

<span id="fn_4686"></span>[399:4687](0030428.htm#fr_4686) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p39"></span> Iste: the Creator.

<span id="fn_4687"></span>[399:4688](0030428.htm#fr_4687) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p40"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4688"></span>[399:4689](0030428.htm#fr_4688) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p41"></span> [Hos. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4689"></span>[399:4690](0030428.htm#fr_4689) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p42"></span> Vel: or, “if you please;” indicating
some uncertainty in the quotation. The passage is more like [Jer. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p42.1"></span>
than anything in Isaiah (see, however, [Isa.
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p42.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_4690"></span>[399:4691](0030428.htm#fr_4690) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p43"></span> Viderit.

<span id="fn_4691"></span>[399:4692](0030428.htm#fr_4691) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p44"></span> [Luke xii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#051)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4692"></span>[399:4693](0030428.htm#fr_4692) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p45"></span> Pamelius supposes that Tertullian
here refers to St. Matthew’s account, where the word is <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p45.1"></span>μάχαιραν</span>, on
the ground that the <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p45.3"></span>mss.</span> and versions of St. Luke’s
Gospel invariably read <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p45.4"></span>διαμερισμόν</span>. According to
Rigaltius, however, Tertullian means that *sword* is written in
Marcion’s Gospel of Luke, as if the heretic had adulterated the passage.
Tertullian no doubt professes to quote all along from the Gospel of
Luke, according to Marcion’s reading.

<span id="fn_4693"></span>[399:4694](0030428.htm#fr_4693) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p45.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p46"></span> St. Luke’s word being <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p46.1"></span>διαμερισμόν</span>
(*division*), not <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p46.2"></span>μάχαιραν</span> (*sword*).

<span id="fn_4694"></span>[399:4695](0030428.htm#fr_4694) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p46.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p47"></span> [Luke xii.
53](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#053)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4695"></span>[399:4696](0030428.htm#fr_4695) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p48"></span> Parentes.

<span id="fn_4696"></span>[399:4697](0030428.htm#fr_4696) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p49"></span> [Mic. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4697"></span>[399:4698](0030428.htm#fr_4697) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p50"></span> [Luke xii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#056)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4698"></span>[399:4699](0030428.htm#fr_4698) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p51"></span> [Luke xii.
57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#057)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4699"></span>[399:4700](0030428.htm#fr_4699) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p52"></span> [Zech. viii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4700"></span>[399:4701](0030428.htm#fr_4700) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p53"></span> [Jer. xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4701"></span>[399:4702](0030428.htm#fr_4701) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p54"></span> [Isa. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4702"></span>[399:4703](0030428.htm#fr_4702) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55"></span> Tertullian calls by a proper name the
vineyard which Isaiah (in his [Isa.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.1"></span>.) designates “the vineyard of the Lord of
hosts,” and interprets to be “the house of Israel” ([Isa.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.2"></span>). The designation comes from [Isa.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.3"></span>, where the original clause <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.4"></span>ירשֹ
והע\[טָיִּוַ</span> is translated in the Septuagint, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.5"></span>Καὶ ἐφύτευσα ἄμπελον
Σωρήκ</span>. Tertullian is most frequently in close agreement with the
LXX.

<span id="fn_4703"></span>[399:4704](0030428.htm#fr_4703) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p55.6"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p56"></span> [Isa. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4704"></span>[399:4705](0030428.htm#fr_4704) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p57"></span> Ex præcepto.

<span id="fn_4705"></span>[399:4706](0030428.htm#fr_4705) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p58"></span> Ex arbitrio.

<span id="fn_4706"></span>[399:4707](0030428.htm#fr_4706) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p59"></span> [Luke
12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058),
[59](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#059)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4707"></span>[399:4708](0030428.htm#fr_4707) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxix-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxix-p60"></span> Eodem gradu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Parables of the Mustard-Seed, and of the Leaven. Transition to
the Solemn Exclusion Which Will Ensue When the Master of the House Has
Shut the Door. This Judicial Exclusion Will Be Administered by Christ,
Who is Shown Thereby to Possess the Attribute of the Creator.](0030429)
