[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030776)  [Next](0030778) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="vi.v.iii-p2"></span>Grant now, O blessed, that even to
Christians the prison is unpleasant; yet we were called to the warfare
of the living God in our very response to the sacramental words. Well,
no soldier comes out to the campaign laden with luxuries, nor does he go
to action from his comfortable chamber, but from the light and narrow
tent, where every kind of hardness, roughness and unpleasantness must be
put up with. Even in peace soldiers inure themselves to war by toils and
inconveniences—marching in arms, running over the plain, working at the
ditch, making the *testudo*, engaging in many arduous labours. The sweat
of the brow is on everything, that bodies and minds may not shrink at
having to pass from shade to sunshine, from sunshine to icy cold, from
the robe of peace to the coat of mail, from silence to clamour, from
quiet to tumult. In like manner, O blessed ones, count whatever is hard
in this lot of yours as a discipline of your powers of mind and body. 
You are about to pass through a noble struggle, in which the living God
acts the part of superintendent, in which the Holy Ghost is your
trainer, in which the prize is an eternal crown of angelic essence,
citizenship in the heavens, glory everlasting. Therefore your Master,
Jesus Christ, who has anointed you with His Spirit, and led you forth to
the arena, has seen it good, before the day of conflict, to take you
from a condition more pleasant in itself, and has imposed on you a
harder treatment, that your strength might be the greater. For the
athletes, too, are set apart to a more stringent discipline, that they
may have their physical powers built up. They are kept from luxury, from
daintier meats, from more pleasant drinks; they are pressed, racked,
worn out; the harder their labours in the preparatory training, the
stronger is the hope of victory. “And they,” says the apostle, “that
they may obtain a corruptible crown.” <span
id="fr_8965"></span>[8966](#fn_8965) We, with the crown eternal in our
eye, look upon the prison as our training-ground, that at the goal of
final judgment we may be brought forth well disciplined by many a trial;
since virtue is built up by hardships, as by voluptuous indulgence it is
overthrown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8965"></span>[694:8966](0030777.htm#fr_8965) <span
id="vi.v.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.iii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)<span id="vi.v.iii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](0030778)
