[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030686)  [Next](0030688) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.x.vi"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.x.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.</span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p2"></span>But if, for the contest’s sake, God had
appointed martyrdoms for us, that thereby we might make trial with our
opponent, in order that He may now keep bruising him by whom man chose
to be bruised, here too generosity rather than harshness in God holds
sway. For He wished to make man, now plucked from the devil’s throat by
faith, trample upon him likewise by courage, that he might not merely
have escaped from, but also completely vanquished, his enemy. He who had
called to salvation has been pleased to summon to glory also, that they
who were rejoicing in consequence of their deliverance may be in
transports when they are crowned likewise. With what good-will the world
celebrates those games, the combative festivals and superstitious
contests of the Greeks, involving forms both of worship and of pleasure,
has now become clear in Africa also. As yet cities, by sending their
congratulations severally, annoy Carthage, which was presented with the
Pythian game after the racecourse had attained to an old age. Thus, by
the world <span id="fr_8251"></span>[8252](#fn_8251) it has been
believed to be a most proper mode of testing proficiency in studies, to
put in competition the forms of skill, to elicit the existing condition
of bodies and of voices, the reward being the informer, the public
exhibition the judge, and pleasure the decision. Where there are mere
contests, there are some wounds: fists make reel, heels kick like
butting rams, boxing-gloves mangle, whips leave gashes. Yet there will
be no one reproaching the superintendent of the contest for exposing men
to outrage. Suits for injuries lie outside the racecourse. But to the
extent that those persons deal in discoloration, and gore, and
swellings, he will design for them crowns, doubtless, and glory, and a
present, political privileges, contributions by the citizens, images,
statues, and—of such sort as the world can give—an eternity of fame, a
resurrection by being kept in remembrance. The pugilist himself does not
complain of feeling pain, for he wishes it; the crown closes the wounds,
the palm hides the blood: he is excited more by victory than by injury.
Will you count this man hurt whom you see happy? But not even the
vanquished himself will reproach the superintendent of the contest for
his misfortune. Shall it be unbecoming in God to bring forth kinds of
skill and rules of His own into public view, into this open ground of
the world, to be seen by men, and angels, and all powers?—to test flesh
and spirit as to stedfastness and endurance?—to give to this one the
palm, to this one distinction, to that one the privilege of citizenship,
to that one pay?—to reject some also, and after punishing to remove them
with disgrace? You dictate to God, forsooth, the times, or the ways, or
the places in which to institute a trial concerning His own troop (of
competitors) as if it were not proper for the Judge to pronounce <span
id="page_639">p. 639</span> <span id="v.x.vi-Page_639"></span>the
preliminary decision also. Well now, if He had put forth faith to suffer
martyrdoms not for the contest’s sake, but for its own benefit, ought it
not to have had some store of hope, for the increase of which it might
restrain desire of its own, and check its wish in order that it might
strive to mount up, seeing they also who discharge earthly functions are
eager for promotion? Or how will there be many mansions in our Father’s
house, if not to accord with a diversity of deserts? How will one star
also differ from another star in glory, unless in virtue of disparity in
their rays? <span id="fr_8252"></span>[8253](#fn_8252) But further, if,
on that account, some increase of brightness also was appropriate to
loftiness of faith, that gain ought to have been of some such sort as
would cost great effort, poignant suffering, torture, death. But
consider the requital, when flesh and life are paid away—than which in
man there is nought more precious, the one from the hand of God, the
other from His breath—that the very things are paid away in obtaining
the benefit of which the benefit consists; that the very things are
expended which may be acquired; that the same things are the price which
are also the commodities. God had foreseen also other weaknesses
incident to the condition of man,—the stratagems of the enemy, the
deceptive aspects of the creatures, the snares of the world; that faith,
even after baptism, would be endangered; that the most, after attaining
unto salvation, would be lost again, through soiling the wedding-dress,
through failing to provide oil for their torchlets—would be such as
would have to be sought for over mountains and woodlands, and carried
back upon the shoulders. He therefore appointed as second supplies of
comfort, and the last means of succour, the fight of martyrdom and the
baptism—thereafter free from danger—of blood.  And concerning the
happiness of the man who has partaken of these, David says: “Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.  Blessed
is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.” <span
id="fr_8253"></span>[8254](#fn_8253) For, strictly speaking, there
cannot any longer be reckoned ought against the martyrs, by whom in the
baptism (of blood) life itself is laid down. Thus, “love covers the
multitude of sins;” <span id="fr_8254"></span>[8255](#fn_8254) and
loving God, to wit, with all its strength (by which in the endurance of
martyrdom it maintains the fight), with all its life <span
id="fr_8255"></span>[8256](#fn_8255) (which it lays down for God), it
makes of man a martyr. Shall you call these cures, counsels, methods of
judging, spectacles, (illustrations of) even the barbarity of God? Does
God covet man’s blood? And yet I might venture to affirm that He does,
if man also covets the kingdom of heaven, if man covets a sure
salvation, if man also covets a second new birth. The exchange is
displeasing to no one, which can plead, in justification of itself, that
either benefit or injury is shared by the parties making it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8251"></span>[638:8252](0030687.htm#fr_8251) <span
id="v.x.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p3"></span> Literally, “age.”—<span class="sc"><span
id="v.x.vi-p3.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_8252"></span>[639:8253](0030687.htm#fr_8252) <span
id="v.x.vi-p3.4"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="v.x.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8253"></span>[639:8254](0030687.htm#fr_8253) <span
id="v.x.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p5"></span> [Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), [Rom.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007)<span id="v.x.vi-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_8254"></span>[639:8255](0030687.htm#fr_8254) <span
id="v.x.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p6"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span id="v.x.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8255"></span>[639:8256](0030687.htm#fr_8255) <span
id="v.x.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.vi-p7"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span id="v.x.vi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](0030688)
