[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030451)  [Next](0030453) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Divine Way of Wisdom, and
Greatness, and Might. God’s Hiding of Himself, and Subsequent
Revelation. To Marcion’s God Such a Concealment and Manifestation
Impossible.  God’s Predestination. No Such Prior System of Intention
Possible to a God Previously Unknown as Was Marcion’s. The Powers of the
World Which Crucified Christ. St. Paul, as a Wise Master-Builder,
Associated with Prophecy.  Sundry Injunctions of the Apostle Parallel
with the Teaching of the Old Testament.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p2"></span>By all these statements, therefore, does
he show us what God he means, when he says, “We speak the wisdom of God
among them that are perfect.” <span id="fr_5425"></span>[5426](#fn_5425)
It is that God who has confounded the wisdom of the wise, who has
brought to nought the understanding of the prudent, who has reduced to
folly <span id="fr_5426"></span>[5427](#fn_5426) the world’s wisdom, by
choosing its foolish things, and disposing them to the attainment of
salvation. This wisdom, he says, once lay hidden in things that were
foolish, weak, and lacking in honour; once also was latent under
figures, allegories, and enigmatical types; but it was afterwards to be
revealed in Christ, who was set “as a light to the Gentiles,” <span
id="fr_5427"></span>[5428](#fn_5427) by the Creator who promised through
the mouth of Isaiah that He would discover “the hidden treasures, which
eye had not seen.” <span id="fr_5428"></span>[5429](#fn_5428) Now, that
that god should have ever hidden anything who had never made a cover
wherein to practise concealment, is in itself a wholly incredible idea.
If he existed, concealment of himself was out of the question—to say
nothing <span id="fr_5429"></span>[5430](#fn_5429) of any of his
religious ordinances. <span id="fr_5430"></span>[5431](#fn_5430) The
Creator, on the contrary, was as well known in Himself as His ordinances
were.  These, we know, were publicly instituted <span
id="fr_5431"></span>[5432](#fn_5431) in Israel; but they lay
overshadowed with latent meanings, in which the wisdom of God was
concealed, <span id="fr_5432"></span>[5433](#fn_5432) to be brought to
light by and by amongst “the perfect,” when the time should come, but
“pre-ordained in the counsels of God before the ages.” <span
id="fr_5433"></span>[5434](#fn_5433) But whose ages, if not the
Creator’s? For because ages consist of times, and times are made up of
days, and months, and years; since also days, and months, and years are
measured by suns, and moons, and stars, which He ordained for this
purpose (for “they shall be,” says He, “for signs of the months and the
years”), <span id="fr_5434"></span>[5435](#fn_5434) it clearly follows
that the ages belong to the Creator, and that nothing of what was
fore-ordained before the ages can be said to be the property of any
other being than Him who claims the ages also as His own. Else let
Marcion show that the ages belong to his god. He must then also claim
the world itself for <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-Page_441"></span>him; for it is in it that the ages are
reckoned, the vessel as it were <span
id="fr_5435"></span>[5436](#fn_5435) of the times, as well as the signs
thereof, or their order. But he has no such demonstration to show us. I
go back therefore to the point, and ask him this question: Why did (his
god) fore-ordain our glory before the ages of the Creator? I could
understand his having predetermined it before the ages, if he had
revealed it at the commencement of time. <span
id="fr_5436"></span>[5437](#fn_5436) But when he does this almost at the
very expiration of all the ages <span
id="fr_5437"></span>[5438](#fn_5437) of the Creator, his predestination
before the ages, and not rather within the ages, was in vain, because he
did not mean to make any revelation of his purpose until the ages had
almost run out their course. For it is wholly inconsistent in him to be
so forward in planning purposes, who is so backward in revealing them.

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p16"></span>In the Creator, however, the two
courses were perfectly compatible—both the predestination before the
ages and the revelation at the end thereof, because that which He both
fore-ordained and revealed He also in the intermediate space of time
announced by the pre-ministration of figures, and symbols, and
allegories.  But because (the apostle) subjoins, on the subject of our
glory, that “none of the princes of this world knew it, for had they
known it they would not have crucified the Lord of glory,” <span
id="fr_5438"></span>[5439](#fn_5438) the heretic argues that the princes
of this world crucified the Lord (that is, the Christ of the rival god)
in order that this *blow* might even recoil <span
id="fr_5439"></span>[5440](#fn_5439) on the Creator Himself. Any one,
however, who has seen from what we have already said how our glory must
be regarded as issuing from the Creator, will already have come to the
conclusion that, inasmuch as the Creator settled it in His own secret
purpose, it properly enough was unknown to all the princes <span
id="fr_5440"></span>[5441](#fn_5440) and powers of the Creator, on the
principle that servants are not permitted to know their masters’ plans,
much less the fallen angels and the leader of transgression himself, the
devil; for I should contend that *these*, on account of their fall, were
greater strangers still to any knowledge of the Creator’s dispensations.
But it is no longer open to me <span
id="fr_5441"></span>[5442](#fn_5441) even to interpret the princes and
powers of this world as the Creator’s, since the apostle imputes
ignorance to *them*, whereas even the devil according to our Gospel
recognised Jesus in the temptation, <span
id="fr_5442"></span>[5443](#fn_5442) and, according to the record which
is common to both (Marcionites and ourselves) the evil spirit knew that
Jesus was the Holy One of God, and that Jesus was His name, and that He
was come to destroy them. <span id="fr_5443"></span>[5444](#fn_5443) The
parable also of the strong man armed, whom a stronger than he overcame
and seized his goods, is admitted by Marcion to have reference to the
Creator: <span id="fr_5444"></span>[5445](#fn_5444) therefore the
Creator could not have been ignorant any longer of the God of glory,
since He is overcome by him; <span id="fr_5445"></span>[5446](#fn_5445)
nor could He have crucified him whom He was unable to cope with. The
inevitable inference, therefore, as it seems to me, is that we must
believe that the princes and powers of the Creator did knowingly crucify
the God of glory in His Christ, with that desperation and excessive
malice with which the most abandoned slaves do not even hesitate to slay
their masters. For it is written in my Gospel <span
id="fr_5446"></span>[5447](#fn_5446) that “Satan entered into
Judas.” <span id="fr_5447"></span>[5448](#fn_5447) According to Marcion,
however, the apostle in the passage under consideration <span
id="fr_5448"></span>[5449](#fn_5448) does not allow the imputation of
ignorance, with respect to the Lord of glory, to the powers of the
Creator; because, indeed, he will have it that these are not meant by
“the princes of this world.”  But (the apostle) evidently <span
id="fr_5449"></span>[5450](#fn_5449) did not speak of spiritual princes;
so that he meant secular ones, those of the princely people, (chief in
the divine dispensation, although) not, of course, amongst the nations
of the world, and their rulers, and king Herod, and even Pilate, and, as
represented by him, <span id="fr_5450"></span>[5451](#fn_5450) that
power of Rome which was the greatest in the world, and then presided
over by him. Thus the arguments of the other side are pulled down, and
our own proofs are thereby built up. But you still maintain that our
glory comes from your god, with whom it also lay in secret.  Then why
does your god employ the self-same Scripture <span
id="fr_5451"></span>[5452](#fn_5451) which the apostle also relies on?
What has your god to do at all with the sayings of the prophets? “Who
hath discovered the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His
counsellor?” <span id="fr_5452"></span>[5453](#fn_5452) So says Isaiah.
What has he also to do with illustrations from our God? For when (the
apostle) calls himself “a wise master-builder,” <span
id="fr_5453"></span>[5454](#fn_5453) we find that the Creator by Isaiah
designates the teacher who sketches <span
id="fr_5454"></span>[5455](#fn_5454) out the divine discipline by the
same title, “I will take away from Judah *the cunning* *artifi*<span
id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-Page_442"></span>*cer*,” <span
id="fr_5455"></span>[5456](#fn_5455) etc. And was it not Paul himself
who was there foretold, destined “to be taken away from Judah”—that is,
from Judaism—for the erection of Christianity, in order “to lay that
only foundation, which is Christ?” <span
id="fr_5456"></span>[5457](#fn_5456) Of this work the Creator also by
the same prophet says, “Behold, I lay in Sion for a foundation a
precious stone and honourable; and he that resteth thereon shall not be
confounded.” <span id="fr_5457"></span>[5458](#fn_5457) Unless it be,
that God professed *Himself* to be the builder up of an earthly work,
that so He might not give any sign of His Christ, as destined to be the
foundation of such as believe in Him, upon which every man should build
at will the superstructure of either sound or worthless doctrine;
forasmuch as it is the Creator’s function, when a man’s work shall be
tried by fire, (or) when a reward shall be recompensed to him by fire;
because it is by fire that the test is applied to the building which you
erect upon the foundation which is laid by Him, that is, the foundation
of His Christ. <span id="fr_5458"></span>[5459](#fn_5458) “Know ye not
that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in
you?” <span id="fr_5459"></span>[5460](#fn_5459) Now, since man is the
property, and the work, and the image and likeness of the Creator,
having his flesh, formed by Him of the ground, and his soul of His
*afflatus*, it follows that Marcion’s god wholly dwells in a temple
which belongs to another, if so be we are not the Creator’s temple. But
“if any man defile the temple of God, he shall be himself
destroyed” <span id="fr_5460"></span>[5461](#fn_5460) —of course, by the
God of the temple. <span id="fr_5461"></span>[5462](#fn_5461) If you
threaten an avenger, you threaten us with the Creator. “Ye must become
fools, that ye may be wise.” <span id="fr_5462"></span>[5463](#fn_5462)
Wherefore?  “Because the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God.” <span id="fr_5463"></span>[5464](#fn_5463) With what God? Even if
the ancient Scriptures have contributed nothing in support of our view
thus far, <span id="fr_5464"></span>[5465](#fn_5464) an excellent
testimony turns up in what (the apostle) here adjoins: “For it is
written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness; and again, The Lord
knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.” <span
id="fr_5465"></span>[5466](#fn_5465) For in general we may conclude for
certain that he could not possibly have cited the authority of that God
whom he was bound to destroy, since he would not teach for Him. <span
id="fr_5466"></span>[5467](#fn_5466) “Therefore,” says he, “let no man
glory in man;” <span id="fr_5467"></span>[5468](#fn_5467) an injunction
which is in accordance with the teaching of the Creator, “wretched is
the man that trusteth in man;” <span
id="fr_5468"></span>[5469](#fn_5468) again, “It is better to trust in
the Lord than to confide in man;” <span
id="fr_5469"></span>[5470](#fn_5469) and the same thing is said about
glorying (in princes). <span id="fr_5470"></span>[5471](#fn_5470)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5425"></span>[440:5426](0030452.htm#fr_5425) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5426"></span>[440:5427](0030452.htm#fr_5426) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p4"></span> Infatuavit.

<span id="fn_5427"></span>[440:5428](0030452.htm#fr_5427) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p5"></span> [Isa. xlii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5428"></span>[440:5429](0030452.htm#fr_5428) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p6"></span> [Isa. xlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p6.1"></span>
(Septuagint).

<span id="fn_5429"></span>[440:5430](0030452.htm#fr_5429) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p7"></span> Nedum.

<span id="fn_5430"></span>[440:5431](0030452.htm#fr_5430) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p8"></span> Sacramenta.

<span id="fn_5431"></span>[440:5432](0030452.htm#fr_5431) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p9"></span> Palam decurrentia.

<span id="fn_5432"></span>[440:5433](0030452.htm#fr_5432) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p10"></span> Delitescebat.

<span id="fn_5433"></span>[440:5434](0030452.htm#fr_5433) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p11"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5434"></span>[440:5435](0030452.htm#fr_5434) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p12"></span> [Gen. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p12.1"></span>,
inexactly quoted.

<span id="fn_5435"></span>[441:5436](0030452.htm#fr_5435) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p13"></span> Quodammodo.

<span id="fn_5436"></span>[441:5437](0030452.htm#fr_5436) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p14"></span> Introductione sæculi.

<span id="fn_5437"></span>[441:5438](0030452.htm#fr_5437) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p15"></span> Pæne jam totis sæculis prodactis.

<span id="fn_5438"></span>[441:5439](0030452.htm#fr_5438) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p17"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5439"></span>[441:5440](0030452.htm#fr_5439) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p18"></span> Ut et hoc recidat.

<span id="fn_5440"></span>[441:5441](0030452.htm#fr_5440) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p19"></span> Virtutibus.

<span id="fn_5441"></span>[441:5442](0030452.htm#fr_5441) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p20"></span> Sed jam nec mihi competit.

<span id="fn_5442"></span>[441:5443](0030452.htm#fr_5442) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p21"></span> [Matt. iv.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5443"></span>[441:5444](0030452.htm#fr_5443) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p22"></span> [Luke iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#034)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5444"></span>[441:5445](0030452.htm#fr_5444) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p23"></span> In Creatoris accipitur apud Marcionem.

<span id="fn_5445"></span>[441:5446](0030452.htm#fr_5445) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p24"></span> Considered, in the hypothesis, as
Marcion’s god.

<span id="fn_5446"></span>[441:5447](0030452.htm#fr_5446) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p25"></span> Apud me.

<span id="fn_5447"></span>[441:5448](0030452.htm#fr_5447) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p26"></span> [Luke xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5448"></span>[441:5449](0030452.htm#fr_5448) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p27"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5449"></span>[441:5450](0030452.htm#fr_5449) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p28"></span> Videtur.

<span id="fn_5450"></span>[441:5451](0030452.htm#fr_5450) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p29"></span> Et quo.

<span id="fn_5451"></span>[441:5452](0030452.htm#fr_5451) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p30"></span> Instrumento.

<span id="fn_5452"></span>[441:5453](0030452.htm#fr_5452) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p31"></span> [Isa. xl.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5453"></span>[441:5454](0030452.htm#fr_5453) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p32"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5454"></span>[441:5455](0030452.htm#fr_5454) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p33"></span> Depalatorem.

<span id="fn_5455"></span>[442:5456](0030452.htm#fr_5455) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p34"></span> So the A.V. of [Isa. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p34.1"></span>;
but the Septuagint and St. Paul use the self-same term, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p34.2"></span>σοφὸς
ἀρχιτέκτων</span>.

<span id="fn_5456"></span>[442:5457](0030452.htm#fr_5456) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p35"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5457"></span>[442:5458](0030452.htm#fr_5457) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p36"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5458"></span>[442:5459](0030452.htm#fr_5458) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p37"></span> We add the original of this sentence:
“Nisi si structorem se terreni operis Deus profitebatur, ut non de suo
Christo significaret, qui futurus esset fundamentum credentium in eum,
super quod prout quisque superstruxerit, dignam scilicet vel indignam
doctrinam si opus ejus per ignem probabitur, si merces illi per ignem
rependetur, creatoris est, quia per ignem judicatur vestra
superædificatio, utique sui fundamenti, id est sui Christi.” Tertullian
is arguing upon an hypothesis suggested by Marcion’s withdrawal of *his*
Christ from everything “terrene.” Such a process as is described by St.
Paul in this passage, [1 Cor. i.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p37.1"></span>, must be left to the Creator and *His*
Christ.

<span id="fn_5459"></span>[442:5460](0030452.htm#fr_5459) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p38"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5460"></span>[442:5461](0030452.htm#fr_5460) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p39"></span> The text has *vitiabitur*, “shall be
*defiled*.”

<span id="fn_5461"></span>[442:5462](0030452.htm#fr_5461) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p40"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5462"></span>[442:5463](0030452.htm#fr_5462) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p41"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5463"></span>[442:5464](0030452.htm#fr_5463) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p42"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5464"></span>[442:5465](0030452.htm#fr_5464) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p43"></span> The older reading, “*adhuc* sensum
pristina præjudicaverunt,” we have preferred to Oehler’s “ad hunc
sensum,” etc.

<span id="fn_5465"></span>[442:5466](0030452.htm#fr_5465) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p44"></span> [1 Cor.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#020), [Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013), [Ps.
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5466"></span>[442:5467](0030452.htm#fr_5466) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p45"></span> Si non illi doceret.

<span id="fn_5467"></span>[442:5468](0030452.htm#fr_5467) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p46"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5468"></span>[442:5469](0030452.htm#fr_5468) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p47"></span> [Jer. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5469"></span>[442:5470](0030452.htm#fr_5469) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p48"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5470"></span>[442:5471](0030452.htm#fr_5470) <span
id="v.iv.vi.vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p49"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.vi.vi-p49.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Paul's Phraseology Often Suggested by the Jewish Scriptures.
Christ Our Passover--A Phrase Which Introduces Us to the Very Heart of
the Ancient Dispensation. Christ's True Corporeity. Married and
Unmarried States. Meaning of the Time is Short. In His Exhortations and
Doctrine, the Apostle Wholly Teaches According to the Mind and Purposes
of the God of the Old Testament. Prohibition of Meats and Drinks
Withdrawn by the Creator.](0030453)
