[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030561)  [Next](0030563) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Explanation of the Lord’s
Question About His Mother and His Brethren. Answer to the Cavils of
Apelles and Marcion, Who Support Their Denial of Christ’s Nativity by
It.</span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p2"></span>But whenever a dispute arises about the
nativity, all who reject it as creating a presumption in favour of the
reality of Christ’s flesh, wilfully deny that God Himself was born, on
the ground that He asked, “Who is my mother, and who are my
brethren?” <span id="fr_7037"></span>[7038](#fn_7037) Let, therefore,
Apelles hear what was our answer to Marcion in that little work, in
which we challenged his own (favourite) gospel to the proof, even that
the material circumstances of that remark (of the Lord’s) should be
considered. <span id="fr_7038"></span>[7039](#fn_7038) First of all,
nobody would have told Him that His mother and brethren were standing
outside, if he were not certain both that He had a mother and brethren,
and that they were the very persons whom he was then announcing,—who had
either been known to him before, or were then and there discovered by
him; although heretics <span id="fr_7039"></span>[7040](#fn_7039) have
removed this passage from the gospel, because those who were admiring
His doctrine said that His <span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="v.vii.vii-Page_528"></span>supposed father, Joseph the carpenter,
and His mother Mary, and His brethren, and His sisters, were very well
known to them. But it was with the view of tempting Him, that they had
mentioned to Him a mother and brethren which He did not possess. The
Scripture says nothing of this, although it is not in other instances
silent when anything was done against Him by way of temptation. 
“Behold,” it says, “a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted Him.” <span
id="fr_7040"></span>[7041](#fn_7040) And in another passage: “The
Pharisees also came unto Him, tempting Him.” Who <span
id="fr_7041"></span>[7042](#fn_7041) was to prevent its being in this
place also indicated that this was done with the view of tempting Him? I
do not admit what you advance of your own apart from Scripture. Then
there ought to be suggested <span id="fr_7042"></span>[7043](#fn_7042)
some occasion <span id="fr_7043"></span>[7044](#fn_7043) for the
temptation. What could they have thought to be in Him which required
temptation?  The question, to be sure, whether He had been born or not?
For if this point were denied in His answer, it might come out on the
announcement of a temptation. And yet no temptation, when aiming at the
discovery of the point which prompts the temptation by its doubtfulness,
falls upon one so abruptly, as not to be preceded by the question which
compels the temptation whilst raising the doubt.  Now, since the
nativity of Christ had never come into question, how can you contend
that they meant by their temptation to inquire about a point on which
they had never raised a doubt?  Besides, <span
id="fr_7044"></span>[7045](#fn_7044) if He had to be tempted about His
birth, this of course was not the proper way of doing it,—by announcing
those persons who, even on the supposition of His birth, might possibly
not have been in existence. We have all been born, and yet all of us
have not either brothers or mother. He might with more probability have
had even a father than a mother, and uncles more likely than brothers.
Thus is the temptation about His birth unsuitable, for it might have
been contrived without any mention of either His mother or His brethren.
It is clearly more credible that, being certain that He had both a
mother and brothers, they tested His divinity rather than His nativity,
whether, when within, He knew what was without; being tried by the
untrue announcement of the presence of persons who were not present. But
the artifice of a temptation might have been thwarted thus:  it might
have happened that He knew that those whom they were announcing to be
“standing without,” were in fact absent by the stress either of
sickness, or of business, or a journey which He was at the time aware
of. No one tempts (another) in a way in which he knows that he may have
himself to bear the shame of the temptation. There being, then, no
suitable occasion for a temptation, the announcement that His mother and
His brethren had actually turned up <span
id="fr_7045"></span>[7046](#fn_7045) recovers its naturalness. But there
is some ground for thinking that *Christ’s* answer denies His mother and
brethren for the present, as even Apelles might learn. “The Lord’s
brethren had not yet believed in Him.” <span
id="fr_7046"></span>[7047](#fn_7046) So is it contained in the Gospel
which was published before Marcion’s time; whilst there is at the same
time a want of evidence of His mother’s adherence to Him, although the
Marthas and the other Marys were in constant attendance on Him.  In this
very passage indeed, their unbelief is evident. Jesus was teaching the
way of life, preaching the kingdom of God *and* actively engaged in
healing infirmities of body and soul; but all the while, whilst
strangers were intent on Him, His very nearest relatives were absent. By
and by they turn up, and keep outside; but they do not go in, because,
forsooth, they set small store <span
id="fr_7047"></span>[7048](#fn_7047) on that which was doing within; nor
do they even wait, <span id="fr_7048"></span>[7049](#fn_7048) as if they
had something which they could contribute more necessary than that which
He was so earnestly doing; but they prefer to interrupt Him, and wish to
call Him away from His great work. Now, I ask you, Apelles, or will you
Marcion, please (to tell me), if you happened to be at a stage play, or
had laid a wager <span id="fr_7049"></span>[7050](#fn_7049) on a foot
race or a chariot race, and were called away by such a message, would
you not have exclaimed, “What are mother and brothers to me?” <span
id="fr_7050"></span>[7051](#fn_7050) And did not Christ, whilst
preaching and manifesting God, fulfilling the law and the prophets,
*and* scattering the darkness of the long preceding age, justly employ
this same form of words, in order to strike the unbelief of those who
stood outside, or to shake off the importunity of those who would call
Him away from His work? If, however, He had meant to deny His own
nativity, He would have found place, time, and means for expressing
Himself very differently, <span id="fr_7051"></span>[7052](#fn_7051) and
not in words which might be uttered by one who had both a mother and
brothers. When denying one’s parents in indignation, one does not deny
*their existence*, <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="v.vii.vii-Page_529"></span>but censures *their faults*. Besides, He
gave others the preference; and since He shows their title to this
favour—even because they listened to the word (of God)—He points out in
what sense He denied His mother and His brethren. For in whatever sense
He adopted as His own those who adhered to Him, in that did He deny as
His <span id="fr_7052"></span>[7053](#fn_7052) those who kept aloof from
Him. Christ also is wont to do to the utmost that which He enjoins on
others. How strange, then, would it certainly <span
id="fr_7053"></span>[7054](#fn_7053) have been, if, while he was
teaching others not to esteem mother, or father, or brothers, as highly
as the word of God, He were Himself to leave the word of God as soon as
His mother and brethren were announced to Him! He denied His parents,
then, in the sense in which He has taught us to deny ours—for God’s
work. But there is also another view of the case: in the abjured mother
there is a figure of the synagogue, as well as of the Jews in the
unbelieving brethren. In their person Israel remained outside, whilst
the new disciples who kept close to Christ within, hearing and
believing, represented the Church, which He called mother in a
preferable sense and a worthier brotherhood, with the repudiation of the
carnal relationship. It was in just the same sense, indeed, that He also
replied to that exclamation (of a certain woman), not denying His
mother’s “womb and paps,” but designating those as more “blessed who
hear the word of God.” <span id="fr_7054"></span>[7055](#fn_7054)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7037"></span>[527:7038](0030562.htm#fr_7037) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p3"></span> [Matt.
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048), [Luke
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021)<span id="v.vii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7038"></span>[527:7039](0030562.htm#fr_7038) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p4"></span> See our *Anti-Marcion*, iv. 19.

<span id="fn_7039"></span>[527:7040](0030562.htm#fr_7039) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p5"></span> Literally, “heresies.”

<span id="fn_7040"></span>[528:7041](0030562.htm#fr_7040) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p6"></span> [Luke x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)<span id="v.vii.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7041"></span>[528:7042](0030562.htm#fr_7041) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p7"></span> Literally, “nobody prevented its being,
etc.”

<span id="fn_7042"></span>[528:7043](0030562.htm#fr_7042) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p8"></span> Subesse.

<span id="fn_7043"></span>[528:7044](0030562.htm#fr_7043) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p9"></span> Materia.

<span id="fn_7044"></span>[528:7045](0030562.htm#fr_7044) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p10"></span> Eo adicimus etiam.

<span id="fn_7045"></span>[528:7046](0030562.htm#fr_7045) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p11"></span> Supervenissent.

<span id="fn_7046"></span>[528:7047](0030562.htm#fr_7046) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p12"></span> [John vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="v.vii.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7047"></span>[528:7048](0030562.htm#fr_7047) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p13"></span> Non computantes scilicet.

<span id="fn_7048"></span>[528:7049](0030562.htm#fr_7048) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p14"></span> Nec sustinent saltem.

<span id="fn_7049"></span>[528:7050](0030562.htm#fr_7049) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p15"></span> Contendens: “videlicet sponsionibus”
(Oehler)

<span id="fn_7050"></span>[528:7051](0030562.htm#fr_7050) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p16"></span> Literally, “Who is my mother, and who
are my brethren?”—Christ’s own words.

<span id="fn_7051"></span>[528:7052](0030562.htm#fr_7051) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p17"></span> The *alius* is a genitive, and must be
taken with *sermonis*.

<span id="fn_7052"></span>[529:7053](0030562.htm#fr_7052) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p18"></span> Abnegavit: “repudiated.”

<span id="fn_7053"></span>[529:7054](0030562.htm#fr_7053) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p19"></span> Force of the indicative *quale erat*.

<span id="fn_7054"></span>[529:7055](0030562.htm#fr_7054) <span
id="v.vii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.vii-p20"></span> [Luke
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)<span id="v.vii.vii-p20.1"></span>.
See also our *Anti-Marcion*, p. 292, Edin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Apelles and His Followers, Displeased with Our Earthly Bodies,
Attributed to Christ a Body of a Purer Sort. How Christ Was Heavenly
Even in His Earthly Flesh.](0030563)
