[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030091)  [Next](0030093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span>To follow out my plan in regard to
places: the circus is chiefly consecrated to the Sun, whose temple
stands in the middle of it, and whose image shines forth from its temple
summit; for they have not thought it proper to pay sacred honours
underneath a roof to an object they have itself in open space. <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span id="iv.v.viii-Page_83"></span>Those who
assert that the first spectacle was exhibited by Circe, and in honour of
the Sun her father, as they will have it, maintain also the name of
circus was derived from her. Plainly, then, the enchantress did this in
the name of the parties whose priestess she was—I mean the demons and
spirits of evil. What an aggregation of idolatries you see, accordingly,
in the decoration of the place! Every ornament of the circus is a temple
by itself. The eggs are regarded as sacred to the Castors, by men who
are not ashamed to profess faith in their production from the egg of a
swan, which was no other than Jupiter himself. The Dolphins vomit forth
in honour of Neptune. Images of Sessia, so called as the goddess of
sowing; of Messia, so called as the goddess of reaping; of Tutulina, so
called as the fruit-protecting deity—load the pillars. In front of these
you have three altars to these three gods—Great, Mighty, Victorious. 
They reckon these of Samo-Thrace.  The huge Obelisk, as Hermeteles
affirms, is set up in public to the Sun; its inscription, like its
origin, belongs to Egyptian superstition. Cheerless were the
demon-gathering without their *Mater Magna*; and so she presides there
over the Euripus. Consus, as we have mentioned, lies hidden under ground
at the Murcian Goals. These two sprang from an idol. For they will have
it that Murcia is the goddess of love; and to her, at that spot, they
have consecrated a temple. See, Christian, how many impure names have
taken possession of the circus! You have nothing to do with a sacred
place which is tenanted by such multitudes of diabolic spirits. And
speaking of places, this is the suitable occasion for some remarks in
anticipation of a point that some will raise. What, then, you say; shall
I be in danger of pollution if I go to the circus when the games are not
being celebrated? There is no law forbidding the mere places to us.  For
not only the places for show-gatherings, but even the temples, may be
entered without any peril of his religion by the servant of God, if he
has only some honest reason for it, unconnected with their proper
business and official duties. Why, even the streets and the
market-place, and the baths, and the taverns, and our very
dwelling-places, are not altogether free from idols. Satan and his
angels have filled the whole world. It is not by merely being in the
world, however, that we lapse from God, but by touching and tainting
ourselves with the world’s sins. I shall break with my Maker, that is,
by going to the Capitol or the temple of Serapis to sacrifice or adore,
as I shall also do by going as a spectator to the circus and the
theatre. The places in themselves do not contaminate, but what is done
in them; from this even the places themselves, we maintain, become
defiled.  The polluted things pollute us.  It is on this account that we
set before you to whom places of the kind are dedicated, that we may
prove the things which are done in them to belong to the idol-patrons to
whom the very places are sacred. <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_355"></span>[83:356](0030092.htm#fr_355) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p3"></span> \[Very admirable reflections on this
chapter may be found in Kaye, pp. 362–3.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.](0030093)
