[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030032)  [Next](0030034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>Enough has been said in these remarks
to confute the charge of treason against your re<span id="page_41">p.
41</span> <span id="iv.iii.xxvii-Page_41"></span>ligion: for we cannot
be held to do harm to that which has no existence. When we are called
therefore to sacrifice, we resolutely refuse, relying on the knowledge
we possess, by which we are well assured of the real objects to whom
these services are offered, under profaning of images and the
deification of human names. Some, indeed, think it a piece of insanity
that, when it is in our power to offer sacrifice at once, and go away
unharmed, holding as ever our convictions, we prefer an obstinate
persistence in our confession to our safety. You advise us, forsooth, to
take unjust advantage of you; but we know whence such suggestions come,
who is at the bottom of it all, and how every effort is made, now by
cunning suasion, and now by merciless persecution, to overthrow our
constancy. No other than that spirit, half devil and half angel, who,
hating us because of his own separation from God, and stirred with envy
for the favour God has shown us, turns your minds against us by an
occult influence, moulding and instigating them to all that perversity
in judgment, and that unrighteous cruelty, which we have mentioned at
the beginning of our work, when entering on this discussion. For, though
the whole power of demons and kindred spirits is subject to us, yet
still, as ill-disposed slaves sometimes conjoin contumacy with fear, and
delight to injure those of whom they at the same time stand in awe, so
is it here.  For fear also inspires hatred.  Besides, in their desperate
condition, as already under condemnation, it gives them some comfort,
while punishment delays, to have the usufruct of their malignant
dispositions. And yet, when hands are laid on them, they are subdued at
once, and submit to their lot; and those whom at a distance they oppose,
in close quarters they supplicate for mercy. So when, like
insurrectionary workhouses, or prisons, or mines, or any such penal
slaveries, they break forth against us their masters, they know all the
while that they are not a match for us, and just on that account,
indeed, rush the more recklessly to destruction. We resist them,
unwillingly, as though they were equals, and contend against them by
persevering in that which they assail; and our triumph over them is
never more complete than when we are condemned for resolute adherence to
our faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.](0030034)
