[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030046)  [Next](0030048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xli"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xli-p2"></span>You, therefore, are the sources of
trouble in human affairs; on you lies the blame of public adversities,
since you are ever attracting them—you by whom God is despised and
images are worshipped. It should surely seem the more natural thing to
believe that it is the neglected One who is angry, and not they to whom
all homage is paid; or most unjustly they act, if, on account of the
Christians, they send trouble on their own devotees, whom they are bound
to keep clear of the punishments of Christians. But this, you say, hits
your God as well, since He permits His worshippers to suffer on account
of those who dishonour Him. But admit first of all His providential
arrangings, and you will not make this retort. For He who once for all
appointed an eternal judgment at the world’s close, does not precipitate
the separation, which is essential to judgment, before the end. 
Meanwhile He deals with all sorts of men alike, so that all together
share His favours and reproofs. His will is, that outcasts and elect
should have adversities and prosperities in common, that we should have
all the same experience of His goodness and severity. Having learned
these things from His own lips, we love His goodness, we fear His wrath,
while both by you are treated with contempt; and hence the sufferings of
life, so far as it is our lot to be overtaken by them, are in our case
gracious admonitions, while in yours they are divine punishments. We
indeed are not the least put about: for, first, only one thing in this
life greatly concerns us, and that is, to get quickly out of it; and
next, if any adversity befalls us, it is laid to the door of your
transgressions. Nay, though we are likewise involved in troubles because
of our close connection with you, we are rather glad of it, because we
recognize in it divine foretellings, which, in fact, go to confirm the
confidence and faith of our hope. But if all the <span id="page_49">p.
49</span> <span id="iv.iii.xli-Page_49"></span>evils you endure are
inflicted on you by the gods you worship out of spite to us, why do you
continue to pay homage to beings so ungrateful, and unjust; who, instead
of being angry with you, should rather have been aiding and abetting you
by persecuting Christians—keeping *you* clear of their sufferings?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII.](0030048)
