[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030042)  [Next](0030044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxvii-p2"></span>If we are enjoined, then, to love our
enemies, as I have remarked above, whom have we to hate? If injured, we
are forbidden to retaliate, lest we become as bad ourselves: who can
suffer injury at our hands? In regard to this, recall your own
experiences. How often you inflict gross cruelties on Christians, partly
because it is your own inclination, and partly in obedience to the laws!
How often, too, the hostile mob, paying no regard to you, takes the law
into its own hand, and assails us with stones and flames! With the very
frenzy of the Bacchanals, they do not even spare the Christian dead, but
tear them, now sadly changed, no longer entire, from the rest of the
tomb, from the asylum we might say of death, cutting them in pieces,
rending them asunder. Yet, banded together as we are, ever so ready to
sacrifice our lives, what single case of revenge for injury are you able
to point to, though, if it were held right among us to repay evil by
evil, a single night with a torch or two could achieve an ample
vengeance? But away with the idea of a sect divine avenging itself by
human fires, or shrinking from the sufferings in which it is tried. If
we desired, indeed, to act the part of open enemies, not merely of
secret avengers, would there be any lacking in strength, whether of
numbers or resources?  The Moors, the Marcomanni, the Parthians
themselves, or any single people, however great, inhabiting a distinct
territory, and confined within its own boundaries, surpasses, forsooth,
in numbers, one spread over all the world! We are but of yesterday, and
we have filled every place among you—cities, islands, fortresses, towns,
market-places, the very camp, tribes, companies, palace, senate,
forum,—we have left nothing to you but the temples of your gods. For
what wars should we not be fit, not eager, even with unequal forces, we
who so willingly yield ourselves to the sword, if in our religion it
were not counted better to be slain than to slay? Without arms even, and
raising no insurrectionary banner, but simply in enmity to you, we could
carry on the contest with you by an ill-willed severance alone. For if
such multitudes of men were to break away from you, and betake
themselves to some remote corner of the world, why, the very loss of so
many citizens, whatever sort they were, would cover the empire with
shame; nay, in the very forsaking, vengeance would be inflicted. Why,
you would be horror-struck at the solitude in which you would find
yourselves, at such an all-prevailing silence, and that stupor as of a
dead world. You would have to seek subjects to govern. You would have
more enemies than citizens remaining. For now it is the immense number
of Christians which makes your enemies so few,—almost all the
inhabitants of your various cities being followers of Christ. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) Yet you choose to call us enemies of
the human race, rather than of human error.  Nay, who would deliver you
from those secret foes, ever busy both destroying your souls and ruining
your health?  Who would save you, I mean, from the attacks of those
spirits of evil, which without reward or hire we exorcise?  This alone
would be revenge enough for us, that you were henceforth left free to
the possession of unclean spirits.  But instead of taking into account
what is due to us for the important protection we afford you, and though
we are not merely no trouble to you, but in fact necessary to your
well-being, you prefer to hold us enemies, as indeed we are, yet not of
man, but rather of his error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[45:130](0030043.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxvii-p3"></span> \[Elucidation VI.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII.](0030044)
