[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030233)  [Next](0030235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—Further Refutation of the
Pythagorean Theory.  The State of Contemporary Civilisation.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxx-p2"></span>But what must we say in reply to what
follows? For, in the first place, if the living come from the dead, just
as the dead proceed from the living, then there must always remain
unchanged one and the selfsame number of mankind, even the number which
originally introduced (human) life. The living preceded the dead,
afterwards the dead issued from the living, and then again the living
from the dead. Now, since this process was evermore going on with the
same persons, therefore they, issuing from the same, must always have
remained in number the same. For they who emerged (into life) could
never have become more nor fewer than they who disappeared (in death).
We find, however, in the records of the Antiquities of Man, <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) that the human race has progressed
with a gradual growth of population, either occupying different portions
of the earth as aborigines, or as nomad tribes, or as exiles, or as
conquerors—as the Scythians in Parthia, the Temenidæ in Peloponnesus,
the Athenians in Asia, the Phrygians in Italy, and the Phœnicians in
Africa; or by the more ordinary methods of migration, which they call
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi.xxx-p3.1"></span>ἀποικίαι</span> or
*colonies*, for the purpose of throwing off redundant population,
disgorging into other abodes their overcrowded masses. The aborigines
remain still in their old settlements, and have also enriched other
districts with loans of even larger populations. Surely it is obvious
enough, if one looks at the whole world, that it is becoming daily
better cultivated and more fully peopled than anciently. All places are
now accessible, all are well known, all open to commerce; most pleasant
farms have obliterated all traces of what were once dreary and dangerous
wastes; cultivated fields have subdued forests; flocks and herds have
expelled wild beasts; sandy deserts are sown; rocks are planted; marshes
are drained; and where once were hardly solitary cottages, there are now
large cities. No longer are (savage) islands dreaded, nor their rocky
shores feared; everywhere are houses, and inhabitants, and settled
government, and civilized life. What most frequently meets our view (and
occasions complaint), is our teeming population: our numbers are
burdensome to the world, which can hardly supply us from its natural
elements; our wants grow more and more keen, and our complaints more
bitter in all mouths, whilst Nature fails in affording us her usual
sustenance. In very deed, pestilence, and famine, and wars, and
earthquakes have to be regarded as a remedy for nations, as the means of
pruning the luxuriance of the human race; and yet, when the hatchet has
once felled large masses of men, the world has hitherto never once been
alarmed at the sight of a restitution of its dead coming back to life
after their millennial exile. <span id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713)
But such a spectacle would have become quite obvious by the balance of
mortal <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxx-Page_211"></span>loss and vital recovery, if it were true
that the dead came back again to life. Why, however, is it after a
thousand years, and not at the moment, that this return from death is to
take place, when, supposing that the loss is not at once supplied, there
must be a risk of an utter extinction, as the failure precedes the
compensation? Indeed, this furlough of our present life would be quite
disproportioned to the period of a thousand years; so much briefer is
it, and on that account so much more easily is its torch extinguished
than rekindled.  Inasmuch, then, as the period which, on the hypothesis
we have discussed, ought to intervene, if the living are to be formed
from the dead, has not actually occurred, it will follow that we must
not believe that men come back to life from the dead (in the way
surmised in this philosophy).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[210:1713](0030234.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="iv.xi.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxx-p3"></span> A probable allusion to Varro’s work, *De
Antiqq. Rerum Humanarum*.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[210:1714](0030234.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="iv.xi.xxx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxx-p4"></span> An allusion to Plato’s notion that, at
the end of a thousand years, such a restoration of the dead, took place.
See his *Phædrus*, p. 248, and *De Republ.* x. p. 614.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Further Exposure of Transmigration, Its Inextricable
Embarrassment.](0030235)
