[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030310)  [Next](0030312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xlv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p4"></span>(Prescription, Chap. I., p. 243,
*Supra*.*)*

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p5"></span>In adopting this expression from the
Roman Law, Tertullian has simply puzzled beginners to get at his idea.
Nor do they learn much when it is called a *demurrer*, which, if I
comprehend the word as used in law-cases, is a rejoinder to the
testimony of the other party, amounting to—“Well, what of it? It does
not prove your case.” Something like this is indeed in Tertullian’s use
of the term *præscription*; but Dr. Holmes furnishes what seems to me
the best explanation, (though he only half renders it,) “the
Prescriptive Rule against Heresies.” In a word, it means, “*the Rule of
Faith* asserted against Heresies.” And his practical point is, it is
useless to discuss Scripture with convicted ([Titus
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011)<span id="v.iii.xlv-p5.1"></span>.)
heretics; every one of them is ready with “his psalm, his doctrine, his
interpretation,” and you may argue fruitlessly till Doomsday. But bring
them to the test of (*Quod Semper*, etc.), the apostolic *præscription*
([1 Corinthians xi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="v.iii.xlv-p5.2"></span>).—*We have no such custom neither the
Churches of God*. State this *Rule of Faith*, viz. Holy Scripture, as
interpreted from the apostolic day: if it proves the doctrine or custom
a *novelty*, then it has no foundation, and even if it be harmless, it
cannot be innocently professed against the order and peace of the
churches.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p6"></span><span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="v.iii.xlv-Page_266"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p6.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p7"></span>(Semler, cap. x., note 15, p. 248.)

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p8"></span>The extent to which Bp. Kaye has
stretched his notice of this critic is to be accounted for by the fact
that, for a time, the German School of the last century exerted a sad
influence in England. In early life Dr. Pusey came near to being led
away by it, and Hugh James Rose was raised up to resist it. Semler lived
(at Halle and elsewhere) from <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1725 to 1791. Kahnis in his
invaluable manual, named below, thus speaks of his Patristic theories:
“The history of the Kingdom of God became, under his hands, a world of
atoms, which crossed each other as chaotically as the masses of notes
which lay heaped up in the memory of Semler.…Under his pragmatical
touches the halo of the martyrs faded, etc.” *Internal Hist. of German
Protestantism* (since *circa* 1750, ) by Ch. Fred. Aug. Kahnis, D.D.
(Lutheran) Professor at Leipzig. Translated.  T. and F. Clark,
Edinburgh, 1856.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p9"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p9.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p10"></span>(Peter, cap. xxii. note 6, p. 253.)

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p11"></span>In the treatise of Cyprian, *De
Unitate*, we shall have occasion to speak fully on this interesting
point.  The reference to Kaye may suffice, here.  But, since the
inveterate confusion of all that is said of Peter with all that is
claimed by a modern bishop for himself promotes a false view of this
passage, it may be well to note (1) that St. Peter’s name is expounded
by himself ([1 Pet. 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.xlv-p11.1"></span>)
so as to make Christ the Rock and *all believers* “lively stones”—or
*Peters*—by faith in Him. St. Peter is often called *the rock*, most
justly, in this sense, by a rhetorical play on his name: Christ the Rock
and all believers “*lively stones*,” being cemented with Him by the
Spirit.  But, (2) this *specialty* of St. Peter, as such, belongs to him
(*Cephas*) only. (3) So far as transmitted it belongs to no particular
See. (4) The claim of Rome is disproved by *Præscription*. (5) Were it
otherwise, it would not justify that See in making new articles of
Faith.  (6) Nor in its Schism with the East.  (7) When it restores St.
Peter’s Doctrine and Holiness, to the Latin Churches, there will be no
quarrel about pre-eminence. Meantime, Rome’s *fallibility* is expressly
taught in [Romans xi. 18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#018)<span
id="v.iii.xlv-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p12"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p12.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p13"></span>(The Apostles, cap. xxv. p. 254.)

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p14"></span>Nothing less than a new incarnation of
Christ and a new commission to new apostles can give us anything new in
religion. This *præscription* is our Catholic answer to the Vatican
oracles of our own time. These give us a new revelation, prefacing the
Gospels (1) by defining the *immaculate conception* of Mary in the womb
of her mother; and (2) adding a new chapter to the Acts of the Apostles,
in defining the infallibility of a single bishop.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p15"></span>Clearly, had Tertullian known anything
of this last dogma of Latin Novelty, he would not have taken the trouble
to write this treatise. He would have said to heretics, We can neither
discuss Scripture nor Antiquity with you. Rome is the touchstone of
dogma, and to its bishop we refer you.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p16"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p16.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p17"></span>(Truth and Peace, cap. xliv. p. 265.)

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p18"></span>The famous appeal of Bishop Jewel, known
as “the Challenge at Paul’s Cross,” which he made in a sermon preached
there on Passion Sunday, <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iii.xlv-p18.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1560, is an instance of
“*Præscription* against heresies,” well worthy of being recalled, in a
day which has seen Truth and Peace newly sacrificed to the ceaseless
innovations of Rome. It is as follows:—“If any learned man of all our
adversaries, or, if all the learned men that be alive, be able to bring
<span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="v.iii.xlv-Page_267"></span>*any one sufficient sentence* out of any
old Catholic doctor or father; or out of any old general Council; or out
of the Holy Scriptures of God; <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) or, any *one example* of the
primitive Church, whereby it may be clearly and plainly proved, that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p20"></span>1. There was any private mass in the
whole world at that time, for the space of six hundred years after
Christ; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p21"></span>2. There was then any communion
ministered unto the people under one kind; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p22"></span>3. The people had their common prayers,
then, in a strange tongue that they understood not; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p23"></span>4. The bishop of Rome was then called an
universal bishop, or the head of the universal Church; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p24"></span>5. The people was then taught to believe
that Christ’s body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally or
naturally in the Sacrament; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p25"></span>6. His body is, or may be, in a thousand
places or more, at one time; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p26"></span>7. The priest did then hold up the
Sacrament over his head; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p27"></span>8. The people did then fall down and
worship it with godly honour; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p28"></span>9. The Sacrament was then, or now ought
to be, hanged up under a canopy; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p29"></span>10. In the Sacrament after the words of
consecration there remaineth only the *accidents* and shews, without the
*substance* of bread and wine; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p30"></span>11. The priest then divided the
Sacrament in three parts and afterwards received himself, alone; or
that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p31"></span>12. Whosoever had said the Sacrament is
a pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ’s body, had therefore been
judged a heretic; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p32"></span>13. It was lawful, then, to have thirty,
twenty, fifteen, ten, or five masses said in one Church, in one day; or
that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p33"></span>14. Images were then set up in churches
to the intent the people might worship them; or that—

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p34"></span>15. The lay people was then forbidden to
read the word of God, in their own tongue:

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p35"></span>“If any man alive be able to prove any
of these articles, by any one clear or plain clause or sentence, either
of the Scriptures, or of the old doctors, or of any old General Council,
or by any Example of the Primitive Church; I promise, then, that I will
give over and subscribe unto him.”

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p36"></span>All this went far beyond the concession
of *præscription* which makes little of *any one saying of any one
Father*, and demands the general consent of Antiquity; but, it is
needless to say that Jewel’s challenge has remained unanswered for more
than three hundred years, and so it will be to all Eternity.

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p37"></span>With great erudition Jewel enlarged his
propositions and maintained all his points. See his works, vol. I., p.
20 *et seqq*. Cambridge University Press, 1845.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[267:2313](0030311.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="v.iii.xlv-p18.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xlv-p19"></span> It must be remembered that an appeal to
Scripture lies behind Tertullian’s *Præscription*: only he will not
discuss Holy Scripture with heretics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Five Books Against Marcion.](0030312)
