[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030093)  [Next](0030095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.x"></span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="iv.v.x-p2"></span>Let us pass on now to theatrical
exhibitions, which we have already shown have a common <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="iv.v.x-Page_84"></span>origin with
the circus, and bear like idolatrous designations—even as from the first
they have borne the name of “Ludi,” and equally minister to idols.  They
resemble each other also in their pomp, having the same procession to
the scene of their display from temples and altars, and that mournful
profusion of incense and blood, with music of pipes and trumpets, all
under the direction of the soothsayer and the undertaker, those two foul
masters of funeral rites and sacrifices. So as we went on from the
origin of the “Ludi” to the circus games, we shall now direct our course
thence to those of the theatre, beginning with the place of exhibition.
At first the theatre was properly a temple of Venus; and, to speak
briefly, it was owing to this that stage performances were allowed to
escape censure, and got a footing in the world. For ofttimes the
censors, in the interests of morality, put down above all the rising
theatres, foreseeing, as they did, that there was great danger of their
leading to a general profligacy; so that already, from this accordance
of their own people with us, there is a witness to the heathen, and in
the anticipatory judgment of human knowledge even a confirmation of our
views.  Accordingly Pompey the Great, less only than his theatre, when
he had erected that citadel of all impurities, fearing some time or
other censorian condemnation of his memory, superposed on it a temple of
Venus; and summoning by public proclamation the people to its
consecration, he called it not a theatre, but a temple, “under which,”
said he, “we have placed tiers of seats for viewing the shows.” So he
threw a veil over a structure on which condemnation had been often
passed, and which is ever to be held in reprobation, by pretending that
it was a sacred place; and by means of superstition he blinded the eyes
of a virtuous discipline. But Venus and Bacchus are close allies. These
two evil spirits are in sworn confederacy with each other, as the
patrons of drunkenness and lust. So the theatre of Venus is as well the
house of Bacchus: for they properly gave the name of Liberalia also to
other theatrical amusements—which besides being consecrated to Bacchus
(as were the Dionysia of the Greeks), were instituted by him; and,
without doubt, the performances of the theatre have the common patronage
of these two deities. That immodesty of gesture and attire which so
specially and peculiarly characterizes the stage are consecrated to
them—the one deity wanton by her sex, the other by his drapery; while
its services of voice, and song, and lute, and pipe, belong to Apollos,
and Muses, and Minervas, and Mercuries. You will hate, O Christian, the
things whose authors must be the objects of your utter detestation. So
we would now make a remark about the arts of the theatre, about the
things also whose authors in the names we execrate. We know that the
names of the dead are nothing, as are their images; but we know well
enough, too, who, when images are set up, under these names carry on
their wicked work, and exult in the homage rendered to them, and pretend
to be divine—none other than spirits accursed, than devils. We see,
therefore, that the arts also are consecrated to the service of the
beings who dwell in the names of their founders; and that things cannot
be held free from the taint of idolatry whose inventors have got a place
among the gods for their discoveries. Nay, as regards the arts, we ought
to have gone further back, and barred all further argument by the
position that the demons, predetermining in their own interests from the
first, among other evils of idolatry, the pollutions of the public
shows, with the object of drawing man away from his Lord and binding him
to their own service, carried out their purpose by bestowing on him the
artistic gifts which the shows require. For none but themselves would
have made provision and preparation for the objects they had in view;
nor would they have given the arts to the world by any but those in
whose names, and images, and histories they set up for their own ends
the artifice of consecration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI.](0030095)
