[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030239)  [Next](0030241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—The Main Points of Our
Author’s Subject. On the Sexes of the Human Race.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p2"></span>For the discussion of these questions
we abandoned, if I remember rightly, ground to which we must now return.
We had established the position that the soul is seminally placed in
man, and by human agency, and that its seed from the very beginning is
uniform, as is that of the soul also, to the race of man; (and this we
settled) owing to the rival opinions of the philosophers and the
heretics, and that ancient saying mentioned by Plato (to which we
referred above). <span id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) We now
pursue in their order the points which follow from them. The soul, being
sown in the womb at the same time as the body, receives likewise along
with it its sex; and this indeed so simultaneously, that neither of the
two substances can be alone regarded as the cause of the sex.  Now, if
in the semination of these substances any interval were admissible in
their conception, in such wise that either the flesh or the soul should
be the first to be conceived, one might then ascribe an especial sex to
one of the substances, owing to the difference in the time of the
impregnations, so that either the flesh would impress its sex upon the
soul, or the soul upon the sex; even as Apelles (the heretic, not the
painter <span id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) ) gives the priority
over their bodies to the souls of men and women, as he had been taught
by Philumena, and in consequence makes the flesh, as the later, receive
its sex from the soul. They also who make the soul supervene after birth
on the flesh predetermine, of course, the sex of the previously formed
soul to be male or female, according to (the sex of) the flesh. But the
truth is, the seminations of the two substances are inseparable in point
of time, and their effusion is also one and the same, in consequence of
which a community of gender is secured to them; so that the course of
nature, whatever that be, shall draw the line (for the distinct sexes). 
Certainly in this view we have an attestation of the method of the first
two formations, when the male was moulded and tempered in a completer
way, for Adam was first formed; and the woman came far behind him, for
Eve was the later formed. So that her flesh was for a long time without
specific form (such as she afterwards assumed when taken out of Adam’s
side); but she was even then herself a living being, because I should
regard her at that time in soul as even a portion of Adam. Besides,
God’s *afflatus* would have animated her too, if there had not been in
the woman a transmission from Adam of his soul also as well as of his
flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[217:1742](0030240.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p3"></span> In ch. xxviii. at the beginning.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[217:1743](0030240.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvi-p4"></span> See above, ch. xxiii. \[Also p. 246,
*infra.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Formation and State of the Embryo. Its Relation with the
Subject of This Treatise.](0030241)
