[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030125)  [Next](0030127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p2"></span>To begin with the real ground of the
military crown, I think we must first inquire whether warfare is proper
at all for Christians. What sense is there in discussing the merely
accidental, when that on which it rests is to be condemned? Do we
believe it lawful for a human oath <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) to be superadded to one divine, for a
man to come under promise to another master after Christ, and to abjure
father, mother, and all nearest kinsfolk, whom even the law has
commanded us to honour and love next to God Himself, to whom the gospel,
too, holding them only of less account than Christ, has in like manner
rendered honour? Shall it be held lawful to make an occupation of the
sword, when the Lord proclaims that he who uses the sword shall perish
by the sword?  And shall the son of peace take part in the battle when
it does not become him even to sue at law? And shall he apply the chain,
and the prison, and the torture, and the punishment, who is not the
avenger even of his own wrongs?  Shall he, forsooth, either keep
watch-service for others more than for Christ, or shall he do it on the
Lord’s day, when he does not even do it for Christ Himself? And shall he
keep guard <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xi-Page_100"></span>before the temples which he has renounced?
And shall he take a meal where the apostle has forbidden him? <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) And shall he diligently protect by
night those whom in the day-time he has put to flight by his exorcisms,
leaning and resting on the spear the while with which Christ’s side was
pierced? Shall he carry a flag, <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)
too, hostile to Christ? And shall *he* ask a watchword from the emperor
who has already received one from God? Shall *he* be disturbed in death
by the trumpet of the trumpeter, who expects to be aroused by the
angel’s trump? And shall the Christian be burned according to camp rule,
when he was not permitted to burn incense to an idol, when to him Christ
remitted the punishment of fire?  Then how many other offences there are
involved in the performances of camp offices, which we must hold to
involve a transgression of God’s law, you may see by a slight survey.
The very carrying of the name over from the camp of light to the camp of
darkness is a violation of it. Of course, if faith comes later, and
finds any preoccupied with military service, their case is different, as
in the instance of those whom John used to receive for baptism, and of
those most faithful centurions, I mean the centurion whom Christ
approves, and the centurion whom Peter instructs; yet, at the same time,
when a man has become a believer, and faith has been sealed, there must
be either an immediate abandonment of it, which has been the course with
many; or all sorts of quibbling will have to be resorted to in order to
avoid offending God, and that is not allowed even outside of military
service; <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) or, last of all, for
God the fate must be endured which a citizen-faith has been no less
ready to accept. Neither does military service hold out escape from
punishment of sins, or exemption from martyrdom. Nowhere does the
Christian change his character. There is one gospel, and the same Jesus,
who will one day deny every one who denies, and acknowledge every one
who acknowledges God,—who will save, too, the life which has been lost
for His sake; but, on the other hand, destroy that which for gain has
been saved to His dishonour. With Him the faithful citizen is a soldier,
just as the faithful soldier is a citizen. <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) A state of faith admits no plea of
necessity; they are under no necessity to sin, whose one necessity is,
that they do not sin. For if one is pressed to the offering of sacrifice
and the sheer denial of Christ by the necessity of torture or of
punishment, yet discipline does not connive even at that necessity;
because there is a higher necessity to dread denying and to undergo
martyrdom, than to escape from suffering, and to render the homage
required. In fact, an excuse of this sort overturns the entire essence
of our sacrament, removing even the obstacle to voluntary sins; for it
will be possible also to maintain that inclination is a necessity, as
involving in it, forsooth, a sort of compulsion. I have, in fact,
disposed of this very allegation of necessity with reference to the
pleas by which crowns connected with official position are vindicated,
in support of which it is in common use, since for this very reason
offices must be either refused, that we may not fall into acts of sin,
or martyrdoms endured that we may get quit of offices. Touching this
primary aspect of the question, as to the unlawfulness even of a
military life itself, I shall not add more, that the secondary question
may be restored to its place. Indeed, if, putting my strength to the
question, I banish from us the military life, I should now to no purpose
issue a challenge on the matter of the military crown. Suppose, then,
that the military service is lawful, as far as the plea for the crown is
concerned. <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_416"></span>[99:417](0030126.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p3"></span> \[He plays on this word *Sacramentum*. Is
the military *sacrament* to be added to the Lord’s?\]

<span id="fn_417"></span>[100:418](0030126.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p4"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010)<span id="iv.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[100:419](0030126.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p5"></span> \[Vexillum. Such words as these prepared
for the *Labarum*.\]

<span id="fn_419"></span>[100:420](0030126.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p6"></span> “Outside of the military service.” By
substituting *ex militia* for the corresponding words *extra militiam*,
as has been proposed by Rigaltius, the sentence acquires a meaning such
that desertion from the army is suggested as one of the methods by which
a soldier who has become a Christian may continue faithful to Jesus. But
the words *extra militiam* are a genuine part of the text. There is no
good ground, therefore, for the statement of Gibbon:  “Tertullian (*de
Corona Militis*, c. xi.) suggests to them the expedient of deserting; a
counsel which, if it had been generally known, was not very proper to
conciliate the favour of the emperors toward the Christian sect.”—<span
class="sc"><span id="iv.vi.xi-p6.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[100:421](0030126.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p7"></span> “The faithful,” etc.; i.e., the kind of
occupation which any one has cannot be pleaded by him as a reason for
not doing all that Christ has enjoined upon His people.—<span
class="sc"><span id="iv.vi.xi-p7.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[100:422](0030126.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p8"></span> \[He was not yet quite a Montanist.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.](0030127)
