[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030040)  [Next](0030042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p2"></span>This is the reason, then, why
Christians are counted public enemies:  that they pay no vain, nor
false, nor foolish honours to the emperor; that, as men believing in the
true religion, they prefer to celebrate their festal days with a good
conscience, instead of with the common wantonness. It is, forsooth, a
notable homage to bring fires and couches out before the public, to have
feasting from street to street, to turn the city into one great tavern,
to make mud with wine, to run in troops to acts of violence, to deeds of
shamelessness to lust allurements! What! is public joy manifested by
public disgrace? Do things unseemly at other times beseem the festal
days of princes? Do they who observe the rules of virtue out of
reverence for Cæsar, for <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-Page_44"></span>his sake turn aside from them? Shall
piety be a license to immoral deeds, and shall religion be regarded as
affording the occasion for all riotous extravagance? Poor we, worthy of
all condemnation! For why do we keep the votive days and high rejoicings
in honour of the Cæsars with chastity, sobriety, and virtue? Why, on the
day of gladness, do we neither cover our door-posts with laurels, nor
intrude upon the day with lamps? It is a proper thing, at the call of a
public festivity, to dress your house up like some new brothel. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) However, in the matter of this homage
to a lesser majesty, in reference to which we are accused of a lower
sacrilege, because we do not celebrate along with you the holidays of
the Cæsars in a manner forbidden alike by modesty, decency, and
purity,—in truth they have been established rather as affording
opportunities for licentiousness than from any worthy motive;—in this
matter I am anxious to point out how faithful and true *you* are, lest
perchance here also those who will not have us counted Romans, but
enemies of Rome’s chief rulers, be found themselves worse than we wicked
Christians! I appeal to the inhabitants of Rome themselves, to the
native population of the seven hills: does that Roman vernacular of
theirs ever spare a Cæsar? The Tiber and the wild beasts’ schools bear
witness. Say now if nature had covered our hearts with a transparent
substance through which the light could pass, whose hearts, all graven
over, would not betray the scene of another and another Cæsar presiding
at the distribution of a largess? And this at the very time they are
shouting, “May Jupiter take years from us, and with them lengthen like
to you,”—words as foreign to the lips of a Christian as it is out of
keeping with his character to desire a change of emperor. But this is
the rabble, you say; yet, as the rabble, they still are Romans, and none
more frequently than they demand the death of Christians. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) Of course, then, the other classes, as
befits their higher rank, are religiously faithful.  No breath of
treason is there ever in the senate, in the equestrian order, in the
camp, in the palace.  Whence, then, came a Cassius, a Niger, an Albinus?
Whence they who beset the Cæsar <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125)
between the two laurel groves? Whence they who practised wrestling, that
they might acquire skill to strangle him? Whence they who in full armour
broke into the palace, <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) more
audacious than all your Tigerii and Parthenii. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) If I mistake not, they were Romans;
that is, they were not Christians. Yet all of them, on the very eve of
their traitorous outbreak, offered sacrifices for the safety of the
emperor, and swore by his genius, one thing in profession, and another
in the heart; and no doubt they were in the habit of calling Christians
enemies of the state. Yes, and persons who are now daily brought to
light as confederates or approvers of these crimes and treasons, the
still remnant gleanings after a vintage of traitors, with what verdant
and branching laurels they clad their door-posts, with what lofty and
brilliant lamps they smoked their porches, with what most exquisite and
gaudy couches they divided the Forum among themselves; not that they
might celebrate public rejoicings, but that they might get a foretaste
of their own votive seasons in partaking of the festivities of another,
and inaugurate the model and image of their hope, changing in their
minds the emperor’s name. The same homage is paid, dutifully too, by
those who consult astrologers, and soothsayers, and augurs, and
magicians, about the life of the Cæsars,—arts which, as made known by
the angels who sinned, and forbidden by God, Christians do not even make
use of in their own affairs. But who has any occasion to inquire about
the life of the emperor, if he have not some wish or thought against it,
or some hopes and expectations after it? For consultations of this sort
have not the same motive in the case of friends as in the case of
sovereigns. The anxiety of a kinsman is something very different from
that of a subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[44:124](0030041.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p3"></span> \[Note this reference to a shameless
custom of the heathen in Rome and elsewhere.\]

<span id="fn_124"></span>[44:125](0030041.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p4"></span> \[See cap. l. and Note on cap. xl.
*infra*.\]

<span id="fn_125"></span>[44:126](0030041.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p5"></span> Commodus.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[44:127](0030041.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p6"></span> To murder Pertinax.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[44:128](0030041.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxv-p7"></span> Tigerius and Parthenius were among the
murderers of Commodus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI.](0030042)
