[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030031)  [Next](0030033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>Examine then, and see if *He* be not
the dispenser of kingdoms, who is Lord at once of the world which is
ruled, and of man himself who rules; if He have not ordained the changes
of dynasties, with their appointed seasons, who was before all time, and
made the world a body of times; if the rise and the fall of states are
not the work of Him, under whose sovereignty the human race once existed
without states at all.  How do you allow yourselves to fall into such
error? Why, the Rome of rural simplicity is older than some of her gods;
she reigned before her proud, vast Capitol was built. The Babylonians
exercised dominion, too, before the days of the Pontiffs; and the Medes
before the Quindecemvirs; and the Egyptians before the Salii; and the
Assyrians before the Luperci; and the Amazons before the Vestal Virgins.
And to add another point: if the religions of Rome give empire, ancient
Judea would never have been a kingdom, despising as it did one and all
these idol deities; Judea, whose God you Romans once honoured with
victims, and its temple with gifts, and its people with treaties; and
which would never have been beneath your sceptre but for that last and
crowning offence against God, in rejecting and crucifying Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII.](0030033)
