[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030600)  [Next](0030602) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—The Sophistical Sense Put by
Heretics on the Phrase “Resurrection of the Dead,” As If It Meant the
Moral Change of a New Life.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xix-p2"></span>Now this consideration of the phrase in
question, and its signification—besides maintaining, of course, the true
meaning of the important words—must needs contribute to this further
result, that whatever obscurity our adversaries throw over the subject
under the pretence of figurative and allegorical language, the truth
will stand out in clearer light, and out of uncertainties certain and
definite rules will be prescribed. For some, when they have alighted on
a very usual form of prophetic statement, generally expressed in figure
and allegory, though not always, distort into some imaginary sense even
the most clearly described doctrine of the resurrection of the dead,
alleging that even death itself must be understood in a spiritual sense.
They say that which is commonly supposed to be death is not really
so,—namely, the separation of body and soul: it is rather the ignorance
of God, by reason of which man is dead to God, and is not less buried in
error than he would be in the grave. Wherefore that also must be held to
be the resurrection, when a man is reanimated by access to the truth,
and having dispersed the death of ignorance, and being endowed with new
life <span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="v.viii.xix-Page_559"></span>by God, has burst forth from the
sepulchre of the old man, even as the Lord likened the scribes and
Pharisees to “whited sepulchres.” <span
id="fr_7393"></span>[7394](#fn_7393) Whence it follows that they who
have by faith attained to the resurrection, are with the Lord after they
have once put Him on in their baptism. By such subtlety, then, even in
conversation have they often been in the habit of misleading our
brethren, as if they held a resurrection of the dead *as well as we*.
Woe, say they, to him who has not risen in the present body; for they
fear that they might alarm their hearers if they at once denied the
resurrection. Secretly, however, in their minds they think this: Woe
betide the simpleton who during his present life fails to discover the
mysteries of heresy; since this, in their view, is the resurrection. 
There are however, a great many also, who, claiming to hold a
resurrection after the soul’s departure, maintain that going out of the
sepulchre means escaping out of the world, since in their view the world
is the habitation of the dead—that is, of those who know not God; or
they will go so far as to say that it actually means escaping out of the
body itself, since they imagine that the body detains the soul, when it
is shut up in the death of a worldly life, as in a grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7393"></span>[559:7394](0030601.htm#fr_7393) <span
id="v.viii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xix-p3"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)<span id="v.viii.xix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Figurative Senses Have Their Foundation in Literal Fact. Besides,
the Allegorical Style is by No Means the Only One Found in the Prophetic
Scriptures, as Alleged by the Heretics.](0030602)
