[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030235)  [Next](0030237) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Empedocles Increased the
Absurdity of Pythagoras by Developing the Posthumous Change of Men into
Various Animals.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p2"></span>But the fact is, Empedocles, who used
to <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-Page_212"></span>dream that he was a god, and on that
account, I suppose, disdained to have it thought that he had ever before
been merely some hero, declares in so many words: “I once was Thamnus,
and a fish.” Why not rather a melon, seeing that he was such a fool; or
a cameleon, for his inflated brag? It was, no doubt, as a fish (and a
queer one too!) that he escaped the corruption of some obscure grave,
when he preferred being roasted by a plunge into Ætna; after which
accomplishment there was an end for ever to his <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p2.1"></span>μετενσωμάτωσις</span>
or putting himself into another body—(fit only now for) a light dish
after the roast-meat. At this point, therefore, we must likewise contend
against that still more monstrous presumption, that in the course of the
transmigration beasts pass from human beings, and human beings from
beasts. Let (Empedocles’) Thamnuses alone. Our slight notice of them in
passing will be quite enough: (to dwell on them longer will
inconvenience us,) lest we should be obliged to have recourse to
raillery and laughter instead of serious instruction. Now our position
is this: that the human soul cannot by any means at all be transferred
to beasts, even when they are supposed to originate, according to the
philosophers, out of the substances of the elements. Now let us suppose
that the soul is either fire, or water, or blood, or spirit, or air, or
light; we must not forget that all the animals in their several kinds
have properties which are opposed to the respective elements. There are
the cold animals which are opposed to fire—water-snakes, lizards,
salamanders, and what things soever are produced out of the rival
element of water. In like manner, those creatures are opposite to water
which are in their nature dry and sapless; indeed, locusts, butterflies,
and chameleons rejoice in droughts. So, again, such creatures are
opposed to blood which have none of its purple hue, such as snails,
worms, and most of the fishy tribes. Then opposed to spirit are those
creatures which seem to have no respiration, being unfurnished with
lungs and windpipes, such as gnats, ants, moths, and minute things of
this sort. Opposed, moreover, to air are those creatures which always
live under ground and under water, and never imbibe air—things of which
you are more acquainted with the existence than with the names. Then
opposed to light are those things which are either wholly blind, or
possess eyes for the darkness only, such as moles, bats, and owls. These
examples (have I adduced), that I might illustrate my subject from clear
and palpable natures. But even if I could take in my hand the “atoms” of
Epicurus, or if my eye could see the “numbers” of Pythagoras, or if my
foot could stumble against the “ideas” of Plato, or if I could lay hold
of the “entelechies” of Aristotle, the chances would be, that even in
these (impalpable) classes I should find such animals as I must oppose
to one another on the ground of their contrariety. For I maintain that,
of whichsoever of the before-mentioned natures the human soul is
composed, it would not have been possible for it to pass for new forms
into animals so contrary to each of the separate natures, and to bestow
an origin by its passage on those beings, from which it would have to be
excluded and rejected rather than to be admitted and received, by reason
of that original contrariety which we have supposed it to possess, <span
id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717) and which commits the bodily
substance receiving it to an interminable strife; and then again by
reason of the subsequent contrariety, which results from the development
inseparable from each several nature. Now it is on quite different
conditions <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) that the soul of
man has had assigned to it (in individual bodies <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) ) its abode, and aliment, and
order, and sensation, and affection, and sexual intercourse, and
procreation of children; also (on different conditions has it, in
individual bodies, received especial) dispositions, as well as duties to
fulfil, likings, dislikes, vices, desires, pleasures, maladies,
remedies—in short, its own modes of living, its own outlets of death.
How, then, shall that (human) soul which cleaves to the earth, and is
unable without alarm to survey any great height, or any considerable
depth, and which is also fatigued if it mounts many steps, and is
suffocated if it is submerged in a fish-pond,—(how, I say, shall a soul
which is beset with such weaknesses) mount up at some future stage into
the air in an eagle, or plunge into the sea in an eel?  How, again,
shall it, after being nourished with generous and delicate as well as
exquisite viands, feed deliberately on, I will not say husks, but even
on thorns, and the wild fare of bitter leaves, and beasts of the
dung-hill, and poisonous worms, if it has to migrate into a goat or into
a quail?—nay, it may be, feed on carrion, even on human corpses in some
bear or lion? But how indeed (shall it stoop to this), when it remembers
its own (nature and dignity)? In the same way, you may submit all other
instances to this criterion of incongruity, and so save us from
lingering over the distinct consideration of each of them in turn. Now,
<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-Page_213"></span>whatever may be the measure and
whatever the mode of the human soul, (the question is forced upon us,)
what it will do in far larger animals, or in very diminutive ones? It
must needs be, that every individual body of whatever size is filled up
by the soul, and that the soul is entirely covered by the body. How,
therefore, shall a man’s soul fill an elephant?  How, likewise, shall it
be contracted within a gnat? If it be so enormously extended or
contracted, it will no doubt be exposed to peril. And this induces me to
ask another question: If the soul is by no means capable of this kind of
migration into animals, which are not fitted for its reception, either
by the habits of their bodies or the other laws of their being, will it
then undergo a change according to the properties of various animals,
and be adapted to their life, notwithstanding its contrariety to human
life—having, in fact, become contrary to its human self by reason of its
utter change? Now the truth is, if it undergoes such a transformation,
and loses what it once was, the human soul will not be what it was; and
if it ceases to be its former self, the *metensomatosis*, or adaptation
of some other body, comes to nought, and is not of course to be ascribed
to the soul which will cease to exist, on the supposition of its
complete change. For only then can a soul be said to experience this
process of the *metensomatosis*, when it undergoes it by remaining
unchanged in its own (primitive) condition. Since, therefore, the soul
does not admit of change, lest it should cease to retain its identity;
and yet is unable to remain unchanged in its original state, because it
fails then to receive contrary (bodies),—I still want to know some
credible reason to justify such a transformation as we are discussing.
For although some men are compared to the beasts because of their
character, disposition, and pursuits (since even God says, “Man is like
the beasts that perish” <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) ), it
does not on this account follow that rapacious persons become kites,
lewd persons dogs, ill-tempered ones panthers, good men sheep, talkative
ones swallows, and chaste men doves, as if the selfsame substance of the
soul everywhere repeated its own nature in the properties of the animals
(into which it passed). Besides, a substance is one thing, and the
nature of that substance is another thing; inasmuch as the substance is
the special property of one given thing, whereas the nature thereof may
possibly belong to many things.  Take an example or two. A stone or a
piece of iron is the substance: the hardness of the stone and the iron
is the nature of the substance. Their hardness combines objects by a
common quality; their substances keep them separate.  Then, again, there
is softness in wool, and softness in a feather: their natural qualities
are alike, (and put them on a par;) their substantial qualities are not
alike, (and keep them distinct.) Thus, if a man likewise be designated a
wild beast or a harmless one, there is not for all that an identity of
soul. Now the similarity of nature is even then observed, when
dissimilarity of substance is most conspicuous: for, by the very fact of
your judging that a man resembles a beast, you confess that their soul
is not identical; for you say that they *resemble* each other, not that
they are the *same*. This is also the meaning of the word of God (which
we have just quoted): it likens man to the beasts in nature, but not in
substance. Besides, God would not have actually made such a comment as
this concerning man, if He had known him to be in substance only
bestial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[212:1718](0030236.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p3"></span> Hujus.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[212:1719](0030236.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p4"></span> Alias.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[212:1720](0030236.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p5"></span> This is the force of the objective
nouns, which are all put in the *plural* form.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[213:1721](0030236.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p6"></span> [Ps. xlix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020)<span id="iv.xi.xxxii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Judicial Retribution of These Migrations Refuted with
Raillery.](0030237)
