[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030436)  [Next](0030438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.—Christ’s Refutations of
the Pharisees. Rendering Dues to Cæsar and to God. Next of the
Sadducees, Respecting Marriage in the Resurrection. These Prove Him Not
to Be Marcion’s But the Creator’s Christ.  Marcion’s Tamperings in Order
to Make Room for His Second God, Exposed and Confuted.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p2"></span>Christ knew “the baptism of John,
whence it was.” <span id="fr_4980"></span>[4981](#fn_4980) Then why did
He ask them, as if He knew not? He knew that the Pharisees would not
give Him an answer; then why did He ask in vain? Was it that He might
judge them out of their own mouth, or their own heart? Suppose you refer
these points to an excuse of the Creator, or to *His* comparison with
Christ; then consider what would have happened if the Pharisees had
replied to His question.  Suppose their answer to have been, that John’s
baptism was “of men,” they would have been immediately stoned to
death. <span id="fr_4981"></span>[4982](#fn_4981) Some Marcion, in
rivalry to Marcion, would have stood up <span
id="fr_4982"></span>[4983](#fn_4982) and said: O most excellent God; how
different are his ways from the Creator’s!  Knowing that men would rush
down headlong over it, He placed them <span id="page_413">p. 413</span>
<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-Page_413"></span>actually <span
id="fr_4983"></span>[4984](#fn_4983) on the very precipice. For thus do
men treat of the Creator respecting His law of the tree. <span
id="fr_4984"></span>[4985](#fn_4984) But John’s baptism was “from
heaven.” “Why, therefore,” asks Christ, “did ye not believe him?” <span
id="fr_4985"></span>[4986](#fn_4985) He therefore who had wished men to
believe John, purposing to censure <span
id="fr_4986"></span>[4987](#fn_4986) them because they had not believed
him, belonged to Him whose sacrament John was administering. But, at any
rate, <span id="fr_4987"></span>[4988](#fn_4987) when He actually met
their refusal to say what they thought, with such reprisals as, “Neither
tell I you by what authority I do these things,” <span
id="fr_4988"></span>[4989](#fn_4988) He returned evil for evil! “Render
unto Cæsar the things which be Cæsar’s, and unto God the things which be
God’s.” <span id="fr_4989"></span>[4990](#fn_4989) What will be “the
things which are God’s?” Such things as are like Cæsar’s *denarius*—that
is to say, His image and similitude. That, therefore, which he commands
to be “rendered unto God,” the Creator, is *man*, who has been stamped
with His image, likeness, name, and substance. <span
id="fr_4990"></span>[4991](#fn_4990) Let Marcion’s god look after his
own mint. <span id="fr_4991"></span>[4992](#fn_4991) Christ bids the
*denarius* of man’s imprint to be rendered to His Cæsar, (His Cæsar I
say,) not the Cæsar of a strange god. <span
id="fr_4992"></span>[4993](#fn_4992) The truth, however, must be
confessed, this god has not a *denarius* to call his own! In every
question the just and proper rule is, that the meaning of the answer
ought to be adapted to the proposed inquiry. But it is nothing short of
madness to return an answer altogether different from the question
submitted to you. God forbid, then, that we should expect from
Christ <span id="fr_4993"></span>[4994](#fn_4993) conduct which would be
unfit even to an ordinary man! The Sadducees, who said there was no
resurrection, in a discussion on that subject, had proposed to the Lord
a case of law touching a certain woman, who, in accordance with the
legal prescription, had been married to seven brothers who had died one
after the other. The question therefore was, to which husband must she
be reckoned to belong in the resurrection? <span
id="fr_4994"></span>[4995](#fn_4994) This, (observe,) was the gist of
the inquiry, this was the sum and substance of the dispute.  And to it
Christ was obliged to return a direct answer. He had nobody to fear;
that it should seem advisable <span id="fr_4995"></span>[4996](#fn_4995)
for Him either to evade their questions, or to make them the occasion of
indirectly mooting <span id="fr_4996"></span>[4997](#fn_4996) a subject
which He was not in the habit of teaching publicly at any other time. He
therefore gave His answer, that “the children of this world
marry.” <span id="fr_4997"></span>[4998](#fn_4997) You see how pertinent
it was to the case in point. Because the question concerned the next
world, and He was going to declare that no one marries there, He opens
the way by laying down the principles that here, where there is death,
there is also marriage. “But they whom God shall account worthy of the
possession of that world and the resurrection from the dead, neither
marry nor are given in marriage; forasmuch as they cannot die any more,
since they become equal to the angels, being made the children of God
and of the resurrection.” <span id="fr_4998"></span>[4999](#fn_4998) If,
then, the meaning of the answer must not turn on any other point than on
the proposed question, and since the question proposed is fully
understood from this sense of the answer, <span
id="fr_4999"></span>[5000](#fn_4999) then the Lord’s reply admits of no
other interpretation than that by which the question is clearly
understood. <span id="fr_5000"></span>[5001](#fn_5000) You have both the
time in which marriage is permitted, and the time in which it is said to
be unsuitable, laid before you, not on their own account, but in
consequence of an inquiry about the resurrection. You have likewise a
confirmation of the resurrection itself, and the whole question which
the Sadducees mooted, who asked no question about another god, nor
inquired about the proper law of marriage. Now, if you make Christ
answer questions which were not submitted to Him, you, in fact,
represent Him as having been unable to solve the points on which He was
really consulted, and entrapped of course by the cunning of the
Sadducees. I shall now proceed, by way of supererogation, <span
id="fr_5001"></span>[5002](#fn_5001) and after the rule (I have laid
down about questions and answers), <span
id="fr_5002"></span>[5003](#fn_5002) to deal with the arguments which
have any consistency in them. <span id="fr_5003"></span>[5004](#fn_5003)
They procured then a copy of the Scripture, and made short work with its
text, by reading it thus: <span id="fr_5004"></span>[5005](#fn_5004)
“Those whom *the god of that world* shall account worthy.” They <span
id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-Page_414"></span>add the phrase “*of that world*” to
the word “*god*,” whereby they make another god “the god of that world;”
whereas the passage ought to be read thus: “Those whom God shall account
worthy of the possession of that world” (removing the distinguishing
phrase “*of this world*” to the end of the clause, <span
id="fr_5005"></span>[5006](#fn_5005) in other words, “Those whom God
shall account worthy of obtaining and rising to that world.” For the
question submitted to Christ had nothing to do with *the god*, but only
with *the state*, of that world. It was: “Whose wife should this woman
be in that world after the resurrection?” <span
id="fr_5006"></span>[5007](#fn_5006) They thus subvert His answer
respecting the essential question of marriage, and apply His words, “The
children of this world marry and are given in marriage,” as if they
referred to the Creator’s men, and His permission to them to marry;
whilst they themselves whom the god of that world—that is, the rival
god—accounted worthy of the resurrection, do not marry even here,
because they are not children of this world. But the fact is, that,
having been consulted about marriage in *that* world, not in this
present one, He had simply declared the non-existence of that to which
the question related. They, indeed, who had caught the very force of His
voice, and pronunciation, and expression, discovered no other sense than
what had reference to the matter of the question. Accordingly, the
Scribes exclaimed, “Master, Thou hast well said.” <span
id="fr_5007"></span>[5008](#fn_5007) For He had affirmed the
resurrection, by describing the form <span
id="fr_5008"></span>[5009](#fn_5008) thereof in opposition to the
opinion of the Sadducees. Now, He did not reject the attestation of
those who had assumed His answer to bear this meaning. If, however, the
Scribes thought Christ was David’s Son, whereas (David) himself calls
Him Lord, <span id="fr_5009"></span>[5010](#fn_5009) what relation has
this to Christ? David did not literally confute <span
id="fr_5010"></span>[5011](#fn_5010) an error of the Scribes, yet David
asserted the honour of Christ, when he more prominently affirmed that He
was his Lord than his Son,—an attribute which was hardly suitable to the
destroyer of the Creator. But how consistent is the interpretation on
our side of the question! For He, who had been a little while ago
invoked by the blind man as “the Son of David,” <span
id="fr_5011"></span>[5012](#fn_5011) then made no remark on the subject,
not having the Scribes in His presence; whereas He now purposely moots
the point before them, and *that* of His own accord, <span
id="fr_5012"></span>[5013](#fn_5012) in order that He might show Himself
whom the blind man, following the doctrine of the Scribes, had simply
declared to be the Son of David, to be also his Lord. He thus honoured
the blind man’s faith which had acknowledged His Sonship to David; but
at the same time He struck a blow at the tradition of the Scribes, which
prevented them from knowing that He was also (David’s) Lord.  Whatever
had relation to the glory of the Creator’s Christ, no other would thus
guard and maintain <span id="fr_5013"></span>[5014](#fn_5013) but
Himself the Creator’s Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4980"></span>[412:4981](0030437.htm#fr_4980) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p3"></span> [Luke xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4981"></span>[412:4982](0030437.htm#fr_4981) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p4"></span> [Luke xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#006)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4982"></span>[412:4983](0030437.htm#fr_4982) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p5"></span> Existeret.

<span id="fn_4983"></span>[413:4984](0030437.htm#fr_4983) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p6"></span> Ipse.

<span id="fn_4984"></span>[413:4985](0030437.htm#fr_4984) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p7"></span> “Of knowledge of good and evil.”
The “*law*” thereof occurs in [Gen. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#003)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4985"></span>[413:4986](0030437.htm#fr_4985) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p8"></span> [Luke xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4986"></span>[413:4987](0030437.htm#fr_4986) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p9"></span> Increpaturus.

<span id="fn_4987"></span>[413:4988](0030437.htm#fr_4987) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p10"></span> Certe. \[The word *sacrament* not
technical here.\]

<span id="fn_4988"></span>[413:4989](0030437.htm#fr_4988) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p11"></span> [Luke xx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4989"></span>[413:4990](0030437.htm#fr_4989) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p12"></span> [Luke xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#025)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4990"></span>[413:4991](0030437.htm#fr_4990) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p13"></span> Materia.

<span id="fn_4991"></span>[413:4992](0030437.htm#fr_4991) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p14"></span> Monetam.

<span id="fn_4992"></span>[413:4993](0030437.htm#fr_4992) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p15"></span> Non alieno.

<span id="fn_4993"></span>[413:4994](0030437.htm#fr_4993) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p16"></span> Quo magis absit a Christo.

<span id="fn_4994"></span>[413:4995](0030437.htm#fr_4994) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p17"></span> [Luke xx.
27-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4995"></span>[413:4996](0030437.htm#fr_4995) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p18"></span> Ut videatur.

<span id="fn_4996"></span>[413:4997](0030437.htm#fr_4996) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p19"></span> Subostendisse.

<span id="fn_4997"></span>[413:4998](0030437.htm#fr_4997) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p20"></span> [Luke xx.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#034)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4998"></span>[413:4999](0030437.htm#fr_4998) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p21"></span> [Luke
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4999"></span>[413:5000](0030437.htm#fr_4999) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p22"></span> Surely Oehler’s *responsio* ought
to be *responsionis*, as the older books have it.

<span id="fn_5000"></span>[413:5001](0030437.htm#fr_5000) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p23"></span> Absolvitur.

<span id="fn_5001"></span>[413:5002](0030437.htm#fr_5001) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p24"></span> Ex abundanti.

<span id="fn_5002"></span>[413:5003](0030437.htm#fr_5002) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p25"></span> We have translated here, *post
præscriptionem*, according to the more frequent sense of the word,
*præscriptio*. But there is another meaning of the word, which is not
unknown to our author, equivalent to our *objection* or *demurrer*, or
(to quote Oehler’s definition) “clausula qua reus adversarii intentionem
oppugnat—the form by which the defendant rebuts the plaintiff’s charge.”
According to this sense, we read: “I shall now proceed…and after putting
in a demurrer (or taking exception) against the tactics of my opponent.”

<span id="fn_5003"></span>[413:5004](0030437.htm#fr_5003) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p26"></span> Cohærentes.

<span id="fn_5004"></span>[413:5005](0030437.htm#fr_5004) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p27"></span> Decucurrerunt in legendo: or,
“they ran through it, by thus reading.”

<span id="fn_5005"></span>[414:5006](0030437.htm#fr_5005) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p28"></span> We have *adapted*, rather than
translated, Tertullian’s words in this parenthesis.  His words of course
suit the order of the Latin, which differs from the English. The
sentence in Latin is, “Quos autem dignatus est Deus illius ævi
possessione et resurrectione a mortuis.” The phrase in question is
*illius ævi*.  Where shall it stand? The Marcionites placed it after
“*Deus*” in government, but Tertullian (following the undoubted meaning
of the sentence) says it depends on “*possessione et resurrectione*,”
i.e., “worthy of the possession, etc., of that world.” To effect this
construction, he says, “Ut facta hic distinctione post deum ad sequentia
pertineat illius ævi;” i.e., he requests that a stop be placed after the
word “deus,” whereby the phrase “illius ævi” will belong to the words
which follow—“*possessione et resurrectione a mortuis*.”

<span id="fn_5006"></span>[414:5007](0030437.htm#fr_5006) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p29"></span> [Luke xx.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#033)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5007"></span>[414:5008](0030437.htm#fr_5007) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p30"></span> [Luke xx.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#039)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5008"></span>[414:5009](0030437.htm#fr_5008) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p31"></span> Formam: “its conditions” or
“process.”

<span id="fn_5009"></span>[414:5010](0030437.htm#fr_5009) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p32"></span> [Luke xx.
41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#041)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5010"></span>[414:5011](0030437.htm#fr_5010) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p33"></span> Non obtundebat.

<span id="fn_5011"></span>[414:5012](0030437.htm#fr_5011) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p34"></span> [Luke xviii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#038)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5012"></span>[414:5013](0030437.htm#fr_5012) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p35"></span> [Luke xx.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#041)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5013"></span>[414:5014](0030437.htm#fr_5013) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxviii-p36"></span> Tueretur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Those Who Come in the Name of Christ. The Terrible
Signs of His Coming. He Whose Coming is So Grandly Described Both in the
Old Testament and the New Testament, is None Other Than the Christ of
the Creator. This Proof Enhanced by the Parable of the Fig-Tree and All
the Trees.  Parallel Passages of Prophecy.](0030438)
