[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030446)  [Next](0030448) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-Page_429"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>Book V.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p2.1"></span>Wherein Tertullian proves, with respect to
St. Paul’s epistles, what he had proved in the preceding book with
respect to St. Luke’s gospel. Far from being at variance, they were in
perfect unison with the writings of the Old Testament, and therefore
testified that the Creator was the only God, and that the Lord Jesus was
his Christ. As in the preceding books, Tertullian supports his argument
with profound reasoning, and many happy illustrations of Holy
Scripture.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p4.1"></span>Chapter I.—Introductory. The Apostle Paul
Himself Not the Preacher of a New God.  Called by Jesus Christ, Although
After the Other Apostles, His Mission Was from the Creator. States How.
The Argument, as in the Case of the Gospel, Confining Proofs to Such
Portions of St. Paul’s Writings as Marcion Allowed.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p5.1"></span>There</span> is nothing without a beginning
but God alone. Now, inasmuch as the beginning occupies the first place
in the condition of all things, so it must necessarily take precedence
in the treatment of them, if a clear knowledge is to be arrived at
concerning their condition; for you could not find the means of
examining even the quality of anything, unless you were certain of its
existence, and that after discovering its origin. <span
id="fr_5191"></span>[5192](#fn_5191) Since therefore I am brought, in
the course of my little work, to this point, <span
id="fr_5192"></span>[5193](#fn_5192) I require to know of Marcion the
origin of his apostle <span id="fr_5193"></span>[5194](#fn_5193) even—I,
who am to some degree a new disciple, <span
id="fr_5194"></span>[5195](#fn_5194) the follower of no other master;
who at the same time <span id="fr_5195"></span>[5196](#fn_5195) can
believe nothing, except that nothing ought to be believed hastily <span
id="fr_5196"></span>[5197](#fn_5196) (and *that* I may further say is
hastily believed, which is believed without any examination <span
id="fr_5197"></span>[5198](#fn_5197) of its beginning); in short, I who
have the best reason possible for bringing this inquiry to a most
careful solution, <span id="fr_5198"></span>[5199](#fn_5198) since a man
is affirmed to me to be an apostle whom I do not find mentioned in the
Gospel in the catalogue <span id="fr_5199"></span>[5200](#fn_5199) of
the apostles. Indeed, when I hear that this man was chosen by the Lord
after He had attained His rest in heaven, I feel that a kind of
improvidence is imputable to Christ, for not knowing before that this
man was necessary to Him; and because He thought that he must be added
to the apostolic body in the way of a fortuitous encounter <span
id="fr_5200"></span>[5201](#fn_5200) rather than a deliberate selection;
by necessity (so to speak), and not voluntary choice, although the
members of the apostolate had been duly ordained, and were now dismissed
to their several missions. Where<span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-Page_430"></span>fore, O shipmaster of Pontus, <span
id="fr_5201"></span>[5202](#fn_5201) if you have never taken on board
your small craft <span id="fr_5202"></span>[5203](#fn_5202) any
contraband goods or smuggler’s cargo, if you have never thrown overboard
or tampered with a freight, you are still more careful and
conscientious, I doubt not, in divine things; and so I should be glad if
you would inform us under what bill of lading <span
id="fr_5203"></span>[5204](#fn_5203) you admitted the Apostle Paul on
board, who ticketed him, <span id="fr_5204"></span>[5205](#fn_5204) what
owner forwarded him, <span id="fr_5205"></span>[5206](#fn_5205) who
handed him to you, <span id="fr_5206"></span>[5207](#fn_5206) that so
you may land him without any misgiving, <span
id="fr_5207"></span>[5208](#fn_5207) lest he should turn out to belong
to him, <span id="fr_5208"></span>[5209](#fn_5208) who can substantiate
his claim to him by producing all his apostolic writings. <span
id="fr_5209"></span>[5210](#fn_5209) He professes himself to be “an
apostle”—to use his own, words—“not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_5210"></span>[5211](#fn_5210) Of course, any one
may make a profession concerning himself; but his profession is only
rendered valid by the authority of a second person. One man signs,
another countersigns; <span id="fr_5211"></span>[5212](#fn_5211) one man
appends his seal, another registers in the public records. <span
id="fr_5212"></span>[5213](#fn_5212) No one is at once a proposer and a
seconder to himself. Besides, you have read, no doubt, that “many shall
come, saying, I am Christ.” <span id="fr_5213"></span>[5214](#fn_5213)
Now if any one can pretend that he is Christ, how much more might a man
profess to be an apostle of Christ! But still, for my own part, I
appear <span id="fr_5214"></span>[5215](#fn_5214) in the character of a
disciple and an inquirer; that so I may even thus <span
id="fr_5215"></span>[5216](#fn_5215) both refute your belief, who have
nothing to support it, and confound your shamelessness, who make claims
without possessing the means of establishing them. Let there be a
Christ, let there be an apostle, although of another god; *but what
matter?* since they are only to draw their proofs out of the Testament
of the Creator. Because even the book of Genesis so long ago promised me
*the Apostle* Paul. For among the types and prophetic blessings which he
pronounced over his sons, Jacob, when he turned his attention to
Benjamin, exclaimed, “Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf; in the morning he
shall devour the prey, and at night he shall impart nourishment.” <span
id="fr_5216"></span>[5217](#fn_5216) He foresaw that Paul would arise
out of the tribe of Benjamin, a voracious wolf, devouring his prey in
the morning: in order words, in the early period of his life he would
devastate the Lord’s sheep, as a persecutor of the churches; but in the
evening he would give them nourishment, which means that in his
declining years he would educate the fold of Christ, as the teacher of
the Gentiles. Then, again, in Saul’s conduct towards David, exhibited
first in violent persecution of him, and then in remorse and
reparation, <span id="fr_5217"></span>[5218](#fn_5217) on his receiving
from him good for evil, we have nothing else than an anticipation <span
id="fr_5218"></span>[5219](#fn_5218) of Paul in Saul—belonging, too, as
they did, to the same tribe—and of Jesus in David, from whom He
descended according to the Virgin’s genealogy. <span
id="fr_5219"></span>[5220](#fn_5219) Should you, however, disapprove of
these types, <span id="fr_5220"></span>[5221](#fn_5220) the Acts of the
Apostles, <span id="fr_5221"></span>[5222](#fn_5221) at all events, have
handed down to me this career of Paul, which you must not refuse to
accept. Thence I demonstrate that from a persecutor he became “an
apostle, not of men, neither by man;” <span
id="fr_5222"></span>[5223](#fn_5222) thence am I led to believe *the
Apostle* himself; thence do I find reason for rejecting your defence of
him, <span id="fr_5223"></span>[5224](#fn_5223) and for bearing
fearlessly your taunt.  “Then you deny the Apostle Paul.”  I do not
calumniate him whom I defend. <span id="fr_5224"></span>[5225](#fn_5224)
I deny him, to compel you to the proof of him. I deny him, to convince
you that he is mine. If you have regard to our belief you should admit
the particulars which comprise it. If you challenge us to your belief,
(pray) tell us what things constitute its basis. <span
id="fr_5225"></span>[5226](#fn_5225) Either prove the truth of what you
believe, or failing in your proof, (tell us) how you believe. Else what
conduct is yours, <span id="fr_5226"></span>[5227](#fn_5226) believing
in opposition to Him from whom alone comes the proof of that which you
believe? Take now from my point of view <span
id="fr_5227"></span>[5228](#fn_5227) the apostle, in the same manner as
you have received the Christ—the apostle shown to be as much *mine* as
the Christ is. And here, too, we will fight within the same lines, and
challenge our <span id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-Page_431"></span>adversary on the mere ground of a simple
rule, <span id="fr_5228"></span>[5229](#fn_5228) that even an apostle
who is said not to belong to the Creator—nay, is displayed as in actual
hostility to the Creator—can be fairly regarded as teaching <span
id="fr_5229"></span>[5230](#fn_5229) nothing, knowing nothing, wishing
nothing in favour of the Creator whilst it would be a first principle
with him to set forth <span id="fr_5230"></span>[5231](#fn_5230) another
god with as much eagerness as he would use in withdrawing us from the
law of the Creator. It is not at all likely that he would call men away
from Judaism without showing them at the same time what was the god in
whom he invited them to believe; because nobody could possibly pass from
allegiance to the Creator without knowing to whom he had to cross over.
For either Christ had already revealed another god—in which case the
apostle’s testimony would also follow to the same effect, for fear of
his not being else regarded <span id="fr_5231"></span>[5232](#fn_5231)
as an apostle of the god whom Christ had revealed, and because of the
impropriety of his being concealed by the apostle who had been already
revealed by Christ—or Christ had made no such revelation concerning God;
*then* there was all the greater need why the apostle should reveal a
God who could now be made known by no one else, and who would
undoubtedly be left without any belief at all, if he were revealed not
even by an apostle. We have laid down this as our first principle,
because we wish at once to profess that we shall pursue the same method
here in the apostle’s case as we adopted before in Christ’s case, to
prove that he proclaimed no new god; <span
id="fr_5232"></span>[5233](#fn_5232) that is, we shall draw our evidence
from the epistles of *St.* Paul himself. Now, the garbled form in which
we have found the heretic’s Gospel will have already prepared us to
expect to find <span id="fr_5233"></span>[5234](#fn_5233) the epistles
also mutilated by him with like perverseness—and that even as respects
their number. <span id="fr_5234"></span>[5235](#fn_5234)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5191"></span>[429:5192](0030447.htm#fr_5191) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p6"></span> Cum cognoveris unde sit.

<span id="fn_5192"></span>[429:5193](0030447.htm#fr_5192) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p7"></span> Materiam.

<span id="fn_5193"></span>[429:5194](0030447.htm#fr_5193) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p8"></span> We have already more than once referred
to Marcion’s preference for *St. Paul*. “The reason of the preference
thus given to that apostle was his constant and strenuous opposition to
the Judaizing Christians, who wished to reimpose the yoke of the Jewish
ceremonies on the necks of their brethren.  This opposition the
Marcionites wished to construe into a direct denial of the authority of
the Mosaic law. They contended also from St. Paul’s assertion, that he
received his appointment to the apostolic office not from man, but from
Christ, that he alone delivered the genuine doctrines of the gospel.
This deference for St. Paul accounts also for Marcion’s accepting *St.
Luke’s* Gospel as the only authentic one, as we saw in the last book of
this treatise; it was because that evangelist had been the companion of
St. Paul” (Bp. Kaye, *On the Writings of Tertullian*, 3d edition, pp.
474–475).

<span id="fn_5194"></span>[429:5195](0030447.htm#fr_5194) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p9"></span> Novus aliqui discipulus.

<span id="fn_5195"></span>[429:5196](0030447.htm#fr_5195) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p10"></span> Interim.

<span id="fn_5196"></span>[429:5197](0030447.htm#fr_5196) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p11"></span> Temere.

<span id="fn_5197"></span>[429:5198](0030447.htm#fr_5197) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p12"></span> Agnitione.

<span id="fn_5198"></span>[429:5199](0030447.htm#fr_5198) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p13"></span> Ad sollicitudinem.

<span id="fn_5199"></span>[429:5200](0030447.htm#fr_5199) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p14"></span> In albo.

<span id="fn_5200"></span>[429:5201](0030447.htm#fr_5200) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p15"></span> Ex incursu: in allusion to St. Paul’s
sudden conversion, [Acts ix. 3-8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)<span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>. \[On St. Paul’s Epistles, see p. 324,
*supra.*\]

<span id="fn_5201"></span>[430:5202](0030447.htm#fr_5201) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p16"></span> Marcion is frequently called “*Ponticus
Nauclerus*,” probably less on account of his own connection with a
seafaring life, than that of his countrymen, who were great sailors. 
Comp. book. i. 18. (*sub fin*.) and book iii. 6. \[pp. 284, 325.\]

<span id="fn_5202"></span>[430:5203](0030447.htm#fr_5202) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p17"></span> In acatos tuas.

<span id="fn_5203"></span>[430:5204](0030447.htm#fr_5203) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p18"></span> Quo symbolo.

<span id="fn_5204"></span>[430:5205](0030447.htm#fr_5204) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p19"></span> Quis illum tituli charactere
percusserit.

<span id="fn_5205"></span>[430:5206](0030447.htm#fr_5205) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p20"></span> Quis transmiserit tibi.

<span id="fn_5206"></span>[430:5207](0030447.htm#fr_5206) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p21"></span> Quis imposuerit.

<span id="fn_5207"></span>[430:5208](0030447.htm#fr_5207) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p22"></span> Constanter.

<span id="fn_5208"></span>[430:5209](0030447.htm#fr_5208) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p23"></span> Ne *illius* probetur, i.e., to the
*Catholic*, for Marcion did not admit all St. Paul’s epistles (Semler).

<span id="fn_5209"></span>[430:5210](0030447.htm#fr_5209) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p24"></span> Omnia apostolatus ejus instrumenta.

<span id="fn_5210"></span>[430:5211](0030447.htm#fr_5210) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p25"></span> [Gal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5211"></span>[430:5212](0030447.htm#fr_5211) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p26"></span> Subscribit.

<span id="fn_5212"></span>[430:5213](0030447.htm#fr_5212) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p27"></span> Actis refert.

<span id="fn_5213"></span>[430:5214](0030447.htm#fr_5213) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p28"></span> [Luke xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5214"></span>[430:5215](0030447.htm#fr_5214) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p29"></span> Conversor.

<span id="fn_5215"></span>[430:5216](0030447.htm#fr_5215) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p30"></span> Jam hinc.

<span id="fn_5216"></span>[430:5217](0030447.htm#fr_5216) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p31"></span> [Gen. xlix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027)<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p31.1"></span>,
Septuagint, the latter clause being <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p31.2"></span>καὶ εἰς τὸ ἑσπέρας δίδωσι τροφήν</span>.

<span id="fn_5217"></span>[430:5218](0030447.htm#fr_5217) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p31.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p32"></span> Satisfactio.

<span id="fn_5218"></span>[430:5219](0030447.htm#fr_5218) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p33"></span> Non aliud portendebat quam.

<span id="fn_5219"></span>[430:5220](0030447.htm#fr_5219) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p34"></span> Secundum Virginis censum.

<span id="fn_5220"></span>[430:5221](0030447.htm#fr_5220) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p35"></span> Figurarum sacramenta.

<span id="fn_5221"></span>[430:5222](0030447.htm#fr_5221) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p36"></span> Although *St. Luke* wrote the Acts of
the Apostles, Marcion does not seem to have admitted this book into his
New Testament. “It is clearly excluded from his catalogue, as given by
Epiphanius. The same thing appears from the more ancient authority of
Tertullian, who begins his Book v. against Marcion with showing the
absurdity of his conduct in rejecting the history and acts of the
apostles, and yet receiving St. Paul as the chief of the apostles, whose
name is never mentioned in the Gospel with the other apostles,
especially since the account given by Paul himself in [Gal.
i.-ii](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p36.1"></span>. confirms the account which we have in the
Acts. But the reason why he rejected this book is (as Tertullian says)
very evident, since from it we can plainly show that the God of the
Christians and the God of the Jews, or the Creator, was the same being
and that Christ was sent by Him, and by no other” (Lardner’s Works,
*Hist. of Heretics*, chap. x. sec. 41).

<span id="fn_5222"></span>[430:5223](0030447.htm#fr_5222) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p37"></span> [Gal. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5223"></span>[430:5224](0030447.htm#fr_5223) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p38"></span> Inde te a defensione ejus expello.

<span id="fn_5224"></span>[430:5225](0030447.htm#fr_5224) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p39"></span> An insinuation that Marcion’s defence
of Paul was, in fact, a calumny of the apostle.

<span id="fn_5225"></span>[430:5226](0030447.htm#fr_5225) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p40"></span> Præstruant eam.

<span id="fn_5226"></span>[430:5227](0030447.htm#fr_5226) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p41"></span> Qualis es.

<span id="fn_5227"></span>[430:5228](0030447.htm#fr_5227) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p42"></span> Habe nunc de meo.

<span id="fn_5228"></span>[431:5229](0030447.htm#fr_5228) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p43"></span> In ipso gradu præscriptionis.

<span id="fn_5229"></span>[431:5230](0030447.htm#fr_5229) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p44"></span> Oportere docere…sapere…velle.

<span id="fn_5230"></span>[431:5231](0030447.htm#fr_5230) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p45"></span> Edicere.

<span id="fn_5231"></span>[431:5232](0030447.htm#fr_5231) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p46"></span> Ne non haberetur.

<span id="fn_5232"></span>[431:5233](0030447.htm#fr_5232) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p47"></span> Nullum alium deum circumlatum.

<span id="fn_5233"></span>[431:5234](0030447.htm#fr_5233) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p48"></span> Præjudicasse debebit.

<span id="fn_5234"></span>[431:5235](0030447.htm#fr_5234) <span
id="v.iv.vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.i-p49"></span> Marcion only received *ten* of St.
Paul’s epistles, and these altered by himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Epistle to the Galatians. The Abolition of the Ordinances
of the Mosaic Law No Proof of Another God. The Divine Lawgiver, the
Creator Himself, Was the Abrogator. The Apostle's Doctrine in the First
Chapter Shown to Accord with the Teaching of the Old Testament. The Acts
of the Apostles Shown to Be Genuine Against Marcion. This Book Agrees
with the Pauline Epistles.](0030448)
