[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030039)  [Next](0030041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>Augustus, the founder of the empire,
would not even have the title Lord; for that, too, is a name of Deity.
For my part, I am willing to give the emperor this designation, but in
the common acceptation of the word, and when I am not forced to call him
Lord as in God’s place. But my relation to him is one of freedom; for I
have but one true Lord, the God omnipotent and eternal, who is Lord of
the emperor as well. How can he, who is truly father of his country, be
its lord?  The name of piety is more grateful than the name of power; so
the heads of families are called fathers rather than lords. Far less
should the emperor have the name of God. We can only profess our belief
that he is that by the most unworthy, nay, a fatal flattery; it is just
as if, having an emperor, you call another by the name, in which case
will you not give great and unappeasable offence to him who actually
reigns?—an offence he, too, needs to fear on whom you have bestowed the
title. Give all reverence to God, if you wish Him to be propitious to
the emperor. Give up all worship of, and belief in, any other being as
divine. Cease also to give the sacred name to him who has need of God
himself. If such adulation is not ashamed of its lie, in addressing a
man as divine, let it have some dread at least of the evil omen which it
bears. It is the invocation of a curse, to give Cæsar the name of god
before his apotheosis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV.](0030041)
