[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030598)  [Next](0030600) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—The Flesh Will Be Associated
with the Soul in Enduring the Penal Sentences of the Final
Judgment.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xvii-p2"></span>“Every uneducated <span
id="fr_7378"></span>[7379](#fn_7378) person who agrees with our opinion
will be apt to suppose that <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="v.viii.xvii-Page_557"></span>the flesh will have to be present at
the *final* judgment even on this account, because otherwise the soul
would be incapable of suffering pain or pleasure, as being incorporeal;
for this is the common opinion. We on our part, however, do here
maintain, and in a special treatise on the subject prove, that the soul
is corporeal, possessing a peculiar kind of solidity in its nature, such
as enables it both to perceive and suffer. That souls are even now
susceptible of torment and of blessing in Hades, though they are
disembodied, and notwithstanding their banishment from the flesh, is
proved by the case of Lazarus. I have no doubt given to my opponent room
to say: Since, then, the soul has a bodily substance of its own, it will
be sufficiently endowed with the faculty of suffering and sense, so as
not to require the presence of the flesh. No, no, (is my reply): it will
still need the flesh; not as being unable to feel anything without the
help of the flesh, but because it is necessary that it should possess
such a faculty along with the flesh. For in *as* far as it has a
sufficiency of its own for action, in *so* far has it likewise a
capacity for suffering. But the truth is, in respect of action, it
labours under some amount of incapacity; for in its own nature it has
simply the ability to think, to will, to desire, to dispose: for fully
carrying out the purpose, it looks for the assistance of the flesh. In
like manner, it also requires the conjunction of the flesh to endure
suffering, in order that by its aid it may be as fully able to suffer,
as without its assistance it was not fully able to act.  In respect,
indeed, of those sins, such as concupiscence, and thought, and wish,
which it has a competency of its own to commit, it at once <span
id="fr_7379"></span>[7380](#fn_7379) pays the penalty of them. Now, no
doubt, if these were alone sufficient to constitute absolute desert
without requiring the addition of *acts*, the soul would suffice in
itself to encounter the full responsibility of the judgment, being to be
judged for those things in the doing of which it alone had possessed a
sufficiency. Since, however, acts too are indissolubly attached to
deserts; since also acts are ministerially effected by the flesh, it is
no longer enough that the soul apart from the flesh be requited with
pleasure or pain for what are actually works of the flesh, although it
has a body (of its own), although it has members (of its own), which in
like manner are insufficient for its full perception, just as they are
also for its perfect action.  Therefore as it has acted in each several
instance, so proportionably does it suffer in Hades, being the first to
taste of judgment as it was the first to induce to the commission of
sin; but still it is waiting for the flesh in order that it may through
the flesh also compensate for its deeds, inasmuch as it laid upon the
flesh the execution of its own thoughts. This, in short, will be the
process of that judgment which is postponed to the last great day, in
order that by the exhibition of the flesh the entire course of the
divine vengeance may be accomplished. Besides, (it is obvious to remark)
there would be no delaying to the end of that doom which souls are
already tasting in Hades, if it was destined for souls alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7378"></span>[556:7379](0030599.htm#fr_7378) <span
id="v.viii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvii-p3"></span> Simplicior.

<span id="fn_7379"></span>[557:7380](0030599.htm#fr_7379) <span
id="v.viii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvii-p4"></span> Interim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Phrases and Passages Clearly Assert “The Resurrection
of the Dead.” The Force of This Very Phrase Explained as Indicating the
Prominent Place of the Flesh in the General Resurrection.](0030600)
