[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030448)  [Next](0030450) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—St. Paul Quite in Accordance
with St. Peter and Other Apostles of the Circumcision. His Censure of
St. Peter Explained, and Rescued from Marcion’s Misapplication. The
Strong Protests of This Epistle Against Judaizers. Yet Its Teaching is
Shown to Be in Keeping with the Law and the Prophets. Marcion’s
Tampering with St. Paul’s Writings Censured.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>But with regard to the
countenance <span id="fr_5267"></span>[5268](#fn_5267) of Peter and the
rest of the apostles, he tells us <span
id="fr_5268"></span>[5269](#fn_5268) that “fourteen years after he went
up to Jerusalem,” in order to confer with them <span
id="fr_5269"></span>[5270](#fn_5269) about the rule which he followed in
his gospel, lest perchance he should all those years have been running,
and be running still, in vain, (which would be the case,) of course, if
his preaching of the gospel fell short of their method. <span
id="fr_5270"></span>[5271](#fn_5270) So great had been his desire to be
approved and supported by those whom you wish on all occasions <span
id="fr_5271"></span>[5272](#fn_5271) to be understood as in alliance
with Judaism!  When indeed he says, that “neither was Titus
circumcised,” <span id="fr_5272"></span>[5273](#fn_5272) he for the
first time shows us that circumcision was the only question connected
with the maintenance <span id="fr_5273"></span>[5274](#fn_5273) of the
law, which had been as yet agitated by those whom he therefore calls
“false brethren unawares brought in.” <span
id="fr_5274"></span>[5275](#fn_5274) These persons went no further than
to insist on a continuance of the law, retaining unquestionably a
sincere belief in the Creator. They perverted the gospel in their
teaching, not indeed by such a tampering with the Scripture <span
id="fr_5275"></span>[5276](#fn_5275) as should enable them to
expunge <span id="fr_5276"></span>[5277](#fn_5276) the Creator’s Christ,
but by so retaining the ancient *régime* as not to exclude the Creator’s
law. Therefore he says: “Because of false brethren unawares brought in,
who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ, that
they might bring us into bondage, to whom we gave place by subjection
not even for an hour.” <span id="fr_5277"></span>[5278](#fn_5277) Let us
only attend to the clear <span id="fr_5278"></span>[5279](#fn_5278)
sense and to the reason of the thing, and the perversion of the
Scripture will be apparent. When he first says, “Neither Titus, who was
with me, being a Greek, was *compelled* to be circumcised,” and then
adds, “And *that* because of false brethren unawares brought in,” <span
id="fr_5279"></span>[5280](#fn_5279) etc., he gives us an insight into
his reason <span id="fr_5280"></span>[5281](#fn_5280) for acting in a
clean contrary way, <span id="fr_5281"></span>[5282](#fn_5281) showing
us wherefore he did that which he would neither have done nor shown to
us, if that had not happened which induced him to act as he did. But
then <span id="fr_5282"></span>[5283](#fn_5282) I want you to tell us
whether they would have yielded to the subjection that was
demanded, <span id="fr_5283"></span>[5284](#fn_5283) if these false
brethren had not crept in to spy out their liberty? I apprehend not.
They therefore gave way (in a partial concession), because there were
persons whose weak faith required consideration. <span
id="fr_5284"></span>[5285](#fn_5284) For their rudimentary belief, which
was still in suspense about the observance of the law, deserved this
concessive treatment, <span id="fr_5285"></span>[5286](#fn_5285) when
even the apostle himself had some suspicion that he might have run, and
be still running, in vain. <span id="fr_5286"></span>[5287](#fn_5286)
Accordingly, the false brethren who were the spies of their Christian
liberty must be thwarted in their efforts to bring it under the yoke of
their own Judaism before that Paul discovered whether his labour had
been in vain, before that those who preceded him in the apostolate gave
him their right hands of fellowship, before that he entered on the
office of preaching to the Gentiles, according to their arrangement with
him. <span id="fr_5287"></span>[5288](#fn_5287) He therefore made some
concession, as was necessary, for a time; and this was the reason why he
had Timothy circumcised, <span id="fr_5288"></span>[5289](#fn_5288) and
the Nazarites introduced into the temple, <span
id="fr_5289"></span>[5290](#fn_5289) which incidents are described in
the Acts.  Their truth may be inferred from their agreement with the
apostle’s own profession, how “to the Jews he became as a Jew, that he
might gain the Jews, and to them that were under <span id="page_434">p.
434</span> <span id="v.iv.vi.iii-Page_434"></span>the law, as under the
law,”—and so here with respect to those who come in secretly,—“and
lastly, how he became all things to all men, that he might gain
all.” <span id="fr_5290"></span>[5291](#fn_5290) Now, inasmuch as the
circumstances require such an interpretation as this, no one will refuse
to admit that Paul preached that God and that Christ whose law he was
excluding all the while, however much he allowed it, owing to the times,
but which he would have had summarily to abolish if he had published a
new god. Rightly, then, did Peter and James and John give their right
hand of fellowship to Paul, and agree on such a division of their work,
as that Paul should go to the heathen, and themselves to the
circumcision. <span id="fr_5291"></span>[5292](#fn_5291) Their
agreement, also, “to remember the poor” <span
id="fr_5292"></span>[5293](#fn_5292) was in complete conformity with the
law of the Creator, which cherished the poor and needy, as has been
shown in our observations on your Gospel. <span
id="fr_5293"></span>[5294](#fn_5293) It is thus certain that the
question was one which simply regarded the law, while at the same time
it is apparent what portion of the law it was convenient to have
observed. Paul, however, censures Peter for not walking
straightforwardly according to the truth of the gospel. No doubt he
blames him; but it was solely because of his inconsistency in the matter
of “eating,” <span id="fr_5294"></span>[5295](#fn_5294) which he varied
according to the sort of persons (whom he associated with) “fearing them
which were of the circumcision,” <span
id="fr_5295"></span>[5296](#fn_5295) but not on account of any perverse
opinion touching another god. For if such a question had arisen, others
also would have been “resisted face to face” by the man who had not even
spared Peter on the comparatively small matter of his doubtful
conversation. But what do the Marcionites wish to have believed (on the
point)? For the rest, the apostle must (be permitted to) go on with his
own statement, wherein he says that “a man is not justified by the works
of the law, but by faith:” <span id="fr_5296"></span>[5297](#fn_5296)
faith, however, in the same God to whom belongs the law also. For of
course he would have bestowed no labour on severing faith from the law,
when the difference of the god would, if there had only been any, have
of itself produced such a severance. Justly, therefore, did he refuse to
“build up again (the structure of the law) which he had
overthrown.” <span id="fr_5297"></span>[5298](#fn_5297) The law, indeed,
had to be overthrown, from the moment when John “cried in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the ways of the Lord,” that valleys <span
id="fr_5298"></span>[5299](#fn_5298) and hills and mountains may be
filled up and levelled, and the crooked and the rough ways be made
straight and smooth <span id="fr_5299"></span>[5300](#fn_5299) —in other
words, that the difficulties of the law might be changed into the
facilities of the gospel.

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p36"></span>For he remembered that the time was
come of which the Psalm spake, “Let us break their bands asunder, and
cast off their yoke from us;” <span id="fr_5300"></span>[5301](#fn_5300)
since the time when “the nations became tumultuous, and the people
imagined vain counsels;” when “the kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against His
Christ,” <span id="fr_5301"></span>[5302](#fn_5301) in order that
thenceforward man might be justified by the liberty of faith, not by
servitude to the law, <span id="fr_5302"></span>[5303](#fn_5302)
“because the just shall live by his faith.” <span
id="fr_5303"></span>[5304](#fn_5303) Now, although the prophet Habakkuk
first said this, yet you have the apostle here confirming the prophets,
even as Christ did. The object, therefore, of the faith whereby the just
man shall live, will be that same God to whom likewise belongs the law,
by doing which no man is justified.  Since, then, there equally are
found the curse in the law and the blessing in faith, you have both
conditions set forth by <span id="fr_5304"></span>[5305](#fn_5304) the
Creator: “Behold,” says He, “I have set before you a blessing and a
curse.” <span id="fr_5305"></span>[5306](#fn_5305) You cannot establish
a diversity of authors because there happens to be one of things; for
the diversity is itself proposed by one and the same author. Why,
however, “Christ was made a curse for us,” <span
id="fr_5306"></span>[5307](#fn_5306) is declared by the apostle himself
in a way which quite helps our side, as being the result of the
Creator’s appointment.  But yet it by no means follows, because the
Creator said of old, “Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree,” <span
id="fr_5307"></span>[5308](#fn_5307) that Christ belonged to another
god, and on that account was accursed even then in the law. And how,
indeed, could the Creator have cursed by anticipation one whom He knew
not of? Why, however, may it not be more suitable for the Creator to
have delivered His own Son to His own curse, than to have submitted Him
to the malediction of that god of yours,—in behalf, too, of man, who is
an alien to him? Now, if this appointment of the Creator respecting His
Son appears to you to be a cruel one, it is equally so in the case of
your own god; if, on the contrary, it be in accordance with reason in
your god, it is <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-Page_435"></span>equally so—nay, much more so—in mine.
For it would be more credible that that God had provided blessing for
man, through the curse of Christ, who formerly set both a blessing and a
curse before man, than that he had done so, who, according to you, <span
id="fr_5308"></span>[5309](#fn_5308) never at any time pronounced
either. “We have received therefore, the promise of the Spirit,” as the
apostle says, “through faith,” even that faith by which the just man
lives, in accordance with the Creator’s purpose. <span
id="fr_5309"></span>[5310](#fn_5309) What I say, then, is this, that
that God is the object of faith who prefigured the grace of faith. But
when he also adds, “For ye are all the children of faith,” <span
id="fr_5310"></span>[5311](#fn_5310) it becomes clear that what the
heretic’s industry erased was the mention of Abraham’s name; for by
faith the apostle declares us to be “*children of Abraham*,” <span
id="fr_5311"></span>[5312](#fn_5311) and after mentioning him he
expressly called us “children of faith” also. But how are we children of
faith? and of whose faith, if not Abraham’s? For since “Abraham believed
God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness;” <span
id="fr_5312"></span>[5313](#fn_5312) since, also, he deserved for that
reason to be called “the father of many nations,” whilst we, who are
even more like him <span id="fr_5313"></span>[5314](#fn_5313) in
believing in God, are thereby justified as Abraham was, and thereby also
obtain life—since the just lives by his faith,—it therefore happens
that, as he in the previous passage called us “sons of Abraham,” since
he is in faith our (common) father, <span
id="fr_5314"></span>[5315](#fn_5314) so here also he named us “children
of faith,” for it was owing to his faith that it was promised that
Abraham should be the father of (many) nations. As to the fact itself of
his calling off faith from circumcision, did he not seek thereby to
constitute us the children of Abraham, who had believed previous to his
circumcision in the flesh? <span id="fr_5315"></span>[5316](#fn_5315) In
short, <span id="fr_5316"></span>[5317](#fn_5316) faith in one of two
gods cannot possibly admit us to the dispensation <span
id="fr_5317"></span>[5318](#fn_5317) of the other, <span
id="fr_5318"></span>[5319](#fn_5318) so that it should impute
righteousness to those who believe in him, and make the just live
through him, and declare the Gentiles to be his children through faith.
Such a dispensation as this belongs wholly to Him through whose
appointment it was already made known by the call of this self-same
Abraham, as is conclusively shown <span
id="fr_5319"></span>[5320](#fn_5319) by the natural meaning. <span
id="fr_5320"></span>[5321](#fn_5320)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5267"></span>[433:5268](0030449.htm#fr_5267) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p3"></span> Ad patrocinium.

<span id="fn_5268"></span>[433:5269](0030449.htm#fr_5268) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p4"></span> *Scribit* often takes the place of
*inquit*; naturally enough as referring to the epistles.

<span id="fn_5269"></span>[433:5270](0030449.htm#fr_5269) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p5"></span> [Gal.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5270"></span>[433:5271](0030449.htm#fr_5270) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p6"></span> Formam.

<span id="fn_5271"></span>[433:5272](0030449.htm#fr_5271) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p7"></span> Si quando.

<span id="fn_5272"></span>[433:5273](0030449.htm#fr_5272) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p8"></span> [Gal. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5273"></span>[433:5274](0030449.htm#fr_5273) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p9"></span> Ex defensione.

<span id="fn_5274"></span>[433:5275](0030449.htm#fr_5274) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p10"></span> [Gal. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5275"></span>[433:5276](0030449.htm#fr_5275) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p11"></span> Interpolatione Scripturæ.

<span id="fn_5276"></span>[433:5277](0030449.htm#fr_5276) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p12"></span> Qua effingerent.

<span id="fn_5277"></span>[433:5278](0030449.htm#fr_5277) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p13"></span> [Gal.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5278"></span>[433:5279](0030449.htm#fr_5278) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p14"></span> Ipsi.

<span id="fn_5279"></span>[433:5280](0030449.htm#fr_5279) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p15"></span> [Gal.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5280"></span>[433:5281](0030449.htm#fr_5280) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p16"></span> Incipit reddere rationem.

<span id="fn_5281"></span>[433:5282](0030449.htm#fr_5281) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p17"></span> Contrarii utique facti. \[Farrar,
*St. Paul*, pp. 232 and 261.\]

<span id="fn_5282"></span>[433:5283](0030449.htm#fr_5282) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p18"></span> Denique.

<span id="fn_5283"></span>[433:5284](0030449.htm#fr_5283) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p19"></span> See Conybeare and Howson, *in loc.*

<span id="fn_5284"></span>[433:5285](0030449.htm#fr_5284) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p20"></span> Fuerunt propter quos crederetur.

<span id="fn_5285"></span>[433:5286](0030449.htm#fr_5285) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p21"></span> The following statement will throw
light upon the character of *the two classes* of Jewish professors of
Christianity referred to by Tertullian: “A pharisaic section was
sheltered in its bosom (of the church at Jerusalem), which continually
strove to turn Christianity into a sect of Judaism.  These men were
restless agitators, animated by the bitterest sectarian spirit; and
although they were numerically a small party, yet we know the power of
the turbulent minority. But besides these Judaizing zealots, there was a
large proportion of the Christians at Jerusalem, whose Christianity,
though more sincere than that of those just mentioned, was yet very weak
and imperfect…Many of them still only knew of a Christ after the flesh—a
Saviour of Israel—a Jewish Messiah. Their minds were in a state of
transition between the law and the gospel; and it was of great
consequence not to shock their prejudices too rudely; lest they should
be tempted to make shipwreck of their faith and renounce their
Christianity altogether.” These were they whose prejudices required to
be wisely consulted in things which did not touch the foundation of the
gospel. (Conybeare and Howson’s *St. Paul*, People’s Edition, vol. ii.
pp. 259, 260.)

<span id="fn_5286"></span>[433:5287](0030449.htm#fr_5286) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p22"></span> [Gal. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5287"></span>[433:5288](0030449.htm#fr_5287) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p23"></span> Ex censu eorum: see [Gal.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5288"></span>[433:5289](0030449.htm#fr_5288) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p24"></span> [Acts xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5289"></span>[433:5290](0030449.htm#fr_5289) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p25"></span> [Acts xxi.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#023)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5290"></span>[434:5291](0030449.htm#fr_5290) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5291"></span>[434:5292](0030449.htm#fr_5291) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p27"></span> [Gal. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5292"></span>[434:5293](0030449.htm#fr_5292) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p28"></span> [Gal. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5293"></span>[434:5294](0030449.htm#fr_5293) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p29"></span> See above, book iv. chap. xiv. p.
365.

<span id="fn_5294"></span>[434:5295](0030449.htm#fr_5294) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p30"></span> Victus: see [Gal.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5295"></span>[434:5296](0030449.htm#fr_5295) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p31"></span> [Gal. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5296"></span>[434:5297](0030449.htm#fr_5296) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p32"></span> [Gal. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5297"></span>[434:5298](0030449.htm#fr_5297) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p33"></span> [Gal. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p33.1"></span>
(see Conybeare and Howson).

<span id="fn_5298"></span>[434:5299](0030449.htm#fr_5298) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p34"></span> Rivi: the *<span class="c42"><span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p34.1"></span>wadys</span>* of the East.

<span id="fn_5299"></span>[434:5300](0030449.htm#fr_5299) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p35"></span> [Luke
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5300"></span>[434:5301](0030449.htm#fr_5300) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p37"></span> [Ps. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5301"></span>[434:5302](0030449.htm#fr_5301) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p38"></span> [Ps.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5302"></span>[434:5303](0030449.htm#fr_5302) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p39"></span> [Gal.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016), [Gal.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5303"></span>[434:5304](0030449.htm#fr_5303) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p40"></span> [Hab. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5304"></span>[434:5305](0030449.htm#fr_5304) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p41"></span> Apud.

<span id="fn_5305"></span>[434:5306](0030449.htm#fr_5305) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p42"></span> [Deut. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5306"></span>[434:5307](0030449.htm#fr_5306) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p43"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5307"></span>[434:5308](0030449.htm#fr_5307) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p44"></span> The LXX. *version* of [Deut. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p44.1"></span>
is quoted by St. Paul in [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p44.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_5308"></span>[435:5309](0030449.htm#fr_5308) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p44.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p45"></span> Apud te.

<span id="fn_5309"></span>[435:5310](0030449.htm#fr_5309) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p46"></span> According to the promise of a prophet
of the Creator. See [Hab. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5310"></span>[435:5311](0030449.htm#fr_5310) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p47"></span> [Gal. iii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5311"></span>[435:5312](0030449.htm#fr_5311) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p48"></span> [Gal.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#009),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5312"></span>[435:5313](0030449.htm#fr_5312) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p49"></span> [Gal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5313"></span>[435:5314](0030449.htm#fr_5313) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p50"></span> Magis proinde: as sharing in the
faith he had, “being yet uncircumcised.” See [Rom. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5314"></span>[435:5315](0030449.htm#fr_5314) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p51"></span> Patris fidei.

<span id="fn_5315"></span>[435:5316](0030449.htm#fr_5315) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p52"></span> In integritate carnis.

<span id="fn_5316"></span>[435:5317](0030449.htm#fr_5316) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p53"></span> Denique.

<span id="fn_5317"></span>[435:5318](0030449.htm#fr_5317) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p54"></span> Formam: “plan” or “arrangement.”

<span id="fn_5318"></span>[435:5319](0030449.htm#fr_5318) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p55"></span> Alterius dei…dei alterius.

<span id="fn_5319"></span>[435:5320](0030449.htm#fr_5319) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p56"></span> Revincatur.

<span id="fn_5320"></span>[435:5321](0030449.htm#fr_5320) <span
id="v.iv.vi.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.iii-p57"></span> Ipso sensu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Another Instance of Marcion's Tampering with St. Paul's Text. The
Fulness of Time, Announced by the Apostle, Foretold by the Prophets. 
Mosaic Rites Abrogated by the Creator Himself. Marcion's Tricks About
Abraham's Name. The Creator, by His Christ, the Fountain of the Grace
and the Liberty Which St. Paul Announced. Marcion's Docetism
Refuted.](0030450)
