[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030199)  [Next](0030201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.x.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p2"></span>Even now, as the matter refers to thy
opinion on a point the more closely belonging to thee, in so far as it
bears on thy personal well-being, we maintain that after life has passed
away thou still remainest in existence, and lookest forward to a day of
judgment, and according to thy deserts art assigned to misery or bliss,
in either way of it for ever; that, to be capable of this, thy former
substance must needs return to thee, the matter and the memory of the
very same human being: for neither good nor evil couldst thou feel if
thou wert not endowed again with that sensitive bodily organization, and
there would be no grounds for judgment without the presentation of the
very person to whom the sufferings of judgment were due. That Christian
view, though much nobler than the Pythagorean, as it does not transfer
thee into beasts; though more complete than the Platonic, since it
endows thee again with a body; though more worthy of honour than the
Epicurean, as it preserves thee from annihilation,—yet, because of the
name connected with it, it is held to be nothing but vanity and folly,
and, as it is called, a mere presumption. But we are not ashamed of
ourselves if our presumption is found to have thy support.  Well, in the
first place, when thou speakest of one who is dead, thou sayest of him,
“Poor man”—poor, surely, not because he has been taken from the good of
life, but because he has been given over to punishment and condemnation.
But at another time thou speakest of the dead as free from trouble; thou
professest to think life a burden, and death a blessing. Thou art wont,
too, to speak of the dead as in repose, <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482) when, returning to their graves
beyond the city gates <span id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) with
food and dainties, thou art wont to present offerings to thyself rather
than to them; or when, coming from the graves again, thou art staggering
under the effects of wine. But I want thy sober opinion. Thou callest
the dead poor when thou speakest thine own thoughts, when thou art at a
distance from them. For at their feast, where in a sense they are
present and recline along with thee, it would never do to cast reproach
upon their lot. Thou canst not but adulate those for whose sake thou art
feasting it so sumptuously. Dost thou then speak of him as *poor* who
feels not? How happens it that thou cursest, as one capable of suffering
from thy curse, the man whose memory comes back on thee with the sting
in it of some old injury?  It is thine imprecation that “the earth may
lie heavy on him,” and that there may be trouble “to his ashes in the
realm of the dead.” In like manner, in thy kindly feeling to him to whom
thou art indebted for favours, thou entreatest “repose to his bones and
ashes,” and thy desire is that among the dead he may “have pleasant
rest.” If thou hast no power of suffering after death, if no feeling
remains,—if, in a word, severance from the body is the annihilation of
thee, what makes thee lie against thyself, as if thou couldst suffer in
another state? Nay, why dost thou fear death at all? There is nothing
after death to be feared, if there is nothing to be felt. For though it
may be said that death is dreadful not for anything it threatens
afterwards, but because it deprives us of the good of life; yet, on the
other hand, as it puts an end to life’s discomforts, which are far more
numerous, death’s terrors are mitigated by a gain that more than
outweighs the loss.  And there is no occasion to be troubled about a
loss of good things, which is amply made up for by so great a blessing
as relief from every trouble. There is nothing dreadful in that which
delivers from all that is to be dreaded. If thou shrinkest from giving
up life because thy experience of it has been sweet, at any rate there
is no need to be in any alarm about death if thou hast no knowledge that
it is evil. Thy dread of it is the proof that thou art aware of its
evil. <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iv.x.iv-Page_178"></span>Thou wouldst never think it evil—thou
wouldst have no fear of it at all—if thou wert not sure that after it
there is something to make it evil, and so a thing of terror. <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) Let us leave unnoted at this time
that natural way of fearing death. It is a poor thing for any one to
fear what is inevitable. I take up the other side, and argue on the
ground of a joyful hope beyond our term of earthly life; for desire of
posthumous fame is with almost every class an inborn thing. <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485) I have not time to speak of the
Curtii, and the Reguli, or the brave men of Greece, who afford us
innumerable cases of death despised for after renown. Who at this day is
without the desire that he may be often remembered when he is dead? Who
does not give all endeavour to preserve his name by works of literature,
or by the simple glory of his virtues, or by the splendour even of his
tomb?  How is it the nature of the soul to have these posthumous
ambitions and with such amazing effort to prepare the things it can only
use after decease? It would care nothing about the future, if the future
were quite unknown to it.  But perhaps thou thinkest thyself surer,
after thy exit from the body, of continuing still to feel, than of any
future resurrection, which is a doctrine laid at our door as one of our
presumptuous suppositions. But it is also the doctrine of the soul; for
if any one inquires about a person lately dead as though he were alive,
it occurs at once to say, “He has gone.” He is expected to return, then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[177:1483](0030200.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iv.x.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p3"></span> \[This whole passage is useful as a
commentary on classic authors who use these poetical expressions. *Cœlo
Musa beat* (Hor. Ode viii. B. 4.) but the real feeling comes out in such
expressions as one finds in Horace’s odes to Sextius, (B. i. Ode 4.), or
to Postumus, B. ii. Od. 14.\]

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[177:1484](0030200.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iv.x.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p4"></span> \[The tombs, by the roadside, of which the
traveller still sees specimens, used to be scenes of debauchery when the
dead were *honoured* in this way. Now, the funeral honours (See *De
Corona*, cap. iii.) which Christians substituted for these were
Eucharistic alms and oblations: thanking God for their holy lives and
perpetuating relations with them in the Communion of Saints.\]

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[178:1485](0030200.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iv.x.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p5"></span> \[Butler, Analogy, Part I. chap. i.\]

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[178:1486](0030200.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="iv.x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iv-p6"></span> \[Horace, Book III. Ode 30.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](0030201)
