[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030783)  [Next](0030785) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—Argument.—When the Saints Were
Apprehended, St. Perpetua Successfully Resisted Her Father’s Pleading,
Was Baptized with the Others, Was Thrust into a Filthy Dungeon. Anxious
About Her Infant, by a Vision Granted to Her, She Understood that Her
Martyrdom Would Take Place Very Shortly.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p2"></span>1. The young catechumens, Revocatus and
his fellow-servant Felicitas, Saturninus and Secundulus, were
apprehended. And among them also was Vivia Perpetua, respectably born,
liberally educated, a married matron, having a father and mother and two
brothers, one of whom, like herself, was a catechumen, and a son an
infant at the breast. She herself was about twenty-two years of age.
From this point onward she shall herself narrate the whole course of her
martyrdom, as she left it described by her own hand and with her own
mind.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p3"></span>2. “While” says she, “we were still with
the persecutors, and my father, for the sake of his affection for me,
was persisting in seeking to turn me away, and to cast me down from the
faith,—‘Father,’ said I, ‘do you see, let us say, this vessel lying here
to be a little pitcher, or something else?’ And he said, ‘I see it to be
so.’ And I replied to him, ‘Can it be called by any other name than what
it <span id="page_700">p. 700</span> <span
id="vi.vi.iii-Page_700"></span>is?’  And he said, ‘No.’ ‘Neither can I
call myself anything else than what I am, a Christian.’ Then my father,
provoked at this saying, threw himself upon me, as if he would tear my
eyes out. But he only distressed me, and went away overcome by the
devil’s arguments. Then, in a few days after I had been without my
father, I gave thanks to the Lord; and his absence became a source of
consolation <span id="fr_8977"></span>[8978](#fn_8977) to me. In that
same interval of a few days we were baptized, and to me the Spirit
prescribed that in the water *of baptism* nothing else was to be sought
for bodily endurance. <span id="fr_8978"></span>[8979](#fn_8978) After a
few days we are taken into the dungeon, and I was very much afraid,
because I had never felt such darkness. O terrible day! O the fierce
heat of the shock of the soldiery, because of the crowds! I was very
unusually distressed by my anxiety for my infant. There were present
there Tertius and Pomponius, the blessed deacons who ministered to us,
and had arranged by means of a gratuity that we might be refreshed by
being sent out for a few hours into a pleasanter part of the prison.
Then going out of the dungeon, all attended to their own wants. <span
id="fr_8979"></span>[8980](#fn_8979) I suckled my child, which was now
enfeebled with hunger. In my anxiety for it, I addressed my mother and
comforted my brother, and commended to their care my son. I was
languishing because I had seen them languishing on my account.  Such
solicitude I suffered for many days, and I obtained for my infant to
remain in the dungeon with me; and forthwith I grew strong and was
relieved from distress and anxiety about my infant; and the dungeon
became to me as it were a palace, so that I preferred being there to
being elsewhere.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p7"></span>3. “Then my brother said to me, ‘My dear
sister, you are already in a position of great dignity, and are such
that you may ask for a vision, and that it may be made known to you
whether this is to result in a passion or an escape.’ <span
id="fr_8980"></span>[8981](#fn_8980) And I, who knew that I was
privileged to converse with the Lord, whose kindnesses I had found to be
so great, boldly promised him, and said, ‘To-morrow I will tell you.’
And I asked, and this was what was shown me. I saw a golden ladder of
marvellous height, reaching up even to heaven, and very narrow, so that
persons could only ascend it one by one; and on the sides of the ladder
was fixed every kind of iron weapon. There were there swords, lances,
hooks, daggers; so that if any one went up carelessly, or not looking
upwards, he would be torn to pieces and his flesh would cleave to the
iron weapons. And under the ladder itself was crouching a dragon of
wonderful size, who lay in wait for those who ascended, and frightened
them from the ascent. And Saturus went up first, who had subsequently
delivered himself up freely on our account, not having been present at
the time that we were taken prisoners. And he attained the top of the
ladder, and turned towards me, and said to me, ‘Perpetua, I am waiting
for <span id="fr_8981"></span>[8982](#fn_8981) you; but be careful that
the dragon do not bite you.’ And I said, ‘In the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, he shall not hurt me.’ And from under the ladder itself, as if
in fear of me, he slowly lifted up his head; and as I trod upon the
first step, I trod upon his head. And I went up, and I saw an immense
extent of garden, and in the midst of the garden a white-haired man
sitting in the dress of a shepherd, <span
id="fr_8982"></span>[8983](#fn_8982) of a large stature, milking sheep;
and standing around were many thousand white-robed ones. And he raised
his head, and looked upon me, and said to me, ‘Thou art welcome,
daughter.’ And he called me, and from the cheese as he was milking he
gave me as it were a little cake, and I received it with folded hands;
and I ate it, and all who stood around said Amen. And at the sound of
their voices I was awakened, still tasting a sweetness which I cannot
describe. And I immediately related this to my brother, and we
understood that it was to be a passion, and we ceased henceforth to have
any hope in this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8977"></span>[700:8978](0030784.htm#fr_8977) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p4"></span> “Refrigeravit,” Græce <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>ἀνέπαυσεν</span>, *scil*.
“requiem dedit.”

<span id="fn_8978"></span>[700:8979](0030784.htm#fr_8978) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p5"></span> i.e. the grace of martyrdom.

<span id="fn_8979"></span>[700:8980](0030784.htm#fr_8979) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p6"></span> Sibi vacabant.

<span id="fn_8980"></span>[700:8981](0030784.htm#fr_8980) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p8"></span> Commeatus.

<span id="fn_8981"></span>[700:8982](0030784.htm#fr_8981) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p9"></span> “Sustineo,” Græce <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>ὑπομένω</span>, *scil*.
“exspecto.”

<span id="fn_8982"></span>[700:8983](0030784.htm#fr_8982) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p10"></span> This was an ordinary mode of picturing
our Lord in the oratories and on the sacred vessels of those days.
\[This passage will recall the allegory of Hermas, with which the martyr
was doubtless familiar.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument.  Perpetua, When Besieged by Her Father, Comforts Him.
When Led with Others to the Tribunal, She Avows Herself a Christian, and
is Condemned with the Rest to the Wild Beasts. She Prays for Her Brother
Dinocrates, Who Was Dead.](0030785)
