[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030597)  [Next](0030599) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—The Heretics Called the Flesh
“The Vessel of the Soul,” In Order to Destroy the Responsibility of the
Body. Their Cavil Turns Upon Themselves and Shows the Flesh to Be a
Sharer in Human Actions.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p2"></span>When, however, we attribute to the soul
authority, and to the flesh submission, we must see to it that (our
opponents) do not turn our position by another argument, by insisting on
so placing the flesh in the service of the soul, that it be not
(considered as) its servant, lest they should be compelled, if it were
so regarded, to admit its companionship (to the soul). For they would
argue that servants and companions possess a discretion in discharging
the functions of their respective <span id="page_556">p. 556</span>
<span id="v.viii.xvi-Page_556"></span>office, and a power over their
will in both relations: in short, (they would claim to be) men
themselves, and therefore (would expect) to share the credit with their
principals, to whom they voluntarily yielded their assistance; whereas
the flesh had no discretion, no sentiment in itself, but possessing no
power of its own of willing or refusing, it, in fact, appears to stand
to the soul in the stead of a vessel as an instrument rather than a
servant. The soul alone, therefore, will have to be judged (at the last
day) pre-eminently as to how it has employed the vessel of the flesh;
the vessel itself, of course, not being amenable to a judicial award:
for who condemns the cup if any man has mixed poison in it? or who
sentences the sword to the beasts, if a man has perpetrated with it the
atrocities of a brigand? Well, now, we will grant that the flesh is
innocent, in so far as bad actions will not be charged upon it: what,
then, is there to hinder its being saved on the score of its innocence?
For although it is free from all imputation of good works, as it is of
evil ones, yet it is more consistent with the divine goodness to deliver
the innocent. A beneficent man, indeed, is bound to do so: it suits then
the character of the Most Bountiful to bestow even gratuitously such a
favour. And yet, as to the cup, I will not take the poisoned one, into
which some certain death is injected, but one which has been infected
with the breath of a lascivious woman, <span
id="fr_7373"></span>[7374](#fn_7373) or of Cybele’s priest, or of a
gladiator, or of a hangman: then I want to know whether you would pass a
milder condemnation on it than on the kisses of such persons? One indeed
which is soiled with our own filth, or one which is not mingled to our
own mind we are apt to dash to pieces, and then to increase our anger
with our servant. As for the sword, which is drunk with the blood of the
brigand’s victims, who would not banish it entirely from his house, much
more from his bed-room, or from his pillow, from the presumption that he
would be sure to dream of nothing but the apparitions of the souls which
were pursuing and disquieting him for lying down with *the blade which
shed* their own blood? Take, however, the cup which has no reproach on
it, and which deserves the credit of a faithful ministration, it will be
adorned by its drinking-master with chaplets, or be honoured with a
handful of flowers. The sword also which has received honourable stains
in war, and has been thus engaged in a better manslaughter, will secure
its own praise by consecration. It is quite possible, then, to pass
decisive sentences even on vessels and on instruments, that so they too
may participate in the merits of their proprietors and employers. *Thus
much do I say* from a desire to meet even this argument, although there
is a failure in the example, owing to the diversity in the nature of the
objects. For every vessel or every instrument becomes useful from
without, consisting as it does of material perfectly extraneous to the
substance of the human *owner or employer*; whereas the flesh, being
conceived, formed, and generated along with the soul from its earliest
existence in the womb, is mixed up with it likewise in all its
operations.  For although it is called “a vessel” by the apostle, such
as he enjoins to be treated “with honour,” <span
id="fr_7374"></span>[7375](#fn_7374) it is yet designated by the same
apostle as “the outward man,” <span id="fr_7375"></span>[7376](#fn_7375)
—that clay, of course, which at the first was inscribed with the title
of a man, not of a cup or a sword, or any paltry vessel.  Now it is
called a “*vessel*” in consideration of its capacity, whereby it
receives and contains the soul; but “*man*,” from its community of
nature, which renders it in all operations a servant and not an
instrument. Accordingly, in the judgment it will be held to be a servant
(even though it may have no independent discretion of its own), on the
ground of its being an integral portion of that which possesses such
discretion, and is not a mere chattel.  And although the apostle is well
aware that the flesh does nothing of itself which is not also imputed to
the soul, he yet deems the flesh to be “*sinful*;” <span
id="fr_7376"></span>[7377](#fn_7376) lest it should be supposed to be
free from all responsibility by the mere fact of its seeming to be
impelled by the soul.  So, again, when he is ascribing certain
praiseworthy actions to the flesh, he says, “*Therefore* glorify and
exalt God in your body,” <span id="fr_7377"></span>[7378](#fn_7377)
—being certain that such efforts are actuated by the soul; but still he
ascribes them to the flesh, because it is to it that he also promises
the recompense. Besides, neither rebuke, (on the one hand), would have
been suitable to it, if free from blame; nor, (on the other hand), would
exhortation, if it were incapable of glory. Indeed, both rebuke and
exhortation would be alike idle towards the flesh, if it were an
improper object for that recompence which is certainly received in the
resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7373"></span>[556:7374](0030598.htm#fr_7373) <span
id="v.viii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p3"></span> “Frictricis” is Oehler’s reading.

<span id="fn_7374"></span>[556:7375](0030598.htm#fr_7374) <span
id="v.viii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p4"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004)<span id="v.viii.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7375"></span>[556:7376](0030598.htm#fr_7375) <span
id="v.viii.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p5"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="v.viii.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7376"></span>[556:7377](0030598.htm#fr_7376) <span
id="v.viii.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p6"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="v.viii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7377"></span>[556:7378](0030598.htm#fr_7377) <span
id="v.viii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xvi-p7"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="v.viii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flesh Will Be Associated with the Soul in Enduring the Penal
Sentences of the Final Judgment.](0030599)
