[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030205)  [Next](0030207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Christian Has Sure and Simple
Knowledge Concerning the Subject Before Us.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p2"></span>Of course we shall not deny that
philosophers have sometimes thought the same things as ourselves. The
testimony of truth is the issue thereof. It sometimes happens even in a
storm, when the boundaries of sky and sea are lost in confusion, that
some harbour is stumbled on (by the labouring ship) by some happy
chance; and sometimes in the very shades of night, through blind luck
alone, one finds access to a spot, or egress from it. In nature,
however, most conclusions are suggested, as it were, by that common
intelligence wherewith God has been pleased to endow the soul of man.
This intelligence has been caught up by philosophy, and, with the view
of glorifying her own art, has been inflated (it is not to be wondered
at that I use this language) with straining after that facility of
language which is practised in the building up and pulling down of
everything, and which has greater aptitude for persuading men by
speaking than by teaching. She assigns to things their forms and
conditions; sometimes makes them common and public, sometimes
appropriates them to private use; on certainties she capriciously stamps
the character of uncertainty; she appeals to precedents, as if all
things are capable of being compared together; she describes all things
by rule and definition, allotting diverse properties even to similar
objects; she attributes nothing to the divine permission, but assumes as
her principles the laws of nature. I could bear with her pretensions, if
only she were herself true to nature, and would prove to me that she had
a mastery over nature as being associated with its creation. She
thought, no doubt, that she was deriving her mysteries from sacred
sources, as men deem them, because in ancient times most authors were
supposed to be (I will not say godlike, but) actually gods: as, for
instance, the Egyptian Mercury, <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500) to whom Plato paid very great
deference; <span id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501) and the Phrygian
Silenus, to whom Midas lent his long ears, when the shepherds brought
him to him; and Hermotimus, to whom the good people of Clazomenæ built a
temple after his death; and Orpheus; and Musæus; and Pherecydes, the
master of Pythagoras. But why need we care, since these philosophers
have also made their attacks upon those writings which are condemned by
us under the title of apocryphal, <span
id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) certain as we are that nothing
ought to be received which does not agree with the true system of
prophecy, which has arisen in this present age; <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503) because we do not forget that there
have been false proph<span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="iv.xi.ii-Page_183"></span>ets, and long previous to them fallen
spirits, which have instructed the entire tone and aspect of the world
with cunning knowledge of this (*philosophic*) cast? It is, indeed, not
incredible that any man who is in quest of wisdom may have gone so far,
as a matter of curiosity, as to consult the very prophets; (*but be this
as it may*), if you take the philosophers, you would find in them more
diversity than agreement, since even in their agreement their diversity
is discoverable. Whatever things are true *in their systems*, and
agreeable to prophetic wisdom, they either recommend as emanating from
some other source, or else perversely apply <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) in some other sense. This process
is attended with very great detriment to the truth, when they pretend
that it is either helped by falsehood, or else that falsehood derives
support from it. The following circumstance must needs have set
ourselves and the philosophers by the ears, especially in this present
matter, that they sometimes clothe sentiments which are common to both
sides, in arguments which are peculiar to themselves, but contrary in
some points to our rule and standard of faith; and at other times defend
opinions which are especially their own, with arguments which both sides
acknowledge to be valid, and occasionally conformable to their system of
belief. The truth has, at this rate, been well-nigh excluded by the
philosophers, through the poisons with which they have infected it; and
thus, if we regard both the modes of coalition *which we have now
mentioned*, and which are equally hostile to the truth, we feel the
urgent necessity of freeing, on the one hand, the sentiments held by us
in common with them from the arguments of the philosophers, and of
separating, on the other hand, the arguments which both parties employ
from the opinions of the same philosophers. *And this we may do* by
recalling all questions to God’s inspired standard, with the obvious
exception of such simple cases as being free from the entanglement of
any preconceived conceits, one may fairly admit on mere *human*
testimony; because plain evidence of this sort we must sometimes borrow
from opponents, when our opponents have nothing to gain from it. Now I
am not unaware what a vast mass of literature the philosophers have
accumulated concerning the subject before us, in their own commentaries
thereon—what various schools of principles there are, what conflicts of
opinion, what prolific sources of questions, what perplexing methods of
solution. Moreover, I have looked into Medical Science also, the sister
(as they say) of Philosophy, which claims as her function to cure the
body, and thereby to have a special acquaintance with the soul. From
this circumstance she has great differences with her sister, pretending
as the latter does to know more about the soul, through the more obvious
treatment, as it were, of her in her domicile *of the body*. But never
mind all this contention between them for pre-eminence!  For extending
their several researches on the soul, Philosophy, on the one hand, has
enjoyed the full scope of her genius; while Medicine, on the other hand,
has possessed the stringent demands of her art and practice. Wide are
men’s inquiries into uncertainties; wider still are their disputes about
conjectures. However great the difficulty of adducing proofs, the labour
of producing conviction is not one whit less; so that the gloomy
Heraclitus was quite right, when, observing the thick darkness which
obscured the researches of the inquirers about the soul, and wearied
with their interminable questions, he declared that he had certainly not
explored the limits of the soul, although he had traversed every road
*in her domains*. To the Christian, however, but few words are necessary
for the clear understanding of the whole subject. But in the few words
there always arises certainty to him; nor is he permitted to give his
inquiries a wider range than is compatible with their solution; for
“endless questions” the apostle forbids. <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505) It must, however, be added, that no
solution may be found by any man, but such as is learned from God; and
that which is learned of God is the sum and substance of the whole
thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[182:1501](0030206.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p3"></span> Mentioned below, c. xxxiii.; also *Adv.
Valent.* c. xv.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[182:1502](0030206.htm#fr_1501) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p4"></span> See his *Phædrus*, c. lix. (p. 274); also
Augustin, *De. Civ. Dei*, viii. 11; Euseb. *Præp. Evang.* ix. 3.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[182:1503](0030206.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p5"></span> Or *spurious*; not to be confounded with
our so-called *Apocrypha*, which were in Tertullian’s days called *Libri
Ecclesiastici*.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[182:1504](0030206.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p6"></span> Here is a touch of Tertullian’s
Montanism.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[183:1505](0030206.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p7"></span> Subornant.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[183:1506](0030206.htm#fr_1505) <span
id="iv.xi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ii-p8"></span> [1 Tim. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004)<span id="iv.xi.ii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Soul's Origin Defined Out of the Simple Words of
Scripture.](0030207)
