[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030656)  [Next](0030658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.x"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—The Very Names of Father and Son
Prove the Personal Distinction of the Two. They Cannot Possibly Be
Identical, Nor is Their Identity Necessary to Preserve the Divine
Monarchy.</span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p2"></span>So it is either the Father or the Son, and
the day is not the same as the night; nor is the Father the same as the
Son, in such a way that Both of them should be One, and One or the Other
should be Both,—an opinion which the most conceited “Monarchians”
maintain. He Himself, they say, made Himself a Son to Himself. <span
id="fr_7867"></span>[7868](#fn_7867) Now a Father makes a Son, and a Son
makes a Father; <span id="fr_7868"></span>[7869](#fn_7868) and they who
thus become reciprocally related out of each other to each other cannot
in any way by themselves simply become so related to themselves, that
the Father can make Himself a Son to Himself, and the Son render Himself
a Father to Himself. And the relations which God establishes, them does
He also guard.  A father must needs have a son, in order to be a father;
so likewise a son, to be a son, must have a father. It is, however, one
thing to have, and another thing to be. For instance, in order to be a
husband, I must have a wife; I can never myself be my own wife. In like
manner, in order to be a father, I have a son, for I never can be a son
to myself; and in order to be a son, I have a father, it being
impossible for me ever to be my own father. And it is these relations
which make me (what I am), when I come to possess them: I shall then be
a father, when I have a son; and a son, when I have a father. Now, if I
am to be to myself any one of these relations, I no longer have what I
am myself to be: neither a father, because I am to be my own father; nor
a son, because I shall be my own son. Moreover, inasmuch as I ought to
*have* one of these relations in order to *be* the other; so, if I am to
be both together, I shall fail to be one while I possess not the other.
For if I must be myself my son, who am also a father, I now cease to
have a son, since I am my own son. But by reason of not having a son,
since I am my own son, how can I be a father? For I ought to *have* a
son, in order to be a father. Therefore I am not a son, because I have
not a father, who makes a son.  In like manner, if I am myself my
father, who am also a son, I no longer have a father, but am myself my
father.  By not having a father, however, since I am my own father, how
can I be a son? For I ought to have a father, in order to be a son. I
cannot therefore be a father, because I have not a son, who makes a
father. Now all this must be the device of the devil—this excluding and
severing one from the other—since by including both together in one
under pretence of the *Monarchy*, he causes neither to be held and
acknowledged, so that He is not the Father, since indeed He has not the
Son; neither is He the Son, since in like manner He has not the Father:
for while He is the Father, He will not be the Son. In this way they
hold the *Monarchy*, but they hold neither the Father nor the Son. 
Well, but “with God nothing is impossible.” <span
id="fr_7869"></span>[7870](#fn_7869) *True enough*; who can be <span
id="page_605">p. 605</span> <span id="v.ix.x-Page_605"></span>ignorant
of it? Who also can be unaware that “the things which are impossible
with men are possible with God?” <span
id="fr_7870"></span>[7871](#fn_7870) “The foolish things also of the
world hath God chosen to confound the things which are wise.” <span
id="fr_7871"></span>[7872](#fn_7871) We have read it all. Therefore,
they argue, it was not difficult for God to make Himself both a Father
and a Son, contrary to the condition of things among men. For a barren
woman to have a child against nature was no difficulty with God; nor was
it for a virgin to conceive. Of course nothing is “too hard for the
Lord.” <span id="fr_7872"></span>[7873](#fn_7872) But if we choose to
apply this principle so extravagantly and harshly in our capricious
imaginations, we may then make out God to have done anything we please,
on the ground that it was not impossible for Him to do it. We must not,
however, because He is able to do all things suppose that He has
actually done what He has not done. But we must inquire *whether He has
really done it*. God could, if He had liked, have furnished man with
wings to fly with, just as He gave wings to kites. We must not, however,
run to the conclusion that He did this because He was able to do it.  He
might also have extinguished Praxeas and all other heretics at once; it
does not follow, however, that He did, simply because He was able. For
it was necessary that there should be both kites and heretics; it was
necessary also that the Father should be crucified. <span
id="fr_7873"></span>[7874](#fn_7873) In one sense there will be
something difficult even for God—namely, that which He has not done—not
because He could not, but because He would not, do it.  For with God, to
be willing is to be able, and to be unwilling is to be unable; all that
He has willed, however, He has both been able to accomplish, and has
displayed His ability. Since, therefore, if God had wished to make
Himself a Son to Himself, He had it in His power to do so; and since, if
He had it in His power, He effected *His purpose*, you will then make
good your proof of His power and His will (to do even this) when you
shall have proved to us that He actually did it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7867"></span>[604:7868](0030657.htm#fr_7867) <span
id="v.ix.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p3"></span> \[Kaye, p. 507, note 3.\]

<span id="fn_7868"></span>[604:7869](0030657.htm#fr_7868) <span
id="v.ix.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p4"></span> As correlatives, one implying the existence
of the other.

<span id="fn_7869"></span>[604:7870](0030657.htm#fr_7869) <span
id="v.ix.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p5"></span> [Matt. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026)<span id="v.ix.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7870"></span>[605:7871](0030657.htm#fr_7870) <span
id="v.ix.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p6"></span> [Luke xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#027)<span id="v.ix.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7871"></span>[605:7872](0030657.htm#fr_7871) <span
id="v.ix.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p7"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="v.ix.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7872"></span>[605:7873](0030657.htm#fr_7872) <span
id="v.ix.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p8"></span> [Gen. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)<span id="v.ix.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7873"></span>[605:7874](0030657.htm#fr_7873) <span
id="v.ix.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.x-p9"></span> An ironical reference to a great paradox in
the Praxean heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Identity of the Father and the Son, as Praxeas Held It, Shown
to Be Full of Perplexity and Absurdity. Many Scriptures Quoted in Proof
of the Distinction of the Divine Persons of the Trinity.](0030658)
