[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030483)  [Next](0030485) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.—The Truth, that God Made All Things
from Nothing, Rescued from the Opponent’s Flounderings.</span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p2"></span>Now, if good was neither produced out of
matter, since it was not in it, evil as it was, nor out of God, since,
according to the position of Hermogenes, nothing could have been
produced out of god, it will be found that good was created out of
nothing, inasmuch as it was formed of none—neither of Matter nor of God.
And if good was formed out of nothing, why not evil too? Nay, if
anything was formed out of nothing, why not all things?  Unless indeed
it be that the divine might was insufficient for the production of *all*
things, though it produced a something out of nothing. Or else if good
proceeded from evil matter, since it issued neither from nothing nor
from God, it will follow that it must have proceeded from the conversion
of Matter contrary to that unchangeable attribute which has been claimed
for *it*, *as* an eternal being. <span
id="fr_6271"></span>[6272](#fn_6271) Thus, in regard to the source
whence good derived its existence, Hermogenes will now have to deny the
possibility of such. But still it is necessary that (good) should
proceed from some one of those sources from which he has denied the very
possibility of its having been derived. Now if evil be denied to be of
nothing for the purpose of denying it to be the work of God, from whose
will there would be too much appearance of its being derived, and be
alleged to proceed from Matter, that it may be the property of that very
thing of whose substance it is assumed to be made, even here also, as I
have said, God will have to be regarded as the Author of evil; because,
whereas it had been His duty <span id="fr_6272"></span>[6273](#fn_6272)
to produce all good things out of Matter, or rather good things simply,
by His identical attribute of power and will, He did yet *not only* not
produce all good things, but even (some) evil things—of course, either
willing that the evil should exist if He was able to cause their
non-existence, or not being strong enough to effect that all things
should be good, if being desirous of that result, He failed in the
accomplishment thereof; since there can be no difference whether it were
by weakness or by will, that the Lord proved to be the Author of evil.
Else what was the reason that, after creating good things, as if Himself
good, He should have also produced evil things, as if He failed in His
goodness, since He did not confine Himself to the production of things
which were simply consistent with Himself? What necessity was there,
after the production of His proper work, for His troubling Himself about
Matter also by producing evil likewise, in order to secure His being
alone acknowledged as good from His good, and at the same time <span
id="fr_6273"></span>[6274](#fn_6273) to prevent Matter being regarded as
evil from (created) evil? Good would have flourished much better if evil
had not blown upon it. For Hermogenes himself explodes the arguments of
sundry persons who contend that evil things were necessary to impart
lustre to the good, which must be understood from their contrasts. This,
therefore, was not the ground for the production <span id="page_486">p.
486</span> <span id="v.v.xv-Page_486"></span>of evil; but if some other
reason must be sought for the introduction thereof, why could it not
have been introduced even from nothing, <span
id="fr_6274"></span>[6275](#fn_6274) since the very same reason would
exculpate the Lord from the reproach of being thought the author of
evil, which now excuses *the existence of* evil things, when He produces
them out of Matter? And if there is this excuse, then the question is
completely <span id="fr_6275"></span>[6276](#fn_6275) shut up in a
corner, where they are unwilling to find it, who, without examining into
the reason itself of evil, or distinguishing how they should either
attribute it to God or separate it from God, do in fact expose God to
many most unworthy calumnies. <span id="fr_6276"></span>[6277](#fn_6276)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6271"></span>[485:6272](0030484.htm#fr_6271) <span
id="v.v.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p3"></span> Contra denegatam æterni conversationem.
Literally, “Contrary to that convertibility of an eternal nature which
has been denied (by Hermogenes) to be possible.” It will be obvious why
we have, in connection with the preceding clause preferred the
equivalent rendering of our text. For the denial of Hermogenes, which
Tertullian refers to, see above, chap. xii. p. 484.

<span id="fn_6272"></span>[485:6273](0030484.htm#fr_6272) <span
id="v.v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p4"></span> Debuisset protulisse.

<span id="fn_6273"></span>[485:6274](0030484.htm#fr_6273) <span
id="v.v.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p5"></span> This clumsy expedient to save the character
of both God and Matter was one of the weaknesses of Hermogenes’ system.

<span id="fn_6274"></span>[486:6275](0030484.htm#fr_6274) <span
id="v.v.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p6"></span> Cur non et ex nihilo potuerit induci?

<span id="fn_6275"></span>[486:6276](0030484.htm#fr_6275) <span
id="v.v.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p7"></span> Ubique et undique.

<span id="fn_6276"></span>[486:6277](0030484.htm#fr_6276) <span
id="v.v.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p8"></span> Destructionibus. “Ruin of character” is the
true idea of this strong term.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Series of Dilemmas.  They Show that Hermogenes Cannot Escape
from the Orthodox Conclusion.](0030485)
