[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030248)  [Next](0030250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xlv"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLV.—Dreams, an Incidental Effect of
the Soul’s Activity.  Ecstasy.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p2"></span>We are bound to expound at this point
what is the opinion of Christians respecting dreams, as incidents of
sleep, and as no slight or trifling excitements of the soul, which we
have declared to be always occupied and active owing to its perpetual
movement, which again is a proof and evidence of its divine quality and
immortality. When, therefore, rest accrues to human bodies, it being
their own especial comfort, the soul, disdaining a repose which is not
natural to it, never rests; and since it receives no help from the limbs
of the body, it uses its own.  Imagine a gladiator without his
instruments or arms, and a charioteer without his team, but still
gesticulating the entire course and exertion of their respective
employments: there is the fight, there is the struggle; but the effort
is a vain one. Nevertheless the whole procedure seems to be gone
through, although it evidently has not been really effected. There is
the act, but not the effect. This power we call *ecstasy*, in which the
sensuous soul stands out of itself, in a way which even resembles
madness. <span id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) Thus in the very
beginning sleep was inaugurated by ecstasy: “And God sent an ecstasy
upon Adam, and he slept.” <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) The
sleep came on his body to cause it to rest, but the ecstasy fell on his
soul to remove rest: from that very circumstance it still happens
ordinarily (and from the order results the nature of the case) that
sleep is combined with ecstasy. In fact, with what real feeling, and
anxiety, and suffering do we experience joy, and sorrow, and alarm in
our dreams! Whereas we should not be moved by any such emotions, by what
would be the merest fan<span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xlv-Page_224"></span>tasies of course, if when we dream we
were masters of ourselves, (unaffected by ecstasy.) In these dreams,
indeed, good actions are useless, and crimes harmless; for we shall no
more be condemned for visionary acts of sin, than we shall be crowned
for imaginary martyrdom. But how, you will ask, can the soul remember
its dreams, when it is said to be without any mastery over its own
operations? This memory must be an especial gift of the ecstatic
condition of which we are treating, since it arises not from any failure
of healthy action, but entirely from natural process; nor does it expel
mental function—it withdraws it for a time. It is one thing to shake, it
is another thing to move; one thing to destroy, another thing to
agitate. That, therefore, which memory supplies betokens soundness of
mind; and that which a sound mind ecstatically experiences whilst the
memory remains unchecked, is a kind of madness. We are accordingly not
said to be mad, but to dream, in that state; to be in the full
possession also of our mental faculties, <span
id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) if we are at any time. For although
the power to exercise these faculties <span
id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) may be dimmed in us, it is still
not extinguished; except that it may seem to be itself absent at the
very time that the ecstasy is energizing in us in its special manner, in
such wise as to bring before us images of a sound mind and of wisdom,
even as it does those of aberration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[223:1766](0030249.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="iv.xi.xlv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p3"></span> We had better give Tertullian’s own
succinct definition: “Excessus sensûs et amentiæ instar.”

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[223:1767](0030249.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="iv.xi.xlv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p4"></span> [Gen. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[224:1768](0030249.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="iv.xi.xlv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p5"></span> Prudentes.

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[224:1769](0030249.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="iv.xi.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlv-p6"></span> Sapere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Diversity of Dreams and Visions. Epicurus Thought Lightly of
Them, Though Generally Most Highly Valued. Instances of
Dreams.](0030250)
