[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030260)  [Next](0030262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.lvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LVII.—Magic and Sorcery Only
Apparent in Their Effects.  God Alone Can Raise the Dead.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p2"></span>It is either a very fine thing to be
detained in these infernal regions with the *Aori*, or souls which were
prematurely hurried away; or else a very bad thing indeed to be there
associated with the *Biaeothanati*, who suffered violent deaths. I may
be permitted to use the actual words and terms with which magic rings
again, that inventor of all these odd opinions—with its Ostanes, and
Typhon, and Dardanus, and Damigeron, and Nectabis, and Berenice. There
is a well-known popular bit of writing, <span
id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) which undertakes to summon up from
the abode of Hades the souls which have actually slept out their full
age, and had passed away by an honourable death, and had even been
buried with full rites and proper ceremony. What after this shall we say
about magic? Say, to be sure, what almost everybody says of it—that it
is an imposture.  But it is not we Christians only whose notice this
system of imposture does not escape. We, it is true, have discovered
these spirits of evil, not, to be sure, by a complicity with them, but
by a certain knowledge which is hostile to them; nor is it by any
procedure which is attractive to them, but by a power which subjugates
them that we handle (their wretched system)—that manifold pest of the
mind of man, that artificer of all error, that destroyer of our
salvation and our soul at one swoop. <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) In this way, even by magic, which
is indeed only a second idolatry, wherein they pretend that after death
they become demons, just as they were supposed in the first and literal
idolatry to become gods (and why not? since the gods are but dead
things), the before-mentioned *Aori Biaeothanati* are actually
invoked,—and not unfairly, <span id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) if
one grounds his faith on this principle, that it is clearly credible for
those souls to be beyond all others addicted to violence and wrong,
which with violence and wrong have been hurried away by a cruel and
premature death and which would have a keen appetite for reprisals. 
Under cover, however, of these souls, demons operate, especially such as
used to dwell in them when they were in life, and who had driven them,
in fact, to the fate which had at last carried them off.  For, as we
have already suggested, <span id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) there
is hardly a human being who is unattended by a demon; and it is well
known to many, that premature and violent deaths, which men ascribe to
accidents, are in fact brought about by demons.  This imposture of the
evil spirit lying concealed in the persons of the dead, we are able, if
I mistake not, to prove by actual facts, when in cases of exorcism (the
evil spirit) affirms himself sometimes to be one of the relatives <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) of the person possessed by him,
sometimes a gladiator or a *bestiarius*, <span
id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) and sometimes even a god; always
making it one of his chief cares to extinguish the very truth which we
are proclaiming, that men may not readily believe that all souls remove
to Hades, and that they may overthrow faith in the resurrection and the
judgment. And yet for all that, the demon, after trying to circumvent
the bystanders, is vanquished by the pressure of divine grace, and
sorely against his will confesses all the truth. So also in that other
kind of magic, which is supposed to bring up from Hades the souls now
resting there, and to exhibit them to public view, there is no other
expedient of imposture ever resorted to which operates more powerfully.
Of course, why a phantom becomes visible, is because a body is also
attached to it; and it is no difficult matter to delude the external
vision of a man whose mental eye it is so easy to blind. The serpents
which emerged from the magicians’ rods, certainly appeared to Pharaoh
and to the Egyptians as bodily substances. It is true <span
id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span id="iv.xi.lvii-Page_234"></span>that
the verity of Moses swallowed up their lying deceit. <span
id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) Many attempts were also wrought
against the apostles by the sorcerers Simon and Elymas, <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) but the blindness which struck
(them) was no enchanter’s trick. What novelty is there in the effort of
an unclean spirit to counterfeit the truth?  At this very time, even,
the heretical dupes of this same Simon (Magus) are so much elated by the
extravagant pretensions of their art, that they undertake to bring up
from Hades the souls of the prophets themselves. And I suppose that they
can do so under cover of a lying wonder. For, indeed, it was no less
than this that was anciently permitted to the Pythonic (or
ventriloquistic) spirit <span id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) —even
to represent the soul of Samuel, when Saul consulted the dead, after
(losing the living) God. <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825) God
forbid, however, that we should suppose that the soul of any saint, much
less of a prophet, can be dragged out of (its resting-place in Hades) by
a demon. We know that “Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light” <span id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) —much more into a man
of light—and that at last he will “show himself to be even God,” <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) and will exhibit “great signs and
wonders, insomuch that, if it were possible, he shall deceive the very
elect.” <span id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) He hardly <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829) hesitated on the before-mentioned
occasion to affirm himself to be a prophet of God, and especially to
Saul, in whom he was then actually dwelling. You must not imagine that
he who produced the phantom was one, and he who consulted it was
another; but that it was one and the same spirit, both in the sorceress
and in the apostate (king), which easily pretended an apparition of that
which it had already prepared them to believe as real—(even the spirit)
through whose evil influence Saul’s heart was fixed where his treasure
was, and where certainly God was not. Therefore it came about, that he
saw him through whose aid he believed that he was going to see, because
he believed him through whose help he saw. But we are met with the
objection, that in visions of the night dead persons are not
unfrequently seen, and that for a set purpose. <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) For instance, the Nasamones consult
private oracles by frequent and lengthened visits to the sepulchres of
their relatives, as one may find in Heraclides, or Nymphodorus, or
Herodotus; <span id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831) and the Celts, for
the same purpose, stay away all night at the tombs of their brave
chieftains, as Nicander affirms.  Well, we admit apparitions of dead
persons in dreams to be not more really true than those of living
persons; but we apply the same estimate to all alike—to the dead and to
the living, and indeed to all the phenomena which are seen. Now things
are not true because they appear to be so, but because they are fully
proved to be so. The truth of dreams is declared from the realization,
not the aspect. Moreover, the fact that Hades is not in any case opened
for (the escape of) any soul, has been firmly established by the Lord in
the person of Abraham, in His representation of the poor man at rest and
the rich man in torment. <span id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832) No
one, (he said,) could possibly be despatched from those abodes to report
to us how matters went in the nether regions,—a purpose which, (if any
could be,) might have been allowable on such an occasion, to persuade a
belief in Moses and the prophets. The power of God has, no doubt,
sometimes recalled men’s souls to their bodies, as a proof of His own
transcendent rights; but there must never be, because of this fact, any
agreement supposed to be possible between the divine faith and the
arrogant pretensions of sorcerers, and the imposture of dreams, and the
licence of poets. But yet in all cases of a true resurrection, when the
power of God recalls souls to their bodies, either by the agency of
prophets, or of Christ, or of apostles, a complete presumption is
afforded us, by the solid, palpable, and ascertained reality (of the
revived body), that its true form must be such as to compel one’s belief
of the fraudulence of every incorporeal apparition of dead persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[233:1817](0030261.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p3"></span> Litteratura.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[233:1818](0030261.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p4"></span> Oehler takes these descriptive clauses
as meant of *Satan*, instead of being synonymes of *magic*, as the
context seems to require.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[233:1819](0030261.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p5"></span> Æque.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[233:1820](0030261.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p6"></span> Above, in ch. xxxix. p. 219.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[233:1821](0030261.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p7"></span> Aliquem ex parentibus.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[233:1822](0030261.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p8"></span> One who fought with wild beasts in the
public games, only without the weapons allowed to the gladiator.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[234:1823](0030261.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p9"></span> [Ex. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[234:1824](0030261.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p10"></span> [Acts
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009), [Acts
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)<span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[234:1825](0030261.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p11"></span> See above in ch. xxviii. p. 209,
*supra.*

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[234:1826](0030261.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p12"></span> [1 Sam. xxviii.
6-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[234:1827](0030261.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p13"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[234:1828](0030261.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p14"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[234:1829](0030261.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p15"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[234:1830](0030261.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p16"></span> Si forte.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[234:1831](0030261.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p17"></span> Non frustra.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[234:1832](0030261.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p18"></span> In iv. 172.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[234:1833](0030261.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="iv.xi.lvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p19"></span> [Luke xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span id="iv.xi.lvii-p19.1"></span>.
\[Compare note 15, p. 231. *supra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion. Points Postponed. All Souls are Kept in Hades Until
the Resurrection, Anticipating Their Ultimate Misery or Bliss.](0030262)
