[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030458)  [Next](0030460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—The Epistle to the Romans.
St. Paul Cannot Help Using Phrases Which Bespeak the Justice of God,
Even When He is Eulogizing the Mercies of the Gospel. Marcion
Particularly Hard in Mutilation of This Epistle. Yet Our Author Argues
on Common Ground. The Judgment at Last Will Be in Accordance with the
Gospel. The Justified by Faith Exhorted to Have Peace with God. The
Administration of the Old and the New Dispensations in One and the Same
Hand.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p2"></span>Since my little work is approaching
its ter<span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-Page_457"></span>mination, <span
id="fr_5784"></span>[5785](#fn_5784) I must treat but briefly the points
which still occur, whilst those which have so often turned up must be
put aside. I regret still to have to contend about the law—after I have
so often proved that its replacement (by the gospel) <span
id="fr_5785"></span>[5786](#fn_5785) affords no argument for another
god, predicted as it was indeed in Christ, and in the Creator’s own
plans <span id="fr_5786"></span>[5787](#fn_5786) ordained for *His*
Christ. (But I must revert to that discussion) so far as (the apostle
leads me, for) this very epistle looks very much as if it
abrogated <span id="fr_5787"></span>[5788](#fn_5787) the law. We have,
however, often shown before now that God is declared by the apostle to
be a Judge; and that in the Judge is implied an Avenger; and in the
Avenger, the Creator. And so in the passage where he says: “I am not
ashamed of the gospel (of Christ): for it is the power of god unto
salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek; for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith,” <span id="fr_5788"></span>[5789](#fn_5788) he undoubtedly
ascribes both the gospel and salvation to Him whom (in accordance with
our heretic’s own distinction) I have called the *just* God, not the
*good* one. It is He who removes (men) from confidence in the law to
faith in the gospel—that is to say, <span
id="fr_5789"></span>[5790](#fn_5789) His own law and His own gospel.
When, again, he declares that “the wrath (of God) is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness,” <span id="fr_5790"></span>[5791](#fn_5790) (I
ask) the wrath of what God? Of the Creator certainly. The truth,
therefore, will be His, whose is also the wrath, which has to be
revealed to avenge the truth. Likewise, when adding, “We are sure that
the judgment of God is according to truth,” <span
id="fr_5791"></span>[5792](#fn_5791) he both vindicated that wrath from
which comes this judgment for the truth, and at the same time afforded
another proof that the truth emanates from the same God whose wrath he
attested, by witnessing to His judgment. *Marcion’s averment* is quite a
different matter, that <span id="fr_5792"></span>[5793](#fn_5792) the
Creator in anger avenges Himself on the truth of the rival god which had
been detained in unrighteousness. But what serious gaps Marcion has made
in this epistle especially, by withdrawing whole passages at his will,
will be clear from the unmutilated text of our own copy. <span
id="fr_5793"></span>[5794](#fn_5793) It is enough for my purpose to
accept in evidence of its truth what he has seen fit to leave unerased,
strange instances as they are also of his negligence and blindness. If,
then, God will judge the secrets of men—both of those who have sinned in
the law, and of those who have sinned without law (inasmuch as they who
know not the law yet do by nature the things contained in the law) <span
id="fr_5794"></span>[5795](#fn_5794) —surely the God who shall judge is
He to whom belong both the law, and that nature which is the rule <span
id="fr_5795"></span>[5796](#fn_5795) to them who know not the law. But
how will He conduct this judgment?  “According to my gospel,” says (*the
apostle*), “by (*Jesus*) Christ.” <span
id="fr_5796"></span>[5797](#fn_5796) So that both the gospel and Christ
must be His, to whom appertain the law and the nature which are to be
vindicated by the gospel and Christ—even at that judgment of God which,
as he previously said, was to be according to truth. <span
id="fr_5797"></span>[5798](#fn_5797) The wrath, therefore, which is to
vindicate truth, can only be revealed from heaven by the God of
wrath; <span id="fr_5798"></span>[5799](#fn_5798) so that this sentence,
which is quite in accordance with that previous one wherein the judgment
is declared to be the Creator’s, <span
id="fr_5799"></span>[5800](#fn_5799) cannot possibly be ascribed to
another god who is not a judge, and is incapable of wrath. It is only
consistent in Him amongst whose attributes are found the judgment and
the wrath of which I am speaking, and to whom of necessity must also
appertain the *media* whereby these attributes are to be carried into
effect, even the gospel and Christ. Hence his invective against the
transgressors of the law, who teach that men should not steal, and yet
practise theft themselves. <span id="fr_5800"></span>[5801](#fn_5800)
(This invective he utters) in perfect homage <span
id="fr_5801"></span>[5802](#fn_5801) to the law of God, not as if he
meant to censure the Creator Himself with having commanded <span
id="fr_5802"></span>[5803](#fn_5802) a fraud to be practised against the
Egyptians to get their gold and silver at the very time when He was
forbidding men to steal, <span id="fr_5803"></span>[5804](#fn_5803)
—adopting such methods as they are apt (shamelessly) to charge upon Him
in other particulars also. Are we then to suppose <span
id="fr_5804"></span>[5805](#fn_5804) that the apostle abstained through
fear from openly calumniating God, from whom notwithstanding He did not
hesitate to withdraw men? Well, but he had gone so far in his censure of
the Jews, as to point against them the denunciation of the prophet,
“Through you the name of God is blasphemed (among the Gentiles).” <span
id="fr_5805"></span>[5806](#fn_5805) But how absurd, that he should
himself blaspheme Him for blaspheming whom he upbraids them <span
id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-Page_458"></span>as
evil-doers! He prefers even circumcision of heart to neglect of it in
the flesh. Now it is quite within the purpose of the God of the law that
circumcision should be that of the heart, not in the flesh; in the
spirit, and not in the letter. <span
id="fr_5806"></span>[5807](#fn_5806) Since this is the circumcision
recommended by Jeremiah: “Circumcise (yourselves to the Lord, and take
away) the foreskins of your heart;” <span
id="fr_5807"></span>[5808](#fn_5807) and even of Moses: “Circumcise,
therefore, the hardness of your heart,” <span
id="fr_5808"></span>[5809](#fn_5808) —the *Spirit* which circumcises the
heart will proceed from Him who prescribed the *letter* also which
clips <span id="fr_5809"></span>[5810](#fn_5809) the flesh; and “the Jew
which is one inwardly” will be a subject of the self-same God as he also
is who is “a Jew outwardly;” <span id="fr_5810"></span>[5811](#fn_5810)
because the apostle would have preferred not to have mentioned a Jew at
all, unless he were a servant of the God of the Jews. It was once <span
id="fr_5811"></span>[5812](#fn_5811) the law; now it is “the
righteousness of God which is by the faith of (Jesus) Christ.” <span
id="fr_5812"></span>[5813](#fn_5812) What means this distinction? Has
your god been subserving the interests of the Creator’s dispensation, by
affording time to Him and to His law? Is the “*Now*” in the hands of Him
to whom belonged the “*Then*”? Surely, then, the law was His, whose is
now the righteousness of God. It is a distinction of dispensations, not
of gods.  He enjoins those who are justified by faith in Christ and not
by the law to have peace with God. <span
id="fr_5813"></span>[5814](#fn_5813) With what God? Him whose enemies we
have never, in any dispensation, <span
id="fr_5814"></span>[5815](#fn_5814) been? Or Him against whom we have
rebelled, both in relation to His written law and His law of nature?
Now, as peace is only possible towards Him with whom there once was war,
we shall be both justified by Him, and to Him also will belong the
Christ, in whom we are justified by faith, and through whom alone
God’s <span id="fr_5815"></span>[5816](#fn_5815) enemies can ever be
reduced to peace.  “Moreover,” says he, “the law entered, that the
offence might abound.” <span id="fr_5816"></span>[5817](#fn_5816) And
wherefore this? “In order,” he says, “that (where sin abounded), grace
might much more abound.” <span id="fr_5817"></span>[5818](#fn_5817)
Whose grace, if not of that God from whom also came the law? Unless it
be, forsooth, that <span id="fr_5818"></span>[5819](#fn_5818) the
Creator intercalated His law for the mere purpose of <span
id="fr_5819"></span>[5820](#fn_5819) producing some employment for the
grace of a rival god, an enemy to Himself (I had almost said, a god
unknown to Him), “that as sin had” in His own dispensation <span
id="fr_5820"></span>[5821](#fn_5820) “reigned unto death, even so might
grace reign through righteousness unto (eternal) life by Jesus
Christ,” <span id="fr_5821"></span>[5822](#fn_5821) His own antagonist!
For this (I suppose it was, that) the law of the Creator had “concluded
all under sin,” <span id="fr_5822"></span>[5823](#fn_5822) and had
brought in “all the world as guilty (before God),” and had “stopped
every mouth,” <span id="fr_5823"></span>[5824](#fn_5823) so that none
could glory through it, in order that grace might be maintained to the
glory of the Christ, not of the Creator, but of Marcion! I may here
anticipate a remark about the substance of Christ, in the prospect of a
question which will now turn up. For he says that “we are dead to the
law.” <span id="fr_5824"></span>[5825](#fn_5824) It may be contended
that Christ’s body is indeed a body, but not exactly <span
id="fr_5825"></span>[5826](#fn_5825) flesh. Now, whatever may be the
substance, since he mentions “the body of Christ,” <span
id="fr_5826"></span>[5827](#fn_5826) whom he immediately after states to
have been “raised from the dead,” <span
id="fr_5827"></span>[5828](#fn_5827) none other body can be understood
than that of the flesh, <span id="fr_5828"></span>[5829](#fn_5828) in
respect of which the law was called (the law) of death. <span
id="fr_5829"></span>[5830](#fn_5829) But, behold, he bears testimony to
the law, and excuses it on the ground of sin:  “What shall we say,
therefore? Is the law sin? God forbid.” <span
id="fr_5830"></span>[5831](#fn_5830) Fie on you, Marcion. “God forbid!” 
(See how) the apostle recoils from all impeachment of the law. I,
however, have no acquaintance with sin except through the law. <span
id="fr_5831"></span>[5832](#fn_5831) But how high an encomium of the law
(do we obtain) from <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-Page_459"></span>this fact, that by it there comes to
light the latent presence of sin! <span
id="fr_5832"></span>[5833](#fn_5832) It was not the law, therefore,
which led me astray, but “sin, taking occasion by the
commandment.” <span id="fr_5833"></span>[5834](#fn_5833) Why then do
you, (O Marcion,) impute to the God of the law what His apostle dares
not impute even to the law itself? Nay, he adds a climax: “The law is
holy, and its commandment just and good.” <span
id="fr_5834"></span>[5835](#fn_5834) Now if he thus reverences the
Creator’s law, I am at a loss to know how he can destroy the Creator
Himself. Who can draw a distinction, and say that there are two gods,
one just and the other good, when He ought to be believed to be both one
and the other, whose commandment is both “*just* and *good*?” Then,
again, when affirming the law to be “spiritual” <span
id="fr_5835"></span>[5836](#fn_5835) he thereby implies that it is
prophetic, and that it is figurative. Now from even this circumstance I
am bound to conclude that Christ was predicted by the law but
figuratively, so that indeed He could not be recognised by all the Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5784"></span>[457:5785](0030459.htm#fr_5784) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p3"></span> Profligatur.

<span id="fn_5785"></span>[457:5786](0030459.htm#fr_5785) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p4"></span> Concessionem.

<span id="fn_5786"></span>[457:5787](0030459.htm#fr_5786) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p5"></span> Apud Creatorem.

<span id="fn_5787"></span>[457:5788](0030459.htm#fr_5787) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p6"></span> Excludere.

<span id="fn_5788"></span>[457:5789](0030459.htm#fr_5788) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p7"></span> [Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5789"></span>[457:5790](0030459.htm#fr_5789) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p8"></span> Utique.

<span id="fn_5790"></span>[457:5791](0030459.htm#fr_5790) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p9"></span> [Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5791"></span>[457:5792](0030459.htm#fr_5791) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p10"></span> [Rom. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5792"></span>[457:5793](0030459.htm#fr_5792) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p11"></span> Aliud est si.

<span id="fn_5793"></span>[457:5794](0030459.htm#fr_5793) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p12"></span> Nostri instrumenti.

<span id="fn_5794"></span>[457:5795](0030459.htm#fr_5794) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p13"></span> [Rom. ii.
12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5795"></span>[457:5796](0030459.htm#fr_5795) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p14"></span> Instar legis: “which is as good as a
law to them,” etc.

<span id="fn_5796"></span>[457:5797](0030459.htm#fr_5796) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p15"></span> [Rom. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5797"></span>[457:5798](0030459.htm#fr_5797) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p16"></span> [Rom. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5798"></span>[457:5799](0030459.htm#fr_5798) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p17"></span> [Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5799"></span>[457:5800](0030459.htm#fr_5799) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p18"></span> See the remarks on [Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p18.1"></span> above.

<span id="fn_5800"></span>[457:5801](0030459.htm#fr_5800) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p19"></span> [Rom. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5801"></span>[457:5802](0030459.htm#fr_5801) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p20"></span> Ut homo.

<span id="fn_5802"></span>[457:5803](0030459.htm#fr_5802) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p21"></span> [Ex. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5803"></span>[457:5804](0030459.htm#fr_5803) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p22"></span> [Ex. xx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p22.1"></span>; see above, book iv. chap. xxiv. p. 387.

<span id="fn_5804"></span>[457:5805](0030459.htm#fr_5804) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p23"></span> Scilicet verebatur.

<span id="fn_5805"></span>[457:5806](0030459.htm#fr_5805) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p24"></span> [Rom. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5806"></span>[458:5807](0030459.htm#fr_5806) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p25"></span> [Rom. ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5807"></span>[458:5808](0030459.htm#fr_5807) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p26"></span> [Jer. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5808"></span>[458:5809](0030459.htm#fr_5808) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p27"></span> [Deut. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p27.1"></span> (Sept.).

<span id="fn_5809"></span>[458:5810](0030459.htm#fr_5809) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p28"></span> Metens.

<span id="fn_5810"></span>[458:5811](0030459.htm#fr_5810) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p29"></span> [Rom. ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5811"></span>[458:5812](0030459.htm#fr_5811) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p30"></span> Tunc.

<span id="fn_5812"></span>[458:5813](0030459.htm#fr_5812) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p31"></span> [Rom.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5813"></span>[458:5814](0030459.htm#fr_5813) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32"></span> Tertullian, by the word “*enjoins*”
(monet), seems to have read the passage in [Rom. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.1"></span>
in the hortatory sense with <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.2"></span>ἔχωμεν</span>, “*let us have* peace with
God.” If so, his authority must be added to that exceedingly strong
<span class="sc"><span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.4"></span>ms.</span>
authority which Dean Alford (*Greek Test. in loc.*) regrets to find
overpowering the received reading of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.5"></span>ἔχομεν</span>, “*we have*,” etc. We
subjoin Alford’s critical note in support of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.6"></span>ἔχωμεν</span>, which
(with Lachmann) he yet admits into his more recent text: “AB
(originally) CDKLfh (originally) m 17 latt (including F-lat); of the
versions the older Syriac (Peschito) (and Copt;of the fathers,
Chrysostom, Cyril, Theodoret, Damascene, Thephylact, Œcumenius, Rufinus,
Pelagius, Orosius, Augustine, Cassiodorus,” before whom I would insert
Tertullian, and the *Codex Sinaiticus*, in its original state; although,
like its great rival in authority, the *Codex Vaticanus*, it afterwards
received the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.7"></span>ἔχομεν</span>. These second readings of
these <span class="sc"><span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.9"></span>mss.</span>,
and the later Syriac (Philoxenian), with Epiphanius, Didymus, and
Sedulius, are the almost only authorities quoted for the received text. 
\[Dr. H. over-estimates the “rival” *Codices*.\]

<span id="fn_5814"></span>[458:5815](0030459.htm#fr_5814) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p32.10"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p33"></span> Nusquam.

<span id="fn_5815"></span>[458:5816](0030459.htm#fr_5815) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p34"></span> Ejus.

<span id="fn_5816"></span>[458:5817](0030459.htm#fr_5816) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p35"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5817"></span>[458:5818](0030459.htm#fr_5817) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p36"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5818"></span>[458:5819](0030459.htm#fr_5818) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p37"></span> Nisi si: an ironical particle.

<span id="fn_5819"></span>[458:5820](0030459.htm#fr_5819) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p38"></span> Ideo ut.

<span id="fn_5820"></span>[458:5821](0030459.htm#fr_5820) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p39"></span> Apud ipsum.

<span id="fn_5821"></span>[458:5822](0030459.htm#fr_5821) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p40"></span> [Rom. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5822"></span>[458:5823](0030459.htm#fr_5822) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p41"></span> [Gal. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5823"></span>[458:5824](0030459.htm#fr_5823) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p42"></span> [Rom. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5824"></span>[458:5825](0030459.htm#fr_5824) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p43"></span> [Rom.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004), [Gal.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p43.1"></span>. This (although a quotation) is here a
Marcionite argument; but there is no need to suppose, with Pamelius,
that Marcion tampers with [Rom. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p43.2"></span>. Oehler also supposes that this is the
passage quoted. But no doubt it is a correct quotation from the *seventh
chapter*, as we have indicated.

<span id="fn_5825"></span>[458:5826](0030459.htm#fr_5825) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p44"></span> Statim (or, perhaps, in respect of
the derivation), “firmly” or “stedfastly.”

<span id="fn_5826"></span>[458:5827](0030459.htm#fr_5826) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p45"></span> Ejus.

<span id="fn_5827"></span>[458:5828](0030459.htm#fr_5827) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p46"></span> [Rom. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5828"></span>[458:5829](0030459.htm#fr_5828) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p47"></span> In this argument Tertullian applies
with good effect the terms “flesh” and “body,” making the first \[which
he elsewhere calls the “*terrena materia*” of our nature (*ad Uxor.* i.
4)\] the proof of the reality of the second, in opposition to Marcion’s
*Docetic* error. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p47.1"></span>Σὰρξ</span> is not = <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p47.2"></span>σῶμα</span>, but as
in [John i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p47.3"></span>, the *material* of which man is in the
body compounded” (Alford).

<span id="fn_5829"></span>[458:5830](0030459.htm#fr_5829) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p47.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p48"></span> Compare the [Rom.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004), [Rom.
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5830"></span>[458:5831](0030459.htm#fr_5830) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p49"></span> [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5831"></span>[458:5832](0030459.htm#fr_5831) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p50"></span> This, which is really the second
clause of [Rom. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p50.1"></span>, seems to be here put as a Marcionite
argument of disparagement to the law.

<span id="fn_5832"></span>[459:5833](0030459.htm#fr_5832) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p51"></span> Per quam liquuit delictum latere: a
playful paradox, in the manner of our author, between *liquere* and
*latere*.

<span id="fn_5833"></span>[459:5834](0030459.htm#fr_5833) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p52"></span> [Rom. vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5834"></span>[459:5835](0030459.htm#fr_5834) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p53"></span> [Rom. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5835"></span>[459:5836](0030459.htm#fr_5835) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p54"></span> [Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xiii-p54.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Power Shown in Christ's Incarnation. Meaning of St.
Paul's Phrase. Likeness of Sinful Flesh. No Docetism in It. Resurrection
of Our Real Bodies. A Wide Chasm Made in the Epistle by Marcion's
Erasure. When the Jews are Upbraided by the Apostle for Their Misconduct
to God; Inasmuch as that God Was the Creator, a Proof is in Fact Given
that St. Paul's God Was the Creator. The Precepts at the End of the
Epistle, Which Marcion Allowed, Shown to Be in Exact Accordance with the
Creator's Scriptures.](0030460)
