[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030679)  [Next](0030681) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p4"></span>(Sundry doctrinal statements of
Tertullian. See p. 601 (*et seqq*.), *supra*.)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p5"></span>I am glad for many reasons that Dr.
Holmes appends the following from Bishop Kaye’s Account of the Writings
of Tertullian:

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p6"></span>“On the doctrine of the blessed
Trinity, in order to explain his meaning Tertullian borrows
illustrations from natural objects. The three Persons of the Trinity
stand to each other in the relation of the root, the shrub, and the
fruit; of the fountain, the river, and the cut from the river; of the
sun, the ray, and the terminating point of the ray. For these
illustrations he professes himself indebted to the Revelations of the
Paraclete. In later times, divines have occasionally resorted to similar
illustrations for the purpose of familiarizing the doctrine of the
Trinity to the mind; nor can any danger arise from the proceeding, so
long as we <span id="page_629">p. 629</span> <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-Page_629"></span>recollect that they are illustrations,
not arguments—that we must not draw conclusions from them, or think that
whatever may be truly predicated of the illustrations, may be predicated
with equal truth of that which it was designed to illustrate.”

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p7"></span>“‘Notwithstanding, however, the
intimate union which subsists between the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
we must be careful,’ says Tertullian, ‘to distinguish between their
Persons.’ In his representations of this distinction he sometimes uses
expressions which in after times, when controversy had introduced
greater precision of language, were studiously avoided by the orthodox.
Thus he calls the Father the whole substance—the Son a derivation from
or portion of the whole.” <span id="fr_8203"></span>[8204](#fn_8203)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p9"></span>“After showing that Tertullian’s
opinions were generally coincident with the orthodox belief of the
Christian Church on the great subject of the Trinity in Unity, Bp. Kaye
goes on to say: ‘We are far from meaning to assert that expressions may
not occasionally be found which are capable of a different
interpretation, and which were carefully avoided by the orthodox writers
of later times, when the controversies respecting the Trinity had
introduced greater precision of language.’ Pamelius thought it necessary
to put the reader on his guard against certain of these expressions; and
Semler has noticed, with a sort of ill-natured industry (we call it
*ill-natured industry*, because the true mode of ascertaining a writer’s
opinions is, not to fix upon particular expressions, but to take the
general tenor of his language), every passage in the Tract against
Praxeas in which there is any appearance of contradiction, or which will
bear a construction favourable to the Arian tenets. Bp. Bull also, who
conceives the language of Tertullian to be explicit and correct on the
subject of the pre-existence and the consubstantiality, admits that he
occasionally uses expressions at variance with the co-eternity of
Christ. For instance, in the Tract against Hermogenes, <span
id="fr_8204"></span>[8205](#fn_8204) we find a passage in which it is
expressly asserted that there was a time when the Son was not. Perhaps,
however, a reference to the peculiar tenets of Hermogenes will enable us
to account for this assertion. That heretic affirmed that matter was
eternal, and argued thus:  ‘God was always God, and always Lord; but the
word Lord implies the existence of something over which He was Lord. 
Unless, therefore, we suppose the eternity of something distinct from
God, it is not true that He was always Lord.’  Tertullian boldly
answered, that God was not always Lord; and that in Scripture we do not
find Him called Lord until the work of creation was completed. In like
manner, he contended that the titles of *Judge* and *Father* imply the
existence of *sin*, and of a *Son*. As, therefore, there was a time when
neither sin nor the Son existed, the titles of Judge and Father were not
at that time applicable to God.  Tertullian could scarcely mean to
affirm (in direct opposition to his own statements in the Tract against
Praxeas) that there was ever a time when the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>λόγος</span>, or *Ratio*, or *Sermo
Internus*did not exist. But with respect to *Wisdom* and the *Son*
(*Sophia* and *Filius*) the case is different. Tertullian assigns to
both a beginning of existence: Sophia was created or formed in order to
devise the plan of the universe; and the Son was begotten in order to
carry that plan into effect. Bp. Bull appears to have given an accurate
representation of the matter, when he says that, according to our
author, the Reason and Spirit of God, being the substance of the Word
and Son, were co-eternal with God; but that the *titles* of Word and Son
were not strictly applicable until the former had been emitted to
arrange, and the latter begotten to execute, the work of creation. 
Without, therefore, attempting to explain, much less to defend, all
Tertullian’s expressions and reasonings, we are disposed to acquiesce in
the statement given by Bp. Bull of his opinions (*Defence of the Nicene
Creed*, sec. iii. ch. x. (p. 545 of the Oxford translation)): ‘From all
this it is clear how rashly, as usual, Petavius has pronounced that,
“*so far as relates to the eternity* <span id="page_630">p. 630</span>
<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-Page_630"></span>*of the Word, it is manifest that
Tertullian did not by any means acknowledge it*.”’ To myself, indeed,
and as I suppose to my reader also, after the many clear testimonies
which I have adduced, the very opposite is manifest, unless indeed
Petavius played on the term, *the Word*, which I will not suppose. For
Tertullian does indeed teach that the Son of God was made and was called
the Word (*Verbum* or *Sermo*) from some definite beginning, *i.e.* at
the time when He went out from God the Father with the voice, ‘Let there
be light’ in order to arrange the universe. But, for all that, that he
really believed that the very hypostasis which is called the Word and
Son of God is eternal, I have, I think, abundantly demonstrated.” (The
whole of Bp. Bull’s remark is worth considering; it occurs in the
translation just referred to, pp. 508–545.)—(Pp. 521–525.)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p11"></span>“In speaking also of the Holy Ghost,
Tertullian occasionally uses terms of a very ambiguous and equivocal
character. He says, for instance (*Adversus Praxean*, c. xii.), that in
[Gen. i. 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>, God addressed the Son, His Word (the
Second Person in the Trinity), and *the Spirit in the Word* (the Third
Person of the Trinity). Here the distinct personality of the Spirit is
expressly asserted; although it is difficult to reconcile Tertullian’s
words, ‘Spiritus in Sermone,’ with the assertion. It is, however,
certain both from the general tenor of the Tract against Praxeas, and
from many passages in his other writings (for instance, *Ad Martyras*,
iii.), that the distinct personality of the Holy Ghost formed an article
of Tertullian’s creed. The occasional ambiguity of his language
respecting the Holy Ghost is perhaps in part to be traced to the variety
of senses in which the term ‘*Spiritus*’ is used. It is applied
generally to God, for ‘God is a Spirit’ (*Adv. Marcionem*, ii. 9); and
for the same reason to the Son, who is frequently called ‘the Spirit of
God,’ and ‘the Spirit of the Creator’ (*De Oratione*, i.; *Adv.
Praxean*, xiv., xxvi.; *Adv. Marcionem*, v. 8; *Apolog.* xxiii.; *Adv.
Marcionem*, iii. 6, iv. 33). Bp. Bull likewise (*Defence of the Nicene
Creed*, i. 2), following Grotius, has shown that the word ‘*Spiritus*’
is employed by the fathers to express the divine nature in Christ.”—(Pp.
525, 526.)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p12"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p13"></span>(The bishop of Rome, cap. i. p. 597.)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p14"></span>Probably Victor (<span
class="sc"><span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>a.d.</span> 190), who is
elsewhere called Victor*inus*, as Oehler conjectures, by a blunderer who
tacked the *inus* to his name, because he was thinking of Zephyr*inus*,
his immediate successor. This Victor “acknowledged the prophetic gifts
of Montanus,” and kept up communion with the Phrygian churches that
adopted them: but worse than that, he now seems to have patronized the
Patri-passion heresy, under the compulsion of Praxeas. So Tertullian
says, who certainly had no idea that the Bishop of Rome was the
infallible judge of controversies, when he recorded the facts of this
strange history. Thus, we find the very founder of “Latin Christianity,”
accusing a contemporary Bishop of Rome of heresy and the patronage of
heresy, in two particulars.  Our earliest acquaintance with that See
presents us with Polycarp’s superior authority, at Rome itself, in
maintaining apostolic doctrine and suppressing heresy. “He it was, who
coming to Rome,” says Irenæus, <span
id="fr_8205"></span>[8206](#fn_8205) “in the time of Anicetus, caused
many to turn away from the aforesaid heretics (viz. Valentinus and
Marcion) to the Church of God, proclaiming that *he had received* this
one and sole truth *from the Apostles*.” Anicetus was a pious prelate
who never dreamed of asserting a superior claim as the chief depositary
of Apostolic orthodoxy, and whose beautiful example in the
Easter-questions discussed between Polycarp and himself, is another
illustration of the independence of the sister churches, at that
period. <span id="fr_8206"></span>[8207](#fn_8206) Nor is it unworthy to
be noted, that the next event, in Western history, establishes a like
principle against that other and <span id="page_631">p. 631</span> <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-Page_631"></span>less worthy occupant of the Roman See,
of whom we have spoken.  Irenæus rebukes Victor for his dogmatism about
Easter, and reproaches him with departing from the example of his
predecessors in the same See. <span id="fr_8207"></span>[8208](#fn_8207)
With Eleutherus he had previously remonstrated, though mildly, for his
toleration of heresy and his patronage of the raising schism of
Montanus. <span id="fr_8208"></span>[8209](#fn_8208)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p19"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p20"></span>(These three are one, cap. xxv. p.
621. Also p. 606.)

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p21"></span>Porson having spoken Pontifically upon
the matter of the text of “the Three Witnesses,” *cadit quæstio, locutus
est Augur Apollo*. It is of more importance that Bishop Kaye in his calm
wisdom, remarks as follows; <span id="fr_8209"></span>[8210](#fn_8209)
“In my opinion, the passage in Tertullian, far from containing an
allusion to [1 John v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)<span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>, furnishes most decisive proof that he
knew nothing of the verse.”  After this, and the acquiescence of
scholars generally, it would be presumption to say a word on the
question of quoting it as Scripture. In Textual Criticism it seems to be
an established canon that it has no place in the Greek Testament. I
submit, however, that, something remains to be said for it, on the
ground of the old African Version used and quoted by Tertullian and
Cyprian; and I dare to say, that, while there would be no ground
whatever for *inserting it* in our English Version, the question of
*striking it out* is a widely different one. It would be sacrilege, in
my humble opinion, for reasons which will appear, in the following
remarks, upon our author.

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p23"></span>It appears to me very clear that
Tertullian is quoting [1 John v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p23.1"></span>
in the passage now under consideration: “*Qui tres unum sunt,* non unus,
quomodo dictum est, Ego et Pater unum sumus, *etc*.” Let me refer to a
work containing a sufficient answer to Porson, on this point of
Tertullian’s quotation, which it is easier to pass *sub-silentio*, than
to refute. I mean Forster’s *New Plea*, of which the full title is
placed in the margin. <span id="fr_8210"></span>[8211](#fn_8210) The
whole work is worth thoughtful study, but, I name it with reference to
this important passage of our author, exclusively. In connection with
other considerations on which I have no right to enlarge in this place,
it satisfies me as to the primitive origin of the text in the Vulgate,
and hence of its right to stand in our English Vulgate until it can be
shewn that the Septuagint Version, quoted and honoured by our Lord, is
free from similar readings, and divergences from the Hebrew <span
class="sc"><span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p25"></span>Stated as a mere question as to the
early African Church, <span id="fr_8211"></span>[8212](#fn_8211) the
various versions known as the *Itala*, and the right of the Latin and
English Vulgates to remain as they are, the whole question is a fresh
one. Let me be pardoned for saying: (1) that I am not pleading for it as
a proof-text of the Trinity, having never once quoted it as such in a
long ministry, during which I have preached nearly a hundred
Trinity-Sunday Sermons; (2) that I consider it as practically
Apocryphal, and hence as coming under St. Jerome’s law, and being
useless to establish doctrine; and (3) that I feel no need of it, owing
to the wealth of Scripture on the same subject. Tertullian, himself says
that he cites “only a few out of many texts—not pretending to bring up
all the passages of Scripture…having produced an accumulation of
witnesses in the fulness of their dignity and authority.”

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p27"></span>To those interested in the question
let me commend the learned dissertation of Grabe on the textual case, as
it stood in his day. <span id="fr_8212"></span>[8213](#fn_8212) I value
it chiefly because it proves that the Greek Testament, elsewhere says,
*disjointedly*, what is collected into [1 John v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p28.1"></span>.
It is, therefore, Holy Scripture in substance, if not in the letter.
What seems to me important, how<span id="page_632">p. 632</span> <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-Page_632"></span>ever, is the balance it gives to the
whole context, and the defective character of the grammar and logic, if
it be stricken out. In the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate of the Old
Testament we have a precisely similar case. Refer to [Psa.
xiii](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#000)<span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p28.2"></span>., alike in the Latin and the Greek, as
compared with our English Version. <span
id="fr_8213"></span>[8214](#fn_8213) Between the third and fourth
verses, three whole verses are interpolated: Shall we strike them out?
Of course, if certain critics are to prevail over St. Paul, for he
quotes them ([Rom. iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)<span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p29.1"></span>) with the formula: “As it is written.”
Now, then, till we expurgate the English Version of the Epistle to the
Romans,—or rather the original of St. Paul himself, I employ Grabe’s
argument only to prove my point, which is this, viz., that [1 John v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p29.2"></span>
being Scripture, ought to be left untouched in the Versions where it
stands, although it be no part of the Greek Testament.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8203"></span>[629:8204](0030680.htm#fr_8203) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p8"></span> Kaye, pp. 504–596.

<span id="fn_8204"></span>[629:8205](0030680.htm#fr_8204) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p10"></span> Ch. iii. compared with ch. xviii.

<span id="fn_8205"></span>[630:8206](0030680.htm#fr_8205) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p15"></span> Vol. i. p. 416, this Series.

<span id="fn_8206"></span>[630:8207](0030680.htm#fr_8206) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p16"></span> Vol. I. p. 569, this Series.

<span id="fn_8207"></span>[631:8208](0030680.htm#fr_8207) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p17"></span> Eusebius, B.V. cap. 24. Refer also to
preceding note, and to Vol. I. p. 310, this Series.

<span id="fn_8208"></span>[631:8209](0030680.htm#fr_8208) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p18"></span> Vol. II. pp. 3 and 4, this Series,
also, Eusebius, B.V. Cap. iii.

<span id="fn_8209"></span>[631:8210](0030680.htm#fr_8209) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p22"></span> p. 516.

<span id="fn_8210"></span>[631:8211](0030680.htm#fr_8210) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p24"></span> “A New Plea for the Authenticity of
the text of the *Three Heavenly Witnesses*: or, Porson’s Letters to
Travis eclectically examined, etc. etc. By the Rev. Charles Forster,
etc.” Cambridge, Deighton, Bell & Co., and London, Bell & Daldy, 1867.

<span id="fn_8211"></span>[631:8212](0030680.htm#fr_8211) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p26"></span> See Milman, *Hist. Lat. Christ.*, i.
p. 29.

<span id="fn_8212"></span>[631:8213](0030680.htm#fr_8212) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p28"></span> See Bull’s Works, Vol. V., p. 381.

<span id="fn_8213"></span>[632:8214](0030680.htm#fr_8213) <span
id="v.ix.xxxiii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxxiii-p29"></span> Where it is Psalm XIV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scorpiace.](0030681)
