[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030408)  [Next](0030410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.x"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Further Proofs of the Same Truth in
the Same Chapter, from the Healing of the Paralytic, and from the
Designation Son of Man Which Jesus Gives Himself. Tertullian Sustains
His Argument by Several Quotations from the Prophets.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p2"></span>The sick of the palsy is healed, <span
id="fr_3760"></span>[3761](#fn_3760) and that in public, in the sight of
the people.  For, says Isaiah, “they shall see the glory of the Lord,
and the excellency of our God.” <span
id="fr_3761"></span>[3762](#fn_3761) What glory, and what excellency?
“Be strong, ye weak hands, and ye feeble knees:” <span
id="fr_3762"></span>[3763](#fn_3762) this refers to the palsy. “Be
strong; fear not.” <span id="fr_3763"></span>[3764](#fn_3763) *Be
strong* is not vainly repeated, nor is *fear not* vainly added; because
with the <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.x-Page_358"></span>renewal of the limbs there was to be,
according to the promise, a restoration also of bodily energies: “Arise,
and take up thy couch;” and likewise moral courage <span
id="fr_3764"></span>[3765](#fn_3764) not to be afraid of those who
should say, “Who can forgive sins, but God alone?” So that you have here
not only the fulfilment of the prophecy which promised a particular kind
of healing, but also of the symptoms which followed the cure.  In like
manner, you should also recognise Christ in the same prophet as the
forgiver of sins. “For,” he says, “He shall remit to many their sins,
and shall Himself take away our sins.” <span
id="fr_3765"></span>[3766](#fn_3765) For in an earlier passage, speaking
in the person of the Lord himself, he had said:  “Even though your sins
be as scarlet, I will make them as white as snow; even though they be
like crimson, I will whiten them as wool.” <span
id="fr_3766"></span>[3767](#fn_3766) In the scarlet colour He indicates
the blood of the prophets; in the crimson, that of the Lord, as the
brighter. Concerning the forgiveness of sins, Micah also says: “Who is a
God like unto Thee? pardoning iniquity, and passing by the
transgressions of the remnant of Thine heritage. He retaineth not His
anger as a testimony *against them*, because He delighteth in mercy. He
will turn again, and will have compassion upon us; He wipeth away our
iniquities, and casteth our sins into the depths of the sea.” <span
id="fr_3767"></span>[3768](#fn_3767) Now, if nothing of this sort had
been predicted of Christ, I should find in the Creator examples of such
a benignity as would hold out to me the promise of similar affections
also in the Son of whom He is the Father. I see how the Ninevites
obtained forgiveness of their sins from the Creator <span
id="fr_3768"></span>[3769](#fn_3768) —not to say from Christ, even then,
because from the beginning He acted in the Father’s name. I read, too,
how that, when David acknowledged his sin against Uriah, the prophet
Nathan said unto him, “The Lord hath cancelled <span
id="fr_3769"></span>[3770](#fn_3769) thy sin, and thou shalt not
die;” <span id="fr_3770"></span>[3771](#fn_3770) how king Ahab in like
manner, the husband of Jezebel, guilty of idolatry and of the blood of
Naboth, obtained pardon because of his repentance; <span
id="fr_3771"></span>[3772](#fn_3771) and how Jonathan the son of Saul
blotted out by his deprecation the guilt of a violated fast. <span
id="fr_3772"></span>[3773](#fn_3772) Why should I recount the frequent
restoration of the nation itself after the forgiveness of their sins?—by
that God, indeed, who will have mercy rather than sacrifice, and a
sinner’s repentance rather than his death. <span
id="fr_3773"></span>[3774](#fn_3773) You will first have to deny that
the Creator ever forgave sins; then you must in reason show <span
id="fr_3774"></span>[3775](#fn_3774) that He never ordained any such
prerogative for His Christ; and so you will prove how novel is that
boasted <span id="fr_3775"></span>[3776](#fn_3775) benevolence of the,
of course, novel Christ when you shall have proved that it is neither
compatible with <span id="fr_3776"></span>[3777](#fn_3776) the Creator
nor predicted by the Creator.  But whether to remit sins can appertain
to one who is said to be unable to retain them, and whether to absolve
can belong to him who is incompetent even to condemn, and whether to
forgive is suitable to him against whom no offence can be committed, are
questions which we have encountered elsewhere, <span
id="fr_3777"></span>[3778](#fn_3777) when we preferred to drop
suggestions <span id="fr_3778"></span>[3779](#fn_3778) rather than treat
them anew. <span id="fr_3779"></span>[3780](#fn_3779) Concerning the Son
of man our rule <span id="fr_3780"></span>[3781](#fn_3780) is a twofold
one: that Christ cannot lie, so as to declare Himself the Son of man, if
He be not truly so; nor can He be constituted the Son of man, unless He
be born of a human parent, either father or mother. And then the
discussion will turn on the point, of which human parent He ought to be
accounted the son—of the father or the mother?  Since He is (begotten)
of God the Father, He is not, of course, (the son) of a human father. If
He is not of a human father, it follows that He must be (the son) of a
human mother. If of a human mother, it is evident that she must be a
virgin. For to whom a human father is not ascribed, to his mother a
husband will not be reckoned; and then to what mother a husband is not
reckoned, the condition of virginity belongs. <span
id="fr_3781"></span>[3782](#fn_3781) But if His mother be not a virgin,
two fathers will have to be reckoned to Him—a divine and a human one.
For she must have a husband, not to be a virgin; and by having a
husband, she would cause two fathers—one divine, the other human—to
accrue to Him, who would thus be Son both of God and of a man. Such a
nativity (if one may call it so) <span
id="fr_3782"></span>[3783](#fn_3782) the mythic stories assign to Castor
or to Hercules. Now, if this distinction be observed, that is to say, if
He be Son of man as born of His mother, because not begotten of a
father, and His mother be a virgin, because His father is not human—He
will be that Christ whom Isaiah foretold that a virgin should
conceive, <span id="fr_3783"></span>[3784](#fn_3783) on what principle
you, Marcion, can admit Him Son of man, I <span id="page_359">p.
359</span> <span id="v.iv.v.x-Page_359"></span>cannot possibly see. If
through a human father, then you deny him to be Son of God; if through a
divine one *also*, <span id="fr_3784"></span>[3785](#fn_3784) then you
make Christ the Hercules of fable; if through a human mother only, then
you concede my point; if not through a human father *also*, <span
id="fr_3785"></span>[3786](#fn_3785) then He is not the son of any
man, <span id="fr_3786"></span>[3787](#fn_3786) and He must have been
guilty of a lie for having declared Himself to be what He was not. One
thing alone can help you in your difficulty: boldness on your part
either to surname your God as actually the human father of Christ, as
Valentinus did <span id="fr_3787"></span>[3788](#fn_3787) with his Æon;
or else to deny that the Virgin was human, which even Valentinus did not
do. What now, if Christ be described <span
id="fr_3788"></span>[3789](#fn_3788) in Daniel by this very title of
“Son of man?”  Is not this enough to prove that He is the Christ of
prophecy? For if He gives Himself that appellation which was provided in
the prophecy for the Christ of the Creator, He undoubtedly offers
Himself to be understood as Him to whom (the appellation) was assigned
by the prophet. But perhaps <span id="fr_3789"></span>[3790](#fn_3789)
it can be regarded as a simple identity of names; <span
id="fr_3790"></span>[3791](#fn_3790) and yet we have maintained <span
id="fr_3791"></span>[3792](#fn_3791) that neither Christ nor Jesus ought
to have been called by these names, if they possessed any condition of
diversity.  But as regards the appellation “Son of man,” in *as* far as
it occurs by accident, <span id="fr_3792"></span>[3793](#fn_3792) in
*so* far there is a difficulty in its occurrence along with <span
id="fr_3793"></span>[3794](#fn_3793) a casual identity of names. For it
is of pure <span id="fr_3794"></span>[3795](#fn_3794) accident,
especially when the same cause does not appear <span
id="fr_3795"></span>[3796](#fn_3795) whereby the identity may be
occasioned.  And therefore, if Marcion’s Christ be also said to be born
of man, then he too would receive an identical appellation, and there
would be two Sons of man, as also two Christs and two Jesuses. 
Therefore, since the appellation is the sole right of Him in whom it has
a suitable reason, <span id="fr_3796"></span>[3797](#fn_3796) if it be
claimed for another in whom there is an identity of name, but not of
appellation, <span id="fr_3797"></span>[3798](#fn_3797) then the
identity of name even looks suspicious in him for whom is claimed
without reason the identity of appellation.  And it follows that He must
be believed to be One and the Same, who is found to be the more fit to
receive both the name and the appellation; while the other is excluded,
who has no right to the appellation, because he has no reason to show
for it. Nor will any other be better entitled to both than He who is the
earlier, and has had allotted to Him the name of Christ and the
appellation of Son of man, even the Jesus of the Creator. It was He who
was seen by the king of Babylon in the furnace with His martyrs: “the
fourth, who was like the Son of man.” <span
id="fr_3798"></span>[3799](#fn_3798) He also was revealed to Daniel
himself expressly as “the Son of man, coming in the clouds of heaven” as
a Judge, as also the Scripture shows. <span
id="fr_3799"></span>[3800](#fn_3799) What I have advanced might have
been sufficient concerning the designation in prophecy of the Son of
man. But the Scripture offers me further information, even in the
interpretation of the Lord Himself. For when the Jews, who looked at Him
as merely man, and were not yet sure that He was God also, as being
likewise the Son of God, rightly enough said that a man could not
forgive sins, but God alone, why did He not, following up their
point <span id="fr_3800"></span>[3801](#fn_3800) about *man*, answer
them, that He <span id="fr_3801"></span>[3802](#fn_3801) had power to
remit sins; inasmuch as, when He mentioned the Son of man, He also named
a human being? except it were because He wanted, by help of the very
designation “Son of man” from the book of Daniel, so to induce them to
reflect <span id="fr_3802"></span>[3803](#fn_3802) as to show them that
He who remitted sins was God and man—that only Son of man, indeed, in
the prophecy of Daniel, who had obtained the power of judging, and
thereby, of course, of forgiving sins likewise (for He who judges also
absolves); so that, when once that objection of theirs <span
id="fr_3803"></span>[3804](#fn_3803) was shattered to pieces by their
recollection of Scripture, they might the more easily acknowledge Him to
be the Son of man Himself by His own actual forgiveness of sins. I make
one more observation, <span id="fr_3804"></span>[3805](#fn_3804) how
that He has nowhere as yet professed Himself to be the Son of God—but
for the first time in this passage, in which for the first time He has
remitted sins; that is, in which for the first time He has used His
function of *judgment*, by the absolution. All that the opposite side
has to allege in argument against these things, (I beg you) carefully
weigh <span id="fr_3805"></span>[3806](#fn_3805) what it amounts to. For
it must needs strain itself to such a pitch of infatuation as, on the
one hand, to maintain that (their Christ) is also Son of man, in order
to save Him from the charge of falsehood; and, on the other hand, to
deny that He was born of woman, lest they grant <span id="page_360">p.
360</span> <span id="v.iv.v.x-Page_360"></span>that He was the Virgin’s
son.  Since, however, the divine authority and the nature of the case,
and common sense, do not admit this insane position of the heretics, we
have here the opportunity of putting in a veto <span
id="fr_3806"></span>[3807](#fn_3806) in the briefest possible terms, *on
the substance of Christ’s body*, against Marcion’s phantoms. Since He is
born of man, being the Son of man. He is body derived from body. <span
id="fr_3807"></span>[3808](#fn_3807) You may, I assure you, <span
id="fr_3808"></span>[3809](#fn_3808) more easily find a man born without
a heart or without brains, like Marcion himself, than without a body,
like Marcion’s Christ. And let this be the limit to your examination of
the heart, or, at any rate, the brains of the heretic of Pontus. <span
id="fr_3809"></span>[3810](#fn_3809)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3760"></span>[357:3761](0030409.htm#fr_3760) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p3"></span> [Luke v.
16-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3761"></span>[357:3762](0030409.htm#fr_3761) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p4"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3762"></span>[357:3763](0030409.htm#fr_3762) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p5"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p5.1"></span> in
an altered form.

<span id="fn_3763"></span>[357:3764](0030409.htm#fr_3763) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p6"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3764"></span>[358:3765](0030409.htm#fr_3764) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p7"></span> Animi vigorem.

<span id="fn_3765"></span>[358:3766](0030409.htm#fr_3765) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p8"></span> This seems to be [Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p8.1"></span>,
last clause.

<span id="fn_3766"></span>[358:3767](0030409.htm#fr_3766) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p9"></span> [Isa. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3767"></span>[358:3768](0030409.htm#fr_3767) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p10"></span> [Mic.
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3768"></span>[358:3769](0030409.htm#fr_3768) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p11"></span> [Jonah iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3769"></span>[358:3770](0030409.htm#fr_3769) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p12"></span> Circumduxit.

<span id="fn_3770"></span>[358:3771](0030409.htm#fr_3770) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p13"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3771"></span>[358:3772](0030409.htm#fr_3771) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p14"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3772"></span>[358:3773](0030409.htm#fr_3772) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p15"></span> Resignati jejunii. See [1 Sam. xiv.
43-45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#043)<span
id="v.iv.v.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3773"></span>[358:3774](0030409.htm#fr_3773) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p16"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3774"></span>[358:3775](0030409.htm#fr_3774) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p17"></span> Consequens est ut ostendas.

<span id="fn_3775"></span>[358:3776](0030409.htm#fr_3775) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p18"></span> Istam.

<span id="fn_3776"></span>[358:3777](0030409.htm#fr_3776) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p19"></span> Parem.

<span id="fn_3777"></span>[358:3778](0030409.htm#fr_3777) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p20"></span> See book i. chap. xxvi.–xxviii.

<span id="fn_3778"></span>[358:3779](0030409.htm#fr_3778) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p21"></span> Admonere.

<span id="fn_3779"></span>[358:3780](0030409.htm#fr_3779) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p22"></span> Retractare: give a set treatise about
them.

<span id="fn_3780"></span>[358:3781](0030409.htm#fr_3780) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p23"></span> Præscriptio.

<span id="fn_3781"></span>[358:3782](0030409.htm#fr_3781) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p24"></span> To secure *terseness* in the premisses,
we are obliged to lengthen out the brief terms of the conclusion, *virgo
est*.

<span id="fn_3782"></span>[358:3783](0030409.htm#fr_3782) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p25"></span> Si forte.

<span id="fn_3783"></span>[358:3784](0030409.htm#fr_3783) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p26"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3784"></span>[359:3785](0030409.htm#fr_3784) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p26.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p27"></span> Si et Dei.

<span id="fn_3785"></span>[359:3786](0030409.htm#fr_3785) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p28"></span> Si neque patris.

<span id="fn_3786"></span>[359:3787](0030409.htm#fr_3786) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p29"></span> On Marcion’s principles, it must be
remembered.

<span id="fn_3787"></span>[359:3788](0030409.htm#fr_3787) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p30"></span> Compare T.’s treatise, *Adversus
Valentinianos*, chap. xii.

<span id="fn_3788"></span>[359:3789](0030409.htm#fr_3788) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p31"></span> Censentur.

<span id="fn_3789"></span>[359:3790](0030409.htm#fr_3789) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p32"></span> Si forte.

<span id="fn_3790"></span>[359:3791](0030409.htm#fr_3790) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p33"></span> Nominum communio simplex.

<span id="fn_3791"></span>[359:3792](0030409.htm#fr_3791) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p34"></span> Defendimus. See above, book iii. chap.
xv. xvi.

<span id="fn_3792"></span>[359:3793](0030409.htm#fr_3792) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p35"></span> Ex accidenti obvenit.

<span id="fn_3793"></span>[359:3794](0030409.htm#fr_3793) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p36"></span> Super.

<span id="fn_3794"></span>[359:3795](0030409.htm#fr_3794) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p37"></span> Proprio.

<span id="fn_3795"></span>[359:3796](0030409.htm#fr_3795) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p38"></span> Non convenit.

<span id="fn_3796"></span>[359:3797](0030409.htm#fr_3796) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p39"></span> Causam.

<span id="fn_3797"></span>[359:3798](0030409.htm#fr_3797) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p40"></span> The context explains the difference
between *nomen* and *appellatio*. The former refers to the name *Jesus*
or *Christ*, the latter to the designation *Son of man*.

<span id="fn_3798"></span>[359:3799](0030409.htm#fr_3798) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p41"></span> [Dan. iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3799"></span>[359:3800](0030409.htm#fr_3799) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p42"></span> [Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span id="v.iv.v.x-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3800"></span>[359:3801](0030409.htm#fr_3800) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p43"></span> Secundum intentionem eorum.

<span id="fn_3801"></span>[359:3802](0030409.htm#fr_3801) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p44"></span> Eum: that is, *man*.

<span id="fn_3802"></span>[359:3803](0030409.htm#fr_3802) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p45"></span> Repercutere.

<span id="fn_3803"></span>[359:3804](0030409.htm#fr_3803) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p46"></span> Scandalo isto.

<span id="fn_3804"></span>[359:3805](0030409.htm#fr_3804) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p47"></span> Denique.

<span id="fn_3805"></span>[359:3806](0030409.htm#fr_3805) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p48"></span> Dispice.

<span id="fn_3806"></span>[360:3807](0030409.htm#fr_3806) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p49"></span> Interpellandi.

<span id="fn_3807"></span>[360:3808](0030409.htm#fr_3807) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p50"></span> Corpus ex corpore.

<span id="fn_3808"></span>[360:3809](0030409.htm#fr_3808) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p51"></span> Plane: introducing the sharp irony.

<span id="fn_3809"></span>[360:3810](0030409.htm#fr_3809) <span
id="v.iv.v.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.x-p52"></span> This is perhaps the best sense of T.’s
sarcasm: “Atque adeo (*thus far*) inspice cor Pontici aut (*or else*)
cerebrum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Call of Levi the Publican. Christ in Relation to the Baptist.
Christ as the Bridegroom. The Parable of the Old Wine and the New.
Arguments Connecting Christ with the Creator.](0030410)
