[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030135)  [Next](0030137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p2"></span>We who are without fear ourselves are not
seeking to frighten you, but we would save all men if possible by
warning them not to fight with God. <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) You may perform the duties of your
charge, and yet remember the claims of humanity; if on no other ground
than that you are liable to punishment yourself, (you ought to do so).
For is not your commission simply to condemn those who confess their
guilt, and to give over to the torture those <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv-Page_107"></span>who deny? You see, then,
how you trespass yourselves against your instructions to wring from the
confessing a denial. It is, in fact, an acknowledgment of our innocence
that you refuse to condemn us at once when we confess. In doing your
utmost to extirpate us, if that is your object, it is innocence you
assail.  But how many rulers, men more resolute and more cruel than you
are, have contrived to get quit of such causes altogether,—as Cincius
Severus, who himself suggested the remedy at Thysdris, pointing out how
the Christians should answer that they might secure an acquittal; as
Vespronius Candidus, who dismissed from his bar a Christian, on the
ground that to satisfy his fellow-citizens would break the peace of the
community; as Asper, who, in the case of a man who gave up his faith
under slight infliction of the torture, did not compel the offering of
sacrifice, having owned before, among the advocates and assessors of
court, that he was annoyed at having had to meddle with such a case.
Pudens, too, at once dismissed a Christian who was brought before him,
perceiving from the indictment that it was a case of vexatious
accusation; tearing the document in pieces, he refused so much as to
hear him without the presence of his accuser, as not being consistent
with the imperial commands.  All this might be officially brought under
your notice, and by the very advocates, who are themselves also under
obligations to us, although in court they give their voice as it suits
them.  The clerk of one of them who was liable to be thrown upon the
ground by an evil spirit, was set free from his affliction; as was also
the relative of another, and the little boy of a third.  How many men of
rank (to say nothing of common people) have been delivered from devils,
and healed of diseases!  Even Severus himself, the father of Antonine,
was graciously mindful of the Christians; for he sought out the
Christian Proculus, surnamed Torpacion, the steward of Euhodias, and in
gratitude for his having once cured him by anointing, he kept him in his
palace till the day of his death. <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) Antonine, too, brought up as he was on
Christian milk, was intimately acquainted with this man. Both women and
men of highest rank, whom Severus knew well to be Christians, were not
merely permitted by him to remain uninjured; but he even bore
distinguished testimony in their favour, and gave them publicly back to
us from the hands of a raging populace. Marcus Aurelius also, in his
expedition to Germany, by the prayers his Christian soldiers offered to
God, got rain in that well-known thirst. <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) When, indeed, have not droughts been
put away by our kneelings and our fastings? At times like these,
moreover, the people crying to “the God of gods, the alone Omnipotent,”
under the name of Jupiter, have borne witness to our God. Then we never
deny the deposit placed in our hands; we never pollute the marriage bed;
we deal faithfully with our wards; we give aid to the needy; we render
to none evil for evil. As for those who falsely pretend to belong to us,
and whom we, too, repudiate, let them answer for themselves. In a word,
who has complaint to make against us on other grounds? To what else does
the Christian devote himself, save the affairs of his own community,
which during all the long period of its existence no one has ever proved
guilty of the incest or the cruelty charged against it?  It is for
freedom from crime so singular, for a probity so great, for
righteousness, for purity, for faithfulness, for truth, for the living
God, that we are consigned to the flames; for this is a punishment you
are not wont to inflict either on the sacrilegious, or on undoubted
public enemies, or on the treason-tainted, of whom you have so many. 
Nay, even now our people are enduring persecution from the governors of
Legio and Mauritania; but it is only with the sword, as from the first
it was ordained that we should suffer. But the greater our conflicts,
the greater our rewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[106:453](0030136.htm#fr_452) <span
id="iv.vii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p3"></span> \[Our author uses the Greek (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.iv-p3.1"></span>μὴ θεομαχεῖν</span>) but
not textually of [Acts v. 39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039)<span
id="iv.vii.iv-p3.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_453"></span>[107:454](0030136.htm#fr_453) <span
id="iv.vii.iv-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p4"></span> \[Another note of time. <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.vii.iv-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 211. See Kaye,
as before.\]

<span id="fn_454"></span>[107:455](0030136.htm#fr_454) <span
id="iv.vii.iv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv-p5"></span> \[Compare Vol. I., p. 187, this
Series.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](0030137)
