[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030044)  [Next](0030046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p2"></span>I shall at once go on, then, to
exhibit the peculiarities of the Christian society, that, as I have
refuted the evil charged against it, I may point out its positive
good. <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) We are a body knit
together as such by a common religious profession, by unity of
discipline, and by the bond of a common hope. We meet together as an
assembly and congregation, that, offering up prayer to God as with
united force, we may wrestle with Him in our supplications. This
violence God delights in. We pray, too, for the emperors, for their
ministers and for all in authority, for the welfare of the world, for
the prevalence of peace, for the delay of the final consummation. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) We assemble to read our sacred
writings, if any peculiarity of the times makes either forewarning or
reminiscence needful. <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) However it
be in that respect, with the sacred words we nourish our faith, we
animate our hope, we make our confidence more stedfast; and no less by
inculcations of God’s precepts we confirm good habits. In the same place
also exhortations are made, rebukes and sacred censures are
administered. For with a great gravity is the work of judging carried on
among us, as befits those who feel assured that they are in the sight of
God; and you have the most notable example of judgment to come when any
one has sinned so grievously as to require his severance from us in
prayer, in the congregation and in all sacred intercourse. The tried men
of our elders preside over us, obtaining that honour not by purchase,
but by established character. There is no buying and selling of any sort
in the things of God. Though we have our treasure-chest, it is not made
up of purchase-money, as of a religion that has its price. On the
monthly day, <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) if he likes, each
puts in a small donation; but only if it be his pleasure, and only if he
be able: for there is no compulsion; all is voluntary. These gifts are,
as it were, piety’s deposit fund.  For they are not taken thence and
spent on feasts, and drinking-bouts, and eating-houses, but to support
and bury poor people, to supply the wants of boys and girls destitute of
means and parents, and of old persons confined now to the house; such,
too, as have suffered shipwreck; and if there happen to be any in the
mines, or banished to the islands, or shut up in the prisons, for
nothing but their fidelity to the cause of God’s Church, they become the
nurslings of their confession. But it is mainly the deeds of a love so
noble that lead many to put a brand upon us. *See*, they say, *how they
love one* <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) *another*, for
themselves are animated by mutual hatred; how they are ready even to die
for one another, for they themselves will sooner put to death. And they
are wroth with us, too, because we call each other brethren; for no
other reason, as I think, than because among themselves names of
consanguinity are assumed in mere pretence of affection.  But we are
your brethren as well, by the law of our common mother nature, though
you are hardly men, because brothers so unkind. At the same time, how
much more fittingly they are called and counted brothers who have been
led to the knowledge of God as their common Father, who have drunk in
one spirit of holiness, who from the same womb of a common ignorance
have agonized into the same light of truth! But on this very account,
perhaps, we are regarded as having less claim to be held true brothers,
that no tragedy makes a noise about our brotherhood, or that the family
possessions, which generally destroy brotherhood among you, create
fraternal bonds among us. One in mind and soul, we do not hesitate to
share our earthly goods with one another. All things are common among us
but our wives. We give up our community where it is practised alone by
others, who not only take possession of the wives of their friends, but
most tolerantly also accommodate their friends with theirs, following
the example, I believe, <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-Page_47"></span>of those wise men of ancient times, the
Greek Socrates and the Roman Cato, who shared with their friends the
wives whom they had married, it seems for the sake of progeny both to
themselves and to others; whether in this acting against their partners’
wishes, I am not able to say. Why should they have any care over their
chastity, when their husbands so readily bestowed it away? O noble
example of Attic wisdom, of Roman gravity—the philosopher and the censor
playing pimps! What wonder if that great love of Christians towards one
another is desecrated by you!  For you abuse also our humble feasts, on
the ground that they are extravagant as well as infamously wicked.  To
us, it seems, applies the saying of Diogenes: “The people of Megara
feast as though they were going to die on the morrow; they build as
though they were never to die!” But one sees more readily the mote in
another’s eye than the beam in his own.  Why, the very air is soured
with the eructations of so many tribes, and *curiæ*, and *decuriæ*. The
Salii cannot have their feast without going into debt; you must get the
accountants to tell you what the tenths of Hercules and the sacrificial
banquets cost; the choicest cook is appointed for the Apaturia, the
Dionysia, the Attic mysteries; the smoke from the banquet of Serapis
will call out the firemen. Yet about the modest supper-room of the
Christians alone a great ado is made.  Our feast explains itself by its
name.  The Greeks call it *agapè*, i.e., affection. Whatever it costs,
our outlay in the name of piety is gain, since with the good things of
the feast we benefit the needy; not as it is with you, do parasites
aspire to the glory of satisfying their licentious propensities, selling
themselves for a belly-feast to all disgraceful treatment,—but as it is
with God himself, a peculiar respect is shown to the lowly. If the
object of our feast be good, in the light of that consider its further
regulations. As it is an act of religious service, it permits no
vileness or immodesty. The participants, before reclining, taste first
of prayer to God. As much is eaten as satisfies the cravings of hunger;
as much is drunk as befits the chaste.  They say it is enough, as those
who remember that even during the night they have to worship God; they
talk as those who know that the Lord is one of their auditors. After
manual ablution, and the bringing in of lights, each <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) is asked to stand forth and sing, as
he can, a hymn to God, either one from the holy Scriptures or one of his
own composing,—a proof of the measure of our drinking. As the feast
commenced with prayer, so with prayer it is closed. We go from it, not
like troops of mischief-doers, nor bands of vagabonds, nor to break out
into licentious acts, but to have as much care of our modesty and
chastity as if we had been at a school of virtue rather than a banquet.
Give the congregation of the Christians its due, and hold it unlawful,
if it is like assemblies of the illicit sort: by all means let it be
condemned, if any complaint can be validly laid against it, such as lies
against secret factions. But who has ever suffered harm from our
assemblies? We are in our congregations just what we are when separated
from each other; we are as a community what we are individuals; we
injure nobody, we trouble nobody. When the upright, when the virtuous
meet together, when the pious, when the pure assemble in congregation,
you ought not to call that a faction, but a *curia*—\[i.e., the court of
God.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[46:131](0030045.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p3"></span> \[Elucidation VII.\]

<span id="fn_131"></span>[46:132](0030045.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p4"></span> \[Chap. xxxii. *supra* p. 43.\]

<span id="fn_132"></span>[46:133](0030045.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p5"></span> \[An argument for Days of Public
Thanksgiving, Fasting and the like.\]

<span id="fn_133"></span>[46:134](0030045.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p6"></span> \[On ordinary Sundays, “they laid by
in store,” apparently: once a month they offered.\]

<span id="fn_134"></span>[46:135](0030045.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p7"></span> \[A precious testimony, though the
caviller asserts that afterwards the heathen used this expression
derisively.\]

<span id="fn_135"></span>[47:136](0030045.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.iii.xxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxix-p8"></span> \[Or, perhaps—“One is prompted to
stand forth and bring to God, as every one can, whether from the Holy
Scriptures, or of his own mind”—i.e. according to his taste.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL.](0030046)
