[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030450)  [Next](0030452) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—The First Epistle to the
Corinthians. The Pauline Salutation of Grace and Peace Shown to Be
Anti-Marcionite. The Cross of Christ Purposed by the Creator. Marcion
Only Perpetuates the Offence and Foolishness of Christ’s Cross by His
Impious Severance of the Gospel from the Creator. Analogies Between the
Law and the Gospel in the Matter of Weak Things, and Foolish Things and
Base Things.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p2"></span>My preliminary remarks <span
id="fr_5385"></span>[5386](#fn_5385) on the preceding epistle called me
away from treating of its superscription, <span
id="fr_5386"></span>[5387](#fn_5386) for I was sure that another
opportunity would occur for considering the matter, it being of constant
recurrence, and in the same form too, in every epistle. The point, then,
is, that it is not (the usual) *health* which the apostle prescribes for
those to whom he writes, but “grace and peace.” <span
id="fr_5387"></span>[5388](#fn_5387) I do not ask, indeed, what a
destroyer of Judaism has to do with a formula which the Jews still use.
For to this day they salute each other <span
id="fr_5388"></span>[5389](#fn_5388) with the greeting of “peace,” and
formerly in their Scriptures they did the same. But I understand him by
his practice <span id="fr_5389"></span>[5390](#fn_5389) plainly enough
to have corroborated the declaration of the Creator: “How beautiful are
the feet of them that bring glad tidings of good, who preach the gospel
of *peace!*” <span id="fr_5390"></span>[5391](#fn_5390) For the herald
of *good*, that is, of God’s “grace” was well aware that along with it
“peace” also was to be proclaimed. <span
id="fr_5391"></span>[5392](#fn_5391) Now, when he announces these
blessings as “from God the Father and the Lord Jesus,” <span
id="fr_5392"></span>[5393](#fn_5392) he uses titles that are common to
both, and which are also adapted to the mystery of our faith; <span
id="fr_5393"></span>[5394](#fn_5393) and I suppose it to be impossible
accurately to determine what God is declared to be the Father and the
Lord Jesus, unless (we consider) which of their accruing attributes are
more suited to them severally. <span
id="fr_5394"></span>[5395](#fn_5394) First, then, I assert that none
other than the Creator and Sustainer of both man and the universe can be
acknowledged as Father *and* Lord; next, that to the Father also the
title of Lord accrues by reason of His power, and that the Son too
receives the same through the Father; then that “grace and peace” are
not only His who had them published, but His likewise to whom offence
had been given. For neither does *grace* exist, except after offence;
nor *peace*, except after war. Now, both the <span id="page_439">p.
439</span> <span id="v.iv.vi.v-Page_439"></span>people (of Israel) by
their transgression of His laws, <span
id="fr_5395"></span>[5396](#fn_5395) and the whole race of mankind by
their neglect of natural duty, <span
id="fr_5396"></span>[5397](#fn_5396) had both sinned and rebelled
against the Creator. Marcion’s god, however, could not have been
offended, both because he was unknown to everybody, and because he is
incapable of being irritated. What *grace*, therefore, can be had of a
god who has not been offended? What *peace* from one who has never
experienced rebellion? “The cross of Christ,” he says, “is to them that
perish foolishness; but unto such as shall obtain salvation, it is the
power of God and the wisdom of God.” <span
id="fr_5397"></span>[5398](#fn_5397) And then, that we may know from
whence this comes, he adds: “For it is written, ‘I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent.’” <span id="fr_5398"></span>[5399](#fn_5398) Now, since these
are the Creator’s words, and since what pertains to the doctrine <span
id="fr_5399"></span>[5400](#fn_5399) of the cross he accounts as
foolishness, therefore both the cross, and also Christ by reason of the
cross, will appertain to the Creator, by whom were predicted the
incidents of the cross.  But if <span
id="fr_5400"></span>[5401](#fn_5400) the Creator, as an enemy, took away
their wisdom in order that the cross of Christ, considered as his
adversary, should be accounted foolishness, how by any possibility can
the Creator have foretold anything about the cross of a Christ who is
not His own, and of whom He knew nothing, when He published the
prediction? But, again, how happens it, that in the system of a
Lord <span id="fr_5401"></span>[5402](#fn_5401) who is so very good, and
so profuse in mercy, some carry off salvation, when they believe the
cross to be the wisdom and power of God, whilst others incur perdition,
to whom the cross of Christ is accounted folly;—(how happens it, I
repeat,) unless it is in the Creator’s dispensation to have punished
both the people *of Israel* and the human race, for some great offence
committed against Him, with the loss of wisdom and prudence? What
follows will confirm this suggestion, when he asks, “Hath not God
infatuated the wisdom of this world?” <span
id="fr_5402"></span>[5403](#fn_5402) and when he adds the reason why:
“For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God <span id="fr_5403"></span>[5404](#fn_5403) by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.” <span
id="fr_5404"></span>[5405](#fn_5404) But first a word about the
expression “*the world*;” because in this passage particularly, <span
id="fr_5405"></span>[5406](#fn_5405) the heretics expend a great deal of
their subtlety in showing that by *world* is meant *the lord of the
world*. We, however, understand the term to apply to any person that is
in the world, by a simple idiom of human language, which often
substitutes that which contains for that which is contained. “The circus
shouted,” “The forum spoke,” and “The basilica murmured,” are well-known
expressions, meaning that the people in these places did so. Since then
the man, not the god, of the world <span
id="fr_5406"></span>[5407](#fn_5406) in his wisdom knew not God, whom
indeed he ought to have known (both the Jew by his knowledge of the
Scriptures, and all the human race by their knowledge of God’s works),
therefore that God, who was not acknowledged in His wisdom, resolved to
smite men’s knowledge with His foolishness, by saving all those who
believe in the folly of the preached cross.  “Because the Jews require
signs,” who ought to have already made up their minds about God, “and
the Greeks seek after wisdom,” <span
id="fr_5407"></span>[5408](#fn_5407) who rely upon their own wisdom, and
not upon God’s. If, however, it was a new god that was being preached,
what sin had the Jews committed, in seeking after signs to believe; or
the Greeks, when they hunted after a wisdom which they would prefer to
accept? Thus the very retribution which overtook both Jews and Greeks
proves that God is both a jealous God and a Judge, inasmuch as He
infatuated the world’s wisdom by an angry <span
id="fr_5408"></span>[5409](#fn_5408) and a judicial retribution. Since,
then, the causes <span id="fr_5409"></span>[5410](#fn_5409) are in the
hands of Him who gave us the Scriptures which we use, it follows that
the apostle, when treating of the Creator, (as Him whom both Jew and
Gentile as yet have) not known, means undoubtedly to teach us, that the
God who is to become known (in Christ) is the Creator.  The very
“stumbling-block” which he declares Christ to be “to the Jews,” <span
id="fr_5410"></span>[5411](#fn_5410) points unmistakeably <span
id="fr_5411"></span>[5412](#fn_5411) to the Creator’s prophecy
respecting Him, when by Isaiah He says: “Behold I lay in Sion a stone of
stumbling and a rock of offence.” <span
id="fr_5412"></span>[5413](#fn_5412) This rock or stone is Christ. <span
id="fr_5413"></span>[5414](#fn_5413) This stumbling-stone Marcion
retains still. <span id="fr_5414"></span>[5415](#fn_5414) <span
id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span id="v.iv.vi.v-Page_440"></span>Now,
what is that “foolishness of God which is wiser than men,” but the cross
and death of Christ? What is that “weakness of God which is stronger
than men,” <span id="fr_5415"></span>[5416](#fn_5415) but the nativity
and incarnation <span id="fr_5416"></span>[5417](#fn_5416) of God? If,
however, Christ was not born of the Virgin, was not constituted of human
flesh, and thereby really suffered neither death nor the cross, there
was nothing in Him either of foolishness or weakness; nor is it any
longer true, that “God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise;” nor, again, hath “God chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty;” nor “the base things” and the least
things “in the world, and things which are despised, which are even as
nothing” (that is, things which really <span
id="fr_5417"></span>[5418](#fn_5417) are not), “to bring to nothing
things which are” (that is, which really are). <span
id="fr_5418"></span>[5419](#fn_5418) For nothing in the dispensation of
God is found to be mean, and ignoble, and contemptible. Such only occurs
in man’s arrangement. The very Old Testament of the Creator <span
id="fr_5419"></span>[5420](#fn_5419) itself, it is possible, no doubt,
to charge with foolishness, and weakness, and dishonour and meanness,
and contempt.  What is more foolish and more weak than God’s requirement
of bloody sacrifices and of savoury holocausts?  What is weaker than the
cleansing of vessels and of beds? <span
id="fr_5420"></span>[5421](#fn_5420) What more dishonourable than the
discoloration of the reddening skin? <span
id="fr_5421"></span>[5422](#fn_5421) What so mean as the statute of
retaliation? What so contemptible as the exception in meats and drinks?
The whole of the Old Testament, the heretic, to the best of my belief,
holds in derision. For God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound its wisdom.  Marcion’s god has no such discipline, because he
does not take after <span id="fr_5422"></span>[5423](#fn_5422) (the
Creator) in the process of confusing opposites by their opposites, so
that “no flesh shall glory; but, as it is written, He that glorieth, let
him glory in the Lord.” <span id="fr_5423"></span>[5424](#fn_5423) In
what Lord?  Surely in Him who gave this precept. <span
id="fr_5424"></span>[5425](#fn_5424) Unless, forsooth, the Creator
enjoined us to glory in the god of Marcion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5385"></span>[438:5386](0030451.htm#fr_5385) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p3"></span> Præstructio.

<span id="fn_5386"></span>[438:5387](0030451.htm#fr_5386) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p4"></span> Titulo.

<span id="fn_5387"></span>[438:5388](0030451.htm#fr_5387) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p5"></span> [1 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5388"></span>[438:5389](0030451.htm#fr_5388) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p6"></span> Appellant.

<span id="fn_5389"></span>[438:5390](0030451.htm#fr_5389) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p7"></span> Officio.

<span id="fn_5390"></span>[438:5391](0030451.htm#fr_5390) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p8"></span> [Isa. lii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5391"></span>[438:5392](0030451.htm#fr_5391) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p9"></span> Pacem quam præferendam.

<span id="fn_5392"></span>[438:5393](0030451.htm#fr_5392) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p10"></span> [1 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5393"></span>[438:5394](0030451.htm#fr_5393) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p11"></span> Competentibus nostro quoque sacramento.

<span id="fn_5394"></span>[438:5395](0030451.htm#fr_5394) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p12"></span> Nisi ex accedentibus cui magis
competant.

<span id="fn_5395"></span>[439:5396](0030451.htm#fr_5395) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p13"></span> Disciplinæ.

<span id="fn_5396"></span>[439:5397](0030451.htm#fr_5396) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p14"></span> Per naturæ dissimulationem. This Fr.
Junius explains by <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p14.1"></span>τὴν φύσεως ἀφοσίωσιν</span>, in the sense of
“*original sin*” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p14.2"></span>ἀφοσιοῦσθαι</span> seems to point to sin
requiring *expiation*).

<span id="fn_5397"></span>[439:5398](0030451.htm#fr_5397) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p14.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p15"></span> [1 Cor. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5398"></span>[439:5399](0030451.htm#fr_5398) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), [Isa.
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5399"></span>[439:5400](0030451.htm#fr_5399) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p17"></span> Causam.

<span id="fn_5400"></span>[439:5401](0030451.htm#fr_5400) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p18"></span> Aut si: introducing a Marcionite cavil.

<span id="fn_5401"></span>[439:5402](0030451.htm#fr_5401) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p19"></span> Apud dominum.

<span id="fn_5402"></span>[439:5403](0030451.htm#fr_5402) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p20"></span> [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5403"></span>[439:5404](0030451.htm#fr_5403) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p21"></span> Boni duxit Deus, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi.v-p21.1"></span>εὐδόκησεν ὁ Θεός</span>.

<span id="fn_5404"></span>[439:5405](0030451.htm#fr_5404) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p22"></span> [1 Cor. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5405"></span>[439:5406](0030451.htm#fr_5405) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p23"></span> Hic vel maxime.

<span id="fn_5406"></span>[439:5407](0030451.htm#fr_5406) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p24"></span> That is, “man who lives in the world,
not God who made the world.”

<span id="fn_5407"></span>[439:5408](0030451.htm#fr_5407) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p25"></span> [1 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5408"></span>[439:5409](0030451.htm#fr_5408) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p26"></span> Æmula.

<span id="fn_5409"></span>[439:5410](0030451.htm#fr_5409) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p27"></span> Causæ: the *reasons* of His retributive
providence.

<span id="fn_5410"></span>[439:5411](0030451.htm#fr_5410) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p28"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5411"></span>[439:5412](0030451.htm#fr_5411) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p29"></span> Consignat.

<span id="fn_5412"></span>[439:5413](0030451.htm#fr_5412) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p30"></span> [Isa. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5413"></span>[439:5414](0030451.htm#fr_5413) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p31"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5414"></span>[439:5415](0030451.htm#fr_5414) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p32"></span> “Etiam Marcion servat.” These words
cannot mean, as they have been translated, that “Marcion even retains
these words” of prophecy; for whenever Marcion fell in with any traces
of this prophecy of Christ, he seems to have expunged them. In [Luke ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p32.1"></span>
holy Simeon referred to it, but Marcion rejected this chapter of the
evangelist; and although he admitted much of chap. xx., it is remarkable
that he erased the ten verses thereof from the end of the eighth to the
end of the eighteenth.  Now in vers. 17, 18, Marcion found the prophecy
again referred to. See Epiphanius, *Adv. Hæres.* xlii. *Schol.* 55.

<span id="fn_5415"></span>[440:5416](0030451.htm#fr_5415) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p32.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p33"></span> [1 Cor. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5416"></span>[440:5417](0030451.htm#fr_5416) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p34"></span> Caro.

<span id="fn_5417"></span>[440:5418](0030451.htm#fr_5417) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p35"></span> Vere.

<span id="fn_5418"></span>[440:5419](0030451.htm#fr_5418) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p36"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5419"></span>[440:5420](0030451.htm#fr_5419) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p37"></span> Apud Creatorem etiam vetera: (*vetera*,
i.e.) “veteris testamenti institutiones” (Oehler).

<span id="fn_5420"></span>[440:5421](0030451.htm#fr_5420) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p38"></span> [Lev.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p38.1"></span>.
*passim*.

<span id="fn_5421"></span>[440:5422](0030451.htm#fr_5421) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p39"></span> [Lev. xiii.
2-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5422"></span>[440:5423](0030451.htm#fr_5422) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p40"></span> Æmulatur.

<span id="fn_5423"></span>[440:5424](0030451.htm#fr_5423) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p41"></span> [1 Cor.
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5424"></span>[440:5425](0030451.htm#fr_5424) <span
id="v.iv.vi.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p42"></span> By [Jer.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="v.iv.vi.v-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Way of Wisdom, and Greatness, and Might. God's Hiding
of Himself, and Subsequent Revelation. To Marcion's God Such a
Concealment and Manifestation Impossible.  God's Predestination. No Such
Prior System of Intention Possible to a God Previously Unknown as Was
Marcion's. The Powers of the World Which Crucified Christ. St. Paul, as
a Wise Master-Builder, Associated with Prophecy.  Sundry Injunctions of
the Apostle Parallel with the Teaching of the Old Testament.](0030452)
