[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030241)  [Next](0030243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.—On the Growth of the
Soul. Its Maturity Coincident with the Maturity of the Flesh in
Man.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p2"></span>Now we have already <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) laid down the principle, that all
the natural properties of the soul which relate to sense and
intelligence are inherent in its very substance, and spring from its
native constitution, but that they advance by a gradual growth through
the stages of life and develope themselves in different ways by
accidental circumstances, according to men’s means and arts, their
manners and customs their local situations, and the influences of the
Supreme Powers; <span id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) but in
pursuance of that aspect of the association of body and soul which we
have now to consider, we maintain that the *puberty* of the soul
coincides with that of the body, and that they attain both together to
this full growth at about the fourteenth year of life, speaking
generally,—the former by the suggestion of the senses, and the latter by
the growth of the bodily members; and (we fix on this age) not because,
as Asclepiades supposes, reflection then begins, nor because the civil
laws date the commencement of the real business of life from this
period, but because this was the appointed order from the very first.
For as Adam and Eve felt that they must cover their naked<span
id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-Page_219"></span>ness after their knowledge of good
and evil so we profess to have the same discernment of good and evil
from the time that we experience the same sensation of shame. Now from
the before-mentioned age (of fourteen years) sex is suffused and clothed
with an especial sensibility, and concupiscence employs the ministry of
the eye, and communicates its pleasure to another, and understands the
natural relations between male and female, and wears the fig-tree apron
to cover the shame which it still excites, and drives man out of the
paradise of innocence and chastity, and in its wild pruriency falls upon
sins and unnatural incentives to delinquency; for its impulse has by
this time surpassed the appointment of nature, and springs from its
vicious abuse.  But the strictly natural concupiscence is simply
confined to the desire of those aliments which God at the beginning
conferred upon man. “Of every tree of the garden” He says, “ye shall
freely eat;” <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) and then again
to the generation which followed next after the flood He enlarged the
grant: “Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; behold, as
the green herb have I given you all these things,” <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) —where He has regard rather to the
body than to the soul, although it be in the interest of the soul also.
For we must remove all occasion from the caviller, who, because the soul
apparently wants ailments, would insist on the soul’s being from this
circumstance deemed mortal, since it is sustained by meat and drink and
after a time loses its rigour when they are withheld, and on their
complete removal ultimately droops and dies. Now the point we must keep
in view is not merely which particular faculty it is which desires these
(aliments), but also for what end; and even if it be for its own sake,
still the question remains, Why this desire, and when felt, and how
long? Then again there is the consideration, that it is one thing to
desire by natural instinct, and another thing to desire through
necessity; one thing to desire as a property of being, another thing to
desire for a special object. The soul, therefore, will desire meat and
drink—for itself indeed, because of a special necessity; for the flesh,
however, from the nature of its properties. For the flesh is no doubt
the house of the soul, and the soul is the temporary inhabitant of the
flesh. The desire, then, of the lodger will arise from the temporary
cause and the special necessity which his very designation
suggests,—with a view to benefit and improve the place of his temporary
abode, while sojourning in it; not with the view, certainly, of being
himself the foundation of the house, or himself its walls, or himself
its support and roof, but simply and solely with the view of being
accommodated and housed, since he could not receive such accommodation
except in a sound and well-built house. (Now, applying this imagery to
the soul,) if it be not provided with this accommodation, it will not be
in its power to quit its dwelling-place, and for want of fit and proper
resources, to depart safe and sound, in possession, too, of its own
supports, and the aliments which belong to its own proper
condition,—namely immortality, rationality, sensibility, intelligence,
and freedom of the will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[218:1747](0030242.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p3"></span> See above, in ch. xx.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[218:1748](0030242.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p4"></span> See above, in ch. xxiv.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[219:1749](0030242.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p5"></span> [Gen. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[219:1750](0030242.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p6"></span> [Gen. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xi.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Evil Spirit Has Marred the Purity of the Soul from the Very
Birth.](0030243)
