[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030610)  [Next](0030612) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Ezekiel’s Vision of the Dry
Bones Quoted.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xxix-p2"></span>Inasmuch, then, as even the figurative
portions of Scripture, and the arguments of facts, and some plain
statements *of Holy Writ*, throw light upon the resurrection of the
flesh (although without specially naming the very substance), how much
more effectual for de<span id="page_566">p. 566</span> <span
id="v.viii.xxix-Page_566"></span>termining the question will not those
passages be which indicate the actual substance of the body by expressly
mentioning it! Take Ezekiel: “And the hand of the Lord,” says he, “was
upon me; and the Lord brought me forth in the Spirit, and set me in the
midst of a plain which was full of bones; and He led me round about them
in a circuit: and, behold, there were many on the face of the plain;
and, lo, they were very dry. And He said unto me, Son of man, will these
bones live? And I said, O Lord God, Thou knowest. And He said unto me,
Prophesy upon these bones; and thou shalt say, Ye dry bones, hear the
word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God to these bones, Behold, I
bring upon you the breath *of life*, and ye shall live: and I will give
unto you the spirit, and I will place muscles over you, and I will
spread skin upon you; and ye shall live, and shall know that I am the
Lord. And I prophesied as the Lord commanded me: and while I prophesy,
behold there is a voice, behold also a movement, and bones approached
bones. And I saw, and behold sinews and flesh came up over them, and
muscles were placed around them; but there was no breath in them. And He
said unto me, Prophesy to the wind, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus
saith the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe in
these dead men, and let them live. So I prophesied to the wind, as He
commanded me, and the spirit entered into the bones, and they lived, and
stood upon their feet, strong and exceeding many. And *the Lord* said
unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel.  They
say themselves, Our bones are become dry, and our hope is perished, and
we in them have been violently destroyed.  Therefore prophesy unto them,
(and say), Behold, even I will open your sepulchres, and will bring you
out of your sepulchres, O my people, and will bring you into the land of
Israel: and ye shall know how that I the Lord opened your sepulchres,
and brought you, O my people, out of your sepulchres; and I will give my
Spirit unto you, and ye shall live, and shall rest in your own land: 
and ye shall know how that I the Lord have spoken and done these things,
saith the Lord.” <span id="fr_7488"></span>[7489](#fn_7488)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7488"></span>[566:7489](0030611.htm#fr_7488) <span
id="v.viii.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxix-p3"></span> [Ezek. xxxvii.
1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)<span
id="v.viii.xxix-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This Vision Interpreted by Tertullian of the Resurrection of the
Bodies of the Dead. A Chronological Error of Our Author, Who Supposes
that Ezekiel in His Ch. XXXI. Prophesied Before the Captivity.](0030612)
