[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030053)  [Next](0030055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p2"></span>Come now, if some philosopher
affirms, as <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-Page_53"></span>Laberius holds, following an opinion
of Pythagoras, that a man may have his origin from a mule, a serpent
from a woman, and with skill of speech twists every argument to prove
his view, will he not gain acceptance for and work in some the
conviction that, on account of this, they should even abstain from
eating animal food? May any one have the persuasion that he should so
abstain, lest by chance in his beef he eats of some ancestor of his? But
if a Christian promises the return of a man from a man, and the very
actual Gaius from Gaius, <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) the cry
of the people will be to have him stoned; they will not even so much as
grant him a hearing. If there is any ground for the moving to and fro of
human souls into different bodies, why may they not return into the very
substance they have left, seeing this is to be restored, to be that
which had been?  They are no longer the very things they had been; for
they could not be what they were not, without first ceasing to be what
they had been. If we were inclined to give all rein upon this point,
discussing into what various beasts one and another might probably be
changed, we would need at our leisure to take up many points. But this
we would do chiefly in our own defence, as setting forth what is greatly
worthier of belief, that a man will come back from a man—any given
person from any given person, still retaining his humanity; so that the
soul, with its qualities unchanged, may be restored to the same
condition, thought not to the same outward framework. Assuredly, as the
reason why restoration takes place at all is the appointed judgment,
every man must needs come forth the very same who had once existed, that
he may receive at God’s hands a judgment, whether of good desert or the
opposite. And therefore the body too will appear; for the soul is not
capable of suffering without the solid substance (that is, the flesh;
and for this reason, also) that it is not right that souls should have
all the wrath of God to bear: they did not sin without the body, within
which all was done by them. But how, you say, can a substance which has
been dissolved be made to reappear again?  Consider thyself, O man, and
thou wilt believe in it! Reflect on what you were before you came into
existence. Nothing. For if you had been anything, you would have
remembered it. You, then, who were nothing before you existed, reduced
to nothing also when you cease to be, why may you not come into being
again out of nothing, at the will of the same Creator whose will created
you out of nothing at the first? Will it be anything new in your case?
You who were not, *were* made; when you cease to be again, you *shall*
be made. Explain, if you can, your original creation, and then demand to
know how you shall be re-created. Indeed, it will be still easier surely
to make you what you were once, when the very same creative power made
you without difficulty what you never were before. There will be doubts,
perhaps, as to the power of God, of Him who hung in its place this huge
body of our world, made out of what had never existed, as from a death
of emptiness and inanity, animated by the Spirit who quickens all living
things, its very self the unmistakable type of the resurrection, that it
might be to you a witness—nay, the exact image of the resurrection. 
Light, every day extinguished, shines out again; and, with like
alternation, darkness succeeds light’s outgoing. The defunct stars
re-live; the seasons, as soon as they are finished, renew their course;
the fruits are brought to maturity, and then are reproduced. The seeds
do not spring up with abundant produce, save as they rot and dissolve
away;—all things are preserved by perishing, all things are refashioned
out of death. Thou, man of nature so exalted, if thou understandest
thyself, taught even by the Pythian <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) words, lord of all these things that
die and rise,—shalt thou die to perish evermore? Wherever your
dissolution shall have taken place, whatever material agent has
destroyed you, or swallowed you up, or swept you away, or reduced you to
nothingness, it shall again restore you. Even nothingness is His who is
Lord of *all*. You ask, Shall we then be always dying, and rising up
from death? If so the Lord of all things had appointed, you would have
to submit, though unwillingly, to the law of your creation. But, in
fact, He has no other purpose than that of which He has informed us. The
Reason which made the universe out of diverse elements, so that all
things might be composed of opposite substances in unity—of void and
solid, of animate and inanimate, of comprehensible and incomprehensible,
of light and darkness, of life itself and death—has also disposed time
into order, by fixing and distinguishing its mode, according to which
this first portion of it, which we inhabit from the beginning of the
world, flows down by a temporal course to a close; but the portion which
succeeds, and to which we look forward continues forever. When,
therefore, the boundary <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-Page_54"></span>and limit, that millennial interspace,
has been passed, when even the outward fashion of the world itself—which
has been spread like a veil over the eternal economy, equally a thing of
time—passes away, then the whole human race shall be raised again, to
have its dues meted out according as it has merited in the period of
good or evil, and thereafter to have these paid out through the
immeasurable ages of eternity. Therefore after this there is neither
death nor repeated resurrections, but we shall be the same that we are
now, and still unchanged—the servants of God, ever with God, clothed
upon with the proper substance of eternity; but the profane, and all who
are not true worshippers of God, in like manner shall be consigned to
the punishment of everlasting fire—that fire which, from its very nature
indeed, directly ministers to their incorruptibility. The philosophers
are familiar as well as we with the distinction between a common and a
secret fire. Thus that which is in common use is far different from that
which we see in divine judgments, whether striking as thunderbolts from
heaven, or bursting up out of the earth through mountain-tops; for it
does not consume what it scorches, but while it burns it repairs. So the
mountains continue ever burning; and a person struck by lighting is even
now kept safe from any destroying flame. A notable proof this of the
fire eternal! a notable example of the endless judgment which still
supplies punishment with fuel! The mountains burn, and last. How will it
be with the wicked and the enemies of God? <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[53:148](0030054.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p3"></span> \[*i.e*., Caius, used (like *John
Doe* with us) in Roman Law.\]

<span id="fn_148"></span>[53:149](0030054.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p4"></span> Know thyself. \[Juvenal, xi. 27, on
which see great wealth of reference in J.E.B. Mayor’s *<span
class="c42"><span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p4.1"></span>Juvenal</span>* (xiii.
Satires), and note especially, Bernard, *Serm. De Divers* xl. 3. *In
Cant. Cantic.* xxxvi. 5–7.\]

<span id="fn_149"></span>[54:150](0030054.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iv.iii.xlviii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlviii-p5"></span> \[Our author’s philosophy may be at
fault, but his testimony is not to be mistaken.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX.](0030055)
