[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030172)  [Next](0030174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII. <span
id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) —The Original Deities Were Human—With
Some Very Questionable Characteristics. Saturn or Time Was Human.
Inconsistencies of Opinion About Him.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p3"></span>Now, how much further need I go in
recounting your gods—because I want to descant on the character of such
as you have adopted? It is quite uncertain whether I shall laugh at your
absurdity, or upbraid you for your blindness. For how many, and indeed
what, gods shall I bring forward? Shall it be the greater ones, or the
lesser? The old ones, or the novel? The male, or the female? The
unmarried, or such as are joined in wedlock? The clever, or the
unskilful? The rustic or the town ones? The national or the foreign? For
the truth is, <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) there are so many
families, so many nations, which require a catalogue <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) (of gods), that they cannot possibly
be examined, or distinguished, or described. But the more diffuse the
subject is, the more restriction must we impose on it. As, therefore, in
this review we keep before us but one object—that of proving that all
these gods were once human beings (not, indeed, to instruct you in the
fact, <span id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) for your conduct shows
that you have forgotten it)—let us adopt our compendious summary from
the most natural method <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) of
conducting the examination, even by considering the origin of their
race. For the origin characterizes all that comes after it. Now this
origin of your gods dates, <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) I
suppose, from Saturn. And when Varro mentions Jupiter, Juno, and
Minerva, as the most ancient of the gods, it ought not to have escaped
our notice, that every father is more ancient than his sons, and that
Saturn therefore must precede Jupiter, even as Cœlus does Saturn, for
Saturn was sprung from Cœlus and Terra. I pass by, however, the origin
of Cœlus and Terra. They led in some unaccountable way <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) single lives, and had no children. Of
course they required a long time for vigorous growth to attain to such a
stature. <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) By and by, as soon as
the voice of Cœlus began to break, <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) and the breasts of Terra to become
firm, <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) they contract marriage
with one another.  I suppose either Heaven <span
id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) came down to his spouse, or Earth went
up to meet her lord. Be that as it may, Earth conceived seed of Heaven,
and when her year was fulfilled brought forth Saturn in a wonderful
manner. Which of his parents did he resemble? Well, then, even after
parentage began, <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) it is
certain <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) that they had no child
previous to Saturn, and only one daughter afterwards—Ops; thenceforth
they ceased to procreate. The truth is, Saturn castrated Cœlus as he was
sleeping. We read this name Cœlus as of the masculine gender. And for
the matter of that, how could he be a father unless he were a male? But
with what instrument was the castration effected? He had a scythe. What,
so early as that? For Vulcan was not yet an artificer in iron. The
widowed Terra, however, although still quite young, was in no
hurry <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) to marry another. Indeed,
there was no second Cœlus for her. What but Ocean offers her an embrace?
But he savours of brackishness, and she has been accustomed to fresh
water. <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) And so Saturn is the sole
male child of Cœlus and Terra. When grown to puberty, he marries his own
sister. No laws as yet prohibited incest, nor punished parricide.  Then,
when male children were born to him, he would devour them; better
himself (should take them) than the wolves, (for to these would they
become a prey) if he exposed them. He was, no doubt, afraid that one of
them might learn the lesson of his father’s scythe. When Jupiter was
born in course of time, he was removed out of the way: <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) (the father) swallowed a stone instead
of the son, as was pretended. This artifice secured his safety for a
time; but at length the son, whom <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>
<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-Page_141"></span>he had not devoured, and who
had grown up in secret, fell upon him, and deprived him of his kingdom.
Such, then, is the patriarch of the gods whom Heaven <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) and Earth produced for you, with the
poets officiating as midwives. Now some persons with a refined <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) imagination are of opinion that, by
this allegorical fable of Saturn, there is a physiological
representation of *Time*: (they think) that it is because all things are
destroyed by Time, that Cœlus and Terra were themselves parents without
having any of their own, and that the (fatal) scythe was used, and that
(Saturn) devoured his own offspring, because he, <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) in fact, absorbs within himself all
things which have issued from him. They call in also the witness of his
name; for they say that he is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p21.1"></span>Κρόνος</span> in Greek, meaning the
same thing as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p21.2"></span>χρόνος</span>. <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) His Latin name also they derive from
*seed-sowing*; <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) for they suppose
him to have been the actual procreator—that the seed, in fact, was dropt
down from heaven to earth by his means. They unite him with *Ops*,
because seeds produce the affluent treasure (*Opem*) of actual life, and
because they develope with labour (*Opus*). Now I wish that you would
explain this metaphorical <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996)
statement. It was either Saturn or Time. If it was Time, how could it be
Saturn? If he, how could it be Time? For you cannot possibly reckon both
these corporeal subjects <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) as
co-existing in one person. What, however, was there to prevent your
worshipping Time under its proper quality? Why not make a human person,
or even a mythic man, an object of your adoration, but each in its
proper nature not in the character of Time? What is the meaning of that
conceit of your mental ingenuity, if it be not to colour the foulest
matters with the feigned appearance of reasonable proofs? <span
id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) Neither, on the one hand, do you mean
Saturn to be Time, because you say he is a human being; nor, on the
other hand, whilst portraying him as Time, do you on that account mean
that he was ever human. No doubt, in the accounts of remote antiquity
your god Saturn is plainly described as living on earth in human guise.
Anything whatever may obviously be pictured as incorporeal which never
had an existence; there is simply no room for such fiction, where there
is reality. Since, therefore, there is clear evidence that Saturn once
existed, it is in vain that you change his character. He whom you will
not deny to have once been man, is not at your disposal to be treated
anyhow, nor can it be maintained that he is either divine or Time. In
every page of your literature the origin <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) of Saturn is conspicuous. We read of
him in Cassius Severus and in the Corneliuses, Nepos and Tacitus, <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000) and, amongst the Greeks also, in
Diodorus, and all other compilers of ancient annals. <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001) No more faithful records of him are
to be traced than in Italy itself. For, after (traversing) many
countries, and (enjoying) the hospitality of Athens, he settled in
Italy, or, as it was called, Œnotria, having met with a kind welcome
from Janus, or Janes, <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) as the
Salii call him. The hill on which he settled had the name Saturnius,
whilst the city which he founded <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) still bears the name Saturnia; in
short, the whole of Italy once had the same designation. Such is the
testimony derived from that country which is now the mistress of the
world: whatever doubt prevails about the origin of Saturn, his actions
tell us plainly that he was a human being. Since, therefore, Saturn was
human, he came undoubtedly from a human stock; and more, because he was
a man, he, of course, came not of Cœlus and Terra. Some people, however,
found it easy enough to call him, whose parents were unknown, the son of
those gods from whom all may in a sense seem to be derived. For who is
there that does not speak under a feeling of reverence of the heaven and
the earth as his own father and mother? Or, in accordance with a custom
amongst men, which induces them to say of any who are unknown or
suddenly apparent, that “they came from the sky?”  Hence it happened
that, because a stranger appeared suddenly everywhere, it became the
custom to call him a heaven-born man, <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) —just as we also commonly call
earth-born all those whose descent is unknown. I say nothing of the fact
that such was the state of antiquity, when men’s eyes and minds were so
habitually rude, that they were excited by the appearance of every
newcomer as if it were that of a god: much more would this be the case
with a king, and that the primeval one.  I will linger some time longer
over the case of Saturn, because by fully discussing his primordial
history I shall beforehand furnish a compendious answer for all other
cases; and I do not wish to omit the more convincing testimony of your
sacred literature, the credit of which ought to be the greater in
proportion to its antiquity.  Now earlier than all litera<span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-Page_142"></span>ture was the Sibyl; that Sibyl, I
mean, who was the true prophetess of truth, from whom you borrow their
title for the priests of your demons. She in senarian verse expounds the
descent of Saturn and his exploits in words to this effect: “In the
tenth generation of men, after the flood had overwhelmed the former
race, reigned Saturn, and Titan, and Japetus, the bravest of the sons of
Terra and Cœlus.” Whatever credit, therefore, is attached to your older
writers and literature, and much more to those who were the simplest as
belonging to that age, <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005) it
becomes sufficiently certain that Saturn and his family <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006) were human beings. We have in our
possession, then, a brief principle which amounts to a prescriptive rule
about their origin serving for all other cases, to prevent our going
wrong in individual instances. The particular character <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007) of a posterity is shown by the
original founders of the race—mortal beings (come) from mortals, earthly
ones from earthly; step after step comes in due relation <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) —marriage, conception,
birth—country, settlements, kingdoms, all give the clearest
proofs. <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009) They, therefore who
cannot deny the birth of men, must also admit their death; they who
allow their mortality must not suppose them to be gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_975"></span>[140:976](0030173.htm#fr_975) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p2"></span> Agrees with *The Apology*, c. x.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[140:977](0030173.htm#fr_976) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p4"></span> Bona fide.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[140:978](0030173.htm#fr_977) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p5"></span> Censum.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[140:979](0030173.htm#fr_978) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p6"></span> There is here an omitted clause,
supplied in *The Apology*, “but rather to recall it to your memory.”

<span id="fn_979"></span>[140:980](0030173.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p7"></span> Ab ipsa ratione.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[140:981](0030173.htm#fr_980) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p8"></span> Signatur.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[140:982](0030173.htm#fr_981) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p9"></span> Undeunde.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[140:983](0030173.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p10"></span> Tantam proceritatem.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[140:984](0030173.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p11"></span> Insolescere, i.e., at the
commencement of puberty.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[140:985](0030173.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p12"></span> Lapilliscere, i.e., to indicate
maturity.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[140:986](0030173.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p13"></span> The nominative “cœlum” is used.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[140:987](0030173.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p14"></span> It is not very clear what is the
force of “sed et pepererit,” as read by Oehler; we have given the clause
an impersonal turn.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[140:988](0030173.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p15"></span> “Certe” is sometime “certo” in our
author.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[140:989](0030173.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p16"></span> Distulit.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[140:990](0030173.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p17"></span> That is, to rain and cloud.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[140:991](0030173.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p18"></span> Abalienato.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[141:992](0030173.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p19"></span> The word is “cœlum” here.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[141:993](0030173.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p20"></span> Eleganter.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[141:994](0030173.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p21"></span> i.e., as representing *Time*.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[141:995](0030173.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p22"></span> So Augustine, *de Civ. Dei*, iv.
10; Arnobius, *adv. Nationes*, iii. 29; Cicero, *de Nat. Deor*. ii. 25.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[141:996](0030173.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p23"></span> As if from “sero,” *satum*.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[141:997](0030173.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p24"></span> Translatio.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[141:998](0030173.htm#fr_997) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p25"></span> Utrumque corporale.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[141:999](0030173.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p26"></span> Mentitis argumentationibus.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[141:1000](0030173.htm#fr_999) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p27"></span> Census.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[141:1001](0030173.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p28"></span> See his *Histories*, v. 2, 4.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[141:1002](0030173.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p29"></span> Antiquitatem canos, “hoary
antiquity.”

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[141:1003](0030173.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p30"></span> Jano sive Jane.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[141:1004](0030173.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p31"></span> Depalaverat, “marked out with
stakes.”

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[141:1005](0030173.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p32"></span> Cœlitem.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[142:1006](0030173.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p33"></span> Magis proximis quoniam illius
ætatis.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[142:1007](0030173.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p34"></span> Prosapia.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[142:1008](0030173.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p35"></span> Qualitas. \[<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p35.2"></span>n.b.</span> Our author’s use of
*Præscriptio*.\]

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[142:1009](0030173.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p36"></span> Comparantur.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[142:1010](0030173.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii.xii-p37"></span> Monumenta liquent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gods Human at First.  Who Had the Authority to Make Them
Divine? Jupiter Not Only Human, But Immoral.](0030174)
