[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030196)  [Next](0030198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.i"></span> <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="iv.x.i-Page_175"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.x.i-p1.1"></span>VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p2"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.x.i-p2.1"></span>The Soul’s Testimony. <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) </span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p4"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.x.i-p4.1"></span>\[Translated by the Rev. S. Thelwall.\]</span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.x.i-p6"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.x.i-p6.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.x.i-p7.1"></span>If</span>, with the object of convicting the
rivals and persecutors of Christian truth, from their own authorities,
of the crime of at once being untrue to themselves and doing injustice
to us, one is bent on gathering testimonies in its favour from the
writings of the philosophers, or the poets, or other masters of this
world’s learning and wisdom, he has need of a most inquisitive spirit,
and a still greater memory to carry out the research.  Indeed, some of
our people, who still continued their inquisitive labours in ancient
literature, and still occupied memory with it, have published works we
have in our hands of this very sort; works in which they relate and
attest the nature and origin of their traditions, and the grounds on
which opinions rest, and from which it may be seen at once that we have
embraced nothing new or monstrous—nothing for which we cannot claim the
support of ordinary and well-known writings, whether in ejecting error
from our creed, or admitting truth into it. But the unbelieving hardness
of the human heart leads them to slight even their own teachers,
otherwise approved and in high renown, whenever they touch upon
arguments which are used in defence of Christianity. Then the poets are
fools, when they describe the gods with human passions and stories; then
the philosophers are without reason, when they knock at the gates of
truth.  He will thus far be reckoned a wise and sagacious man who has
gone the length of uttering sentiments that are almost Christian; while
if, in a mere affectation of judgment and wisdom, he sets himself to
reject their ceremonies, or to convicting the world of its sin, he is
sure to be branded as a Christian. We will have nothing, then, to do
with the literature and the teaching, perverted in its best results,
which is believed in its errors rather than its truth. We shall lay no
stress on it, if some of their authors have declared that there is one
God, and one God only. Nay, let it be granted that there is nothing in
heathen writers which a Christian approves, that it may be put out of
his power to utter a single word of reproach.  For all are not familiar
with their teachings; and those who are, have no assurance in regard to
their truth.  Far less do men assent to our writings, to which no one
comes for guidance unless he is already a Christian.  I call in a new
testimony, yea, one which is better known than all literature, more
discussed than all doctrine, more public than all publications, greater
than the whole man—I mean all which is man’s. Stand forth, O soul,
whether thou art a divine and eternal substance, as most philosophers
believe if it be so, thou wilt be the less likely to lie,—or whether
thou art the very opposite of divine, because indeed a mortal thing, as
Epicurus alone thinks—in that case there will be the less temptation for
thee to speak falsely in this case: whether thou art received from
heaven, or sprung from earth; whether thou art formed of numbers, or of
atoms; whether thine existence begins with that of the body, or thou art
put into it at a later stage; from whatever source, and in whatever way,
thou makest man a rational being, in the highest degree capable of
thought and knowledge,—stand forth and give thy witness. But I call thee
not as when, fashioned in schools, trained in libraries, fed in Attic
academies and porticoes, thou belchest wisdom.  I address thee simple,
rude, uncultured and untaught, such as they have thee who have thee
only; that very thing of the road, the street, the work-shop, wholly. I
want thine inexperience, since in thy small experience no one feels any
confidence. I demand of thee the things thou bringest with thee into
man, which thou knowest either from <span id="page_176">p. 176</span>
<span id="iv.x.i-Page_176"></span>thyself, or from thine author, whoever
he may be. Thou art not, as I well know, Christian; for a man becomes a
Christian, he is not born one. Yet Christians earnestly press thee for a
testimony; they press thee, though an alien, to bear witness against thy
friends, that they may be put to shame before thee, for hating and
mocking us on account of things which convict thee as an accessory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[175:1477](0030197.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="iv.x.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p3"></span> \[The tract *De Testimonio Animæ* is cast
into an apologetic form and very properly comes into place here.  It was
written in Orthodoxy and forms a valuable preface to the *De Anima*, of
which we cannot say that it is quite free from errors. As it refers to
the Apology, we cannot place it before that work, and perhaps we shall
not greatly err if we consider it a sequel to the Apology. If it proves
to others the source of as much enjoyment as it affords to me, it will
be treasured by them as one of the most precious testimonies to the
Gospel, introducing Man to himself.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](0030198)
