[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030312)  [Next](0030314) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.i"></span> <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="v.iv.i-Page_269"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.i-p2.1"></span>The Five Books Against Marcion.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.i-p3.1"></span>\[Translated by Dr. Holmes.\]</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.i-p4.1"></span>Introductory Notes.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv.i-p6"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.i-p6.1"></span>Dedication.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.i-p7.1"></span>To the Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of
Chester.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p8"></span>*My Dear Lord*,

<span id="v.iv.i-p9"></span>I am gratified to have your permission to
dedicate this volume to your Lordship. It is the fruit of some two
years’ leisure labour.  Every man’s occupation spares to him some <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.i-p9.1"></span>λείψανα χρόνου</span>; and
thirty years ago you taught me, at Oxford, how to husband these
opportunities in the pleasant studies of Biblical and Theological
Science.  For that and many other kindnesses I cannot cease to be
thankful to you.

<span id="v.iv.i-p10"></span>But, besides this private motive, I have in
your Lordship’s own past course an additional incentive for resorting to
you on this occasion. You, until lately, presided over the theological
studies of our great University; and you have given great encouragement
to patristic literature by your excellent edition of the Apostolic
Fathers. <span id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) To whom could I more
becomingly present this humble effort to make more generally known the
great merits of perhaps the greatest work of the first of the Latin
Fathers than to yourself?

<span id="v.iv.i-p12"></span>I remain, with much respect,

<span id="v.iv.i-p13"></span>My dear Lord,

<span id="v.iv.i-p14"></span>Very faithfully yours,

<span id="v.iv.i-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.i-p15.1"></span>Peter Holmes</span>.

<span id="v.iv.i-p16"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.i-p16.1"></span>Mannamead, Plymouth</span>, <span
id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314)

<span id="v.iv.i-p18"></span>*March*, 1868.

<span id="v.iv.i-p19"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.i-p19.1"></span>Preface by the Translator. <span
id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) </span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.i-p21.1"></span>The</span> reader has, in this volume a
translation (attempted for the first time in English) of the largest of
the extant works of the earliest Latin Fathers.  The most important of
Tertullian’s writings have always been highly valued in the church,
although, as was natural from their varied character, for different
reasons. Thus his two best-known treatises, *The Apology* and *The
Prescription against Heretics*, have divided between them for more than
sixteen centuries the admiration of all intelligent readers,—the one for
its masterly defence of the Christian religion against its heathen
persecutors, and the other for its lucid vindication of the church’s
rule of faith against its heretical assailants. The present work has
equal claims on the reader’s appreciation, in respect of those qualities
of vigorous thought, close reasoning, terse expression, and earnest
purpose, enlivened by sparkling wit and impassioned eloquence, which
have always secured for Tertullian, in spite of many drawbacks, the
esteem which is given to a great and favourite author. If these books
against Marcion have received, as indeed it must be allowed they have,
less attention from the general reader than their intrinsic merit
deserves, the neglect is mainly due to the fact that the interesting
character of their contents is concealed by the usual title-page, which
points only to a heresy supposed to be extinct and inapplicable, whether
in the materials of its defence or confutation, to any modern
circumstances. But many treatises of great authors, which have outlived
their literal occasion, retain a value from their collateral arguments,
which is not inferior to that effected by their primary subject. Such is
the case with the work before us. If Marcionism is in the letter
obsolete, there is its spirit still left in the church, which in more
ways than one develops its ancient <span id="page_270">p. 270</span>
<span id="v.iv.i-Page_270"></span>characteristics. What these were, the
reader will soon discover in this volume; but reference may be made even
here, in passing, to that prominent aim of the heresy which gave
Tertullian his opportunity of proving the essential coherence of the Old
and the New Testaments, and of exhibiting both his great knowledge of
the details of Holy Scripture, and his fine intelligence of the
progressive nature of God’s revelation as a whole. This constitutes the
charm of the present volume, which might almost be designated a
*Treatise on the Connection between the Jewish and the Christian
Scriptures*. How interesting this subject is to earnest men of the
present age, is proved by the frequent treatment of it in our religious
literature. <span id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) In order to
assist the reader to a more efficient use of this volume, in reference
to its copiousness of Scripture illustration, a full *Index of
Scriptural Passages* has been drawn up. Another satisfactory result
will, it is believed, accompany the reading of this volume, in the
evidence which it affords of the venerable catholicity of that system of
biblical and dogmatic truth which constitutes the belief of what is
called the “*orthodox*” Christian of the present day. Orthodoxy has been
impugned of late, as if it had suffered much deterioration in its
transmission to us; and an advanced school of thinkers has demanded its
reform by a manipulation which they have called “free handling.” To such
readers, then, as prize the deposit of the Christian creed which they
have received, in the light of St. Jude’s description, as “*the faith
once for all delivered to the saints*,” it cannot but prove satisfactory
to be able to trace in Tertullian, writing more than sixteen centuries
ago, the outlines of their own cherished convictions—held by one who
cannot be charged with too great an obsequiousness to traditional
authority, and who at the same time possessed honesty, earnestness, and
intelligence enough to make him an unexceptionable witness to facts of
such a kind. The translator would only add, that he has, in compliance
with the wise canon laid down by the editors of this series, endeavoured
always to present to the reader the meaning of the author in readable
English, keeping as near as idiomatic rules allowed to the sense and
even style of the original. Amidst the many well-known difficulties of
Tertullian’s writings (and his *Anti-Marcion* is not exempt from any of
these difficulties, <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) ) the
translator cannot hope that he has accomplished his labour without
mistakes, for which he would beg the reader’s indulgence. He has,
however, endeavoured to obviate the inconvenience of faulty translation
by quoting in foot-notes all words, phrases, and passages which appeared
to him difficult. <span id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318) He has also
added such notes as seemed necessary to illustrate the author’s
argument, or to explain any obscure allusions. The translation has been
made always from Oehler’s edition, with the aid of his scholarly Index
Verborum. Use has also been made of Semler’s edition, and the *variorum*
reprint of the Abbé Migne, the chief result of which recension has been
to convince the translator of the great superiority and general
excellence of Oehler’s edition. When he had completed two-thirds of his
work, he happened to meet with the French translation of Tertullian by
Monr. Denain, in Genoude’s series, *<span id="v.iv.i-p24.1"></span>Les
Pères de l’Eglise*, published some twenty-five years ago. This version,
which runs in fluent language always, is very unequal in its relation to
the original: sometimes it has the brevity of an abridgment, sometimes
the fulness of a paraphrase.  Often does it miss the author’s point, and
never does it keep his style. The Abbé Migne correctly describes it:
“Elegans potius quam fidissimus interpres, qui Africanæ loquelæ
asperitatem splendenti ornavit sermone, egregiaque interdum et ad vivum
expressa interpretatione recreavit.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[269:2314](0030313.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="v.iv.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p11"></span> \[The name of Bishop Jacobson was often
introduced in our first volume, in notes to the Apostolic Fathers. He
has recently “fallen asleep,” after a life of exemplary labour “with
good report of all men and of the Truth itself.” His learning and piety
were adorned by a profound humility, which gave a primitive cast to his
character. At the Lambeth Conference, having the honour to sit at his
side, I observed his extreme modesty. He rarely rose to speak, though he
sometimes honoured me with words in a whisper, which the whole assembly
would have rejoiced to hear. Like his great predecessor, Pearson, in
many respects, the mere filings and clippings of his thoughts were
gold-dust.\]

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[269:2315](0030313.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="v.iv.i-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p17"></span> \[Dr. Holmes is described, in the
Edinburgh Edition, as “Domestic Chaplain to the Rt. Hon. the Countess of
Rothes.” He was B.A. (Oxon.) in 1840, and took orders that year. Was
Head-Master of Plymouth Grammar School at one time, and among his very
valuable and learned works should be mentioned, as very useful to the
reader of this series, his Translation of Bull’s *Defensio Fidei Nicænæ*
(two vols. 8vo. Oxford, 1851), and of the same great author’s *Judicium
Ecclesiæ Catholicæ*, 8vo. Oxford, 1855.\]

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[269:2316](0030313.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="v.iv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p20"></span> \[This preface and the frequent
annotations of our author relieve the American editor, save very
sparingly, from adding notes of his own.\]

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[270:2317](0030313.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="v.iv.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p22"></span> Two works are worth mentioning in
connection with this topic for their succinct and handy form, as well as
satisfactory treatment of their argument: Mr. Perowne’s Norrisian prize
essay, entitled *The Essential Coherence of the Old and New Testaments*
(1858), and Sir William Page Wood’s recent work, *The Continuity of
Scripture*, as declared by the Testimony of our Lord, and of the
evangelists and apostles.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[270:2318](0030313.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="v.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p23"></span> Bishop Kaye says of Tertullian (page 62):
“He is indeed the harshest and most obscure of writers, and the least
capable of being accurately represented in a translation;” and he quotes
the learned Ruhnken’s sentence of our author: “Latinitatis certè
pessimum auctorem esse aio et confirmo.” This is surely much too
sweeping. To the careful student Tertullian’s style commends itself, by
and by, as suited exactly to his subject—as the terse and vigorous
expression of terse and vigorous thought. Bishop Butler has been often
censured for an awkward style; whereas it is a fairer criticism to say,
that the arguments of the *Analogy* and the *Sermons of Human Nature*
have been delivered in the language best suited to their character. This
adaptation of style to matter is probably in all great authors a real
characteristic of genius. A more just and favourable view is taken of
Tertullian’s Latin by Niebuhr, *Hist. Rom*. (Schmitz), vol. v. p. 271,
and his *Lectures on Ancient Hist*. (Schmitz), vol. ii. p. 54.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[270:2319](0030313.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="v.iv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p24"></span> He has also, as the reader will observe,
endeavoured to distinguish, by the help of type, between the true God
and Marcion’s god, printing the initials of the former, and of the
pronouns referring to Him, in capitals, and those of the latter in small
letters. To do this was not always an easy matter, for in many passages
the argument amalgamates the two. Moreover, in the earlier portion of
the work the translator fears that he may have occasionally neglected to
make the distinction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](0030314)
