[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030011)  [Next](0030013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>I would now have these most religious
protectors and vindicators of the laws and institutions of their
fathers, tell me, in regard to their own fidelity and the honour, and
submission they themselves show to ancestral institutions, if they have
departed from nothing—if they have in nothing gone out of the old
paths—if they have not put aside whatsoever is most useful and necessary
as rules of a virtuous life. What has become of the laws repressing
expensive and ostentatious ways of living? which forbade more than a
hundred *asses* to be expended on a supper, and more than one fowl to be
set on the table at a time, and that not a fatted one; which expelled a
patrician from the senate on the serious ground, as it was counted, of
aspiring to be too great, because he had acquired ten pounds of silver;
which put down the theatres as quickly as they arose to debauch the
manners of the people; which did not permit the insignia of official
dignities or of noble birth to be rashly or with impunity usurped? For I
see the Centenarian suppers must now bear the name, not from the hundred
asses, but from the hundred sestertia <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) expended on them; and that mines of
silver are made into dishes (it were little if this applied only to
senators, and not to freedmen or even mere whip-spoilers <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) ). I see, too, that neither is a single
theatre enough, nor are theatres unsheltered: no doubt it was that
immodest pleasure might not be torpid in the wintertime, the
Lacedæmonians invented their woollen cloaks for the plays. I see now no
difference between the dress of matrons and prostitutes. In regard to
women, indeed, those laws of your fathers, which used to be such an
encouragement to modesty and sobriety, have also fallen into desuetude,
when a woman had yet known no gold upon her save on the finger, which,
with the bridal ring, her husband had sacredly pledged to himself; when
the abstinence of women from wine was carried so far, that a matron, for
opening the compartments of a wine cellar, was starved to death by her
friends,—while in the times of Romulus, for merely tasting wine,
Mecenius killed his wife, and suffered nothing for the deed. With
reference to this also, it was the custom of women to kiss their
relatives, that they might be detected by their breath. Where is that
happiness of married life, ever so desirable, which distinguished our
earlier manners, and as the result of which for about 600 years there
was not among us a single <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vi-Page_23"></span>divorce?  Now, women have every member of
the body heavy laden with gold; wine-bibbing is so common among them,
that the kiss is never offered with their will; and as for divorce, they
long for it as though it were the natural consequence of marriage. The
laws, too, your fathers in their wisdom had enacted concerning the very
gods themselves, you their most loyal children have rescinded.  The
consuls, by the authority of the senate, banished Father Bacchus and his
mysteries not merely from the city, but from the whole of Italy. The
consuls Piso and Gabinius, no Christians surely, forbade Serapis, and
Isis, and Arpocrates, with their dogheaded friend, <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) admission into the Capitol—in the act
casting them out from the assembly of the gods—overthrow their altars,
and expelled them from the country, being anxious to prevent the vices
of their base and lascivious religion from spreading. These, you have
restored, and conferred highest honours on them. What has come to your
religion—of the veneration due by you to your ancestors? In your dress,
in your food, in your style of life, in your opinions, and last of all
in your very speech, you have renounced your progenitors. You are always
praising antiquity, and yet every day you have novelties in your way of
living. From your having failed to maintain what you should, you make it
clear, that, while you abandon the good ways of your fathers, you retain
and guard the things you ought not. Yet the very tradition of your
fathers, which you still seem so faithfully to defend, and in which you
find your principal matter of accusation against the Christians—I mean
zeal in the worship of the gods, the point in which antiquity has mainly
erred—although you have rebuilt the altars of Serapis, now a Roman
deity, and to Bacchus, now become a god of Italy, you offer up your
orgies,—I shall in its proper place show that you despise, neglect, and
overthrow, casting entirely aside the authority of the men of old. I go
on meantime to reply to that infamous charge of secret crimes, clearing
my way to things of open day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[22:83](0030012.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span> As = 2-1/8 farthings. Sestertium = £7,
16s. 3d.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[22:84](0030012.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span> Slaves still bearing the marks of the
scourge.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[23:85](0030012.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span> Anubis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](0030013)
