[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030720)  [Next](0030722) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p4"></span>(Such as have lapsed, cap. vii. p. 660.)

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p5"></span>The penitential system of the Primitive
days, referred to in our author, began to be changed when less public
confessions were authorized, on account of the scandals which publicity
generated. Changes were as follows:

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p6"></span>1. A grave presbyter was appointed to
receive and examine voluntary penitents as the Penitentiary of a
diocese, and to suspend or reconcile them with due solemnities—*circa*
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.ii.xiii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 250.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p7"></span>2. This plan also became encumbered with
difficulties and was abolished in the East, *circa* <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.ii.xiii-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span> 400.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p8"></span>3. A discipline similar to that of the
Anglican Church (which is but loosely maintained therein) succeeded,
under St. Chrysostom; who frequently maintains the sufficiency of
confession according to [Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>. A
Gallican author <span id="fr_8537"></span>[8538](#fn_8537) says—“this is
the period regarded by historians as the most brilliant in Church
history. At the close of the fourth century, in the great churches of
the Orient, *sixty thousand Christians* received the Eucharistic
communion, in one day, *in both kinds*, with no other than their private
confessions to Almighty God.  The scandalous evil-liver alone was
repelled from the Eucharistic Table.” This continued till *circa* <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 700.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p10"></span>4.  Particular, but voluntary
confessions were now made in the East and West, but with widely various
acceptance under local systems of discipline. The absolutions were
*precatory*: “may God absolve Thee.” This lasted, even in the West, till
the compulsory system of the Lateran Council, <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p10.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1215.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p11"></span>5. Since this date, so far as the West
is concerned, the whole system of corrupt casuistry and enforced
confession adopted in the West has utterly destroyed the Primitive
doctrine and discipline as to sin and its remedy wherever it prevails.
In the East, private confession exists in a system wholly different and
one which maintains the Primitive Theology and the Scriptural principle.
(1) It is voluntary; (2) it is free from the corrupt system of the
casuists; (3) it distinguishes between Ecclesiastical Absolution and
that of Him who alone “seeth in secret;” (4) it admits no compromise
with *attrition*, but exacts the contrite heart <span id="page_667">p.
667</span> <span id="vi.ii.xiii-Page_667"></span>and the firm resolve to
go and sin no more, and (5) finally, it employs a most guarded and
Evangelical formula of remission, of which see Elucidation IV.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p12"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p13"></span>(The last hope, cap. vii. p. 662.)

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p14"></span>How absolutely the Lateran Council has
overthrown the Primitive discipline is here made manifest. The spirit of
the latter is expressed by our author in language which almost prompts
to despair. It makes sin “exceeding sinful” and even Ecclesiastical
forgiveness the reverse of easy.  The Lateran System of enforced
Confession makes sin easy and restoration to a sinless state equally so:
a perpetual resort to the confessor being the only condition for evil
living, and a chronic state of pardon and peace.  But, let the Greek
Church be heard in this matter, rather than an Anglican Catholic. I
refer to Macarius, Bishop of Vinnitza and Rector of the Theological
Academy of St. Petersburg, as follows: <span
id="fr_8538"></span>[8539](#fn_8538) “It is requisite (for the effective
reception of Absolution) at least according to the teaching of the
Orthodox Church of the Orient, that the following conditions be
observed: (1) Contrition for sins, is in the very nature of Penitence,
indispensable; (2), consequently, there must be a firm resolution to
reform the life; (3) also, faith in Christ and hope in his mercy, with
(4) auricular confession before the priest.” He allows that this latter
condition was not *primitive*, but was a *maternal concession* to
penitents of later date: this, however, is voluntary, and of a widely
different form from that of the Latin, as will appear below in
Elucidation IV.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p16"></span>Now, he contrasts with this the system
of Rome, and condemns it, on overwhelming considerations.  1. It makes
penances compensations <span id="fr_8539"></span>[8540](#fn_8539) or
“satisfaction,” offered for sins to divine Justice, this (he says) “is
in contradiction with the Christian doctrine of justification, the
Scripture teaching one full and entire satisfaction for the sins of the
whole human race, once for all presented by our Lord Jesus Christ. This
doctrine is equally in conflict with the entire teaching of the
Primitive Church.”

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p18"></span>2. It introduces a false system of
*indulgences*, as the consequence of its false premisses.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p19"></span>3. He demonstrates the insufficiency of
*attrition*, which respects the fear of punishment, and not sin itself.
But the Council of Trent affirms the sufficiency of *attrition*, and
permits the confessor to absolve the attrite.  Needless to say, the
masses accept this wide gate and broad way to salvation rather than the
strait gate and narrow way of hating sin and reforming the life, in
obedience to the Gospel.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p20"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p21"></span>(Among brethren, cap. x., p. 662.)

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p22"></span>A controversial writer has lately
complained that Bp. Kaye speaks of the *public confession* treated of by
our author in this work, and adds—“Tertullian nowhere used the word
*public*.” The answer is that he speaks of the discipline of
*Exomologesis*, which was, in its own nature, as public as preaching. A
Gallican writer, less inclined to Jesuitism in the use of words, says
frankly: “When one studies this question, with the documents before his
eyes, it is impossible not to confess that the Primitive discipline of
the Church exhibits not a vestige of the auricular confession afterwards
introduced.” See Irenæus, *Adv. Hæres*. Vol. I. p. 335, this Series. The
Lii. of the canons called Apostolical, reflects a very simple view of
the matter, in these words: “If any Bishop or Presbyter will not receive
one who *turns from* his sins, but casts him out, let him be deposed:
for he grieves Christ, who said, There shall be joy in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth.” The ascetic spirit of our author seems at war
with that of this Canon.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p23"></span><span id="page_668">p. 668</span> <span
id="vi.ii.xiii-Page_668"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p24"></span>(Exomologesis, cap. xii., p. 663.)

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p25"></span>To this day, in the Oriental Churches,
the examination of the presbyter who hears the voluntary confession of
penitents, is often very primitive in its forms and confined to general
inquiries under the Decalogue. The Casuistry of (Dens and Liguori) the
Western *Schemata Practica* has not defiled our Eastern brethren to any
great extent.

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p26"></span>In the office <span
id="fr_8540"></span>[8541](#fn_8540) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p27.1"></span>᾽Ακολουθία τῶν ἐξομολουγουμένων</span>) we
have a simple and beautiful form of prayer and supplication in which the
following is the formula of Absolution: “My Spiritual child, who hast
confessed to my humility, I, unworthy and a sinner, *have not the power
to forgive sins on Earth*; God only can: and through that Divine voice
which came to the Apostles, after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ, saying—‘Whosoever sins, etc.,’ we, therein confiding,
say—Whatsoever thou hast confessed to my extreme humility, and
whatsoever thou hast *omitted to say*, either through ignorance or
forgetfulness, *God forgive thee* in this present world and in that
which is to come.”

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p28"></span>The plural (*We* therein confiding) is
significant and a token of Primitive doctrine: *i.e.* of confession
before the whole Church, ([2 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p28.1"></span>): and note the precatory form—“God forgive
thee.” The perilous form *Ego te absolvo* is not Catholic: it dates from
the thirteenth century and is used in the West only. It is not wholly
dropped from the Anglican Office, but has been omitted from the American
Prayer-Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8537"></span>[666:8538](0030721.htm#fr_8537) <span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p9"></span> Le Confesseur, par L’Abbé \* \* \* p.
15, Brussels 1866.

<span id="fn_8538"></span>[667:8539](0030721.htm#fr_8538) <span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p15"></span> *Theol. Dogmat. Orthodoxe*, pp.
529–541, etc.

<span id="fn_8539"></span>[667:8540](0030721.htm#fr_8539) <span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p17"></span> *Couc. Trident.* Sess. xiv. cap. 8.

<span id="fn_8540"></span>[668:8541](0030721.htm#fr_8540) <span
id="vi.ii.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xiii-p27"></span> The Great Euchologion, p. 220, Venice,
1851.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Baptism.](0030722)
