[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030116)  [Next](0030118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii-Page_94"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p2"></span>I affirm that not one of the Faithful has
ever a crown upon his head, except at a time of trial. That is the case
with all, from catechumens to confessors and martyrs, <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) or (as the case may be) deniers. 
Consider, then, whence the custom about which we are now chiefly
inquiring got its authority. But when the question is raised why it is
observed, it is meanwhile evident that it is observed. Therefore that
can neither be regarded as no offence, or an uncertain one, which is
perpetrated against a practice which is capable of defence, on the
ground even of its repute, and is sufficiently ratified by the support
of general acceptance. It is undoubted, so that we ought to inquire into
the reason of the thing; but without prejudice to the practice, not for
the purpose of overthrowing it, but rather of building it up, that you
may all the more carefully observe it, when you are also satisfied as to
its reason. But what sort of procedure is it, for one to be bringing
into debate a practice, when he has fallen from it, and to be seeking
the explanation of his having ever had it, when he has left it off?
Since, although he may wish to seem on this account desirous to
investigate it, that he may show that he has not done wrong in giving it
up, it is evident that he nevertheless transgressed previously in its
presumptuous observance.  If he has done no wrong to-day in accepting
the crown he offended before in refusing it. This treatise, therefore,
will not be for those who not in a proper condition for inquiry, but for
those who, with the real desire of getting instruction, bring forward,
not a question for debate, but a request for advice. For it is from this
desire that a true inquiry always proceeds; and I praise the faith which
has believed in the duty of complying with the rule, before it has
learned the reason of it. An easy thing it is at once to demand where it
is written that we should not be crowned.  But is it written that we
should be crowned? Indeed, in urgently demanding the warrant of
Scripture in a different side from their own, men prejudge that the
support of Scripture ought no less to appear on their part. For if it
shall be said that it is lawful to be crowned on this ground, that
Scripture does not forbid it, it will as validly be retorted that just
on this ground is the crown unlawful, because the Scripture does not
enjoin it. What shall discipline do? Shall it accept both things, as if
neither were forbidden? Or shall it refuse both, as if neither were
enjoined? But “the thing which is not forbidden is freely permitted.” I
should rather say <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) that what has
not been freely allowed is forbidden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_384"></span>[94:385](0030117.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p3"></span> \[Kaye (p. 231) notes this as a rare
instance of classing *Catechumens* among “the Faithful.”\]

<span id="fn_385"></span>[94:386](0030117.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p4"></span> \[This is said not absolutely but in
contrast with extreme license; but it shows the Supremacy of Scripture.
Compare *De Monogam*, cap. 4.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](0030118)
