[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030619)  [Next](0030621) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.—Christ, by Raising the
Dead, Attested in a Practical Way the Doctrine of the Resurrection of
the Flesh.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxviii-p2"></span>After the Lord’s *words*, what are
we to think of the purport of His *actions*, when He raises dead persons
from their biers *and* their graves? To what end did He do so? If it was
only for the mere exhibition of His power, or to afford the temporary
favour of restoration to life, it was really no great matter for Him to
raise men to die over again. If, however, as was the truth, it was
rather to put in secure keeping men’s belief in a future resurrection,
then it must follow from the particular form of His own examples, that
the said resurrection will be a bodily one. I can never allow it to be
said that the resurrection of the future, being destined for the soul
only, did then receive these preliminary illustrations of a raising of
the flesh, simply because it would have been impossible to have shown
the <span id="page_573">p. 573</span> <span
id="v.viii.xxxviii-Page_573"></span>resurrection of an invisible soul
except by the resuscitation of a visible substance. They have but a poor
knowledge of God, who suppose Him to be only capable of doing what comes
within the compass of their own thoughts; and after all, they cannot but
know full well what His capability has ever been, if they only make
acquaintance with the writings of John. For unquestionably he, who has
exhibited to our sight the martyrs’ hitherto disembodied souls resting
under the altar, <span id="fr_7533"></span>[7534](#fn_7533) was quite
able to display them before our eyes rising without a body of flesh. I,
however, for my part prefer (believing) that it is impossible for God to
practise deception (weak as He only could be in respect of artifice),
from any fear of seeming to have given preliminary proofs of a thing in
a way which is inconsistent with His actual disposal of the thing; nay
more, from a fear that, since He was not powerful enough to show us a
sample of the resurrection without the flesh, He might with still
greater infirmity be unable to display (by and by) the full
accomplishment of the sample in the self-same substance *of the flesh*.
No example, indeed, is greater than the thing of which it is a sample.
Greater, however, it is, if souls with their body are to be raised as
the evidence of their resurrection without the body, so as that the
entire salvation of man *in soul and body* should become a guarantee for
only the half, *the soul*; whereas the condition in all examples is,
that which would be deemed the less—I mean the resurrection of the soul
only—should be the foretaste, as it were, of the rising of the flesh
also at its appointed time. And therefore, according to our estimate of
the truth, those examples of dead persons who were raised by the Lord
were indeed a proof of the resurrection both of the flesh and of the
soul,—a proof, in fact, that this gift was to be denied to neither
substance. Considered, however, as examples only, they expressed all the
less significance—*less, indeed*, than Christ will express at last—for
they were not raised up for glory and immortality, but only for another
death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7533"></span>[573:7534](0030620.htm#fr_7533) <span
id="v.viii.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxviii-p3"></span> [Rev. vi.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)<span
id="v.viii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Evidence Afforded to Us in the Acts of the
Apostles.](0030621)
