[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030200)  [Next](0030202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.v"></span>

<span id="iv.x.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.x.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iv.x.v-p2"></span>These testimonies of the soul are simple as
true, commonplace as simple, universal as commonplace, natural as
universal, divine as natural.  I don’t think they can appear frivolous
or feeble to any one, if he reflect on the majesty of nature, from which
the soul derives its authority. <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486) If you acknowledge the authority of
the mistress, you will own it also in the disciple.  Well, nature is the
mistress here, and her disciple is the soul. But everything the one has
taught or the other learned, has come from God—the Teacher of the
teacher. And what the soul may know from the teachings of its chief
instructor, thou canst judge from that which is within thee. Think of
that which enables thee to think; reflect on that which in forebodings
is the prophet, the augur in omens, the foreseer of coming events. Is it
a wonderful thing, if, being the gift of God to man, it knows how to
divine? Is it anything very strange, if it knows the God by whom it was
bestowed? Even fallen as it is, the victim of the great adversary’s
machinations, it does not forget its Creator, His goodness and law, and
the final end both of itself and of its foe. Is it singular then, if,
divine in its origin, its revelations agree with the knowledge God has
given to His own people? But he who does not regard those outbursts of
the soul as the teaching of a congenital nature and the secret deposit
of an inborn knowledge, will say that the habit and, so to say, the vice
of speaking in this way has been acquired and confirmed from the
opinions of published books widely spread among men.  Unquestionably the
soul existed before letters, and speech before books, and ideas before
the writing of them, and man himself before the poet and
philosopher. <span id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487) Is it then to be
believed, that before literature and its publication no utterances of
the sort we have pointed out came from the lips of men? Did nobody speak
of God and His goodness, nobody of death, nobody of the dead? Speech
went a-begging, I suppose; nay, (the subjects being still awanting,
without which it cannot even exist at this day, when it is so much more
copious, and rich, and wise), it could not exist at all if the things
which are now so easily suggested, that cling to us so constantly, that
are so very near to us, that are somehow born on our very lips, had no
existence in ancient times, before letters had any existence in the
world—before there was a Mercury, I think, at all. And whence was it, I
pray, that letters themselves came to know, and to disseminate for the
use of speech, what no mind had ever conceived, or tongue put forth, or
ear taken in? But, clearly, since the Scriptures of God, whether
belonging to Christians or to Jews, into whose olive tree we have been
grafted—are much more ancient than any secular literature, (or, let us
only say, are of a somewhat earlier date, as we have shown in its proper
place when proving their trustworthiness); if the soul have taken these
utterances from writings at all, we must believe it has taken them from
ours, and not from yours, its instruction coming more naturally from the
earlier than the later works. Which latter indeed waited for their own
instruction from the former, and though we grant that light has come
from you, still it has flowed from the first fountainhead originally;
and we claim as <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span
id="iv.x.v-Page_179"></span>entirely ours, all you may have taken from
us and handed down. Since it is thus, it matters little whether the
soul’s knowledge was put into it by God or by His book. Why, then, O
man, wilt thou maintain a view so groundless, as that those testimonies
of the soul have gone forth from the mere human speculations of your
literature, and got hardening of common use?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[178:1487](0030201.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="iv.x.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.v-p3"></span> \[This appeal to the universal conscience
and consciousness of mankind is unanswerable, and assures us that
counter-theories will never prevail.  See Bossuet, *<span
id="iv.x.v-p3.1"></span>De la Connoisance de Dieu* <span
id="iv.x.v-p3.2"></span>et de Soi-même. Œuvres, Tom. V. pp. 86 et. seqq.
Ed. Paris, 1846.\]

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[178:1488](0030201.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="iv.x.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x.v-p4"></span> \[Compare the heathen ideas in Plato: e.g.
the story Socrates tells in the Gorgias, (near the close) about death
and Judgment.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](0030202)
