[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030339)  [Next](0030341) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—In the Attribute of Justice,
Marcion’s God is Hopelessly Weak and Ungodlike.  He Dislikes Evil, But
Does Not Punish Its Perpetration.</span>

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>But it is here sufficient that the
extreme perversity of their god is proved from the mere exposition of
his lonely goodness, in which they refuse to ascribe to him such
emotions of mind as they censure in the Creator.  Now, if he is
susceptible of no feeling of rivalry, or anger, or damage, or injury, as
one who refrains from exercising judicial power, I cannot tell how any
system of discipline—and that, too, a plenary one—can be consistent in
him. For how is it possible that he should issue commands, if he does
not mean to execute them; or forbid sins, if he intends not to punish
them, but rather to decline the functions of the judge, as being a
stranger to all notions of severity and judicial chastisement? For why
does he forbid the commission of that which he punishes not when
perpetrated? It would have been far more right, if he had not forbidden
what he meant not to punish, than that he should punish what he had not
forbidden. Nay, it was his duty even to have permitted what he was about
to prohibit in so unreasonable a way, as to annex no penalty to the
offence. <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656) For even now that is
tacitly permitted which is forbidden without any infliction of
vengeance. Besides, he only forbids the commission of that which he does
not like to have done.  Most listless, therefore, is he, since he takes
no offence at the doing of what he dislikes to be done, although
dis<span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-Page_292"></span>pleasure ought to be the companion of
his violated will. Now, if he is offended, he ought to be angry; if
angry, he ought to inflict punishment. For such infliction is the just
fruit of anger, and anger is the debt of displeasure, and displeasure
(as I have said) is the companion of a violated will. However, he
inflicts no punishment; therefore he takes no offence.

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p4"></span>He takes no offence, therefore his
will is not wronged, although that is done which he was unwilling to
have done; and the transgression is now committed with the acquiescence
of <span id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) his will, because whatever
offends not the will is not committed against the will. Now, if this is
to be the principle of the divine virtue or goodness, to be unwilling
indeed that a thing be done and to prohibit it, and yet not be moved by
its commission, we then allege that he has been moved already when he
declared his unwillingness; and that it is vain for him not to be moved
by the accomplishment of a thing after being moved at the possibility
thereof, when he willed it not to be done. For he prohibited it by his
not willing it. Did he not therefore do a judicial act, when he declared
his unwillingness, and consequent prohibition of it? For he judged that
it ought not to be done, and he deliberately declared <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) that it should be forbidden. 
Consequently by this time even he performs the part of a judge. If it is
unbecoming for God to discharge a judicial function, or at least only so
far becoming that He may merely declare His unwillingness, and pronounce
His prohibition, then He may not even punish for an offence when it is
committed.  Now, nothing is so unworthy of the Divine Being as not to
execute retribution on what He has disliked and forbidden. *First*, He
owes the infliction of chastisement to whatever sentence or law He
promulges, for the vindication of His authority and the maintenance of
submission to it; *secondly*, because hostile opposition is inevitable
to what He has disliked to be done, and by that dislike forbidden.
Moreover, it would be a more unworthy course for God to spare the
evil-doer than to punish him, especially in the most good and holy God,
who is not otherwise fully good than as the enemy of evil, and *that* to
such a degree as to display His love of good by the hatred of evil, and
to fulfil His defence of the former by the extirpation of the latter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[291:2657](0030340.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> Ut non defensurus. Defendo = vindico.
See Oehler’s note for other instances.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[292:2658](0030340.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p5"></span> Secundum.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[292:2659](0030340.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii.xxvi-p6"></span> Pronunciavit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dangerous Effects to Religion and Morality of the Doctrine of So
Weak a God.](0030341)
