[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030788)  [Next](0030790) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Argument. From the Prison They
are Led Forth with Joy into the Amphitheatre, Especially Perpetua and
Felicitas. All Refuse to Put on Profane Garments. They are Scourged,
They are Thrown to the Wild Beasts. Saturus Twice is Unhurt. Perpetua
and Felicitas are Thrown Down; They are Called Back to the Sanavivarian
Gate. Saturus Wounded by a Leopard, Exhorts the Soldier. They Kiss One
Another, and are Slain with the Sword.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p2"></span>1. The day of their victory shone forth,
and they proceeded from the prison into the amphitheatre, as if to an
assembly, joyous and of brilliant countenances; if perchance shrinking,
it was with joy, and not with fear. Perpetua followed with placid look,
and with step and gait as a matron of Christ, beloved of God; casting
down the luster of her eyes from the gaze of all. Moreover, Felicitas,
rejoicing that she had safely brought forth, so that she might fight
with the wild beasts; from the blood and from the midwife to the
gladiator, to wash after childbirth with a second baptism. And when they
were brought to the gate, and were constrained to put on the
clothing—the men, that of the priests of Saturn, and the women, that of
those who were consecrated to Ceres—that noble-minded woman resisted
even to the end with constancy. For she said, “We have come thus far of
our own accord, for this reason, that our liberty might not be
restrained. For this reason we have yielded our minds, that we might not
do any such thing as this:  we have agreed on this with you.”  Injustice
acknowledged the justice; the tribune yielded to their being brought as
simply as they were. Perpetua sang psalms, already treading under foot
the head of the Egyptian; Revocatus, and Saturninus, and Saturus uttered
threatenings against the gazing people about this martyrdom. When they
came within sight of Hilarianus, by gesture and nod, they began to say
to Hilarianus, “Thou judgest us,” say they, “but God will judge thee.”
At this the people, exasperated, demanded that they should be tormented
with scourges as they passed along the rank of the *venatores*. <span
id="fr_9004"></span>[9005](#fn_9004) And they indeed rejoiced that they
should have incurred any one of their Lord’s passions.

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p4"></span>2. But He who had said, “Ask, and ye
<span id="page_705">p. 705</span> <span
id="vi.vi.viii-Page_705"></span>shall receive,” <span
id="fr_9005"></span>[9006](#fn_9005) gave to them when they asked, that
death which each one had wished for. For when at any time they had been
discoursing among themselves about their wish in respect of their
martyrdom, Saturninus indeed had professed that he wished that he might
be thrown to all the beasts; doubtless that he might wear a more
glorious crown. Therefore in the beginning of the exhibition he and
Revocatus made trial of the leopard, and moreover upon the scaffold they
were harassed by the bear. Saturus, however, held nothing in greater
abomination than a bear; but he imagined that he would be put an end to
with one bite of a leopard. Therefore, when a wild boar was supplied, it
was the huntsman rather who had supplied that boar who was gored by that
same beast, and died the day after the shows.  Saturus only was drawn
out; and when he had been bound on the floor near to a bear, the bear
would not come forth from his den. And so Saturus for the second time is
recalled unhurt.

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p6"></span>3. Moreover, for the young women the
devil prepared a very fierce cow, provided especially for that purpose
contrary to custom, rivalling their sex also in that of the beasts. And
so, stripped and clothed with nets, they were led forth. The populace
shuddered as they saw one young woman of delicate frame, and another
with breasts still dropping from her recent childbirth. So, being
recalled, they are unbound. <span id="fr_9006"></span>[9007](#fn_9006)
Perpetua is first led in. She was tossed, and fell on her loins; and
when she saw her tunic torn from her side, she drew it over her as a
veil for her middle, rather mindful of her modesty than her suffering.
Then she was called for again, and bound up her dishevelled hair; for it
was not becoming for a martyr to suffer with dishevelled hair, lest she
should appear to be mourning in her glory. So she rose up; and when she
saw Felicitas crushed, she approached and gave her her hand, and lifted
her up. And both of them stood together; and the brutality of the
populace being appeased, they were recalled to the Sanavivarian gate.
Then Perpetua was received by a certain one who was still a catechumen,
Rusticus by name, who kept close to her; and she, as if aroused from
sleep, so deeply had she been in the Spirit and in an ecstasy, began to
look round her, and to say to the amazement of all, “I cannot tell when
we are to be led out to that cow.” And when she had heard what had
already happened, she did not believe it <span
id="fr_9007"></span>[9008](#fn_9007) until she had perceived certain
signs of injury in her body and in her dress, and had recognised the
catechumen.  Afterwards causing that catechumen and the brother to
approach, she addressed them, saying, “Stand fast in the faith, and love
one another, all of you, and be not offended at my sufferings.”

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p9"></span>4. The same Saturus at the other
entrance exhorted the soldier Pudens, saying, “Assuredly here I am, as I
have promised and foretold, for up to this moment I have felt no beast.
And now believe with your whole heart. Lo, I am going forth to that
beast, and I shall be destroyed with one bite of the leopard.” And
immediately at the conclusion of the exhibition he was thrown to the
leopard; and with one bite of his he was bathed with such a quantity of
blood, that the people shouted out to him as he was returning, the
testimony of his second baptism, “Saved and washed, saved and
washed.” <span id="fr_9008"></span>[9009](#fn_9008) Manifestly he was
assuredly saved who had been glorified in such a spectacle. Then to the
soldier Pudens he said, “Farewell, and be mindful of my faith; and let
not these things disturb, but confirm you.”  And at the same time he
asked for a little ring from his finger, and returned it to him bathed
in his wound, leaving to him an inherited token and the memory of his
blood. And then lifeless he is cast down with the rest, to be
slaughtered in the usual place. And when the populace called for them
into the midst, that as the sword penetrated into their body they might
make their eyes partners in the murder, they rose up of their own
accord, and transferred themselves whither the people wished; but they
first kissed one another, that they might consummate their martyrdom
with the kiss of peace. The rest indeed, immoveable and in silence,
received the sword-thrust; much more Saturus, who also had first
ascended the ladder, and first gave up his spirit, for he also was
waiting for Perpetua. But Perpetua, that she might taste some pain,
being pierced between the ribs, cried out loudly, and she herself placed
the wavering right hand of the youthful gladiator to her throat. <span
id="fr_9009"></span>[9010](#fn_9009) Possibly such a woman could not
have been slain unless she herself had willed it, because she was feared
by the impure spirit.

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p12"></span>O most brave and blessed martyrs! O
truly called and chosen unto the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ! whom
whoever magnifies, and honours, and adores, assuredly ought to read
these examples for the edification of the Church, not less than the
ancient ones, so that <span id="page_706">p. 706</span> <span
id="vi.vi.viii-Page_706"></span>new virtues also may testify that one
and the same Holy Spirit is always operating even until now, and God the
Father Omnipotent, and His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, whose is the glory
and infinite power for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9004"></span>[704:9005](0030789.htm#fr_9004) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p3"></span> A row of men drawn up to scourge them
as they passed along, a punishment probably similar to what is called
“running the gauntlet.”

<span id="fn_9005"></span>[705:9006](0030789.htm#fr_9005) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p5"></span> [John xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_9006"></span>[705:9007](0030789.htm#fr_9006) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p7"></span> Ita revocatæ discinguntur. Dean Milmam
prefers reading this, “Thus recalled, they are clad in loose robes.”

<span id="fn_9007"></span>[705:9008](0030789.htm#fr_9007) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p8"></span> \[Routh, *Reliq.* Vol. I. p. 360.\]

<span id="fn_9008"></span>[705:9009](0030789.htm#fr_9008) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p10"></span> A cry in mockery of what was known as
the effect of Christian baptism.

<span id="fn_9009"></span>[705:9010](0030789.htm#fr_9009) <span
id="vi.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.viii-p11"></span> \[Routh, *Reliquiæ*, Vol. I. p. 358.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations.](0030790)
