[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030043)  [Next](0030045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxxviii-p2"></span>Ought not Christians, therefore, to
receive not merely a somewhat milder treatment, but to have a place
among the law-tolerated societies, seeing they are not chargeable with
any such crimes as are commonly dreaded from societies of the illicit
class? For, unless I mistake the matter, the prevention of such
associations is based on a prudential regard to public order, that the
state may not be divided into parties, which would naturally lead to
disturbance in the electoral assemblies, the councils, the curiæ, the
special conventions, even in the public shows by the hostile collisions
of rival parties; especially when now, in pursuit of gain, men have
begun to consider their violence an article to be bought and sold. But
as those in whom all ardour in the pursuit of glory and honour is dead,
we have no pressing inducement to take part in your public meetings; nor
is there aught more entirely foreign to us than affairs of state. We
ac<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxxviii-Page_46"></span>knowledge one all-embracing
commonwealth—the world. We renounce all your spectacles, as strongly as
we renounce the matters originating them, which we know were conceived
of superstition, when we give up the very things which are the basis of
their representations.  Among us nothing is ever said, or seen, or
heard, which has anything in common with the madness of the circus, the
immodesty of the theatre, the atrocities of the arena, the useless
exercises of the wrestling-ground. Why do you take offence at us because
we differ from you in regard to your pleasures?  If we will not partake
of your enjoyments, the loss is ours, if there be loss in the case, not
yours. We reject what pleases you. You, on the other hand, have no taste
for what is our delight.  The Epicureans were allowed by you to decide
for themselves one true source of pleasure—I mean equanimity; the
Christian, on his part, has many such enjoyments—what harm in that?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX.](0030045)
