[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030777)  [Next](0030779) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.v.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="vi.v.iv-p2"></span>From the saying of our Lord we know that
the flesh is weak, the spirit willing. <span
id="fr_8966"></span>[8967](#fn_8966) Let us not, withal, take delusive
comfort from the Lord’s acknowledgment of the weakness of the flesh. For
precisely on this account He first declared the spirit willing, that He
might show which of the two ought to be subject to the other—that the
flesh might yield obedience to the spirit—the weaker to the stronger;
the <span id="page_695">p. 695</span> <span
id="vi.v.iv-Page_695"></span>former thus from the latter getting
strength. Let the spirit hold convene with the flesh about the common
salvation, thinking no longer of the troubles of the prison, but of the
wrestle and conflict for which they are the preparation. The flesh,
perhaps, will dread the merciless sword, and the lofty cross, and the
rage of the wild beasts, and that punishment of the flames, of all most
terrible, and all the skill of the executioner in torture. But, on the
other side, let the spirit set clearly before both itself and the flesh,
how these things, though exceeding painful, have yet been calmly endured
by many,—and, have even been eagerly desired for the sake of fame and
glory; and this not only in the case of men, but of women too, that you,
O holy women, may be worthy of your sex. It would take me too long to
enumerate one by one the men who at their own self-impulse have put an
end to themselves. As to women, there is a famous case at hand: the
violated Lucretia, in the presence of her kinsfolk, plunged the knife
into herself, that she might have glory for her chastity.  Mucius burned
his right hand on an altar, that this deed of his might dwell in fame.
The philosophers have been outstripped,—for instance Heraclitus, who,
smeared with cow dung, burned himself; and Empedocles, who leapt down
into the fires of Ætna; and Peregrinus, <span
id="fr_8967"></span>[8968](#fn_8967) who not long ago threw himself on
the funeral pile. For women even have despised the flames. Dido did so,
lest, after the death of a husband very dear to her, she should be
compelled to marry again; and so did the wife of Hasdrubal, who,
Carthage being on fire, that she might not behold her husband suppliant
as Scipio’s feet, rushed with her children into the conflagration, in
which her native city was destroyed. Regulus, a Roman general, who had
been taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, declined to be exchanged for a
large number of Carthaginian captives, choosing rather to be given back
to the enemy. He was crammed into a sort of chest; and, everywhere
pierced by nails driven from the outside, he endured so many
crucifixions. Woman has voluntarily sought the wild beasts, and even
asps, those serpents worse than bear or bull, which Cleopatra applied to
herself, that she might not fall into the hands of her enemy. But the
fear of death is not so great as the fear of torture. And so the
Athenian courtezan succumbed to the executioner, when, subjected to
torture by the tyrant for having taken part in a conspiracy, still
making no betrayal of her confederates, she at last bit off her tongue
and spat it in the tyrant’s face, that he might be convinced of the
uselessness of his torments, however long they should be continued.
Everybody knows what to this day is the great Lacedæmonian solemnity—the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.v.iv-p4.3"></span>διαμαστύγωσις</span>,
or scourging; in which sacred rite the Spartan youths are beaten with
scourges before the altar, their parents and kinsmen standing by and
exhorting them to stand it bravely out. For it will be always counted
more honourable and glorious that the soul rather than the body has
given itself to stripes. But if so high a value is put on the earthly
glory, won by mental and bodily vigour, that men, for the praise of
their fellows, I may say, despise the sword, the fire, the cross, the
wild beasts, the torture; these surely are but trifling sufferings to
obtain a celestial glory and a divine reward. If the bit of glass is so
precious, what must the true pearl be worth? Are we not called on, then,
most joyfully to lay out as much for the true as others do for the
false?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8966"></span>[694:8967](0030778.htm#fr_8966) <span
id="vi.v.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.iv-p3"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span id="vi.v.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8967"></span>[695:8968](0030778.htm#fr_8967) <span
id="vi.v.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v.iv-p4"></span> \[He is said to have perished *circa*
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.v.iv-p4.2"></span>a.d</span>. 170.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](0030779)
