[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toj02)  [Next](toj04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

The

EMPEROR JULIAN'S

ORATION

to the

SOVEREIGN SUN

IT appears to me that the present oration very properly belongs to all

--who breathe or creep on earth, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

who participate of being, of a rational soul, and of intellect; but I
consider it as particularly belonging to myself; for I am an attendant
of the sovereign Sun: and of the truth of this, indeed, I possess most
accurate assurances, one of which it may be lawful for me, without envy,
to relate. A vehement love for the splendors of this god took possession

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of me from my youth; in consequence of which, while I was a boy, my
rational part was ravished with astonishment as often as I surveyed his
etherial light; nor was I alone desirous of stedfastly beholding his
diurnal splendors, but likewise at night, when the heavens were clear
and serene, I was accustomed to walk abroad, and, neglecting every other
concern, to gaze on the beauty of the celestial regions with rapturous
delight: indeed I was so lost in attentive vision, that I was equally
unconscious of another's discourse, and of my own conduct on such
occasions. Hence I appeared to be too studious of their contemplation,
and too curious in such employments; and, in consequence of this, though
I was yet short of the perfection of manhood, I was suspected by some to
be skilled in astronimical divination; but, indeed, no book of this kind
was as yet in my possession, and I was entirely ignorant of its meaning
and use. But why do I relate such trifling particulars, when I have
things of far greater moment to declare, if I should tell my conceptions
of the gods at that period of life. However, let the darkness of
childhood be consigned to the shades of oblivion. But that the celestial
light, with which I was

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

every way environed, so excited and exalted me to its contemplation,
that I observed by myself the contrary course of the moon to that of the
universe, before I met with any who philosophized on these subjects, may
easily be credited from the indications which I have previously related.
Indeed I admire the felicity of the man on whom divinity bestows a body
united from sacred and prophetic seed, that he may disclose the
treasuries of wisdom; but, at the same time, I will not despise the
condition allotted me by the benefit of this deity; I mean, that I rank
among those to whom the dominion and empire of the earth at the present
period belong.

It is, indeed, my opinion, that the sun (if we may credit the wise) is
the common father of all mankind; for as it is very properly said, *man
and the sun generate man* <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22). But this
deity disseminates souls into the earth not from himself alone, but from
other divinities; and these evince by their lives the end of their
propagation. And his destiny will indeed be most illustrious, who, prior
to his third progeny, and from a long series of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

ancestors, has been addicted to the service of this deity: nor is this
to be despised, if some one, knowing himself to be naturally a servant
of this god, alone among all, or with a few of mankind, delivers himself
to the cultivation of his lord.

Let us then, to the best of our ability, celebrate his festival, which
the royal city renders illustrious by its annual sacrifices and solemn
rites. But I am well aware how difficult it is to conceive the nature of
the unapparent sun, if we may conjecture from the excellence of the
apparent god; and to declare this to others, can perhaps be accomplished
by no one without derrogating from the dignity of the subject; for I am
fully convinced that no one can attain to, the dignity of his nature:
however, to possess a mediocrity in celebrating his majesty, appears to
be the summit of human attainments. But may Mercury, the ruling deity of
discourse, together with the Muses, and their leader, Apollo, be present
in this undertaking; for this oration pertains to Apollo; and may they
enable me so to speak of the immortal gods, that the credibility of my
narration may be grateful and acceptable to their divinities. What mode
of celebration then shall we

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

adopt? Shall we, if we speak of his nature and origin, of his power and
energies, as well manifest as occult, and besides this, of the
communication of good which he largely distributes to every world, shall
we, I say, by this means, frame an encomium, not perfectly abhorrent
from the god? Let us therefore begin our oration from hence.

That divine and all-beautiful world, then, which, from the supreme arch
of the heavens, to the extremity of the earth, is contained by the
immutable providence of the deity, existed from eternity without any
generation, and will be eternal through all the following periods of
time; nor is it guarded by any other substance, than by the proximate
investiture of the fifth body <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23), the
summit of which is the solar ray, situated, as it were, in the second
degree from the intelligible world: but it is more antiently
comprehended by the king and moderator of all things, about whom the
universe subsists. This cause therefore, whether it is lawful to call
him that which is superior to intellect; or the idea of the things which
are, (but whom I

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

should call the intelligible whole;) or *the one* <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24), since *the one* appears to be the most
antient of all things; or that which Plato is accustomed to denominate
*the good*; this uniform cause, then, of the universe, who is to all
beings the. administrator of beauty, perfection, union, and immeasurable
power, according to a primary nature abiding in himself, produced from
himself as a medium between the middle intellectual and demiurgic
causes, that mighty divinity the sun perfectly similar to himself. And
this was the opinion of the divine **Plato**, when he says <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25): "This is what I called the son of the
good, which the good generated analogous to itself: that as *this* in
the intelligible place is to intellect and the objects of intelligence,
so is *that* in the visible place to sight and the objects of sight."
Hence it appears to me, that light has the same proportion to that which
is visible, as truth to that which is intelligible, But this
intelligible universe, as it, is the progeny of the idea of the first
and greatest good, eternally abiding about his stable essence, obtains
the supremacy among the intellectual gods; and is the, source of the
same perfection to these, as

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

*the good* to the intelligible gods. But according to my opinion, good
is to intelligibles the cause of beauty, essence, perfection, and union;
comprehending and illuminating their nature by its boniform power: the
sun therefore distributes the same excellences to the intellectual gods,
of whom he is appointed the sovereign ruler by the ordination of *the
good*. At the same time, it must be observed, that these. gods are
coexistent with this intellectual sun; by means of which, as it appears
to me, from exerting a boniform cause among the intellectual gods, he
administers all things according to the invariable rectitude of
intellect.

But besides this, the third divine principle, I mean the apparent and
splendid orbicular sun, is the cause of well-being to sensible natures;
and whatever we have asserted as flowing from the mighty intellectual
sun among the intellectual gods, the same perfections the apparent sun
communicates to apparent forms; and the truth of this will be clearly
evinced by contemplating invisible natures, from the objects of sensible
inspection. Let us then begin the contemplation. And, in the first
place, is not light <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) the incorporeal

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and divine form of that which is diaphanous in energy? But whatever that
which is diaphanous may be, which is subjected to all the elements, and
is their proximate form, it is certain that it is neither corporeal nor
mixt, nor does it display any of the peculiar qualities of body. Hence
you cannot affirm that heat is one of its properties, nor its contrary
cold; you can neither ascribe to it hardness nor softness, nor any other
tangible difference; nor attribute taste or smell as peculiarities of
its essence: for a nature of this kind, which is called forth into
energy by the interposition of light, is alone subject to the power of
sight. But light is the form of a diaphanous essence, which resembles
that common matter, the subject of bodies, through which it is every
where diffused; and rays are the summit, and as it were, flower of
light, which is an incorporeal nature. But according to the opinion of
the Phœnicians, who are skilled in divine science and wisdom, the
universally-diffused splendor

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of light is the sincere energy of an intellect perfectly pure; and this
doctrine will be found agreeable to reason, when we consider, that since
light is incorporeal, its fountain cannot be body, but the sincere
energy of intellect, illuminating in its proper habitation the middle
region of the heavens: and from this exalted situation scattering its
light, it fills all the celestial orbs with powerful vigor, and
illuminates the universe with divine and incorruptible light.

But the operations of this pure intellect on the gods we have already
briefly exhibited, and we shall shortly more largely discuss; for
whatever we first perceive by the sight, is nothing but a mere name of
honourable labour, unless it receives the ruling assistance of light:
for how can any thing be visible unless, like matter, it is moved to the
artificer that it may receive the supervening investments of form? Just
as gold in a state of simple fusion is indeed gold, but is not a statue
or an image till the artificer invests it with form: in a similar manner
all naturally visible objects cease to be apparent unless light is
present with the perceiver. Hence, since it confers vision on the
perceiver, and visibility on the objects of perception,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

it perfects two natures in energy, sight and that which is visible; but
perfections are form and essence; though perhaps an assertion of this
kind is more subtle than is suited to our present purpose. However, of
this all men are persuaded, both the scientific and the illiterate,
philosophers and the learned, that day and night are fabricated by the
power of this rising and setting divinity; and that he manifestly
changes and convolves the world. But to which of the other stars does a
province of this kind belong? Do we not therefore derive conviction from
hence, that the unapparent and divine race of intellectual gods, above
the heavens, are replenished from the sun with boniform powers; to whose
authority the whole choir of the stars submits; and whose nod
generation, which he governs by his providence, attentively obeys? For
the planets, indeed, dancing round him as their king, harmoniously
revolve in a circle, with definite intervals, about his orb; producing
certain stable energies, and advancing backwards and forwards: (terms by
which the skilful in the spheric theory signify such like phænomena of
the stars) to which we may add, as manifest

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to every one, that the light of the moon is augmented or diminished
according to her distance from the sun.

Is it not then highly probable, that the ordination of the intellectual
gods, which is more antient than that of bodies, is analogous to the
mundane disposition? Hence we infer his *perfective* power from the
whole phænomena, because he gives vision to visive natures; for he
perfects these by his light. But we collect his *demiurgic* and
*prolific* power from the mutation of the universe; and his *capacity of
connecting all things into one*, from the properties of motion
conspiring into union and consent; and *middle position*, from his own
central situation. Lastly, we infer his *royal establishment among the
intellectual gods*, from his middle order between the planets; for if we
perceived these, or as many other properties, belonging to any other of
the apparent gods, we should not ascribe the principality among the gods
to the sun. But if he has nothing in common with the rest, except that
benificent power which he imparts to all, we ought to rely on the
testimony of the Cyprian priests, who raised common altars to Jupiter
and the Sun; or, indeed, prior to these, we should

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

confide in Apollo, who is the attendant of this god; for thus he speaks:
*Jupiter, Pluto, Serapis, and the Sun, are one*. And thus we should
consider that there is a common, or rather one and the same
principality, among the intellectual gods, of Jupiter and the Sun; hence
as it appears to me, Plato does not absurdly call Pluto a prudent god;
whom we also denominate Serapis, as if he were ἄιδῆσ, i.e. invisible and
intellectual; to whom, according to his relation, the souls of those are
elevated who have lived most wisely and just. For we must not conceive a
Pluto of that kind, such as fables describe, horrid to the view; but one
benevolent and mild, who perfectly liberates souls from the bands of
generation, and fixes such as are not liberated in other bodies, that he
may punish them for their guilt, and absolve the decisions of justice.
Add too, that he likewise leads souls on high, and elevates them to the
intelligible world.

But that this is not a recent opinion, but embraced by the most antient
of poets, Homer and Hesiod, whether this arose the conceptions of their
minds, or whether from a divine afflatus, as is usual with poets,
enthusiastically energizing about truth, is evident

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

from hence: for the one describing the genealogy of the sun, says, that
he descended from Hyperion and Thea, that he may by this means evince,
that he is the legitimate progeny of the super-eminent god; for how can
we otherwise interpret the epithet Hyperion? And as to what pertains to
the apellation Thea, is he not, after another mode, denominated by this
means the most divine of beings? Nor must we conceive, with respect to
his nature, that there is any copulation of bodies, or intervention of
nuptials, which are the incredible and paradoxical sports of the poetic
muse; but we must believe that his father and generator is most divine
and supreme: and such will he be, who is above all things, about whom
all things are placed, and for whose sake all things subsist. But Homer
denominates him Hyperion from his father, that he may evince his perfect
freedom and his superiority over all necessity: for Jupiter, who, as he
says, is the lord of all, compels others to his will; but to this
divinity, who threatened, on account of the impiety of Ulysses'
companions, to forsake Olympus, he does not say <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27),

"I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land;"

 

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

nor does he menace chains or the exertion of force; but promises
vengeance on the authors of this impiety, and entreats him to continue
to illuminate the gods. What else then can he mean to insinuate by this
narration, but that this deity, exclusive of his perfect freedom, is of
a telesiurgic nature, or is endued with a perfective operative power?
For why would the gods require his assistance, unless by occultly
illuminating their essence and being, he obtained a power of
accomplishing the goods we have previously described? For when Homer
says <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28),

Meantime, unweary'd with his heav'nly way,  
In ocean's waves th' unwilling light of day  
Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,

he indicates nothing more than that a premature opinion of night arose,
through the intervention of horrid darkness: for of this goddess the
poet thus speaks in another place:

Illustrious Juno then before them spread  
A mist profound.---------------------------

But we shall take our leave of the poets, because they mingle much of
human imperfection with the excellence of divinity; however,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

what this deity appears to have taught concerning himself and others, we
shall now endeavour to unfold.

The region surrounding this earth has its being entirely in generation,
or in an ever flowing subsistence (ἐν τω γίνεσθαι). Who is it then that
confers perpetuity on its nature? Is it not he, who comprehends it in
limited measures! For the nature of body cannot be infinite; since it is
neither without generation nor self subsistent: but if any thing should
be continually produced from an apparent existence, without being
resolved into it again, the essence of things in generation would be no
more. Hence the solar god, exciting a nature of this kind with a sure
and measured motion, raises and invigorates it as he approaches, and
diminishes and destroys it as he recedes; or rather he vivifies it by
his progress, moving and pouring into generation the rivers of life. But
when he deserts one hemisphere and is transferred into another, he
brings destruction on corruptible natures. And, indeed, the
communication of good, originating from this divinity, equally diffuses
itself on the earth: for it is participated by different regions at
different periods; so that generation will never fail,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

nor will the god confer his beneficence on the passive world with any
variations of good: for as there is a sameness of essence, so likewise
of energy among the gods; especially in the sun, the king of the
universe, whose motion is the most simple of all the natures, revolving
contrary to the course of the world. And it is by this argument that the
illustrious Aristotle proves his superiority to the rest: but a power by
no means obscure is imparted to the world from the other intellectual
gods. What then? Are we to exclude these while we confer sovereignty on
the sun? By no means; for we endeavour to procure credibility,
concerning unapparent essences, from such as are manifest and known.
Hence, as he gives perfection, and harmonizes both to himself and to the
universe, the power proceeding from the rest, and diffused on the earth,
so it is proper to believe, that in the secret recesses of their natures
they have a conjunction with each other; the sun, indeed, possessing the
principality, while the rest conspire into union and consent with his
divinity.

But as we have asserted that he is allotted a middle situation between
the middle intellectual

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

gods, what this middle station may be, in the midst of which he is
established, may the sovereign sun enable me to explain. By a medium,
therefore, in this place, we mean not that which is observed in
contraries, and is equally distant from the extremes; as among colours,
yellow, between white and black; or warmth, between heat and cold, and
others of a similar nature; but that which unifies and copulates things
divided and separate; such as is the harmony of Empedocles, from which
he perfectly excluded strife and contention. What then are the natures
which he connects, and of which he is said to be the medium? We reply,
that he is the unifying medium of the apparent and mundane deities, and
of the immaterial and intelligible gods, who surround *the good*; as he
is an intelligible and divine essence multiplied without passivity, and
augmented without addition. After this manner, then, the intellectual
and all-beautiful essence of the royal sun, consists from no temperament
of the extremes, but is perfect and free from all mixture, both of
apparent and invisible, of sensible and intelligible gods. And thus we
have declared the medium

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

which it is proper to ascribe to his nature.

But if it be requisite to be more explicit, and to explain the medium of
his essence, and how we may separately, and by species, understand his
proportion to the first and last, though it is difficult to accomplish
the whole of this arduous undertaking, yet we will attempt the
explanation to the best of our ability. There is, then, an intelligible
one perpetually pre-existent, who comprehends the universality of things
in one. But what? Is not the whole world one animal, profoundly
replenished with soul and intellect, and perfect from the conjunction of
perfect parts? Hence, between this twofold unifying perfection, I mean
that which in the intelligible place comprehends all things in one, and
the other which is conversant about the world, and coalesces in one and
the same perfect nature, the unifying perfection of the royal sun
intervenes, seated in the midst of the intellectual gods. But, posterior
to this, there is a certain connection of the gods in the intelligible
world, harmonizing all things into one; for do not the heavens appear to
revolve about the substance of the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

fifth body, which connects all their parts, and binds and establishes in
itself their mutually dissoluble and flowing natures? Hence the royal
sun so collects into one these two connecting essences, one of which is
perceived in intelligibles, but the other in sensibles, that he
perfectly imitates the connecting power in intellectuals, of which he is
the source. But he presides and rules over that last unifying nature
which is perceived about this apparent world. And I know not whether
that which is called self-subsistent, which is first among
intelligibles, but last in the celestial phænomena, possesses the
middle, self-subsistent essence of the royal sun; from which
first-operative' substance that splendor emanates which illumines every
thing in the apparent world.

Again, that we may consider this affair in a different mode, since there
is one demiurgus of the universe, but many demiurgic gods, who revolve
round the heavens, it is proper to place in the midst of these the
mundane administration of the sun: besides, the fertile power of life is
copious and redundant in intelligibles, and the world is full of the
same prolific life. Hence it is evident that the fertile life of the
sovereign sun is a

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

medium between the two, as the mundane phænomena perpetually evince.
For, with respect to forms, some he perfects, and others he fabricates;
some he adorns, and others he excites; nor is any thing capable of
advancing into light and generation without the demiurgic power of the
sun. Besides this, if we attend to the sincere, pure, and immaterial
essence of intelligibles, to which nothing extrinsical flows, and
nothing foreign adheres, but which is full of its own domestic
simplicity, and afterwards consider the defecated nature of that pure
and divine body which is conversant with mundane bodies revolving in an
orb, and which is free from all elementary mixture, we shall find that
the splendid and incorruptible essence of the royal sun, is a medium
between the immaterial purity of intelligibles and that which in
sensibles is sincere and remote from generation and corruption. But the
greatest argument for the truth of this is derived from hence, that the
light which flows from the sun upon the earth will not suffer itself to
be mingled with any thing; nor is it polluted by any sordid nature, or
by any contagion; but it abides every where pure, undefiled, and
impassive. Again, if we

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

consider not only immaterial, and intelligible forms, but such as are
sensible, subsisting in matter, the middle intellectual situation of
forms about the mighty sun will be no less certain and clear: for these
afford continual assistance to forms merged in matter; so that they
could neither exist, nor preserve themselves in existence, unless this
beneficent deity co-operated with their essence. In short, is he not the
cause of the secretion of forms and the concretion of matter? from whom
we not only possess the power of understanding his nature, but from whom
our eyes are endued with the faculty of sight? for the distribution of
rays throughout the world, and union of light, exhibit the demiurgic
secretion of the artificer.

But as there are many apparent goods in the essence of this divinity
which demonstrate his middle position between the intelligible and
mundane gods, let us pass on to the last and apparent condition of the
sun. His first condition then about the last world is, that of the solar
angels, whose idea and hypostasis is situated in their paradigm or
exemplar. But, posterior to this, his power generative of sensibles
succeeds; whose more honourable part contains the cause of the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

heavens and the stars, and whose inferior part presides over generation,
at the same time comprehending eternally in itself an essence invariably
the same. But indeed no one can explain all that is contained in the
essence of this god, though intelligence should be conferred on him by
this divinity himself; since intellect appears to me incapable of
comprehending the whole.

It will here however be proper to set a seal, as it were, to our
much-extended oration, that we may pass on to other disquisitions, which
require a contemplation by no means inferior to the former: but what
this seal may be, and what the conception of his essence, who summarily
comprehends the universality of things, may the god himself inform my
understanding; as I am desirous of comprehending with brevity from what
principle he proceeds, in what his nature consists, and with what goods
he replenishes the apparent world. We must assert, therefore, that from
one god, I mean from one intelligible world, one sovereign sun proceeds,
constituted in the middle of the intellectual gods, according to an
all-various mediocrity; who connecting concordant and friendly natures,
and such as, though distant,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

conspire into friendship and consent, conciliates in unity first natures
with the last; containing in himself the middle of perfection, and
connection of prolific life and uniform essence: who, besides this, is
the author of every good to the sensible world, not only illuminating
and adorning it by his splendour, but giving the same subsistence with
himself to the essence of solar angels, and comprehending an unbegotten
cause of generated natures; and, prior to this, containing a cause of
eternal bodies free from the depredations of age, and endued with
stability of life.

And thus far our oration has extended concerning the essence of the god;
in which, though we have omitted many things, we have delivered not a
few. But because the copiousness of his powers, and the beauty of his
energies, are so great, that the properties considered in his essence
vehemently excel: (for such is the condition of divine natures, that
when they proceed into apparent form, they are multiplied through a
redundancy and fecundity of life,) consider what occasion there is, that
we who are as yet scarcely refreshed from the preceding long oration,
should venture on an immense

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

ocean of enquiry. Let us, however, dare the investigation, trusting in
the assistance of the god, and endeavour to accomplish our discourse.

In the first place, then, we must consider that whatever we have
previously asserted concerning his essence, belongs in common to his
powers; for the essence of the god is not one thing, his power another,
and his energy a third; since all that he wishes, he both is, and can
be, and produces in energy: for neither does he wish to be that which he
is not, nor is he unable to become what he wishes, nor does he wish to
energize what he cannot effect. The case indeed is very different with
respect to mankind; for in man a twofold and discordant nature is
discerned conciliated into one, *i.e.* the nature of soul and body; the
former of which is divine, and the latter shadowy and dark, the source
of contention and strife. Hence, as Aristotle observes, neither
pleasures nor griefs are in amicable conjunction with our nature; for
what is pleasant to the one procures molestation to its contrary, the
other. But among the gods nothing of this kind subsists <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29); for

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

their essence supplies them with good, invariably, and in a perpetual
series. Whatever therefore we have asserted for the purpose of
explaining his essence, the same must be applied to his powers and
energies. But since our oration appears to reciprocate in these, it
follows that we must consider in our subsequent speculations about his
powers and energies, that these are not his operations only, but his
essence: for there are certain divinities allied to, and connate with,
the sun, who augment the pure essence of the god, and who, though they
are multiplied in the world, yet subsist uniformly about the sun.

But attend, in the first place, to their assertions who have not
contemplated the heavens, like horses, or oxen, or other irrational and
brutal animals, but have laboured to investigate an unapparent nature
from sensible appearances. And prior to this, you may, if so inclined,
speculate a little concerning his supermundane powers and energies. Of
these powers, the first is that by which he

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

causes the whole of an intellectual essence to appear profoundly one, by
collecting extremes into one and the same; for as we clearly perceive in
the sensible world that air and water are situated between fire and
earth, for the purpose of connecting the extremes as by a bond, there is
no reason why we should not admit a similar establishment in an essence
prior to body <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) and separate from its
nature; which obtains the principle of generation, and is itself
superior to origin. Hence, in an essence of this kind, as well as among
elementary forms, the extreme principles which are separated from all
corporeal commerce being through certain mediums collected into one by
the royal sun, become united about his nature: and with this indeed the
demiurgic power of Jupiter accords; to whom, as we have previously
related, temples were dedicated in Cyprus in common with the sun. In the
same place, too, we have brought the testimony of Apollo in confirmation
of its truth, who doubtless understands his nature better than the
wisest of mankind;

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

for he is present and communicates with the sun, possessing the same
simplicity of intellection, stability of essence, and sameness of
energy. For Apollo appears by no means to separate from the sun the
multiplied and partial operation of Bacchus, but rather, as he
perpetually subjects him to the sun, and demonstrates him to be his
attendant, he assists us in framing the most beautiful conceptions about
the god. Besides, so far as the sun contains in himself the principles
of the most beautiful intellectual temperament, he becomes Apollo, the
leader of the Muses; but so far as he accomplishes the elegant order of
the whole of life, he generates Esculapius in the world; whom at the
same time he comprehended in himself prior to the world.

But though we may contemplate many powers of the god, yet we can never
exhaust the whole. This, however, ought to suffice us, that in a nature
separate from, and more antient than, body, and in a genus of causes
abstracted from appearances, we may contemplate an equal, and the same
principallity and power of Jupiter and the sun. We may likewise survey a
simplicity of intelligence, together with perpetuity, and a stability of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

sameness, united with Apollo; but divisibility of operation, in
conjunction with Bacchus, who presides over a partial essence. Add to,
that we may perceive the power of beautiful symmetry and intellectual
temperament in union with Musagetes. And lastly, we may conceive that
power which fills up the elegant order of the whole of life as combined
with Esculapius. And thus much concerning the supermundane powers of the
god; whose correspondent operations above the apparent world consist in
diffussing a perpetual plenitude of good; for as he is the genuine
progeny of the good, from whom he receives a perfect and beneficent
condition, he distributes this excellency of his nature to all the
intellectual gods, assigning them an essence benignant and perfect. But
another employment of the god consists in conferring an absolute
distribution of intelligible beauty among intellectual and incorporeal
forms; for as the generative essence apparent in nature desires to beget
in the beautiful and to expose its progeny to the light, it is necessary
that an essence should antecede and be the leader of this, which
eternally generates in intelligible beauty: at the same time we

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

must observe that it does not operate at one time and not at another; or
beget at one period and become afterwards barren; for whatever is
sometimes beautiful here, is perpetually fair among intelligible
natures. Hence we must assert, that an unbegotten progeny, subsisting in
intellectual and eternal beauty, antecedes every prolific cause in the
apparent world: and this progeny the sun contains, and establishes about
his own essence; conferring on him a perfect intellect, and by this
means giving sight, as it were, to his eyes by the benefit of his light.
In a similar manner, in the intelligible world, by means of an
intellectual paradigm, which scatters a light far brighter than ethereal
splendor, he extends, as it appears to me, the power of intellection,
and of being intelligible, to all intellectual natures. But, besides
this, there is another admirable energy belonging to the sun, the king
of the universe; I mean that better condition which he attributes to the
more excellent genera of beings, such as angels, dæmons, heroes, and
partial souls, who perpetually abide in the reason of their exemplar and
idea without merging themselves in the darkness of body. And thus we
have hastily explained, to the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

best of our ability, the supermundane essence of the god, by celebrating
its powers and operations in that universal king the sun. But since the
eyes (as it is said) are more worthy of belief than the ears, though
they deserve less credibility, and are more imbecil than intelligence,
let us now consider his apparent fabrication, having first intreated his
pardon, for endeavouring, with moderate abilities, to celebrate his
divinity.

The apparent world then, perpetually subsists about the sun; and his
light, which surrounds the universe, obtains an eternal seat; so as not
to be subject to any variations of place, since it is for ever the same.
But if any one is willing to conceive by mere thought alone this eternal
nature as temporal, he will easily know respecting the sun, the king of
the universe, who immediately illuminates every thing with his light,
what abundant goods he eternally confers on the world. I am not indeed
ignorant that both the great Plato, and Jamblichus of Chalcis, who was
posterior to Plato in time, though not in the powers of mind, and to
whose books I am indebted for other philosophical information, as well
as the present arcana, consider the sun as generated for hypothesis

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

only; and establish a certain temporal production for the sake of
disputation, that we may be able to comprehend the magnitude of his
effects. But this is on no account to be attempted by me, who am
inferior to them in all mental endowments; especially since the very
hypothesis of his temporary production is not without danger, as was
evident to that illustrious hero Jamblichus himself. However, since this
god proceeded from an eternal cause, or rather produced all things from
eternity, generating such as are apparent at present from unapparent
causes, by a divine will, an ineffable celerity, and an invincible
power: hence he is allotted the middle region of the heavens, as more
accommodated to his nature, that he may afford to the gods, produced
from, and together with him, an equal distribution of good; and besides
this, that he may preside over the eight spheres of the heavens; and may
govern the ninth fabrication, which possesses an eternal vicissitude in
generation and decay. For as to the planets, it is manifest, that,
dancing, as it were, round the sun, their motions are measured by a
certain symphony of figures with respect to the god; to which we may
add, that the whole heavens harmonizing

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

with him in all their parts, are replenished with gods from his
divinity: for this god presides over the five celestial orbs, and by
revolving round three of these, generates as many Graces, while the rest
are called the balances of mighty Necessity. But these observations are
perhaps more obscure to the Greeks, and on that account unacceptable; as
if we should relate nothing but what is common and known.

But indeed they are by no means unusual and strange; for who (O ye most
wise, and without inquiry assenting to a multitude of assertions) are
the Dioscuri? Are they not said to live on alternate days, because it is
not lawful for both of them to be apparent on the same day; as, for
instance, that you may clearly **understand** me, yesterday and today?
Then again, consider with respect to the same Dioscuri, endeavouring
with me to adapt your conceptions to their nature, lest we should assert
any thing new and unintelligible. But indeed we shall find nothing of
this kind, though we scrutinize in the most accurate manner: for the
assertion of some theologists that they are the two hemispheres of the
world, by no means pertains to the present investigation; since it is
not easy to

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

conceive why each of these is called ετερημερος, or *diurnally
alternate*, as their illustration is gradually augmented without any
sensation of diurnal increment.

But we are now entering upon speculations, in the course of which we may
possibly appear to make some innovations. In the first place then, those
may be very properly said to participate the same day, to whom an equal
time of the solar progression, in one and the same month, belongs. Let
any one now consider how this diurnal alternation can be accommodated,
as well with other, as the tropical circles <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31). But a speculation of this kind is not
indeed adapted to our present investigation; because these circles are
always apparent, and are conspicuous to the inhabitants of regions
situated in opposite shadows, each to each; yet he who perceives the one
cannot by any means discover the other. However, that we may not dwell
any longer in explaining the present affair, the sun, as we know by his
annual revolutions, is the parent of the seasons; and considered as

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

never receding from the poles, he is the Ocean, the ruler of a two-fold
essence; nor is such an assertion by any means obscure, since
Homer <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32), so long before us, calls
Ocean <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) the generation of mortals, of
the blessed divinities, and of all things: and this indeed with the
greatest truth and propriety; for there is nothing in the universe which
is not the natural progeny of the Ocean. But are you willing I should
explain in what respect this concerns the vulgar? Though perhaps it

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

might be better to be silent, I will speak on this occasion: I will
speak, though my discourse will not be properly received by all.

The solar orb, then, is moved in the starless, which is far higher then
the inerratic sphere. Hence, he is not the middle of the planets, but of
the three worlds, according to the mystic hypotheses <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34); if it be proper to call them hypotheses,
and not rather dogmata; confining the appellation of hypothesis to the
doctrine of the sphere: for the truth of the former is testified by men
who audibly received this information from gods, or mighty dæmons; but
the latter is founded on the probability arising from the agreement of
the phænomena. Hence, if any one should esteem it better both to praise
and confide in the former, such a one, whether I am trifling or in
earnest, will meet with my esteem and admiration.

But besides those which I have mentioned, there is an innumerable
multitude of celestial gods, perceived by such as do not contemplate the
heavens indolently and after the manner of brutes. As the sun quadruply
divides

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

these three worlds, on account of the communion of the zodiac with each,
so he again divides the zodiac into twelve powers of gods, and each of
these into three others, so that thirty-six are produced in the whole.
Hence, as it appears to me, a triple benefit of the Graces proceeds to
us from the heavens, I mean from those circles which the god quadruply
dividing produces in consequence of this, a quadripartite beauty and
elegance of seasons and times. But the Graces also imitate a circle in
their resemblances on the earth. Add too, that Bacchus <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) is the source of joy, who is said to
obtain a common kingdom with the sun. But why should I here mention the
epithet Horus, or other names of the gods, all of which correspond with
the divinity of the sun? Mankind, indeed, may conceive the excellence of
the god from his operations; since he perfects the heavens

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

with intellectual goods, and renders them partakers of intelligible
beauty. For as he originates from this beauty, he applies himself, both
totally and by parts, to the distribution of good . . . . <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) These gods indeed preside over all motion,
as far as to the utmost boundaries of the world; so that both nature and
soul, and every thing that exists, is perfected by their beneficent
communications. But the sun combining this abundant army of gods into
one ruling unity, confers on it the providence of Minerva; who
originated, according to fables, from the head of Jupiter; but who,
according to our opinion, proceeded from the whole of the sovereign sun,
and is wholly comprehended in his nature. Hence we differ from fables in
this, that we do not consider her as springing from the summit, but as
totally born from the whole of Jupiter; for by conceiving no difference
between Jupiter and the sun, we shall think agreeable to the decisions
of the antients. And, indeed, by calling the sun *providential Minerva*,
we shall not assert any thing new, if we properly understand the
following verse. "he came to Python, and to providential

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Minerva <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)." For thus the antients
seated Minerva with Apollo, who appears to differ in nothing from the
sun. And I know not whether Homer, by a certain divine instinct, (for it
is probable that he was seized with a divine fury,) prophesies this,
when he sings,

So might my life, and glory know no bound,  
Like Pallas worship'd, like the Sun renown'd <span
id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38).

That is to say, like Jupiter, who is the same with the sun. And as the
king Apollo, on account of his simplicity of intellection, communicates
with the sun, so likewise it is proper to believe that Minerva, since
she receives her essence from this deity, and is his perfect
intellection, combines into union, without any confusion, the gods who
surround the sovereign sun; and that the same goddess, from the summit
of heaven, pours through the seven planetary orbs, as far as to the
moon, the genuine and pure rivers of

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

life; indeed she fills the moon <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39), who
is the last of the orbicular bodies, with intelligence; and thus causes
her to contemplate the intelligibles above the heavens, to regard
inferior natures, and to beautify matter with the investiture of forms,
by removing from its shadowry essence whatever it contains, wild,
turbulent, and destitute of order.

But the goods which Minerva confers on mankind are wisdom, intelligence,
and operative arts: she is also said to obtain the towers of cities,
because she establishes civil community by her wisdom. It is likewise
proper to declare a few particulars respecting Venus <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40), who, according to the learned among the
**Phœnicians**, (which is likewise my opinion) has a demiurgic community
with Minerva. Venus, then, is the temperament of the celestial gods, and
the friendship and

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

union, by which their harmony subsists; for as she is proximate to the
sun, in conjunction with whom she revolves, she fills the heavens with
the best temperament, gives fertility to the earth, and is the source of
perpetuity to the generation of animals. And of all this the sovereign
sun is the primary cause: but Venus concurs in her operations with this
divinity; alluring our souls with pleasure, and diffusing from æther,
delightful and incorruptible splendors on the earth, far superior to the
brightest refulgence of gold. I am likewise desirous of disclosing a few
arcana from the **Phœnician** theology; whether or not in vain, our
oration will gradually disclose. Those, then, who inhabit Edessa, a
region eternally dedicated to the sun, consider *Monimus, and Azizus*,
as the attendants of this deity; *Monimus*, according to Jamblichus,
(from whom we have received a few observations out of many,) being the
same with Mercury <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) and *Azizus*, the
same as Mars; and each of them, in conjunction with the sun, diffusing a
variety of goods on the earth.

Such, then, are the effects of this god in the heavens, and through
these his perfections

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

are **propagated** to the utmost boundaries of the earth: but as it
would be arduous to enumerate all his operations beneath the moon, let
us celebrate them by a compendious recital. I know, indeed, that I have
already mentioned these, when I investigated the invisible properties of
the god from the phænomena; but the order of my discourse requires that
I should now resume the narration.

As therefore we have asserted that the sun obtains the principallity
among the intellectual gods, whose impartible essence is surrounded with
a great and uniform multitude of gods, as likewise that he is the leader
and lord of the natures, which among sensibles revolve in an orb, with
an eternal and blessed progression; and that as he fills the heavens
with apparent splendor, so likewise with an infinite abundance of
unapparent goods; from whose occult and divine energy too the goods
derived from the other apparent gods receive their perfection; so
likewise we must consider; that certain gods reside in the receptacle of
generation, who are comprehended by the sovereign sun, and who governing
the quadruple nature, are established about the souls of the elements,
together with the three

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

genera, more excellent than man <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42). But
consider what mighty goods he confers on partial souls! <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) For to these he extends judgement, governs
them by justice, and purifies them by his splendor. Besides this, does
he not move and suscitate all nature, by imparting to it fecundity from
on high? For he is the true cause of particular natures arriving at the
destined end of their existence; since (as Aristotle observes) man and
the sun generate man. Hence, we should form the same judgement, of the
sovereign sun, in every other effect of particular natures: for does not
the god fabricate for us rains and winds, and whatever else is produced
in the aerial regions? Since, by giving heat to the earth he excites
vapour and fume, by means of which, not only these sublime phænomena,
but likewise subterranean events of greater or less importance, are
produced.

But why should we protract this enumeration any farther, since it is now
proper to hasten to the conclusion; first of all celebrating the goods
which the sun bestows on mankind? For as he is the source of our
existence,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

so likewise of the aliment by which that existence is supported. And
indeed he confers on us more divine advantages peculiar to souls; for he
loosens these from the bands of a corporeal nature, reduces them to the
kindred essence of divinity, and assigns them the subtile and firm
texture of divine splendor, as a vehicle in which they may safely
descend to the realms of generation. And these benefits of the god have
been celebrated by others according to their desert, and require the
assent of faith more than the evidence of demonstration.

But we ought not to fear attempting the relation of such things as are
naturally the objects of knowledge to all men. Plato, then, asserts that
the heavens are the masters of wisdom to mankind, since it is from these
that we learn the nature of number; and our knowledge of its diversity
is solely derived from the revolution of the sun. To which Plato also
adds, that the heavens <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44), by the
succession of many days and nights, never cease

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

to instruct the dullest apprehensions in the art of numbering; and that
this is also effected by the varying light of the moon, which is solely
imparted to this goddess from the sun; indeed the farther we advance in
our researches into wisdom of this kind, the more shall we every where
perceive the symphony and consent of other deities with the sun. And
this Plato <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) himself evinces when he
says, that the gods pitying the human race, which is naturally laborious
and afflicted, gave to us Bacchus and the Muses <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46), who perpetually combine in one harmonious
choir. But the sun appears to be the common ruler of these, since he is
celebrated as the father of Bacchus, and the leader of the Muses; for
does not Apollo, whose government is united in amicable conjunction with
these divinities, diffuse his oracles over all the earth? Does he not
extend divinely-inspired wisdom to mankind, and adorn cities with sacred
and political institutions? It is this divinity who, through the
colonies of the Greeks, has civilized the greatest part of the globe,
and disposed

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

it to receive with less refluctance the authority of the Romans; who
indeed are not only descended from a Grecian origin, but have adopted,
and perpetually preserved, from the beginning to the end, the sacred
rites of the Greeks, and their piety towards the gods. To which we may
add, that the Romans have established a form of government by no means
inferior to that of any of the cities which have enjoyed the best
constitutions, but rather one excelling all the modes of political
administration which have ever been adopted. And through these
considerations, I consider the city of Rome as Grecian, both on account
of its origin, and political institutions. But why, besides this, should
I assert to you, how the sun, by generating Esculapius, has provided for
the health and safety of all things? And how he imparts all-various
virtue, while he sends to mankind Venus and Minerva in amicable
conjunction? Like a provident guardian appointing, by immutable law,
that the mixt nature of bodies should pursue no other end than the
generation of its like. Hence, by the constant revolutions of this
deity, all vegetable and animal tribes are excited to the propagation of
natures similar to their own. Why again is it

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

necessary, to celebrate the rays and light of the sun? For who does not
perceive the dreadful aspect of the night, which is not illustrated
either by the splendor of the moon or stars? So that from this
circumstance alone, we may conjecture how great a good we obtain through
the light derived from this resplendent god. But this light indeed he
imparts perpetually, and without being interrupted by the intervening
shades of night, to places where it is necessary, or the regions above
the moon; but to us he benignantly affords a cessation from labour,
through the friendly interposition of the night. Indeed there would be
no bound to our oration if we should pursue every particular of this
kind, since there is no good belonging to our existence which we do not
receive as the gift of this divinity; whether it is perfectly imparted
from him alone, or receives its consummation from him, through the
ministry of other gods.

But this deity presides over the city of Rome, and on this account
Jupiter, the celebrated father of all things, not only resides in its
tower, together with Minerva, and Venus, but Apollo also resides on the
Palatine hill, together with the sun himself, who

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

is universally known to be the same with Apollo. But I will mention a
few things out of a many, principally pertaining to the sun, and to us
who are the descendants of Romulus, and Æneas. For Æneas, according to
tradition, descended from Venus, who assists the operations of the sun,
and is allied to his nature: and the son of Mars <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) is reported to have been the founder of
our city; which, however paradoxical and incredible, was abundantly
confirmed by succeeding prodigies. However, as I am well aware, and have
already mentioned, that Mars, who is called by the Edessenian Syrians,
Azizus, is the forerunner of the sun, I shall not insist on this
particular at present. But it may be asked, why is a wolf consecrated to
Mars rather than to the sun? For they denominate from hence the space of
a year *Lycabas*. Nor is this appellation assumed by Homer only, and the
more illustrious Greeks, but by a god himself; for thus he speaks:
"Accomplishing, by a leaping progression, *Lycabas*, the path of twelve
months."

Are you willing therefore that I should

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

demonstrate by a more powerful argument, that the founder of our city
not only descended from Mars, but that however the martial, and noble
dæmon <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48), who is said to have met with
Silvia carrying the bath of the goddess, might contribute to the
fabrication

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of his body, yet the soul of the god Quirinus wholly proceeded from the
sun? For we ought, I think, to believe in general report. As therefore
the conjunction of the sun and moon, who distribute in common the
principallity of apparent natures, sent his soul on the earth, so
likewise this conjunction received it back again from earth into the
heavens, after it had consumed by the fire of thunder whatever was
mortal in his corporeal frame. And from hence it is evident that the
demiurgic goddess <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) of terrene
concerns, who is in a most perfect manner subjected to the sun, received
our Quirinus, when he was sent by providential Minerva on the earth; and
afterwards brought him back, when flying from. this terrene abode, to
the sun, the sovereign of the world. But if you are desirous, besides
this, that I should employ another argument on the same subject, derived
from the works of King Numa, behold the unextinguished fire, enkindled
from the sun which is preserved among us by sacred

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

virgins according <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) to the different
seasons of the year; and which, by this means, imitates the beneficent
energy of the moon in her revolution round the earth.

But I am able to produce another, and a much more indubitable argument,
concerning this god, from the institutions of that most divine king. For
while all other nations number their months from the course of the moon,
we alone, together with the Egyptians, measure the days of our year from
the revolutions of the sun. To all which, if I should add that we
celebrate Mithras <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52), and institute
quadrennial contests in honour of the sun, I should speak of things more
recent and known: but it will be better perhaps to adduce one testimony
from more antient traditions.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Different nations then differently determine the commencement of the
annual circuit; for some reckon from the vernal equinox; some from the
middle of summer; most from autumn in its decline: yet all these
celebrate the most apparent gifts of the sun. For some with grateful
recollection honour the god for the opportunity afforded them in autumn
for rustic labour; when the earth, pouring from her kindly womb
all-various fruits, is cloathed with fertility, and every where exhibits
the appearance of splendid hilarity; when the sea smooths its waters for
the convenience of navigation; and the stormy brow of winter is changed
into festive serenity.

But others derive the origin of their year from the summer day; because
at that time they have greater security with respect to the success of
fruits; since the various seeds deposited in the earth are at that
period collected together; apples are in their most flourishing state;
and the depending fruit of trees has acquired maturity through the
benevolent heat of the solar fire. But others more elegant than these,
establish the end of the year, when every fruit has acquired its most
perfect vigor, and is tending to decay;

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and on this account, when autumn is in its decline, they date the
commencement of their year. But our ancestors having learned from that
most divine King Numa, to be more studious in venerating this divinity
than other nations, without paying so much attention to what is useful,
(acting in this respect in a manner becoming men of a divine nature and
excellent understanding) directed their attention rather to the cause of
these effects, and commanded the people to bind their heads at that
period of the year, when the sun, having left the last meridian limit,
returns to us again, and bending his course towards Capricorn, as to his
destined goal, proceeds from the south to the north, that he may impart,
by such a progression, his annual benefits to mankind. And from hence we
may conjecture, that an attentive consideration of this particular
induced our ancestors to establish this period as the beginning of the
year; for they do not perform this annual ceremony on the day in which
the sun commences his revolution, but when his progression from the
meridian to the north is universally apparent: for as yet the subtility
of those canons was not sufficiently known,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

which were discovered by the Chaldeans and Egyptians, and perfected by
Hipparchus and Ptolomy. But forming their judgment solely from the
testimony of the senses, they pursued the celestial phænomena: those of
a more modern period, perceiving at the same time the rectitude of their
observations. Hence, immediately on the close of the last month, which
is dedicated to Saturn, and prior to the beginning of the new year, we
celebrate most magnificent games in honour of the sun, whom we
denominate *unconquered*; and, in conjunction with these games, it is
unlawful to exhibit any of those sorrowful spectacles which necessarily
pertain to the last month of the year.

But after the Saturnalia, which are the last of all, the Helian
ceremonies return with the revolving year. And I sincerely wish that the
sovereign gods would frequently permit me to celebrate and engage in
these sacred festivals, and particularly that the sun, the king of the
universe, would grant me permission, who from eternity is produced about
the prolific essence of *the good*, as a harmonizing medium, between the
middle intellectual gods; on whom he confers indissoluble connection,
infinite beauty, affluent fecundity,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

perfect intellect, and an eternal accumulation of every good: who, in an
indivisible moment, illuminates his conspicuous seat, which he eternally
obtains in the middle region of the heavens: who imparts his
intellectual beauty to this visible universe, and fills all the
celestial regions with as many gods as he comprehends intellectually in
himself, multiplied indivisibly about him, and uniformly conjoined with
his essence. Nor does he less comprehend in his divinity the sublunary
region, through a perpetuity of generation, and a communication of goods
derived through a circular body; at the same time extending his
providential care to the whole human race, and privately protecting the
city of Rome. To which I may add, *that he has generated my soul from
eternity, and rendered it an attendant on his divinity*. May he,
therefore, communicate these gifts, and such others as we have already
earnestly implored him to impart. But may he bestow on our city in
common a perpetual duration, and benevolently preserve it from hostile
devastation. And lastly, may he confer upon me, so long as he shall
supply the streams of life, felicity and prosperity in whatever pertains
to human and divine concerns: but may I

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

live, and administer public affairs, as long as shall be pleasing to his
divinity, useful to myself, and advantageous to the common affairs of
the Romans.

And such, dear Sallust, is the oration, which, being mostly composed in
the space of three nights, according to the triple administration of the
god, and from the suggestions of memory at the time, I have dared to
submit to your inspection; since a former piece of my composition on the
Saturnalia, did not appear to you entirely foreign from the purpose, and
undeserving your esteem. But if you are desirous of more perfect, and
mystic discourses on this subject, by revolving the books of the divine
Jamblichus, composed with the same design as the present oration, you
will find the perfect consummation <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)
of human wisdom. But may the mighty sun, nevertheless, enable me to
understand whatever pertains to his divinity; and to impart my
information to all men in *common, and privately* to those who are
worthy of such instruction. In the mean time, till the god shall crown
my desires in this respect

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

with success, let us both venerate Jamblichus, the friend of this
divinity, from whom we have committed to writing a few particulars out
of many which occurred to our recollection at the time: for I well know
that no one can speak more perfectly on this subject than Jamblichus;
though by the most vigorous contention, he should endeavour to add
something of novelty to his discourse; for by such an attempt, as it is
reasonable to suppose, he would deviate from true conceptions of the
god.

Indeed if I had composed the present oration merely for the sake of
instructing others, the labour of writing on such a theme after
Jamblichus would perhaps have been in vain: but since I had no other
intention than to render thanks to this divinity by a hymn, and
considered my end accomplished in speaking of his essence to the utmost
of my ability, I do not think that I have misspent my time by the
present composition. For the admonition of Hesiod <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54),

Perform, according to your utmost power,  
Pure, sacred rites, to the immortal gods.

is not only to be understood as necessary in sacrifices, but likewise in
the praises of the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

gods. In the third place, therefore, I earnestly entreat the sun, the
king of the universe, that he will be propitious to me for my affection
to his divinity; that he will impart to me a good life; more perfect
wisdom; a divine intellect; and a gentle departure from the present
state in a convenient time, that I may ascend to his divinity, and abide
with him, if possible, in perpetual conjunction. But if this be a reward
too great for my conduct on this terrene abode, may I at least be united
with him for many, and long-extended periods of time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[39:1](toj03.htm#fr_21) Odyssy 6.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[41:1](toj03.htm#fr_22) A well-known saying of
Aristotle.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[43:1](toj03.htm#fr_23) For an account of this
fifth body, see my Introduction to Plato's Timæus.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[44:1](toj03.htm#fr_24) See my Introduction to
the Parmenides of Plato.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[44:2](toj03.htm#fr_25) In the 6th book of his
Republic.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[45:1](toj03.htm#fr_26) Light, **according** to
Proclus, and, I think, according to <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
truth, is an immaterial body, *i.e.* immaterial when compared with our
gross sublunary matter; and is likewise the same with place. But for a
larger account of this interesting particular, see note page 14, and
note page 242, Vol. II of my translation of Proclus on Euclid.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[51:1](toj03.htm#fr_27) Iliad, 8.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[52:1](toj03.htm#fr_28) Iliad, 18.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[62:1](toj03.htm#fr_29) In the Greek οὐσία γὰρ
αὐτοῖς ὑπάρχει τὰ ἀγαθά καὶ διηνεκῶς· οὐ ποτὲ μεν, ποτὲ δ᾿ οὐ. Petavius
thinks οὐσία <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> should be read οὐσίᾳ, than
which nothing can be more absurd, as is evident to every Tyro in
Platonism. His version indeed of this part appears to me to be perfect
nonsense. "Nam essentia, perpetuoque, nec per vices illis bona
suppetunt."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[64:1](toj03.htm#fr_30) In the Greek, agreeable
to our version προ των σωμάτων, which is evidently the proper reading;
and yet such is the ignorance of Petavius, that he thinks πρώτων should
be read instead of προ των! (note: last greek string printed *upside
down* in my edition--*JBH*.)

<span id="fn_31"></span>[71:1](toj03.htm#fr_31) This sentence is
defective In the Greek; for there is nothing more than ὑπολήψεταί τις,
οὐκ ἴσον ἐστιν. Perhaps αλλ᾿ ει ought to be prefixed, agreeable to the
sense of our translation.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[72:1](toj03.htm#fr_32) Iliad, 14.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[72:2](toj03.htm#fr_33) Ocean, according to his
first subsistence, belongs to that order of gods which is properly
called *intellectual*, and is therefore πηγαιος θεος, a *fontal* deity.
"Hence," (says Proclus, in his Scholia on "the Cratylus",) he is the
cause to all the gods of "acute and vigorous energy, and bounds the
distinctions of the first, middle, and last orders; converting himself
to himself, and to his proper principles through swiftness of intellect,
but moving all things from himself, to energies accommodated to their
natures; perfecting their powers and causing them to possess a
never-failing subsistence." As a fountain therefore is the origin of a
stream, in the same manner Ocean gives birth to the procession of the
gods into the sensible universe, from their subsistence in the
intellectual order; and therefore he may very properly be called *the
generation of the gods*. Ocean, however, is far from being the same with
the sun, though this seems to have been the opinion of the Emperor; for
*Ocean*, as I have before observed, originates among the *intellectual
gods*, of which order Saturn is the summit; but *the sun* commences from
the *ruling* or *supermundane* order, of which *Jupiter* is the monad.
See more concerning this divinity in my notes on the Cratylus.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[73:1](toj03.htm#fr_34) That is, according to
the Zoroastrian Oracles, the sun is the middle of the Empyrean,
Ætherial, and Material worlds, the two last of which receive a triple
division. See the Introduction to this Volume.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[74:1](toj03.htm#fr_35) Dionysius, or Bacchus,
is the mundane intellect, and the monad, or proximately exempt producing
cause, of the Titans, or ultimate artificers of things. He is said to
have been torn in pieces by the Titans, because the soul of the world,
which immediately participates this deity, and which is of an
intellectual nature, is partially participated by these divinities, and
may be said to be plucked off and scattered into generation. See more
concerning this divinity in my notes on the Cratylus. See also my
translation of Proclus's Hymn to the Sun.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[76:1](toj03.htm#fr_36) There is an unfortunate
chasm in this place in the Oration.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[70:1](toj03.htm#fr_37) Iliad, 13. For a copious
account of this divinity, who, abiding in Jupiter, from whom she was
produced, becomes a separate, immaterial, and fabricative intelligence,
see my notes on the Cratylus. I only add at present, that as Minerva
ranks among the Curetes, who subsist in the intellectual order, she is
consequently superior to the sun.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[70:2](toj03.htm#fr_38) Pope's Homer. Book 8,
line 669.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[77:1](toj03.htm#fr_39) The following triad of
consubsistent divinities is, according to Proclus, contained in the
Moon, viz. Diana, Proserpine, and Minerva.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[77:2](toj03.htm#fr_40) According to the arcana
of the antient theology, Venus contains in herself the cause of the most
uniform and pure life, (for *beauty is a vital, intellectual form,
illuminating all things with symmetry*), and exterminates every thing
confused and inordinate In the universe: but this is likewise the
province of Minerva, considered according to her **undefiled**
characteristic. See more concerning Venus in my notes on the Cratylus.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[78:1](toj03.htm#fr_41) For an account of
Mercury and Mars, see my Notes on the Cratylus.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[80:1](toj03.htm#fr_42) i.e. Angels, Dæmons and
Heroes.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[80:2](toj03.htm#fr_43) *i.e.* Such souls as
ours.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[81:1](toj03.htm#fr_44) This assertion of Plato,
which as well as that preceding it, is to be found in the Epinomis, is
defective in the Greek text of this oration. Whether or not, I have
supplied it according to Julian's intention, the learned reader must
determine, by perusing that excellent dialogue. Petavius, however, has
not even mentioned the place where these words of Plato are to be found.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[82:1](toj03.htm#fr_45) De Legib, lib. 2.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[82:2](toj03.htm#fr_46) For an account of
Bacchus, see my notes on the Cratylus; and of the Muses, the note to my
translation of Proclus's Hymns to these divinities.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[85:1](toj03.htm#fr_47) i.e. Romulus, who was
wholly of a martial nature, and who, knowing that he descended from this
deity, entirely pursued a martial life, was therefore called a hero, or
demigod, and the son of Mars.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[86:1](toj03.htm#fr_48) According to the arcana
of the ancient theology, every god produces his own proper series,
commencing from on high to the last of things; and this series
comprehends in itself many essences differing from each other. Thus, for
instance, the sun produces angelical, dæmoniacal, heroical, and
nymphical powers, **each** of which subsists according to a solar
characteristic; and the lowest of these powers possess a great alliance
with the human race: for throughout the whole of things the extremity of
a superior order coalesces with the summit of one inferior. Hence, these
powers contribute to the natural operations of the human race, and among
these to their procreations. Hence too, say Proclus <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49), it often appears, that *heroes* are
generated from the mixture of these powers with mankind; for those that
possess a certain prerogative above human nature, are properly
denominated *heroes*. He adds, that not only a dæmoniacal genus of this
kind sympathizes physically with men, but that other kinds sympathize
with other natures, as Nymphs with trees, others with fountains, and
others with stags or serpents. It is therefore by no means wonderful,
that a dæmon belonging to the series of Mars should contribute to the
generation of Romulus, who descended from that deity, and to whom he was
so exquisitely allied, that, according to *habitude* or *proximity*
(κατασχεσιν) he ranked in the order of Martial heroes. I only add, that
if we carefully remember, in conjunction with the above theory, that the
lowest of these orders were assigned by antient theologists the same
names as their leaders the gods, we shall find nothing In the Grecian
theology but what is admirably consistent, and beautifully sublime.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[86:2](toj03.htm#fr_49) In Cratylum.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[87:1](toj03.htm#fr_50) That is, the moon, who
maternally produces whatever the sun produces paternally, and who, on
account of her intimate alliance with this divinity, was called by some
of the ancients a lesser sun.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[88:1](toj03.htm#fr_51) Petavius is right in
observing that Julian expresses himself very obscurely in this sentence,
κατὰ τὰς διαφόρουσ ὥρας, *according to the different seasons of the
year*; but he is certainly wrong in conjecturing that it alludes to the
vestal virgins watching by turns; for this has no affinity whatever with
the text. If we may be allowed to offer our own opinion, perhaps it
alludes to the quality of the fire, which was preserved more or less
intense according to the greater or less power of the sun at different
periods of the year!

<span id="fn_52"></span>[88:2](toj03.htm#fr_52) Mithras, according to
the information of Porphyry, de Antro Nymph, is considered by the
Persians as the father and creator of things, and consequently is the
same with the Jupiter of the Greeks.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[93:1](toj03.htm#fr_53) Petavius in the margin
conjectures that σθένος should be wrote instead of τελος, that is,
*Strength* or *power*, instead of *the end*; but for what reason I am
unable to discover!

<span id="fn_54"></span>[94:1](toj03.htm#fr_54) Opera et Dies. lib. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Julian's Oration to the Mother of the Gods](toj04)
