[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toj03)  [Next](toj05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

The

EMPEROR JULIAN'S

ORATION

to the

MOTHER OF THE GODS

IS it therefore requisite that we should speak about particulars of this
kind; and that we should divulge, by a written oration, things which it
is not lawful to mention, and which are ineffable? I mean, who Attis or
Gallus is; and who the mother of the gods: what the particulars are
respecting her sacred rites; and on what account they were delivered to
us at first: for they were delivered indeed by the most antient
Phrygians, and were first of all received by the Greeks, not indeed
indiscriminately, but by the Athenians, after

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

they had learned by experience that they were very far from acting
properly in deriding him who performed the orgies of the mother of the
gods. For they report that Gallus was injuriously treated, and ejected
by the Athenians as one who introduced novelties in divine concerns; and
this because they did not as yet understand the properties of the
goddess, and her agreement with Deo, Rhea, and Ceres. But this injurious
conduct was followed by the avenging anger of the god, and an expiation
of his wrath. For the priest of the Pythian god, who becomes the leader
of the Greeks in all their illustrious undertakings, exhorted them to
appease the anger of the mother of the gods; in consequence of which, as
they report, a temple was raised to the goddess, in which all the public
writings of the Athenians are preserved.

But after the Greeks, the Romans received the same sacred rites, the
Pythian deity persuading them also to this undertaking, that they might
procure the presence of the Phrygian goddess as a military associate in
the Carthaginian war. And here perhaps it will not be improper to insert
the following short history of this affair. As soon as the Romans had
received the oracle of Apollo,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the inhabitants of Rome, the friend of divinity, sent an ambassador to
the kings of Pergamus, who then reigned in Phrygia, and ordered him to
request of the Phrygians the most holy image of the goddess: but the
ambassador receiving the sacred burthen, placed it in a good-sailing
vessel, and which was in every respect well adapted to swim over such a
length of sea. The ship therefore, having passed over the Ægean and
Ionian, and sailed about the Sicilian and Tyrrhene sea, drove at length
to the mouth of the Tyber. But then the common people of Rome, together
with the senate, poured forth to the spectacle: and the priests and
priestesses in particular were far more eager on this occasion than the
rest; all of whom, invested with becoming ornaments, and such as were
agreeable to the custom of their country, attentively fixed their eyes
on the ship sailing with a prosperous course, and on the impetuosity of
the parted billows as they dashed about the keel. But afterwards, when
the ship drove into the port, each person adored the statue at a
distance from the place where he happened to stand. But the goddess, as
if willing to convince the Roman people that they had not led from
Phrygia an inanimate image, but some

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

thing endued with a greater and more divine power than ordinary <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md), stopped the vessel as soon as it reached
the Tyber, and suddenly rooted it, as it were, in the stream. Hence, on
the people endeavouring to draw it against the tide, it resisted their
efforts, and remained fixed; nor did it in the least yield to their
attempts of thrusting it forward; and though every artifice was employed
for this purpose, yet it still remained immovable. In consequence of
this, a dire and unjust suspicion

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

arose against the all-sacred priesthood of the consecrated virgin; and
Clodia (for this was the name of the venerable virgin) was accused as
one not perfectly pure, and who had not preserved herself inviolate to
the goddess; and hence it was said, the divinity gave evident tokens of
indignation and wrath; for it now appeared to every one that the image
was something more divine than usual.

But in consequence of this suspicion, the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

virgin was at first filled with shame, so very remote was she from a
conduct so unlawful and base. But when she perceived that the accusation
against her gathered strength, then, unbinding her zone, and girding it
round the extremity of the ship, like one agitated by divine
inspiration, she ordered all the multitude to depart. Afterwards she
entreated the goddess that she would not suffer her to be circumvented
by unjust blasphemies: and then, as they report, raising her voice, as
if she was giving a nautical signal, *O, queen mother*, (says she) *if I
am chaste, follow me*. But after she had thus spoken, she not only moved
the ship, but drew it for a considerable space along the stream. And
these two circumstances the goddess exhibited to the Romans for the
purpose, as it appears to me, of convincing them that they had not
brought from Phrygia a burthen of inconsiderable honour, but one worthy
the highest estimation, as not being any thing human but truly divine;
nor a piece of inanimate earth, but an inspired and divine possession.
This then was one of the particulars which the goddess exhibited to the
Romans; but the other, that no citizen, whether virtuous or depraved,
could be concealed from her

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

inspection. And besides this, the Romans from that time warred on the
Carthaginians with prosperous success.

These historical particulars therefore, though they may appear
incredible to some, and neither adapted to a philosopher nor a
theologist, ought, nevertheless, to be mentioned; for they are commonly
related by most historians, and the representation of them is yet
preserved in brazen images in Rome, the most powerful of cities, and
beloved by the gods. Though I am not ignorant that some of *the
vehemently wise* will consider these matters as the intolerable trifles
of old women; but to me it appears more proper to give credit to cities
in these affairs, than to such *knowing* men, whose *little* soul is
indeed acute, but beholds nothing with a vision healthy and sound.

But I hear that Porphyry has philosophized about some of those
particulars which I had an intention of discoursing upon during the time
in which the sacred rites of the goddess were celebrated; but I know not
what Porphyry has said on this occasion, nor have I yet met with his
discourse on the subject, though it may happen that his opinion may

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

be coincident with mine. But I (as the result of my own spontaneous
conceptions on the occasion) understand by Gallus and Attis, the essence
of that prolific and demiurgic intellect which generates all things even
to the lowest matter, and which contains in itself all the reasons and
causes of material forms: for the forms of all things do not subsist in
all, nor are the ideas of the lowest and last of things, which possess
nothing but the name of privation, with an obscure conception, in the
most supreme and first of causes <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md). As
therefore there are many essences, and many artificers of things, that
nature of the third demiurgus, (who contains the exempt reasons, and
continued causes, of material forms), which, descending from on high,
through the stars, pervades through prolific abundance as far as to the
earth, is that Attis

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

who is the subject of our present investigation. But perhaps it is
necessary to express my meaning more clearly.

We say then, that matter is something, and that there is also a material
form; but unless we admit that there is a certain cause which has an
establishment prior to these, we shall, through ignorance, verge to an
Epicurean opinion: for if there be nothing more ancient than these two
principles, the realms of generation must be alloted a rash and
fortuitous impulse. But we may perceive (says a certain sagacious
Peripatetic, such as Xenarchus) that the cause of these is a fifth and
circular body <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md). But it appears to me
that both Aristotle and Theophrastus are ridiculously anxious about a
body of this kind, and that they are ignorant, as it were, of their own
voice. For, as when we have arrived at an incorporeal and intelligible
essence it is necessary to stop, and not to investigate any superior
cause, but content ourselves with saying, that these things are thus
naturally established, so, (say they) with respect to the fifth body, it
is necessary to acknowledge

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

that it naturally subsists in this manner; to explore no other causes,
but to stop here, without ascending to an intelligible essence, which,
as it is naturally in itself nothing, so it is nothing but an empty
conception in the soul; for after this manner I remember to have heard
Xenarchus discoursing; but whether he is right or not in such
assertions, I shall leave to the first-rate Peripatetics to determine.
That this, indeed, is not agreeable to my opinions on the subject, must
be perfectly evident to every one; since I consider the hypotheses of
Aristotle as wanting support, unless they are conciliated with those of
Plato; or rather unless they are found to be consonant to the oracles of
the gods.

But perhaps it is worth inquiring how a circular body is capable of
containing the causes of material forms, for it is manifest and clear,
that without these, generation cannot possibly subsist: for on what
account are so many things generated? From whence do the male and female
natures originate? From whence the difference of things subsisting
according to genus in bounded forms, unless there are certain
previously-subsisting and presiding reasons and causes which pre-exist

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

as paradigms, and to the perception of which, if our sight is dull, we
should still farther purify the eyes of our soul? But proper purgation
consists in a conversion of the soul to itself, and a perception how
soul and a material intellect are, as it were, certain express
resemblances and images of immaterial <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) forms: for there is not any one body, or
any thing incorporeal, which subsists and is beheld about bodies, the
image of which intellect is not able to receive in an incorporeal
manner; and this it could never be able to accomplish unless it
possessed something naturally allied to these. On this account Aristotle
also says, that the soul is the place of forms, not indeed in energy,
but in capacity only <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59.md). It is
necessary therefore that such a soul, and which converts itself to the
body, should possess these in capacity: and if there is any soul
unrestrained by, and unmixed with, the body, we ought to think that all
things subsist in such a soul no longer in capacity but in perfect
energy.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

But we shall understand this more clearly by means of the paradigm which
Plato employs in the Sophista, though for a purpose different from the
present. But I do not introduce this example with a view to give
demonstration to what has been said, for it is not proper to receive
this by demonstration, but by a *direct application of intellect* <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) alone: for our discourse is about first
principles, or things co-ordinate with such as are first; since Attis is
considered by us, and with great propriety, as a god. But what, and of
what kind, is this example? Plato then says, that, among those who are
conversant with imitation, if any one wishes to imitate in such a manner
as to emulate the real subsistence of the things imitated, such an
undertaking will be laborious and difficult, and almost next to
impossible; but that the imitation of things according to their
appearance is easy, expeditious, and extremely possible. When,
therefore, receiving a mirror,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

we carry it about, we may easily exhibit the representations of the
several species of things. Let us now transfer the similitude of this
example to the subject of our investigation; and let the mirror be that
which is called by Aristotle the place in capacity of forms: but it is
perfectly necessary that the forms themselves should subsist in energy
prior to capacity. Since our soul therefore contains, as it appears to
Aristotle, the forms of things in capacity, where shall we first place
these as subsisting in energy? Shall we establish them in material
natures? But these are evidently the last of things. It remains,
therefore, that we should explore immaterial causes, which subsist in
energy prior to material natures, and from which, having a prior
subsistence, our soul necessarily receives the reasons of forms, in the
same manner as a mirror the images of things. But from hence she imparts
them through nature to matter, and to these material bodies: for we are
certain that Nature <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

is the artificer of bodies, as a whole of the universe; but as
subsisting in individuals, of every thing which has the relation of a
part. But nature in energy subsists in us without phantasy; and soul
above this is endued with phantasy. If therefore it be confessed that
nature contains the cause of things of which she possesses no phantasy,
what by the gods should hinder us from assigning this prerogative to
soul, by a much better and more ancient right; since we know this very
particular in a phantastic manner, and at the same time apprehend it by
a reasoning energy? Besides, where is the person so contentious, who
will allow that material reasons subsist in nature, all indeed in
capacity, though not all according to the same in energy, and yet will
not allow this to soul? If, therefore, forms subsist in nature in
capacity, and not in energy <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md), and
likewise subsist in soul, but more pure and distinct, so as that they
can be apprehended and known, but yet are by no means in energy; from
whence do we derive the firm persuasion of the perpetuity of generation?
Or where can our intellect find any

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

stability in arguments respecting the eternity of the world? For a
circular body is a composite of subject and form. It is necessary
therefore, that though these are not separate from each other in energy,
yet in our conceptions we should consider forms as having a prior and
more ancient subsistence.

Since therefore it is admitted, that a certain preceding cause of
material forms, in itself perfectly immaterial, is in subjection to the
third artificer of things, who is not only the father and lord of these,
but also of the apparent and fifth body; hence, separating Attis from
this deity, as a cause descending as far as to matter, we are persuaded
that Attis or Gallus is a prolific god. But, according to the fable,
this god being placed near the whirling streams of the river Gallus,
obtained a flourishing condition of being, and afterwards appearing
beautiful and grand, was beloved by the mother of the gods; who, after
she had committed all things to his charge, placed on his head a starry
hat. But since this apparent heaven thus covers the head of Attis, is it
proper to interpret the river Gallus as signifying the Gallaxy? For here
a passive body is said to be mingled

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

with the impassive circulation of the fifth body. And thus far the
mother of the gods permitted this beautiful and intellectual god Attis,
who is similar to the solar rays, to leap and dance. But when, in the
course of his progression, he arrived at the extremity of things, the
fable relates that he came into a cavern, and had connection with a
nymph, obscurely signifying by this, the humid nature of matter <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md); though indeed matter is not so much
signified here, as that last incorporeal cause which presides over
matter; for, according to Heraclitus,

"Death is the portion of the humid soul."

Such, then, is the intellectual god Gallus, i.e. a deity who contains in
himself material and sublunary forms, and who associates with the cause
presiding over the fluctuating nature of matter. But he does not
associate with the nymph as one with another of the same dignity and
rank, but after the manner of one falling into matter. Who then is the
mother of the gods? She is indeed the fountain of the intellectual and
demiurgic gods who govern the apparent series of things: or

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

certainly a deity producing things, and at the same time subsisting with
the mighty Jupiter; a goddess mighty, after one mighty, and conjoined
with the mighty demiurgus of the world. She is the mistress of all life,
and the cause of all generation, who most easily confers perfection on
her productions, and generates and fabricates things without passion, in
conjunction with the father of the universe. She is also a virgin,
without a mother, the assessor of Jupiter, and the true parent of all
the gods: for receiving in herself the causes of all the intelligible
supermundane gods, she becomes a fountain to the intellectual gods. The
mother of the gods therefore, subsisting after this manner, and who is
also called *Providence*, was inflamed with an impassive love of Attis:
for she voluntarily comprehends not only material forms, but much more
the causes of these. But, according to the fable, this divine
providence, which preserves all **generated** and perishable natures,
fell in love with their demiurgic and prolific cause, and exhorted him
to generate rather in an intelligible nature, and to be willing to
convert himself to her essence, and to dwell with her

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

divinity; and lastly, she commanded him to associate with no other than
herself.

But her intention in these injunctions was, that he might at the same
time pursue a salutary union, and avoid verging to matter. Hence she
ordered him to behold her, as she was the fountain of the demiurgic
gods, and this without being drawn downwards or allured into generation.
For by this means the mighty Attis would become an artificer in a more
excellent degree; since in all things conversion to a better nature is
more efficacious than a propensity to a worse condition of being. For
the fifth body, indeed, is on this account more fabricative and divine
than terrestrial natures, because it is more converted to the gods. But
no one will dare to affirm that a body, though it should be composed of
the purest æther, is better than an undefiled soul, such as the
demiurgus assigned to Hercules: for his soul, prior to her incarnation,
then was, and appeared to be, more efficacious than when she consented
to a conjunction with body. For a providential attention to these
inferior concerns is much easier to Hercules now, having wholly departed
to his universal father <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md), than it was
formerly,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

when, being invested with flesh, he was educated among men. So much more
efficacious to every nature is a conversion to that which is better,
than an apostization to that which is worse. But the fable, desirous to
signify this, says, that the mother of the gods exhorted Attis to take
care of himself, and neither depart any where else, nor be captivated
with any other. but Attis, departing from the mother of the gods,
descended even to the very extremity of matter. Hence, since it was
necessary that infinity should, some time or other, be restrained and
stop in its progression, Corybas, or the mighty sun, who has the same
establishment as the mother of the gods, who fabricated, and
providentially governs, all things in conjunction with her, and who
performs nothing without her, persuaded the lion to announce the descent
of Attis into the lowest matter. Who then is the lion? We are told for a
certainty that he was yellow: he is therefore a cause presiding over a
hot and fiery nature; which cause was hereafter to contend with a

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

nymph and emulate her association with Attis.

But who the nymph is, we have already explained: and the lion is said to
be subservient to the demiurgic providence of things, i.e. without
doubt, to the mother of the gods; and afterwards by his detecting and
betraying Attis, to have been the cause of his castration. But
castration <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) is a certain repression
of infinity: for things in generation are not established in bounded
forms, and restrained by a demiurgic providence, without that which is
called the insanity of Attis; which, when it departs from measure, and
transcends all bound, becomes, as it were, debilitated, and is no longer
able to preserve the prerogative of its nature. And it is not irrational
to believe that this should take place about the last cause among the
gods. Behold, therefore, the fifth body unaltered according to every
variation, and terminated by the illuminations of the moon, that this
rising and perishing world may be in the vicinity of the fifth body.
For, in the illuminations of the moon, we perceive that a certain
variation and passion takes place. It is by no means

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

therefore absurd to assert, that Attis is a certain demigod, (for this
is the meaning of the fable) or rather he is in reality a god: for he
proceeds from the third demiurgus, and after his castration is again
recalled to the mother of the gods; but as he persuaded himself wholly
to verge, he appears to incline <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) into
matter. Indeed he who considers this deity as the last of the gods, but
the head of all the divine genera, will by no means deviate from the
truth; for on this account the fable calls him a demigod <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md), that it may evince the difference between
him and the immutable

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

gods. And the Corybantes <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md), who are
the three ruling hypostases of the more excellent genera after the gods,
were placed round him by the mother of the gods as his guards.

But Attis likewise rules over the lions, who, being allotted a hot and
fiery nature, together with the lion, their leader, are indeed, in the
first place, the causes of safety to fire; and through the heat and
motive energy derived from thence, preserve other natures from decay.
Add too, that Attis spreads himself round the heavens, which cover him
like a tiara, and tends, as it were, from thence to the earth. And after
this manner does the mighty Attis present himself to our view; and from
hence the lamentations for his long departure, and concealment, for his
vanishings and falling into a cavern, arise. But the time in which his
mysteries are performed sufficiently evinces the truth of what I have
here advanced: for they say that the sacred tree should be cut down on
the very

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

day when the sun arrives at the extremity of the equinoctial arch; that
on the following day the sounding of the trumpets should take place;
that on the third day the sacred and arcane fertile crop of the god
Gallus should be cut down; and that after all this, the hilaria and
festive days should succeed.

That this excision therefore, which is so celebrated by many, is nothing
more than a repression of infinity, is evident from this ceremony
commencing when the mighty sun has arrived at the *equinoctial* circle,
in which place his course receives the greatest circumscription: for
that which is *equal* is bounded, but the *unequal* is infinite and
incapable of being passed over. At this period, therefore, the section
of the tree takes place; and after this the remaining ceremonies follow;
some of them indeed, through mystic and secret institutions, but others,
according to rites which may be divulged to all men. But by the section
of the tree, the gods, in my opinion, symbolically teach us that,
plucking the most beautiful of productions from the earth, it is
necessary to offer virtue in conjunction with piety to the goddess, as a
symbol of having lived in a becoming manner in the present

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

state. For a tree indeed germinates from the earth, but hastens, as it
were, to shoot up into æther; it is likewise beautiful to behold,
affords a cool shade in the heats of summer, sends forth fruits from
itself, and liberally bestows them on mankind, through the abundant
fertility which it possesses. The sacred institution, therefore, exhorts
us, who are naturally celestial plants, though detained on the earth,
that collecting together virtue in conjunction with piety from a
terrestrial polity, we should eagerly hasten to the primogenial and
vivific mother of the gods. But the recalling signal by the sound of a
trumpet, which is given to Attis immediately after his castration, is
also a signal to us, who, flying from heaven, have fallen upon earth.
But after this symbol king Attis stops his infinity through the
castration; and the gods by this means exhort us also to cut off the
infinity of our nature, and hasten back again to that which is bounded
and uniform, and, if possible, *to the one itself*; after which, when
perfectly accomplished, it is proper that the *hilaria* should succeed.
For what can be more joyful, what can be the occasion of greater
hilarity, than the soul flying from infinity and generation, and the
storms in

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

which it is perpetually involved, and by this means returning to the
gods themselves? But Attis being among the number of these, the mother
of the gods by no means neglected him in his progressions beyond what
was proper, but commanding him to restrain his infinity, converted him
to herself.

But let not anyone suspect that all this is said as of things which were
once performed or really existed; as if the gods were ignorant what they
should fabricate, or had any concerns which it was proper they should
correct. For the ancients in interpreting the causes of things which
have a perpetual subsistence, or rather in exploring the nature of the
gods under the inspiring influence of the gods themselves, when they had
discovered the objects of their investigation, concealed them under the
veil of incredible fables <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md), that
through the paradoxical and apparently incongruous nature of the
fictions, we might be secretly excited to an enquiry after the truth; an
utility which is merely irrational, and which takes place through
symbols only, being, in my opinion, sufficient for

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

the simple part of mankind; but to those who are prudentially skilful,
an emolument respecting the truth of the gods can then alone take place,
when any one inquiring after it, discovers and receives it under the
guiding influence of the gods themselves. And such a one, indeed, will
be admonished by the ænigmas, that it is necessary to investigate
something concerning them; and when he has discovered their
signification, will advance through contemplation to the end, and, as it
were, summit of the concealed truth; and this not through reverence and
faith of a foreign opinion, rather than by the exercise of another
energy, which subsists alone according to intellect.

In short, whatever we conceive having a subsistence as far as to the
fifth body, I do not mean that which is intelligible only, but likewise
these apparent bodies <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md), which are of
an impassive and divine condition, as far as to these, the *pure* <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) gods are understood to subsist:

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

but matter eternally proceeded, together with the prolific essence of
the gods by whom these inferior natures were produced. And that
providence of things, which is eternally consubsistent with the gods,
through the superplenal abundance of prolific and demiurgic cause which
they possess, and which being seated together with king Jupiter, is the
fountain of the intellectual gods;--this divine providence adorns,
rectifies, and transfers to a better state, that which is apparently
void of life, unprolific, abject, and, as it may be said, the very dregs
and sediment of things; and this it accomplishes through that which is
last in the gods, and in which all their essences end. For Attis having
a tiara ornamented with stars, evidently implies that he establishes, as
the beginning of his government, the visible allotments of all the gods
in this apparent world. But whatever is sincere and pure in the universe
extends as far as to the galaxy: and, as about this place, that which is
passive is mingled with the impassive, and matter subsists together with
such a mixture; hence a communication with matter is the descent of
Attis into a cavern, which, though it did not take place contrary to the
will of the gods, and to the mother of

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the gods, yet it is said to have been contrary to their desire; for the
gods naturally subsisting in that which is more excellent, that better
condition of being, is by no means willing that they should be drawn
down to these degraded concerns; but through the accommodating descent
of more excellent beings, these lowest natures also are led back to a
mode of subsistence more excellent and more friendly to divinity. Hence
the mother of the gods is said not to have pursued Attis with hatred
after his castration, but then to have been indignant no longer; but she
is said to have been indignant on account of his descent, because,
though of a more excellent condition, and a god, yet he gave himself up
to an inferior nature. But the goddess repressing the progression of his
infinity, and adorning that which was unadorned, through sympathy with
the equinoctial circle, where the mighty sun governs the most perfect
measure of bounded motion, willingly recalled the god to herself, or
rather she retains him perpetually with herself; nor did these
particulars ever subsist otherwise than at present, but *Attis is always
the minister and charioteer of the mother of the gods*, and always
desires the realms of generation; and

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

lastly, always cuts off infinity through the bounded cause of forms.

Again, when Attis was led back, as it were, from the earth, he is said
to have recovered the possession of his ancient sceptres; not that in
reality he ever fell from them, or ever will; but he is said to have
deserted his dominion, on account of his being mingled with a passive
nature <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md). But it is perhaps worth
investigating why, since the equinoctial is twofold, we do not celebrate
the mysteries of this god when the sun is in Libra, but when he is in
Aries; the reason therefore of this is beyond all doubt obvious: for
when the sun first approaches to us, then advancing from the
equinoctial, and the days increasing, this season, in my opinion,
appeared the most convenient of all others for the occasion. And indeed,
without having recourse to the reason, which asserts that light is the
domestic associate of the gods, I can readily believe that the
reductorial rays of the sun are aptly accommodated to those who hasten
to be liberated from the realms of generation.

But consider this affair clearly as follows:

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the sun draws all things from the earth, and calls them upwards with a
resuscitating and wonderful heat; separating bodies, as it appears to
me, as far as to the most exquisite subtilty, and elevating things which
are naturally borne downwards. But all such effects as these are
arguments of his unapparent powers: for how is it possible that he, who
through corporeal heat can produce such effects in bodies, should not
much more draw upwards and lead back again fortunate souls, through an
unapparent, perfectly incorporeal, divine, and pure essence established
in his rays? Hence, since it appears that this light is allied to the
gods, and to such as hasten to return from whence they fell, and a light
of this kind is increased in our world, so that the day is longer than
the night, when the royal sun begins to proceed through the ram;--hence,
the naturally reductorial power of the rays of the god is shewn by his
apparent and unapparent energy, through which a great multitude of souls
are led back again, by following the most splendid and eminently solar
form of the senses: for the sense of sight is celebrated by the divine
Plato <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) as not only lovely and useful
for the purposes of life, but

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

as a leader in the acquisition of wisdom. But if I should touch upon
that arcane and mystic narration which the Chaldean <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md), agitated by divine fury, poured forth
about the *seven-rayed god*, and through which he leads souls back again
to the courts of light, I should speak of things unknown, and indeed
vehemently so, to the sordid vulgar, though well known to theurgic and
blessed men; and therefore I shall be silent respecting such particulars
at present.

But, as I before observed, the time appointed by the antients for the
celebration of these sacred rites was not irrationally assumed, but with
the greatest propriety, and agreeable to the most perfect reason: and an
argument for the truth of this may be derived from considering, that the
venerable and arcane mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md) are celebrated when the sun is in Libra;
and this with the greatest propriety; for it is necessary to be again
initiated when the solar god is departing from our zone, that we may
suffer no molestation from the prevalence of

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

an atheistical and dark power. Hence the Athenians celebrate the
mysteries of Ceres twice; the lesser mysteries when the sun is in Aries,
and the greater when he is in Libra; through the causes which I have
already assigned. But it appears to me that they were called greater and
lesser on other accounts, but especially for this reason, because it is
more proper to celebrate these mysteries when the god is departing from,
than when he is approaching to, our zone. Hence, in the lesser
mysteries, the *proteleia* <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) of
initiation take place, and this so far only as is sufficient for the
purposes of recollection; as the saving and reductorial god is at this
period present. But a little after this, continued lustrations, and the
performance of holy ceremonies belonging to the sacred mysteries,
succeed: but when the god departs from us to the region of the
Antichthones, then the very summit of the mysteries receives its
consummation. But see how, as in the mysteries of Gallus, the cause of
generation is cut off, so among the Athenians, those who

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

are concerned in the arcana are perfectly holy; and the hierophant who
presides over these entirely abstains from all generation, as one to
whom a progression into the infinitive by no means belongs, but an
essence bounded, and perpetually abiding, contained in one, undecaying
and pure. And thus much may suffice respecting particulars of this kind.

It now remains that we investigate the sanctity and lustrations
belonging to the mysteries of Gallus and the Mother of the Gods, that if
we should find any thing in these pertaining to our hypothesis we may
transfer it from thence. But this, in the first place, appears
ridiculous to every one, that the sacred law permits in these mysteries
the feeding on flesh, but prohibits the use of vegetables; for are not
the latter deprived of, but the former endued with, soul? And is not
flesh full of blood and many other things which both the sight and the
hearing cannot easily endure? Is not this too the greatest argument in
favour of vegetables, that injury to no one results from their use; but
no one can feed on flesh without the slaughter of animals, the execution
of which must necessarily be attended

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

with affliction and pain? Such are the objections which may be raised by
many, and those not of the vulgar of mankind: and these very particulars
are now derided by the most impious <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md);
for, say they, in these rites, the stalks of pot-herbs may be eaten, but
the roots must be rejected, as likewise turnips; and again, figs are
allowed, but pomegranates and apples are not permitted to be eaten. As I
have often heard many murmuring about particulars of this kind, and have
myself formerly started the same objections, I alone among all men seem
to owe the tribute of thanks to all the gods, but especially to the
mother of the gods, not only on account of her beneficence towards me in
other affairs, but for her goodness in not neglecting me as one
wandering in darkness; but, in the first place, commanding me to cut
off, not indeed from my body, but from the irrational impulses and
motions of my soul, whatever is considered as superfluous and vain by
the intellectual and presiding cause of our souls; and in the next
place, establishing in my intellect certain reasons, which are perhaps
not perfectly abhorrent from the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

true and holy science concerning the gods. But my discourse seems to
revolve in a circle, as if I had nothing to say on this occasion; this,
however, is far from being the case; for in running through the several
particulars, I am able to exhibit clear and manifest causes why it is
not lawful to feed on those vegetables which the sacred institution
prohibits, and this I shall very shortly accomplish; but at present it
is better to propose, as it were, certain formula and rules, by
following which we may be able to form a judgement of any particulars
which, through the haste of composition, may have escaped our attention:
and, in the first place, it is necessary briefly to call to mind the
account which we have given of Attis and his castration, and the meaning
of the symbols which take place after his castration as far as to the
hilaria, together with the intention of the sacred lustrations. Attis,
then, has been said by us to be a certain cause and divinity who
proximately fabricates the material world, and who, descending even to
the extremity of things, is at length stopt by the demiurgic motion of
the sun, when the solar god arrives at the extreme bounded circumference
of the universe, and which, from its effect, is called

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the equinoctial circle. But we have said that castration is the
restraining of infinity, which takes place no otherwise than by a
revocation and emersion to a more antient and primary cause; but we
consider the elevation of souls as the ultimate design of lustration.

These sacred rites, therefore, do not permit us, in the first place, to
feed on seeds which decline towards the earth. for earth is the last of
things, into which evil, according to Plato, being impelled, perpetually
revolves; and the gods in the Oracles every where denominate it dregs,
and continually exhort us to fly from thence. In the first place,
therefore, the vivific and providential goddess does not permit us to
use aliment which declines towards the earth, but exhorts us to look to
heaven, or rather above the heavens themselves. There are some, indeed,
who feed on one kind of seed only, that is, on beans, which they
consider as not ranking among seeds any more than pot-herbs, since they
naturally rise upwards and are straight, and do not drive their roots in
the earth, but are rooted in the same manner as the fruit of the ivy
depends from the tree, or that of the vine from the reed: on this
account therefore, the goddess forbids us to use the seed

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of plants, but permits us to feed on fruits and pot-herbs; not indeed on
such as are almost level with the ground, but on such as are sublimely
raised from the earth. In like manner, with respect to turnips, she
orders us to abstain from whatever they possess of a terrestrial nature,
merely on account of its alliance to earth; but she allows us the use of
whatever emerges upwards and raises itself on high, on account of the
purity of its nature. Hence, she permits us to use the stalks of
pot-herbs, but forbids us to feed on the roots, and especially from such
as are nourished in, and sympathize with, the earth.

Again, with respect to the fruits of trees, she prohibits us from
corrupting and consuming apples, as being sacred and golden, and images
of the rewards attending arcane and telestic labours <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md); and as deserving reverence and respect,
on account of their exemplars: but she forbids the use of the
pomegranate as being a terrestrial plant; and likewise the fruit of the
palm, because, perhaps some one may say, it does not grow in Phrygia,
where this sacred institution was first established:

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

but to me, the prohibition seems rather to arise from its being a plant
sacred to the sun, and of an undecaying nature, and that on this account
it is not assumed in the purifying rites for the nourishment of the
body. But after this, we are forbidden to feed on any kind of fish, the
reason of which is, a problem in common with us and the Egyptians. But
it appears to me, that any one may, with great propriety, always abstain
from fish, for two reasons, and especially in purifying ceremonies: In
the first place, because it is not proper to feed on things which we
sacrifice to the gods; and here, indeed, I shall have no occasion to
fear being accused of gluttony, which I recollect was once the case,
should any one enquire why we do not frequently sacrifice these to the
gods; for we have something to offer in reply to this interrogation. And
we sacrifice these, indeed, O blessed man, in certain telestic rites;
just as the Romans sacrifice a horse, and, both Greeks and Romans, many
other animals and wild beasts, as, for instance, dogs to Hecate: and
among other nations, in telestic sacrifices, such like victims are
offered, once or twice a year. But this is not the case in the most
honoured sacrifices,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

through which alone we are rendered worthy of entering into communion
and banqueting with the gods. Hence, we do not sacrifice fishes in the
most venerable rites, because we neither feed on them, nor take any care
of their propagation; nor, lastly, have we any herds of fishes, as we
have of oxen and sheep; for as these animals are assisted and multiplied
through the attention which we pay to them, they are on this account
useful to us for other purposes, and for honourable sacrifices to the
gods: and this is one reason why I do not think it is proper to feed on
fish during the time of the purifying rites.

But the other reason, and which, I think, harmonizes better with what
has been before said, is this, that fishes being after a certain manner
merged in the profundities of the earth, are more terrestrial than
seeds; but he who desires to fly away, and soar sublimely above the air
to the very summit of the heavens, will justly abhor every thing of this
kind, and will pursue and convert himself to natures tending towards the
air, and hastening to arduous sublimities, and, that I may speak in
poetical language, beholding the heavens. Again, this sacred institution
permits

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

us to feed on birds, a few excepted, which happen to be perfectly
sacred; and likewise all quadrupeds which we usually feed on, except the
hog: for as this animal is entirely terrestrial in its form, manner of
living, and from the very condition of its essence, (as its flesh is
excrementitious and gross <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79).md) on this
account it is driven from the sacred feast: for this victim is not
undeservedly considered as friendly to the terrestrial gods; since it is
an animal which never beholds the heavens, and is not only unwilling,
but is naturally incapable of such a survey.

And such are the causes why the divine institution says that it is
proper to abstain from certain species of aliment, and which we
ourselves understanding, communicate to those who possess a knowledge of
the gods. We shall only therefore observe, concerning other particulars,
the use of which is permitted, that the sacred institution does not
prescribe all things to all; but the divine law, regarding that which is
possible to human nature, permits the multitude to use common aliment of
this kind; not that we should all

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

of us necessarily equally abstain in all things, (for this perhaps is
not easy to be accomplished) but that we should, in the first place,
feed on that aliment which the power of the body will readily admit;
which, in the second place, we possess the ability of obtaining; and
thirdly, to which our will assents. For in sacred rites it is well worth
extending the will in such a manner that it may rise above the power of
body, and may cheerfully endeavour to comply with the divine
institutions; for this, indeed, is eminently conducive to the safety of
the soul--to pay a much greater attention to itself, than to the
salubrity of the body; and even the body, though in a secret manner,
will appear to receive by this means greater and more wonderful
advantages: for when the soul gives the whole of herself to the gods,
and wholly delivers herself to the guidance of better natures, purifying
rites, as it appears to me, succeeding, and prior to these, divine
institutions taking the lead, nothing farther now prohibiting and
impeding; for all things are contained in the gods, and subsist about
them) when this is the case, the divine light will immediately shine
upon her. But in consequence

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of her being thus deified, she transfuses a certain vigorous strength
into her connate spirit, which, when included, and, as it were,
possessing dominion, becomes through this spirit the cause of safety to
the whole body. For that all diseases, or at least the greater part, and
the greatest, happen from the mutation and erroneous motion of the
spirit, will not, I think, be denied by any physician: for, according to
some, all diseases, and according to others, the greater part, and the
greatest, and the most difficult to be cured, originate from hence. And
indeed the Oracles of the gods testify the truth of these assertions,
when they declare, that through purifying ceremonies, not the soul only,
but bodies themselves, become worthy of receiving much assistance and
health: "for (say they) the mortal vestment of bitter matter will, by
this means, be preserved <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md)." And this
the gods in an exhortatory manner, announce to the most holy of
Theurgists.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

What therefore now remains for us to say; especially since we have
composed this Oration without any respite in a short part of one night,
without any previous reading or meditation on the subject, and without
even intending to discourse on these particulars, till we called for
these note books in order to commit them to writing? The goddess herself
is a witness of the truth of my assertion. What then remains for us to
accomplish, except recalling the goddess into our memory, together with
Minerva and Bacchus, whose festivals the law establishes in these
purifying rites? And this indeed took place, in consequence of the
authors of these ceremonies perceiving the alliance of Minerva with the
mother of the gods, through providential similitude in the essence of
each; from perceiving likewise the partial fabrication of Bacchus, which
this mighty god receiving from the uniform and stable life of the mighty
Jupiter, in consequence of proceeding from him, distributed to all
apparent natures; at the same time **administering** and ruling over
every partial fabrication. But it

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

is proper likewise to call to mind, in conjunction with these, Hermes
*Epaphroditus* <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md); for thus is this god
denominated by the mystics, who are said to kindle lamps in honour of
the wise Attis. Who, therefore, is so dull of apprehension as not to
understand that all things which entirely subsist for the sake of
generation are called upward **through** Hermes and Venus <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md)? And this recalling power is especially
the characteristic of reason; but is not Attis he, who, a little before
being imprudent, is now, through his castration, denominated wise? For
he was before unwise, because he connected himself with matter, and
undertook the government of generation: but he is now wise, because he
has adorned with beauty the sordid nature of matter, and has so
vanquished its deformity, as to surpass all the imitative art and
intelligence of man.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

But what will be the end of this discourse? Is it not evident that it
should close with a hymn to the mighty goddess!

A mother of gods and men! O assistant and partner in the throne of
mighty Jupiter! O fountain of the intellectual gods! O thou whose nature
concurs with the uncontaminated essences of intelligibles, and who,
receiving a common cause from all intelligibles, dost impart it to
intellectual natures! Vivific goddess, Counsel and Providence, and the
fabricator of our souls! O thou who didst love the mighty Bacchus, who
didst preserve the castrated Attis, and when he had fallen into the
cavern of earth, didst again lead him upwards to his pristine abode! O
thou who art the leader of every good to the intellectual gods, with
which thou dost likewise fill this sensible world, and who dost impart
to us all possible good in every thing belonging to our nature!
Graciously bestow upon all men felicity, the summit of which is the
knowledge of the gods: but especially grant to the Roman people in
common, that they may wipe away the stains of their impiety; and that
they may be blessed with prosperous fortune, which, in conjunction with
them, may govern the empire for many thousands

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

of years. But with respect to myself, may the fruit of my cultivation of
thy divinity be the possession of truth in dogmata concerning the gods,
perfection in Theurgy, in all the actions which I shall undertake, both
political and military, virtue, in conjunction with good fortune; and
lastly a departure from the present life without pain, and attended with
glory, together with good hope of a progression to thy divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[102:1](toj04.htm#fr_55.md) To believe that the
statues of the gods, such as they were fabricated by the ancients,
participated of a divine influence, as much as the substances from which
they were composed is capable of admitting, must appear ridiculous to
every one who is ignorant that the construction of these statues was the
result of the most consummate theological science, and that from their
apt resemblance to divine natures they became participants of divine
illumination. For, as Sallust well observes, in his treatise *On the
Gods and the World*, (chap. 15) "As the providence of the gods is every
where extended, a certain habitude or fitness is all that is requisite
in order to receive their beneficent communications. But all habitude is
produced through imitation and similitude; and hence temples imitate the
heavens, but altars the earth; *statues resemble life, and on this
account they are similar to animals*; and prayers imitate that which is
intellectual; but characters, superior ineffable powers; herbs and
stones resemble matter; and animals which are sacrificed the irrational
life of our souls." Statues therefore, through their habitude or
fitness, conjoin the souls of those who pray to them with the gods
themselves: and when we view the ancient mode of worshiping images in
this light, we shall find it equally as rational as any other mode of
conduct in which a certain end is proposed to be obtained by legitimate
means.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

Some of these statues were called *Diopeteis, or such as descended from
heaven*, "because, (says Jamblichus apud Phot. p. 554) the occult art by
which they were fabricated by human hands was inconspicuous." And we are
informed by Proclus on Euclid, in his comment on the definition of
*Figure*, "that this occult or theurgic art fashioned some of the
resemblances of the gods, by characters, in an ineffable manner; for
characters of this kind manifest the unknown powers of the gods: but
others it imitated by forms and images; fashioning some of them erect
and others sitting; and some similar to a heart, but others spherical;
and others it expressed by different figures. And, again, some it
fabricated of a simple form, but others it composed from a multitude of
forms; and some of these were sacred and venerable, but others domestic,
exhibiting the peculiar gentleness of the gods: and some it constructed
of a severe aspect; and lastly, attributed to others different symbols,
according to the similitude and sympathy pertaining to the gods." Let
not the reader, however, confound this *scientific worship* of the
ancients with the *filthy piety*, as Proclus in his hymn to the Muses
justly calls it, of the Catholics: for it is surely one thing to worship
the images of those *giant-like Barbarians* called *Saints*, and another
to reverence the *resemblances of divinity*; since the former conduct is
*horridly impious and full of delusion and insanity*; but the latter is
*beautifully pious*, is replete with *real good*, and is *divinely
wise*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[106:1](toj04.htm#fr_56.md) I have already
observed, in the Introduction to this volume, that our religious Emperor
had not arrived at the most consummate degree of perfection In
philosophic attainments, and the present passage proves the truth of my
assertion; for, in reality, the lowest forms subsist In the highest, and
the highest In the lowest; but with this difference, that the lowest are
contained in the highest in a paradigmatical or causal manner, and the
highest in the lowest according to ultimate subjection, or after the
manner of images. So that all forms subsist in each, but in a manner
accommodated to the nature of each; just as earth subsists in heaven
*celestially*, and heaven in earth according to a *terrestrial
property*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[107:1](toj04.htm#fr_57.md) Concerning this fifth
body, see my Introduction to the Timæus of Plato.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[109:1](toj04.htm#fr_58.md) The original is ενυλων,
but should doubtless be αυλων.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[109:2](toj04.htm#fr_59.md) The soul is, indeed
παμμορφον αγαλμα, an omniform image; and the forms which partial souls
like ours contain, are, prior to the Illuminations of science, said to
be in capacity, because they are then in a dormant state, and may be
compared to beautiful colours secluded from the light.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[110:1](toj04.htm#fr_60.md) The, νοερα επιβολη, or
*application of intellect*, which the Emperor mentions in this place,
signifies that self-inspective power of intellect by which it is able to
pass into immediate contact with ideas superior to such as are
participated by soul: and a knowledge of this kind is superior to that
of science, above which it is immediately situated. See more concerning
this in a note to my translation of the Phædo of Plato.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[111:1](toj04.htm#fr_61.md) Nature is that
divisible life which subsists about body, which is productive of seeds,
and which is the cause to all bodies of vegetation, nutrition, and
increase: but this life is void of phantasy, as is evident from its
being distributed through every part of the body, and becoming by this
means passive in the most eminent degree, whereas the phantasy, which is
the summit of the irrational life, is undistributed and impassive.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[112:1](toj04.htm#fr_62.md) Forms subsist in Nature
fabricative, but not intellective; in partial souls like ours,
intellective but not fabricative; and in divine souls and Intellects,
both fabricative and intellective.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[114:1](toj04.htm#fr_63.md) See more concerning
this In my translation of Porphyry's Cave of the Nymphs.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[116:1](toj04.htm#fr_64.md) Let the reader
carefully remember that Hercules is <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>
said to have been the son of Jupiter, because, during his subsistence on
the earth, he immutably preserved a commanding or ruling life, over
which Jupiter presides, and knew that he descended from Jupiter: and a
similar reasoning must be preserved in the characters of the other
heroes.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[118:1](toj04.htm#fr_65.md) Castration among the
gods signifies the prolific progression of secondary divine causes into
a subject order.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[119:1](toj04.htm#fr_66.md) It must ever be
remembered that the gods comprehend and preside over the whole of things
in an impassive and immaterial manner.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[119:2](toj04.htm#fr_67.md) As Attis is the
artificer of things conversant with generation and corruption, he may be
called a dæmon with respect to a god who is the artificer of immutable
natures: not that he is a dæmon *essentially*, but only according to
*analogy*; for as it is the employment of essential dæmons to attend on
the gods and proximately preside over inferior natures; so each
subordinate order of gods, from following the operations of Its
proximate superior order, and presiding over subject natures, may be
called analogically, dæmoniacal with respect to that order. It is in
this sense of the word that Plato, in the Timæus, calls the sublunary
gods *dæmons* in one place, and in another *gods of gods*; and that in
the Banquet he calls Love *a mighty dæmon*, and in the Phædrus a *god*.
I only add, that the superficial writers on mythology of the present
day, from being ignorant of this particular, have dogmatically asserted
that Plato only believed in one god, and that he considered all the
other powers subordinate to this god, as nothing more than dæmons; but
nothing can be more false than such an assertion; for in the <span
id="page_120">p. 120</span> speech of Diotima in the Banquet, Plato
clearly places the genus of *dæmons* as a medium between *gods* and
*men*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[120:1](toj04.htm#fr_68.md) The *Corybantes* form
the unpolluted, guardian triad of the *supermundane* order of gods, and
are analogous to the *Curetes* in the *intellectual* order.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[123:1](toj04.htm#fr_69.md) See more concerning
this in my translation of Sallust on the Gods and the World.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[124:1](toj04.htm#fr_70.md) *i.e.* The celestial
bodies.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[124:2](toj04.htm#fr_71.md) The celestial gods may
be called pure with respect to the sublunary gods from the bodies which
are their participants; *i.e.* because a celestial is so much purer than
a sublunary body. For as the essences of all the gods are transcendently
pure, when one deity is called purer than another, this can only be
understood as Implying that the participant suspended from the one is
purer than that of the other.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[127:1](toj04.htm#fr_72.md) *i.e.* From his
presiding over a passive nature.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[128:1](toj04.htm#fr_73.md) In the Timæus.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[129:1](toj04.htm#fr_74.md) *i.e.*, Julian the
Theurgist.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[129:2](toj04.htm#fr_75.md) See my Dissertation on
the Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[130:1](toj04.htm#fr_76.md) The mysteries consisted
of three parts τελετη, μυνσις, and εποπτεια i.e. *certain perfective
rites*, *initiation*, and *inspection*; and the *proteleia*, or *things
previous to perfection*, belonged to the two first of these parts, but
not to the third.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[132:1](toj04.htm#fr_77.md) Meaning the Christians,
Epicureans, and perfect Atheists.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[135:1](toj04.htm#fr_78.md) He alludes to the
Hesperian golden apples which were plucked by Hercules, which formed his
last labour, and signify his reaping undefiled advantages through mystic
operations; for gold is a symbol of purity.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[138:1](toj04.htm#fr_79.md) I have observed that
the most vulgar and gross part of mankind are remarkably fond of pork;
and this very properly, since like rejoices in like.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[140:1](toj04.htm#fr_80.md) This is most probably
one of the Chaldæan Oracles, but is not to be found among the fragments
of the Zoroastrian Oracles, collected first by Patricius, and afterwards
republished by Stanley. Among these fragments, however, the following
Oracle is to be found, which perfectly corresponds in meaning with that
quoted by our pious Emperor:

Εκτεινας πυρινον νουν  
Εργον επ᾿ ευσεβιης, ρευστον και σωμα σαωσεις. <span id="page_141">p.
141</span>

i.e. "By extending a fiery intellect to the work of piety, you will
preserve the flowing body." But the Oracle by a fiery intellect, means
an intellect full of divine conceptions, and which profoundly beholds
the nature of the gods.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[142:1](toj04.htm#fr_81.md) That is, *beautiful*,
or *graceful*, a name which was doubtless given to Hermes from his
intimate alliance with Venus; for Mercury forms the summit of the
*harmonic* and *elevating*, or *reductorial* supermundane triad, which
consists of *Mercury, Venus, Apollo*. To which we may add, that the
Greek word επαφρος Epaphros, signifies *one upon whom there is foam*;
and foam implies, as Proclus on the Cratylus beautifully observes in his
account of Venus, *purity of nature, prolific light and power, and, as
it were, the highest flower of life*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[142:2](toj04.htm#fr_82.md) And this because they
belong to the supermundane reductorial triad, which elevates through
*Truth, Beauty, and Harmony*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Ancient Platonic Philosophers](toj05.md)
