[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toj00)  [Next](toj02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE Emperor Julian, the author of the two following Orations, is well
known in the character of a Sovereign and an Apostate which he once
sustained, but very few are acquainted with him in the characters of a
Theologist and Philosopher, which he displays through the whole of his
works, in a manner by no means contemptible or weak. It is true, indeed,
that his philosophical and theological attainments are not to be
compared with those of Pythagoras, Plato, and Proclus, who appear to
have arrived at the summit of human piety and wisdom, or with those of
many of the Platonists prior and posterior to Proclus; but, at the same
time, they were certainly far superior to those which many celebrated
antients possessed, or which even fell to the share of such a man as the
biographer Plutarch.

Indeed it is impossible that a man burthened

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

with the weight of a corrupt empire, such as that of Rome, or that the
governor of any community except a republic, like that of Plato, should
be able to philosophize in the most exquisite degree, and leave
monuments behind him of perfect erudition and science. Julian, however,
appears to have possessed as much of the philosophical genius as could
possibly be the portion of an Emperor of Rome, and was doubtless as much
superior to any other Emperor, either prior or posterior to him, as the
philosophy and theology which he zealously professed transcend all
others in dignity and worth. Hence, in the ensuing orations, he has
happily blended the majestic diction of a Roman Emperor with the gravity
of sentiment peculiar to a Platonic philosopher, and with that
scientific and manly piety which is so conspicuous in the writings of
antient theologists. His language is, indeed, highly magnificent, and in
every respect becoming the exalted rank which he sustained, and the
great importance of the subjects of his discourse: in short, the
grandeur of his soul is so visible in his composition, that we may
safely credit what he asserted of himself, that he was formerly
Alexander the Great. And if we consider the actions

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of Alexander and Julian, we shall easily be induced to believe, that it
was one and the same person who, in different periods, induced the
Indians, Bactrians, and inhabitants of Caucasus, to worship the Grecian
deities: took down the contemptible ensign of his predecessor, and
raised in its stead the majestic Roman eagles; and every where
endeavoured to restore a religion which is coeval with the universe, by
banishing gigantically-daring, and barbaric belief.

The first of these orations, which celebrates that glorious divinity,
the Sun, is not only valuable for the piety and eloquence displayed in
its composition, but for its containing much important information from
a treatise of Jamblichus on the gods, which is unfortunately lost. The
name of Jamblichus must, indeed, be dear to every genuine lover of
Platonism, and any work replete with his doctrines may certainly, with
justice, lay claim to immortality. However, as the theology of Orpheus,
Pythagoras, and Plato, does not appear to have been unfolded in the most
consummate perfection, even by Jamblichus himself, this great talk being
reserved for the incomparable Proclus, we shall find in such books of
Proclus as are fortunately

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

preserved, a more accurate account in some particulars of the essence
and powers of the Sun. This account I shall lay before the reader,
(after I have premised a few particulars concerning the existence and
nature of the gods), that he may see in what the Emperor's discourse is
defective, and in what it is agreeable to the truth.

That after the first cause, then, who, from the transcendent excellence
of his nature, was justly considered by all the, pious antients as
superessential and ineffable, there should be a divine multitude, or, in
other words, gods subordinate indeed to the first, but at the same time
exquisitely allied to him, is a doctrine so congenial with the
unperverted conceptions of the soul, that it can only be rejected during
the most degraded generations of mankind: for if there be no such thing
as a vacuum either in incorporeal or corporeal natures, and if in every
well-ordered progression the similar precedes the dissimilar, and this,
so as to cause the whole series to be united in the most perfect degree,
it is necessary that the first progeny of the first god should be no
other than gods. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Indeed, those who are skilled in the most scientific dialectic of Plato,
know that a unity or monad is every where the leader of a kindred
multitude; and that, in consequence of this, there is one first nature
and many natures, one first soul and many souls, one first intellect and
many intellects, and one first god and a kindred multitude of gods.

But as this highest god, from the transcendent simplicity of his nature,
was profoundly called by the Platonic philosophers *the one*, hence all
the gods, considered according to the characteristics or summits of
their natures, will be *unities*; but they will differ from the first
cause in this, that he is alone superessential without any addition, and
is perfectly exempt from all habitude or alliance to any other nature,
whereas each of the other gods is participated by something inferior to
itself, viz. either by being, life, intellect, soul, or body, from which
participations all the divine orders are produced, and through which
they become subordinate to the highest god.

In addition, therefore, to what I have said concerning the first cause,
and the gods, his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

immediate progeny, in my Introduction to Plato's Parmenides, the
following observations, extracted from the 6th book of Proclus, on that
most theological dialogue, will, I doubt not, be highly acceptable to
the truly liberal reader. "*The one*, then, is the principle of all
things, since to be united is to every thing good, and the greatest of
goods; but that which is every way separated from unity is evil, and the
greatest of evils; since it becomes the cause of dissimilitude,
privation of sympathy, division, and a departure from a subsistence
according to nature. The first cause, therefore, as supplying all things
with the greatest good, unites all things, and is, on this account,
called *the one*. And hence the gods, from their surpassing similitude
to the first god, will be unities proceeding from this one principle,
and yet ineffably absorbed in his nature. Thus, for instance, (that we
may illustrate this doctrine by an example) we perceive many causes of
light, some of which are celestial and others sublunary; for light
proceeds to our terrestrial abode from material fire, from the moon, and
from the other stars, and this, so as to be different according to the
difference of its cause. But if we explore the one monad of all mundane
light,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

from which other lucid natures and sources of light derive their
subsistence, we shall find that it is no other, than the apparent orb of
the Sun; for this orbicular body proceeds, as it is said, from. an
occult and supermundane order, and disseminates in all mundane natures a
light commensurate with each."

"Shall we say then that this apparent body is the principle of light?
But this is endued with interval, and is divisible, and light proceeds
from the different parts which it contains. But we are at present
investigating the one principle of light: shall we say, therefore, that
the ruling soul of this body generates mundane light? This indeed
produces light, but not primarily, for it is itself multitude; and light
contains a representation of a simple and uniform subsistence. May not
intellect therefore, which is the cause of soul, be the fountain of this
light! Intellect, indeed, is more united than soul, but is not that
which is properly and primarily the principle of light. It remains,
therefore, that the one of this intellect, its summit, and, as it were,
flower, must be the first principle of mundane light. For this is
properly the sun which reigns over the visible place, and, according

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

to Plato in the Republic, is the offspring of *the good*; since every
unity proceeds from thence, and every deity is the progeny of the unity
of unities, and the fountain of the gods. And as *the good* is the
principle of light to intelligibles, in like manner the unity of the
solar order is the principle of light to all visible natures, and is
analogous to the good, in which it is occultly established, and from
which it never departs."

"But this unity having an order prior to the solar intellect, there is
also in intellect, so far as intellect, a unity participated from this
unity, which is emitted into it like a seed, and through which intellect
is united with the unity or deity of the sun. This, too, is the case
with the soul of the sun; for this, through *the one* which she
contains, is elevated through *the one* of intellect as a medium, to the
deity of the sun. And we must understand the same with respect to the
body of the sun, that there is in this a **certain** resounding echo, as
it were, of the primary solar *one*: for it is necessary that the solar
body should participate of things superior to itself; of soul, according
to the life which is disseminated in it; of intellect, according to its
form; and of unity, according to its one, since soul

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

participates both of intellect and this one, and participations are
different from the things which are participated. You may say,
therefore, that the proximate cause of the solar light is this *unity*
of the solar orb."

"In like manner, if we should investigate the root, as it were, of all
bodies, from which celestial and sublunary bodies, wholes and parts,
blossom into existence, we may not improperly say that this is *Nature*,
which is the principle of motion and rest to all bodies, and which is
established in them, whether they are in motion or at rest. But I mean
by *Nature*, the one life of the world, which, being subordinate to
intellect and soul, participates through these of generation. And this,
indeed, is more a principle than many and partial natures, but is not
that which is properly the principle of bodies; for this contains a
multitude of powers, and through such as are different, governs
different parts of the universe: but we are now investigating the one
and common principle of all bodies, and not many and distributed
principles. If, therefore, we wish to discover this one principle, we
must raise ourselves to that which is most united in Nature to its
flower, and that

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

through which it is a deity, by which it is suspended from its proper
fountain, connects, unites, and causes the universe to have a
sympathetic consent with itself. This *one*, therefore, is the principle
of all generation) and is that which reigns over the many powers of
Nature, over partial natures, and universally over every thing subject
to the dominion of Nature."

Thus far Proclus, from which admirable passage it is easy to infer that
principles are every where unities, and that the highest principles are
no other than gods or superessential blossoms, involved in unproceeding
union with the first god, and absorbed in ineffable light. But the same
incomparable man farther observes, "All these unities are in each other,
and are profoundly united with each other, and their union is far
greater than the communion and sameness which subsist in beings; for in
these there is, indeed, a mutual mixture of forms, similitude and
friendship, and a participation of each other; but the union of the
gods, as being a union of unities, is much more uniform, ineffable, and
transcendent: for here *all are in all* which does not take place in
forms or ideas; <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) and their

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

unmingled purity, and the characteristic of each, in a manner far
surpassing the diversity in ideas, preserves their natures unconfused,
and distinguishes their peculiar powers. Hence some of them are more
universal, and others more particular; some of them are characterized
according to abiding, others according to progression, and others
according to conversion; some again are generative, others reductive,
and others demiurgic; and universally there are different
characteristics of different gods, viz. the connective, perfective,
demiurgic assimilative, and such others as are celebrated posterior to
these: so that all are in all, and yet each is, at the same time,
separate and distinct."

"Indeed, we obtain this knowledge of their union and characteristics
from the natures by which they are participated; for, with respect to
the apparent gods, we say, that there is one soul of the sun and another
of the earth directing our attention to the apparent bodies of these
divinities, which possess much variety in their essence, powers, and
dignity among wholes. As, therefore, we apprehend the difference of
incorporeal essences from sensible inspection, in like manner from the
variety of incorporeal essences we are enabled

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

to know something of the unmingled distinction of the first and
superessential unities, and of the characteristics of each; for each
unity has a multitude suspended from its nature, which is either
intelligible <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) alone, or, at the same
time, intelligible and intellectual, or intellectual alone; and this
last is either participated or not participated, and this again is
either supermundane or mundane: and thus far does the progression of the
unities extend." And, shortly after, he adds, "As trees by their
extremities are rooted in the earth, and through this are earthly in
every part, in the same manner divine natures are rooted by their
summits in *the one*, and each is a *unity* and *one*, through its
unconfused union with *the one itself*."

If the reader, therefore, unites these beautiful passages with what I
have delivered concerning the gods, in my Introduction to the
Parmenides, and has, at the same time, a genius adapted to such
speculations, he will find that the observation of Jamblichus is no less
admirable than true, "that a knowledge of the Gods is virtue, wisdom,
and consummate felicity, and assimilates us to the Gods

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

themselves." He will find that the theology of Plato is the progeny of
the most consummate science and wisdom, and that it is as much superior
to all other theological systems which oppose it, as reality to fiction,
or intellect to irrational opinion.

Having premised thus much, I shall now present the reader with an
account of the nature of the Sun, extracted from Proclus on Plato's
Theology, from his Commentaries on the Timæus, and from his Scholia on
the Cratylus, in which he will find the most arcane and perfect
information concerning this mighty divinity which can perhaps at present
be obtained. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

The fontal sun, then, subsists in Jupiter, the perfect artificer of the
world, who produced the hypostasis of, the sun from his own essence.
Through the solar fountain contained in his essence, the Demiurgus
generates solar powers in the principles of the universe, and a triad of
solar gods, through which all things are unfolded into light, and are
perfected and replenished with intellectual

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

goods; through the first of these solar monads participating unpolluted
light and intelligible harmony; but from the other two, efficacious
power, vigour, and demiurgic perfection. The sun subsists in the most
beautiful proportion to *the good*: for as the splendour proceeding from
*the good* is the light of intelligible natures; so that proceeding from
Apollo is the light of the intellectual world; and that which emanates
from the apparent sun is the light of the sensible world. And both the
sun and Apollo are analogous to the good; but sensible light and
intellectual truth are analogous to superessential light. But though
Apollo and the sun subsist in wonderful union with each other, yet they
likewise inherit a proper distinction and diversity of nature. Hence, by
poets inspired by Phœbus, the different generative causes of the two are
celebrated, and the fountains are distinguished from which their
hypostasis is derived. At the same time they are described as closely
united with each other, and are celebrated with each other's mutual
appellations: for the sun vehemently rejoices to be celebrated as
Apollo; and Apollo, when he is invoked as the sun, benignantly imparts
the splendid light of truth. It is the illustrious

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

property of Apollo to collect multitude into one, to comprehend number
in one, and from one to produce many natures; to convolve in himself,
through intellectual simplicity, all the variety of secondary natures;
and, through one hyparxis, to collect into one multiform essences and
powers. This god, through a simplicity exempt from multitude, imparts to
secondary natures *prophetic truth*; for that which is simple is the
same with. that which is true: but through his liberated essence he
imparts *a purifying, unpolluted, and preserving power*: and *his
emission of arrows* is the symbol of his destroying every thing
inordinate, wandering, and immoderate in the world. But his revolution
is the symbol of the harmonic motion of the universe, collecting all
things into union and consent. And these four powers of the god may be
accommodated to the three solar monads, which he contains. The first
monad <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md), therefore, of this god is
enunciative of truth, and of the intellectual light which subsists
occultly in the gods. But the second <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md)
is destructive of every thing wandering and confused:

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

but the third <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) causes all things to
subsist in symmetry and familiarity with each other, through harmonic
reasons. And the unpolluted and most pure cause, which he comprehends in
himself, obtains the principality, illuminating all things with
perfection and power, according to nature, and banishing every thing
contrary to these.

Hence, of the solar triad, the first monad unfolds intellectual light,
enunciates it to all secondary natures, fills all things with universal
truth, and converts them to the intellect of the gods; which employment
is ascribed to the prophetic power of Apollo, who produces into light
the truth contained ill divine natures, and perfects that which is
unknown in the secondary orders of things. But the second and third
monads are the causes of efficacious vigour, demiurgic effection in the
universe, and perfect energy, according to which these monads adorn
every sensible nature, and exterminate every thing indefinite and
inordinate in the world.

And one monad is analogous to musical fabrication, and to the harmonic
providence of natures which are moved. But the second

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

is analogous to that which is destructive of all confusion, and of that
perturbation which is contrary to form, and the orderly disposition of
the universe. But the third monad, which supplies all things with an
abundant communion of beauty, and extends true beautitude to all things,
bounds the solar principles, and guards its triple progression. In a
similar manner, likewise, it illuminates progressions with a perfect and
intellectual measure of a blessed life, by those purifying and pæonian
powers of the king Apollo, which obtain an analogous principality in the
sun.--The sun is allotted a supermundane <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) order

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

in the world, an unbegotten supremacy among generated forms, and an
intellectual dignity among sensible natures. Hence he

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

has a twofold progression, one in conjunction with the other mundane
gods, but the other exempt from them, supernatural and unknown. For the
Demiurgus, according to Plato in the Timæus, enkindled in the solar
sphere a light unlike the splendour of the other planets, producing it
from his own essence, extending to mundane natures, as it were from
certain secret recesses, a symbol of intellectual essences, and
exhibiting to the universe the arcane nature of the supermundane gods.
Hence, when the sun first arose, he astonished the mundane gods, all of
whom were desirous of dancing round him, and of being replenished with
his light. The sun, too, governs the twofold co-ordinations of the
world, which co-ordinations are denominated hands, by those who are
skilled in divine concerns, because they are effective, motive, and
demiurgic of the universe. But they are considered as twofold; one the
right hand, but the other the left.

And lastly, the sun being supermundane, emits the fountains of light;
for among supermundane natures there is a solar world and total light;
and this light is a monad prior to the empyrean, ætherial, and material

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

worlds <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md). And thus much for an account
of the sun, from Proclus, *On the Timæus and Theology of Plato*: the
following is from his Scholia on the Cratylus.

In the first place, then, Proclus informs us, that there is a great
correspondence between the Coric series, or the order belonging to
Proserpine, and the Apolloniacal; for the former is the unity of the
middle triad of Rulers, (meaning of the supermundane gods) and emits
from herself vivific powers; but the latter converts the solar
principles to one union: and the solar principles are allotted a
subsistence immediately after the vivific. Hence (says he) according to
Orpheus, when Ceres delivered up the government to Proserpine, she thus
admonished her:

Αυταρ Απολλωνος θαλερον λεχος εισαναβασα,  
Τεξεται αγλαα τεκνα πυριφλεγεθοντα προσωποις.

That is,

But next Apollo's florid bed ascend;  
For thus the god fam'd offspring shall beget,  
Refulgent with the beams of glowing fire.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

But how could this be the case, unless there was a considerable degree
of communion between these divinities.

But it is requisite to know thus much concerning Apollo, that, according
to the first and most natural conception, his name signifies the cause
of union, and that power which collects multitude into one; and this
mode of speculation concerning his name harmonizes with all the orders
of the god. After this, he observes, in answer to the question why
Socrates, in the Cratylus, begins from the *medicinal* power of the
gods, proceeds through his *prophetic* and *arrow-darting* powers, and
lastly ends in his harmonic power, that all the energies of this
divinity subsist in all the orders of beings, but that different
energies appear to have more or less dominion in different orders: thus,
for instance, the *medicinal* power of Apollo is most apparent in the
sublunary region, for

There slaughter, rage, and countless Ills beside,  
Disease, decay, and rottenness reside. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)

And as these are moved in an inordinate

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

manner, they require to be restored from a condition contrary, into one
agreeable to nature, and from incommensuration and manifold division,
into symmetry and union.

But the *prophetic* energy of the god is most apparent in the heavens;
for there his enunciative power shines forth, unfolding intelligible
goods to celestial natures, and on this account he revolves together
with the sun, with whom he participates the same intellect in common;
since the sun also illuminates whatever heaven contains, and extends a
unifying power to all its parts. But his *arrow-darting* energy mostly
prevails among *the liberated* <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) gods;
for there ruling over *the wholes* <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md)
which the universe contains, he excites their motions by his rays, which
are always assimilated to arrows, extirpates every thing inordinate, and
fills all things with demiurgic gifts. And though he has a separate and
exempt subsistence, he reaches all things by his energies.

Again, his harmonic power is more predominant

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

in the *ruling supermundane* order; for it is this divinity who
harmonizing the universe, establishes about himself according to one
union the choir of the Muses, and produces by this means, as a certain
Theurgist says, "*the harmony of exulting light*." Apollo, therefore, as
we have shewn, is *harmonic*, and this is likewise the case with the
other Apollos <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) which are contained in
the earth, and the other spheres; but this power appears in some places
more and in others less. These powers too, subsist in the god himself in
an united manner, and exempt from other natures, but in those attendants
of the gods who are superior to us, divisibly and according to
participation; for there is a great multitude of *medicinal, prophetic,
harmonic, and arrow-darting* angels, dæmons, and heroes, suspended from
Apollo, who distribute

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

in a partial manner the uniform powers of the god.

But it is necessary to consider each of these powers according to one
definite characteristic; as, for instance, his *harmonic* power,
according to its binding together separated multitude; his *prophetic*
power, according to the enunciative; his *arrow-darting* power,
according to its being subvertive of an inordinate nature; and his
medicinal power, according to its perfective energy. We should likewise
speculate these characteristics differently in gods, angels, dæmons,
heroes, men, animals, and plants; for the powers of the gods extend from
on high to the last of things, and at the same time appear in an
accommodated manner in each; and the Telestic or mystic art endeavours
through sympathy to conjoin these ultimate participants with the gods.
But in all these orders we must carefully observe, that this god is the
cause of union to multiplied natures: for his *medicinal* power, which
takes away the *multiform* nature of disease, imparts *uniform* health;
since health is symmetry, and a subsistence according to nature, but
that which is contrary to nature is multifarious. Thus too, his
*prophetic* power,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

which unfolds the simplicity of truth, takes away the variety of that
which is false; but his *arrow-darting* power, which exterminates every
thing furious and wild, but prepares that which is orderly and gentle to
exercise dominion, vindicates to itself unity, and exterminates a
disordered nature tending to multitude: and his *musical* power, through
rythm and harmony, places a bond, friendship and union in *wholes*, and
subdues the contraries of these.

And all these powers, indeed, subsist primarily in an exempt manner and
uniformly in the demiurgus <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) of
wholes, but secondarily and separately in Apollo. Hence Apollo is not
the same with the demiurgic intellect; for this comprehends these powers
totally and paternally, but Apollo, with subjection, imitating his
father; since all the energies and powers of secondary gods, are
comprehended in the Demiurgus according to cause. And the Demiurgus
fabricates and adorns the universe according to all these powers, and in
a collected manner; but the other deities which

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

proceed from him, co-operate with their father according to different
powers.

Thus far the truly admirable Proclus, who certainly merited the
appellation of *Coryphæus* which is given him by Damascius, in the most
eminent degree; for he was beyond all doubt the man who, in the language
of Ammonius Hermeas <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md), possessed the
ability of interpreting the doctrines of the ancients, and a scientific
judgment of the nature of things, in the greatest perfection possible to
man. For my own part, indeed, the whole of time would not be sufficient
to pay him thanks adequate to the benefits which I have received from
his incomparable works; and I shall consider the employment (if
permitted me) of translating and illustrating the whole of his
philosophical works in English, as forming a very principal part of the
felicity of my life. I only add farther concerning this Oration to the
Sun, that it is addressed to one) Sallust, who was a governor of some
Roman province, who appears to have been greatly esteemed by the
Emperor, and who of course was a professor of the genuine religion of
mankind.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

With respect to the Oration to the Mother of the Gods, it is necessary
to observe, that this divinity first subsists at the summit of that
order of gods which is called by the Chaldean theologists νοητος και
νεορος, i.e. *intelligible, and at the same time intellectual*; that she
is there no other than the celebrated goddess *Night*; and that she
produces from thence, in the *intellectual* order, *Rhea, Ceres, Tethys*
and *Juno*, each of whom, from subsisting according to the same
characteristic, is the mother of all the divinities respectively
subordinate to each. So that this vivific series, or luminous chain,
commences from the occult goddess Night, and extends to the utmost
extremities of animated being. Indeed, the various orders of the gods
are in reality no other than the golden chain of Homer <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md), the topmost link of which is suspended,
from the ineffable principle of all things, and whose series is
terminated only

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

by the dark, fluctuating, and rebounding receptacle of matter.

I shall only observe farther at present, that the Emperor's explanation
of the mystic fable, respecting Attis and the Mother of the Gods is
agreeable to that of the philosopher Sallust, in his treatise *On the
Gods and the World*, as may be seen in Chap. IV. of my translation of
that invaluable work. I shall therefore conclude this Introduction with
a hymn to *Apollo* and the *Sun*, considered as in a certain respect one
and the same divinity, and in which the reader will find an epitome of a
great part, of the arcane information concerning this mighty deity which
has been already delivered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[8:1](toj01.htm#fr_0.md) See this most important
subject more largely discussed in my Introduction to the Parmenides.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[14:1](toj01.htm#fr_1.md) For in these all are in
each, but not all in all.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[16:1](toj01.htm#fr_2.md) For an account of the
*Intelligible Gods*, see my Introduction to the Parmenides.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[17:1](toj01.htm#fr_3.md) The first part of this
account is already published, and forms a part of one of the notes to my
translation of the Cratylus: but the latter part from Proclus on the
Cratylus was never before this made public.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[19:1](toj01.htm#fr_4.md) *i.e.* Mercury.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[19:2](toj01.htm#fr_5.md) Venus.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[20:1](toj01.htm#fr_6.md) Apollo.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[21:1](toj01.htm#fr_7.md) That the Platonic reader
may be demonstratively convinced that the Sun ranks in the
*supermundane* order of gods, let him attend to the following
observations, which belong to the greatest arcana of the ancient
theology. Every order of gods commences from a *monad*, or proximately
exempt producing cause: for it is necessary, that every divine cause
should be to its progeny what the first cause is to all the divine
orders; since it can no otherwise produce in the best manner, than by
imitating that which is best. But the first cause in an *imparticipable*
one, or, in other words, is not consubsistent with his progeny; and
hence every divine order must have a presubsisting and primary principle
of its progression, which, from its similitude to the first cause, is
very properly called a *monad*. The immediate progeny, too, of every
divine monad, must be exquisitely allied to the monad Its cause, since
the similar, In every well-ordered progression, must always subsist
prior to the dissimilar. This being premised, the reader, *who knows
scientifically* the <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> number of the divine
orders, may easily collect, that as *the ineffable one*, who is superior
to an intelligible essence, is the *monad* of first intelligibles, which
he illuminates with superessential light; so *Phanes*, or *intelligible
intellect*, which is the extremity of the intelligible order, is the
*monad of intellectuals*, whom he illuminates with intelligible light.
In like manner *Jupiter*, who is the boundary of the gods, *properly
called intellectual*, is the *king* or *monad* of the *supermundane
gods*, whom he illuminates with intellectual light; and consequently the
*Sun* must subsist at the extremity of the supermundane order, must be
the *monad* of the *mundane gods*, and must illuminate sensible natures
with *supermundane light*: for otherwise the mundane gods would not be
suspended from a monad analogous to the other divine orders. And lastly,
*Bacchus*, or the *mundane intellect*, is the *monad* of the *Titans*,
or the *ultimate artificers of things*, whom he Illuminates with *light
of a mundane* characteristic. Hence, Bacchus is the cause of the mundane
properties of light, viz. of those properties which are inseparable from
a corporeal nature, and which are found to subsist in visible light: for
light, as I have elsewhere shewn from Proclus, is an immaterial body.

I only add, that the reader who *profoundly* understands this theory,
may consider himself as possessing the key which easily opens the
treasury of the highest Wisdom: but let not any one who has not
*legitimately* studied the philosophy of Plato, deceive himself by
supposing that this theory may be understood by barely reading over the
above observations; for it is certainly ridiculous in the extreme to
imagine that a theory like the preceding, which respects the most
sublime objects of speculation, which is the result of the most
consummate science, and which depends on a variety of previous
disciplines, can be apprehended as soon as mentioned: the man that can
entertain an opinion so stupid and arrogant, is not only *ignorant* in
matters of the highest importance, but is even *ignorant of his
ignorance*!

<span id="fn_8"></span>[24:1](toj01.htm#fr_8.md) have already shewn in my
notes on the Cratylus, that the celebrated seven worlds of the Chaldæans
are to be distributed as follows: One empyrean; three ætherial, situated
above the inerratic sphere; and three material, consisting of the
inerratic sphere, the seven planets, and the sublunary region. As the
Emperor, therefore, In this Hymn informs us that, according to the
Assyrians, the sun moves in the middle of these seven worlds, he must
consequently revolve in the last of the ætherial worlds.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[25:1](toj01.htm#fr_9.md) These lines from
Empedocles are as follow in the original:

Ενθα κοτος τε φονος τε, και αλλων εθνεα κηρων,  
Αυχμησαι τε νοσοι, και σηψιες, εργα τε ρευστα.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[26:1](toj01.htm#fr_10.md) For an account of this
and the following order of gods, viz. the *supermundane*, see my
Introduction to the Parmenides, and notes on the Cratylus.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[26:2](toj01.htm#fr_11.md) See my Introduction to
the Timæus for an account of these wholes.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[27:1](toj01.htm#fr_12.md) In my Introduction to
the Timæus, I have shewn that, according to the ancient Theology, every
sphere in the universe is surrounded with a multitude of gods in
splendid orbicular bodies analogus to the number of the fixed stars;
that these gods are subordinate to the gods of the spheres as being
their Satellites; that they are characterized by the properties of the
several spheres; and that they are distributed from all the various
orders of the gods: so that, for instance, about the sphere of the sun,
there is a solar Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcan, etc., and so of the rest.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[29:1](toj01.htm#fr_13.md) *i.e.* In Jupiter.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[30:1](toj01.htm#fr_14.md) In Aristot, de
Interpretatione.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[31:1](toj01.htm#fr_15.md) A reader unskilled in
the ancient theology will doubtless imagine from this, that as Homer's
chain commences from Jupiter, hence Jupiter is no other than the first
cause: to such it is necessary to observe, that Homer's chain, of which
Jupiter is the monad or topmost link, is only a part of the whole chain,
which commences from the first cause, as there are various orders of
gods superior to Jupiter, the demiurgus of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Apollo and the Sun](toj02.md)
