[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cm19)  [Next](cm21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE RAINY DAY

Sullen clouds are gathering fast over the black fringe of the forest.

O child, do not go out!

The palm trees in a row by the lake are smiting their heads against the
dismal sky; the crows with their draggled wings are silent on the
tamarind branches, and the eastern bank of the river is haunted by a
deepening gloom.

Our cow is lowing loud, tied at the fence.

O child, wait here till I bring her into the stall.

Men have crowded into the flooded field to catch the fishes as they
escape from the overflowing ponds; the rain water is running in rills
through the narrow lanes like a laughing boy who has run away from his
mother to tease her.

Listen, someone is shouting for the boatman at the ford.

O child, the daylight is dim, and the crossing at the ferry is closed.

The sky seems to ride fast upon the madly-rushing rain; the water in the
river is loud and impatient; women have hastened home early from the
Ganges with their filled pitchers.

The evening lamps must be made ready.

O child, do not go out!

The road to the market is desolate, the lane to the river is slippery.
The wind is roaring and struggling among the bamboo branches like a wild
beast tangled in a net.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Paper Boats](cm21)
