[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cm31)  [Next](cm33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WICKED POSTMAN

Why do you sit there on the floor so quiet and silent, tell me, mother
dear?

The rain is coming in through the open window, making you all wet, and
you don't mind it.

Do you hear the gong striking four? It is time for my brother to come
home from school.

What has happened to you that you look so strange?

Haven't you got a letter from father to-day?

I saw the postman bringing letters in his bag for almost everybody in
the town.

Only, father's letters he keeps to read himself. I am sure the postman
is a wicked man.

But don't be unhappy about that, mother dear.

To-morrow is market day in the next village. You ask your maid to buy
some pens and papers.

I myself will write all father's letters; you will not find a single
mistake.

I shall write from A right up to K.

But, mother, why do you smile?

You don't believe that I can write as nicely as father does!

But I shall rule my paper carefully, and write all the letters
beautifully big.

When I finish my writing, do you think I shall be so foolish as father
and drop it into the horrid postman's bag?

I shall bring it to you myself without waiting, and letter by letter
help you to read my writing.

I know the postman does not like to give you the really nice letters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hero](cm33.md)
