[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Tagore](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cm33)  [Next](cm35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE END

It is time for me to go, mother; I am going.

When in the paling darkness of the lonely dawn you stretch out your arms
for your baby in the bed, I shall say, "Baby is not there!"--mother, I
am going.

I shall become a delicate draught of air and caress you; and I shall be
ripples in the water when you bathe, and kiss you and kiss you again.

In the gusty night when the rain patters on the leaves you will hear my
whisper in your bed, and my laughter will flash with the lightning
through the open window into your room.

If you lie awake, thinking of your baby till late into the night, I
shall sing to you from the stars, "Sleep mother, sleep."

On the straying moonbeams I shall steal over your bed, and lie upon your
bosom while you sleep.

I shall become a dream, and through the little opening of your eyelids I
shall slip into the depths of your sleep; and when you wake up and look
round startled, like a twinkling firefly I shall flit out into the
darkness.

When, on the great festival of *puja*, the neighbours' children come and
play about the house, I shall melt into the music of the flute and throb
in your heart all day.

Dear auntie will come with *puja*-presents and will ask, "Where is our
baby, sister? Mother, you will tell her softly, "He is in the pupils of
my eyes, he is in my body and in my soul."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Recall](cm35)
