[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hh07)  [Next](hh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877854769/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Heaven and Hell*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by John C. Ager
\[1900\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Heaven and Hell

<span class="margnote"><span id="351.">351.</span></span>

It is believed in the world that those who have much knowledge, whether
it be knowledge of the teachings of the church and the Word or of the
sciences, have a more interior and keen vision of truth than others,
that is, are more intelligent and wise; and such have this opinion of
themselves. But what true intelligence and wisdom are, and what spurious
and false intelligence and wisdom are, shall be told in what now
follows. \[2\] True intelligence and wisdom is seeing and perceiving
what is true and good, and thereby what is false and evil, and clearly
distinguishing between them, and this from an interior intuition and
perception. With every man there are interior faculties and exterior
faculties; interior faculties belonging to the internal or spiritual
man, and exterior faculties belonging to the exterior or natural man.
Accordingly as man's interiors are formed and made one with his
exteriors man sees and perceives. His interiors can be formed only in
heaven, his exteriors are formed in the world. When his interiors have
been formed in heaven the things they contain flow into his exteriors
which are from the world, and so form them that they correspond with,
that is, act as one with, his interiors; and when this is done man sees
and perceives from what is interior. The interiors can be formed only in
one way, namely, by man's looking to the Divine and to heaven, since, as
has been said, the interiors are formed in heaven; and man looks to the
Divine when he believes in the Divine, and believes that all truth and
good and consequently all intelligence and wisdom are from the Divine;
and man believes in the Divine when he is willing to be led by the
Divine. In this way and none other are the interiors of man opened.
\[3\] The man who is in that belief and in a life that is in accordance
with his belief has the ability and capacity to understand and be wise;
but to become intelligent and wise he must learn many things, both
things pertaining to heaven and things pertaining to the world - things
pertaining to heaven from the Word and from the church, and things
pertaining to the world from the sciences. To the extent that man learns
and applies to life he becomes intelligent and wise, for to that extent
the interior sight belonging to his understanding and the interior
affection belonging to his will are perfected. The simple of this class
are those whose interiors have been opened, but not so enriched by
spiritual, moral, civil and natural truths. Such perceive truths when
they hear them, but do not see them in themselves. But the wise of this
class are those whose interiors have been both opened and enriched. Such
both see truths inwardly and perceive them. All this makes clear what
true intelligence is and what true wisdom is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="352.">352.</span></span>

Spurious intelligence and wisdom is failing to see and perceive from
within what is true and what is good, and thereby what is false and what
is evil, but merely believing that to be true and good and that to be
false and evil which is said by others to be so, and then confirming it.
Because such see truth from some one else, and not from the truth
itself, they can seize upon and believe what is false as readily as what
is true, and can confirm it until it appears true; for whatever is
confirmed puts on the appearance of truth; and there is nothing that can
not be confirmed. The interiors of such are opened only from beneath;
but their exteriors are opened to the extent that they have confirmed
themselves. For this reason the light from which they see is not the
light of heaven but the light of the world, which is called natural
light \[lumen\]; and in that light falsities can shine like truths; and
when confirmed they can even appear resplendent, but not in the light of
heaven. Of this class those are less intelligent and wise who have
strongly confirmed themselves, and those are more intelligent and wise
who have less strongly confirmed themselves. All this shows what
spurious intelligence and wisdom are. \[2\] But those are not included
in this class who in childhood supposed what they heard from their
masters to be true, if in a riper age, when they think from their own
understanding, they do not continue to hold fast to it, but long for
truth, and from that longing seek for it, and when they find it are
interiorly moved by it. Because such are moved by the truth for the
truth's sake they see the truth before they confirm it. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[352-1](#fn_226) \[3\] This may be illustrated by an
example. There was a discussion among spirits why animals are born into
all the knowledge suited to their nature, but man is not; and the reason
was said to be that animals are in the order of their life, and man is
not, consequently man must needs be led into order by means of what he
learns of internal and external things. But if man were born into the
order of his life, which is to love God above all things and his
neighbor as himself, he would be born into intelligence and wisdom, and
as knowledges are acquired would come into a belief in all truth. Good
spirits saw this at once and perceived it to be true, and this merely
from the light of truth; while the spirits who had confirmed themselves
in faith alone, and had thereby set aside love and charity, were unable
to understand it, because the light of falsity which they had confirmed
had made obscure to them the light of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="353.">353.</span></span>

False intelligence and wisdom is all intelligence and wisdom that is
separated from the acknowledgment of the Divine; for all such as do not
acknowledge the Divine, but acknowledge nature in the place of the
Divine, think from the bodily-sensual, and are merely sensual, however
highly they may be esteemed in the world for their accomplishments and
learning. <span id="fr_227"></span>[353-1](#fn_227) For their learning
does not ascend beyond such things as appear before their eyes in the
world; these they hold in the memory and look at them in an almost
material way, although the same knowledges serve the truly intelligent
in forming their understanding. By sciences the various kinds of
experimental knowledge are meant, such as physics, astronomy, chemistry,
mechanics, geometry, anatomy, psychology, philosophy, the history of
kingdoms and of the literary world, criticism, and languages. \[2\] The
clergy who deny the Divine do not raise their thoughts above the sensual
things of the external man; and regard the things of the Word in the
same way as others regard the sciences, not making them matters of
thought or of any intuition by an enlightened rational mind; and for the
reason that their interiors are closed up, together with those exteriors
that are nearest to their interiors. These are closed up because they
have turned themselves away from heaven, and have retroverted those
faculties that were capable of looking heavenward, which are, as has
been said above, the interiors of the human mind. For this reason they
are incapable of seeing anything true or good, this being to them in
thick darkness, while whatever is false and evil is in light. \[3\] And
yet sensual men can reason, some of them more cunningly and keenly than
any one else; but they reason from the fallacies of the senses confirmed
by their knowledges; and because they are able to reason in this way
they believe themselves to be wiser than others. <span
id="fr_228"></span>[353-2](#fn_228) The fire that kindles with affection
their reasonings is the fire of the love of self and the world. Such are
those who are in false intelligence and wisdom, and who are meant by the
Lord in Matthew: Seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither
do they understand (13:13-15). And again: These things are hid from the
intelligent and wise, and revealed unto babes (11:25, 26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="354.">354.</span></span>

It has been granted me to speak with many of the learned after their
departure from the world; with some of distinguished reputation and
celebrated in the literary world for their writings, and with some not
so celebrated, although endowed with profound wisdom. Those that in
heart had denied the Divine, whatever their professions may have been,
had become so stupid as to have little comprehension even of anything
truly civil, still less of anything spiritual. I perceived and also saw
that the interiors of their minds were so closed up as to appear black
(for in the spiritual world such things become visible), and in
consequence they were unable to endure any heavenly light or admit any
influx from heaven. This blackness which their interiors presented was
more intense and extended with those that had confirmed themselves
against the Divine by the knowledges they had acquired. In the other
life such accept all falsity with delight, imbibing it as a sponge does
water; and they repel all truth as an elastic bony substance repels what
falls upon it. In fact, it is said that the interiors of those that have
confirmed themselves against the Divine and in favor of nature become
bony, and their heads down to the nose appear callous like ebony, which
is a sign that they no longer have any perception. Those of this
description are immersed in quagmires that appear like bogs; and there
they are harassed by the fantasies into which their falsities are
turned. Their infernal fire is a lust for glory and reputation, which
prompts them to assail one another, and from an infernal ardor to
torment those about them who do not worship them as deities; and this
they do one to another in turns. Into such things is all the learning of
the world changed that has not received into itself light from heaven
through acknowledgment of the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="355.">355.</span></span>

That these are such in the spiritual world when they come into it after
death may be inferred from this alone, that all things that are in the
natural memory and are in immediate conjunction with the things of
bodily sense (which is true of such knowledges as are mentioned above)
then become quiescent; and only such rational principles as are drawn
from these then serve for thought and speech. For man carries with him
his entire natural memory, but its contents are not then under his view,
and do not come into his thought as when he lived in the world. He can
take nothing from that memory and bring it forth into spiritual light
because its contents are not objects of that light. But those things of
the reason and understanding that man has acquired from knowledges while
living in the body are in accord with the light of the spiritual world;
consequently so far as the spirit of man has been made rational in the
world through knowledge and science it is to the same extent rational
after being loosed from the body; for man is then a spirit, and it is
the spirit that thinks in the body. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[355-1](#fn_229)

<span class="margnote"><span id="356.">356.</span></span>

But in respect to those that have acquired intelligence and wisdom
through knowledge and science, who are such as have applied all things
to the use of life, and have also acknowledged the Divine, loved the
Word, and lived a spiritual moral life (of which above, n. 319), to such
the sciences have served as a means of becoming wise, and also of
corroborating the things pertaining to faith. The interiors of the mind
of such have been perceived by me, and were seen as transparent from
light of a glistening white, flamy, or blue color, like that of
translucent diamonds, rubies, and sapphires; and this in accordance with
confirmations in favor of the Divine and Divine truths drawn from
science. Such is the appearance of true intelligence and wisdom when
they are presented to view in the spiritual world. This appearance is
derived from the light of heaven; and that light is Divine truth going
forth from the Lord, which is the source of all intelligence and wisdom
(see above, n. 126-133). \[2\] The planes of that light, in which
variegations like those of colors exist, are the interiors of the mind;
and these variegations are produced by confirmations of Divine truths by
means of such things as are in nature, that is, in the sciences. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[356-1](#fn_230) For the interior mind of man looks
into the things of the natural memory, and the things there that will
serve as proofs it sublimates as it were by the fire of heavenly love,
and withdraws and purifies them even into spiritual ideas. This is
unknown to man as long as he lives in the body, because there he thinks
both spiritually and naturally, and he has no perception of the things
he then thinks spiritually, but only of those he thinks naturally. But
when he has come into the spiritual world he has no perception of what
he thought naturally in the world, but only of what he thought
spiritually. Thus is his state changed. \[3\] All this makes clear that
it is by means of knowledges and sciences that man is made spiritual,
also that these are the means of becoming wise, but only with those who
have acknowledged the Divine in faith and life. Such also before others
are accepted in heaven, and are among those there who are at the center
(n. 43), because they are in light more than others. These are the
intelligent and wise in heaven, who "shine as with the brightness of the
firmament" and "who shine as the stars," while the simple there are
those that have acknowledged the Divine, have loved the Word, and have
lived a spiritual and moral life, but the interiors of their minds have
not been so enriched by knowledges and sciences. The human mind is like
soil which is such as it is made by cultivation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="357.">357.</span></span>

XXXIX\. THE RICH AND THE POOR IN HEAVEN. There are various opinions
about reception into heaven. Some are of the opinion that the poor are
received and the rich are not; some that the rich and the poor are
equally received; some that the rich can be received only by giving up
their wealth and becoming like the poor; and proofs are found in the
Word for all of these opinions. But those who make a distinction in
regard to heaven between the rich and the poor do not understand the
Word. In its interiors the Word is spiritual, but in the letter it is
natural; consequently those who understand the Word only in accordance
with its literal sense, and not according to any spiritual sense, err in
many respects, especially about the rich and the poor; for example, that
it is as difficult for the rich to enter into heaven as for a camel to
pass through the eye of a needle; and that it is easy for the poor
because they are poor, since it is said, Blessed are the poor, for
theirs is the kingdom of the heavens (Matt. 5:3; Luke 6:20, 21). But
those who know anything of the spiritual sense of the Word think
otherwise; they know that heaven is for all who live a life of faith and
love, whether rich or poor. But who are meant in the Word by "the rich"
and who by "the poor" will be told in what follows. From much
conversation and interaction with angels it has been granted me to know
with certainty that the rich enter heaven just as easily as the poor,
and that no man is shut out of heaven on account of his wealth, or
received into heaven on account of his poverty. Both the rich and the
poor are in heaven, and many of the rich in greater glory and happiness
than the poor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="358.">358.</span></span>

It should be said to begin with that a man may acquire riches and
accumulate wealth as far as opportunity is given, if it is not done by
craft or fraud; that he may enjoy the delicacies of food and drink if he
does not place his life therein; that he may have a palatial dwelling in
accord with his condition, have interaction with others in like
condition, frequent places of amusement, talk about the affairs of the
world, and need not go about like a devotee with a sad and sorrowful
countenance and drooping head, but may be joyful and cheerful; nor need
he give his goods to the poor except so far as affection leads him; in a
word, he may live outwardly precisely like a man of the world; and all
this will be no obstacle to his entering heaven, provided that inwardly
in himself he thinks about God as he ought, and acts sincerely and
justly in respect to his neighbor. For a man is such as his affection
and thought are, or such as his love and faith are, and from these all
his outward acts derive their life; since acting is willing, and
speaking is thinking, acting being from the will, and speaking from the
thought. So where it is said in the Word that man will be judged
according to his deeds, and will be rewarded according to his works, it
is meant that he will be judged and rewarded in accordance with his
thought and affection, which are the source of his deeds, or which are
in his deeds; for deeds are nothing apart from these, and are precisely
such as these are. <span id="fr_231"></span>[358-1](#fn_231) All this
shows that the man's external accomplishes nothing, but only his
internal, which is the source of the external. For example: if a man
acts honestly and refrains from fraud solely because he fears the laws
and the loss of reputation and thereby of honor or gain, and if that
fear did not restrain him would defraud others whenever he could;
although such a man's deeds outwardly appear honest, his thought and
will are fraud; and because he is inwardly dishonest and fraudulent he
has hell in himself. But he who acts honestly and refrains from fraud
because it is against God and against the neighbor would have no wish to
defraud another if he could; his thought and will are conscience, and he
has heaven in himself. The deeds of these two appear alike in outward
form, but inwardly they are wholly unlike.

<span class="margnote"><span id="359.">359.</span></span>

Since a man can live outwardly as others do, can grow rich, keep a
plentiful table, dwell in an elegant house and wear fine clothing
according to his condition and function, can enjoy delights and
gratifications, and engage in worldly affairs for the sake of his
occupation and business and for the life both of the mind and body,
provided he inwardly acknowledges the Divine and wishes well to the
neighbor, it is evident that to enter upon the way to heaven is not so
difficult as many believe. The sole difficulty lies in being able to
resist the love of self and the world, and to prevent their becoming
dominant; for this is the source of all evils. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[359-1](#fn_232) That this is not so difficult as is
believed is meant by these words of the Lord: Learn of Me, for I am meek
and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls; for My yoke is
easy and My burden is light (Matt. 11:29, 30). The Lord's yoke is easy
and His burden light because a man is led by the Lord and not by self
just to the extent that he resists the evils that flow forth from love
of self and of the world; and because the Lord then resists these evils
in man and removes them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="360.">360.</span></span>

I have spoken with some after death who, while they lived in the world,
renounced the world and gave themselves up to an almost solitary life,
in order that by an abstraction of the thoughts from worldly things they
might have opportunity for pious meditations, believing that thus they
might enter the way to heaven. But these in the other life are of a sad
disposition; they despise others who are not like themselves; they are
indignant that they do not have a happier lot than others, believing
that they have merited it; they have no interest in others, and turn
away from the duties of charity by which there is conjunction with
heaven. They desire heaven more than others; but when they are taken up
among the angels they induce anxieties that disturb the happiness of the
angels; and in consequence they are sent away; and when sent away they
betake themselves to desert places, where they lead a life like that
which they lived in the world. \[2\] Man can be formed for heaven only
by means of the world. In the world are the outmost effects in which
everyone's affection must be terminated; for unless affection puts
itself forth or flows out into acts, which is done in association with
others, it is suffocated to such a degree finally that man has no longer
any regard for the neighbor, but only for himself. All this makes clear
that a life of charity towards the neighbor, which is doing what is just
and right in every work and in every employment, is what leads to
heaven, and not a life of piety apart from charity; <span
id="fr_233"></span>[360-1](#fn_233) and from this it follows that only
to the extent that man is engaged in the employments of life can charity
be exercised and the life of charity grow; and this is impossible to the
extent that man separates himself from those employments. \[3\] On this
subject I will speak now from experience. Of those who while in the
world were employed in trade and commerce and became rich through these
pursuits there are many in heaven, but not so many of those who were in
stations of honor and became rich through those employments; and for the
reason that these latter by the gains and honors that resulted from
their dispensing justice and equity, and also by the lucrative and
honorable positions bestowed on them were led into loving themselves and
the world, and thereby separating their thoughts and affections from
heaven and turning them to themselves. For to the extent that a man
loves self and the world and looks to self and the world in everything,
he alienates himself from the Divine and separates himself from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="361.">361.</span></span>

As to the lot of the rich in heaven, they live more splendidly than
others. Some of them dwell in palaces within which everything is
resplendent as if with gold and silver. They have an abundance of all
things for the uses of life, but they do not in the least set their
heart on these things, but only on uses. Uses are clearly seen as if
they were in light, but the gold and silver are seen obscurely, and
comparatively as if in shade. This is because while they were in the
world they loved uses, and loved gold and silver only as means and
instruments. It is the uses that are thus resplendent in heaven, the
good of use like gold and the truth of use like silver. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[361-1](#fn_234) Therefore their wealth in heaven is
such as their uses were in the world, and such, too, are their delight
and happiness. Good uses are providing oneself and one's own with the
necessaries of life; also desiring wealth for the sake of one's country
and for the sake of one's neighbor, whom a rich man can in many ways
benefit more than a poor man. These are good uses because one is able
thereby to withdraw his mind from an indolent life which is harmful,
since in such a life man's thoughts run to evil because of the evil
inherent in him. These uses are good to the extent that they have the
Divine in them, that is, to the extent that man looks to the Divine and
to heaven, and finds his good in these, and sees in wealth only a
subservient good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="362.">362.</span></span>

But the lot of the rich that have not believed in the Divine, and have
cast out of their minds the things pertaining to heaven and the church,
is the opposite of this. Such are in hell, where filth, misery, and want
exist; and into these riches that are loved as an end are changed; and
not only riches, but also their very uses, which are either a wish to
live as they like and indulge in pleasures, and to have opportunity to
give the mind more fully and freely to shameful practices, or a wish to
rise above others whom they despise. Such riches and such uses, because
they have nothing spiritual, but only what is earthly in them, become
filthy; for a spiritual purpose in riches and their uses is like a soul
in the body, or like the light of heaven in moist ground; and such
riches and uses become putrid as a body does without a soul, or as moist
ground does without the light of heaven. Such are those that have been
led and drawn away from heaven by riches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="363.">363.</span></span>

Every man's ruling affection or love remains with him after death, nor
is it rooted out to eternity, since a man's spirit is wholly what his
love is, and what is unknown, the body of every spirit and angel is the
outward form of his love, exactly corresponding to his inward form,
which is the form of his disposition and mind; consequently the quality
of his spirit is known from his face, movements, and speech. While a man
is living in the world the quality of the spirit would be known if he
had not learned to counterfeit in his face, movements, and speech what
is not his own. All this shows that man remains to eternity such as his
ruling affection or love is. It has been granted me to talk with some
who lived seventeen hundred years ago, and whose lives are well known
from writings of that time, and it was found that the same love still
rules them as when they were on the earth. This makes clear also that
the love of riches, and of uses from riches, remains with everyone to
eternity, and that it is exactly the same as the love acquired in the
world, yet with the difference that in the case of those who devoted
their riches to good uses riches are changed in the other world into
delights which are in accord with the uses performed; while in the case
of those who devoted their riches to evil uses riches are turned into
mere filth, in which they then take the same delight as they did in the
world in their riches devoted to evil uses. Such then take delight in
filth because filthy pleasures and shameful acts, which had been the
uses to which they had devoted their riches, and also avarice, which is
a love of riches without regard to use, correspond to filth. Spiritual
filth is nothing else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="364.">364.</span></span>

The poor come into heaven not on account of their poverty but because of
their life. Everyone's life follows him, whether he be rich or poor.
There is no peculiar mercy for one in preference to another; <span
id="fr_235"></span>[364-1](#fn_235) he that has lived well is received,
while he that has not lived well is rejected. Moreover, poverty leads
and draws man away from heaven just as much as wealth does. There are
many among the poor who are not content with their lot, who strive after
many things, and believe riches to be blessings; <span
id="fr_236"></span>[364-2](#fn_236) and when they do not gain them are
much provoked, and harbor ill thoughts about the Divine providence; they
also envy others the good things they possess, and are as ready as any
one to defraud others whenever they have opportunity, and to indulge in
filthy pleasures. But this is not true of the poor who are content with
their lot, and are careful and diligent in their work, who love labor
better than idleness, and act sincerely and faithfully, and at the same
time live a Christian life. I have now and then talked with those
belonging to the peasantry and common people, who while living in the
world believed in God and did what was just and right in their
occupations. Since they had an affection for knowing truth they inquired
about charity and about faith, having heard in this world much about
faith and in the other life much about charity. They were therefore told
that charity is everything that pertains to life, and faith everything
that pertains to doctrine; consequently charity is willing and doing
what is just and right in every work, and faith is thinking justly and
rightly; and faith and charity are conjoined, the same as doctrine and a
life in accordance with it, or the same as thought and will; and faith
becomes charity when that which a man thinks justly and rightly he also
wills and does, and then they are not two but one. This they well
understood, and rejoiced, saying that in the world they did not
understand believing to be anything else but living.

<span class="margnote"><span id="365.">365.</span></span>

All this makes clear that the rich and the poor alike come into heaven,
the one as easily as the other. The belief that the poor enter heaven
easily and the rich with difficulty comes from not understanding the
Word where the rich and the poor are mentioned. In the Word those that
have an abundance of knowledges of good and truth, thus who are within
the church where the Word is, are meant in the spiritual sense by the
"rich;" while those who lack these knowledges, and yet desire them, thus
who are outside of the church and where there is no Word, are meant by
the "poor." \[2\] The rich man clothed in purple and fine linen, and
cast into hell, means the Jewish nation, which is called rich because it
had the Word and had an abundance of knowledges of good and truth
therefrom, "garments of purple" signifying knowledges of good, and
"garments of fine linen" knowledges of truth. <span
id="fr_237"></span>[365-1](#fn_237) But the poor man who lay at the rich
man's gate and longed to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich
man's table, and who was carried by angels into heaven, means the
nations that have no knowledges of good and truth and yet desired them
(Luke 16:19-31). Also the rich that were called to a great supper and
excused themselves mean the Jewish nation, and the poor brought in in
their place mean the nations outside of the church (Luke 14:16-24).
\[3\] By the rich man of whom the Lord says: It is easier for a camel to
go through a needle's eye than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of God (Matt. 19:24), the rich in both the natural sense and the
spiritual sense are meant. In the natural sense the rich are those that
have an abundance of riches and set their heart upon them; but in the
spiritual sense they are those that have an abundance of knowledges and
learning, which are spiritual riches, and who desire by means of these
to introduce themselves into the things of heaven and the church from
their own intelligence. And because this is contrary to Divine order it
is said to be "easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye," a
"camel" signifying in general in the spiritual sense the knowing faculty
and things known, and a "needle's eye" signifying spiritual truth. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[365-2](#fn_238) That such is the meaning of a
"camel" and a "needle's eye" is not at present known, because the
knowledge that teaches what is signified in the spiritual sense by the
things said in the literal sense of the Word has not up to this time
been disclosed. In every particular of the Word there is a spiritual
sense and also a natural sense; for the Word was made to consist wholly
of correspondences between natural and spiritual things in order that
conjunction of heaven with the world, or of angels with men might
thereby be effected, direct conjunction having ceased. This makes clear
who in particular are meant in the Word by the "rich man." \[4\] That
the "rich" in the Word mean in the spiritual sense those who are in
knowledges of truth and good, and "riches" the knowledges themselves,
which are spiritual riches, can be seen from various passages (as in
Isa. 10:12-14; 30:6, 7; 45:3; Jer. 17:3; 48:7; 50:36, 37; 51:13; Dan.
5:2-4; Ezek. 26:7, 12; 27:1 to the end; Zech. 9:3, 4; Psalm 45:12; Hosea
12:9; Apoc. 3:17, 18; Luke 14:33; and elsewhere). Also that the "poor"
in the spiritual sense signify those who do not possess knowledges of
good and of truth, and yet desire them (Matt. 11:5; Luke 6:20, 21;
14:21; Isa. 14:30; 29:19; 41:17, 18; Zeph. 3:12, 13). All these passages
may be seen explained in accordance with the spiritual sense in the
Arcana Coelestia (n. 10227).

<span class="margnote"><span id="366.">366.</span></span>

MARRIAGES IN HEAVEN. As heaven is from the human race, and angels
therefore are of both sexes, and from creation woman is for man and man
is for woman, thus the one belongs to the other, and this love is innate
in both, it follows that there are marriages in heaven as well as on the
earth. But marriages in heaven differ widely from marriages on the
earth. Therefore what marriages in heaven are, and how they differ from
marriages on the earth and wherein they are like them, shall now be
told.

<span class="margnote"><span id="367.">367.</span></span>

Marriage in heaven is a conjunction of two into one mind. It must first
be explained what this conjunction is. The mind consists of two parts,
one called the understanding and the other the will. When these two
parts act as one they are called one mind. In heaven the husband acts
the part called the understanding and the wife acts the part called the
will. When this conjunction, which belongs to man's interiors, descends
into the lower parts pertaining to the body, it is perceived and felt as
love, and this love is marriage love. This shows that marriage love has
its origin in the conjunction of two into one mind. This in heaven is
called cohabitation; and the two are not called two but one. So in
heaven a married pair is spoken of, not as two, but as one angel. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[367-1](#fn_239)

<span class="margnote"><span id="368.">368.</span></span>

Moreover, such a conjunction of husband and wife in the inmosts of their
minds comes from their very creation; for man is born to be
intellectual, that is, to think from the understanding, while woman is
born to be affectional, that is, to think from her will; and this is
evident from the inclination or natural disposition of each, also from
their form; from the disposition, in that man acts from reason and woman
from affection; from the form in that man has a rougher and less
beautiful face, a deeper voice and a harder body; while woman has a
smoother and more beautiful face, a softer voice, and a more tender
body. There is a like difference between understanding and will, or
between thought and affection; so, too, between truth and good and
between faith and love; for truth and faith belong to the understanding,
and good and love to the will. From this it is that in the Word "youth"
or "man" means in the spiritual sense the understanding of truth, and
"virgin" or "woman" affection for good; also that the church, on account
of its affection for good and truth, is called a "woman" and a "virgin;"
also that all those that are in affection for good are called "virgins"
(as in Apoc. 14:4). <span id="fr_240"></span>[368-1](#fn_240)

<span class="margnote"><span id="369.">369.</span></span>

Everyone, whether man or woman, possesses understanding and will; but
with the man the understanding predominates, and with the woman the will
predominates, and the character is determined by that which
predominates. Yet in heavenly marriages there is no predominance; for
the will of the wife is also the husband's will, and the understanding
of the husband is also the wife's understanding, since each loves to
will and to think like the other, that is mutually and reciprocally.
Thus are they conjoined into one. This conjunction is actual
conjunction, for the will of the wife enters into the understanding of
the husband, and the understanding of the husband into the will of the
wife, and this especially when they look into one another's faces; for,
as has been repeatedly said above, there is in the heavens a sharing of
thoughts and affections, more especially with husband and wife, because
they reciprocally love each other. This makes clear what the conjunction
of minds is that makes marriage and produces marriage love in the
heavens, namely, that one wishes what is his own to be the others, and
this reciprocally.

<span class="margnote"><span id="370.">370.</span></span>

I have been told by angels that so far as a married pair are so
conjoined they are in marriage love, and also to the same extent in
intelligence, wisdom and happiness, because Divine truth and Divine good
which are the source of all intelligence, wisdom, and happiness, flow
chiefly into marriage love; consequently marriage love, since it is also
the marriage of good and truth, is the very plane of Divine influx. For
that love, as it is a conjunction of the understanding and will, is also
a conjunction of truth and good, since the understanding receives Divine
truth and is formed out of truths, and the will receives Divine good and
is formed out of goods. For what a man wills is good to him, and what he
understands is truth to him; therefore it is the same whether you say
conjunction of understanding and will or conjunction of truth and good.
Conjunction of truth and good is what makes an angel; it makes his
intelligence, wisdom, and happiness; for an angel is an angel
accordingly as good in him is conjoined with truth and truth with good;
or what is the same, accordingly as love in him is conjoined with faith
and faith with love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="371.">371.</span></span>

The Divine that goes forth from the Lord flows chiefly into marriage
love because marriage love descends from a conjunction of good and
truth; for it is the same thing as has been said above, whether you say
conjunction of understanding and will or conjunction of good and truth.
Conjunction of good and truth has its origin in the Lord's Divine love
towards all who are in heaven and on earth. From Divine love Divine good
goes forth, and Divine good is received by angels and men in Divine
truths. As truth is the sole receptacle of good nothing can be received
from the Lord and from heaven by any one who is not in truths; therefore
just to the extent that the truths in man are conjoined to good is man
conjoined to the Lord and to heaven. This, then, is the very origin of
marriage love, and for this reason that love is the very plane of Divine
influx. This shows why the conjunction of good and truth in heaven is
called the heavenly marriage, and heaven is likened in the Word to a
marriage, and is called a marriage; and the Lord is called the
"Bridegroom" and "Husband," and heaven and also the church are called
the "bride" and the "wife." <span id="fr_241"></span>[371-1](#fn_241)

<span class="margnote"><span id="372.">372.</span></span>

Good and truth conjoined in an angel or a man are not two but one, since
good is then good of truth and truth is truth of good. This conjunction
may be likened to a man's thinking what he wills and willing what he
thinks, when the thought and will make one, that is, one mind; for
thought forms, that is, presents in form that which the will wills, and
the will gives delight to it; and this is why a married pair in heaven
are not called two, but one angel. This also is what is meant by the
Lord's words: Have ye not read that He who made them from the beginning
made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother and shall cleave to his wife, and they twain shall
become one flesh? Therefore, they are no more twain, but one flesh.
What, therefore, God hath joined together let not man put asunder. Not
all can receive this word but they to whom it is given (Matt. 19:4-6,
11; Mark 10:6-9; Gen. 2:24). This is a description both of the heavenly
marriage in which the angels are and of the marriage of good and truth,
"man's not putting asunder what God has joined together" meaning that
good is not to be separated from truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="373.">373.</span></span>

From all this the origin of true marriage love is made clear, namely,
that it is formed first in the minds of those who are in marriage, and
descends therefrom and is derived into the body, where it is perceived
and felt as love; for whatever is felt and perceived in the body has its
origin in the spiritual, because it is from the understanding and the
will. The understanding and the will constitute the spiritual man.
Whatever descends from the spiritual man into the body presents itself
there under another aspect, although it is similar and accordant, like
soul and body, and like cause and effect; as can be seen from what has
been said and shown in the two chapters on Correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="374.">374.</span></span>

I heard an angel describing true marriage love and its heavenly delights
in this manner: That it is the Lord's Divine in the heavens, which is
Divine good and Divine truth so united in two persons, that they are not
as two but as one. He said that in heaven the two consorts are marriage
love, since everyone is his own good and his own truth in respect both
to mind and to body, the body being an image of the mind because it is
formed after its likeness. From this he drew the conclusion that the
Divine is imaged in the two that are in true marriage love; and as the
Divine is so imaged so is heaven, because the entire heaven is Divine
good and Divine truth going forth from the Lord; and this is why all
things of heaven are inscribed on marriage love with more blessings and
delights than it is possible to number. He expressed the number by a
term that involved myriads of myriads. He wondered that the man of the
church should know nothing about this, seeing that the church is the
Lord's heaven on the earth, and heaven is a marriage of good and truth.
He said he was astounded to think that within the church, even more than
outside of it, adulteries are committed and even justified; the delight
of which in itself is nothing else in a spiritual sense, and
consequently in the spiritual world, than the delight of the love of
falsity conjoined to evil, which delight is infernal delight, because it
is the direct opposite of the delight of heaven, which is the delight of
the love of truth conjoined with good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="375.">375.</span></span>

Everyone knows that a married pair who love each other are interiorly
united, and that the essential of marriage is the union of dispositions
and minds. And from this it can be seen that such as their essential
dispositions or minds are, such is their union and such their love for
each other. The mind is formed solely out of truths and goods, for all
things in the universe have relation to good and truth and to their
conjunction; consequently such as the truths and goods are out of which
the minds are formed, exactly such is the union of minds; and
consequently the most perfect union is the union of minds that are
formed out of genuine truths and goods. Let it be known that no two
things mutually love each other more than truth and good do; and
therefore it is from that love that true marriage love descends. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[375-1](#fn_242) Falsity and evil also love each
other, but this love is afterwards changed into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="376.">376.</span></span>

From what has now been said about the origin of marriage love one may
conclude who are in that love and who are not; namely, that those are in
marriage love who are in Divine good from Divine truths; and that
marriage love is genuine just to the extent that the truths are genuine
with which the good is conjoined. And as all the good that is conjoined
with truths is from the Lord, it follows that no one can be in true
marriage love unless he acknowledges the Lord and His Divine; for
without that acknowledgment the Lord cannot flow in and be conjoined
with the truths that are in man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="377.">377.</span></span>

Evidently, then, those that are in falsities, and especially those that
are in falsities from evil, are not in marriage love. Moreover, those
that are in evil and in falsities therefrom have the interiors of their
minds closed up; and in such, therefore, there can be no source of
marriage love; but below those interiors, in the external or natural man
separated from the internal, there can be a conjunction of falsity and
evil, which is called infernal marriage. I have been permitted to see
what this marriage is between those that are in the falsities of evil,
which is called infernal marriage. Such converse together, and are
united by a lustful desire, but inwardly they burn with a deadly hatred
towards each other, too intense to be described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="378.">378.</span></span>

Nor can marriage love exist between two partners belonging to different
religions, because the truth of the one does not agree with the good of
the other; and two unlike and discordant kinds of good and truth cannot
make one mind out of two; and in consequence the love of such does not
have its origin in any thing spiritual. If they live together in harmony
it is solely on natural grounds. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[378-1](#fn_243) And this is why in the heavens
marriages are found only with those who are in the same society, because
such are in like good and truth and not with those outside of the
society. It may be seen above (n. 41, seq.) that all there in a society
are in like good and truth, and differ from those outside the society.
This was represented in the Israelitish nation by marriages being
contracted within tribes, and particularly within families, and not
outside of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="379.">379.</span></span>

Nor is true marriage love possible between one husband and several
wives; for its spiritual origin, which is the formation of one mind out
of two, is thus destroyed; and in consequence interior conjunction,
which is the conjunction of good and truth, from which is the very
essence of that love, is also destroyed. Marriage with more than one is
like an understanding divided among several wills; or it is like a man
attached not to one but to several churches, since his faith is so
distracted thereby as to come to naught. The angels declare that
marrying several wives is wholly contrary to Divine order, and that they
know this from several reasons, one of which is that as soon as they
think of marriage with more than one they are alienated from internal
blessedness and heavenly happiness, and become like drunken men, because
good is separated from its truth in them. And as the interiors of their
mind are brought into such a state merely by thinking about it with some
intention, they see clearly that marriage with more than one would close
up their internal mind, and cause marriage to be displaced by lustful
love, which love withdraws from heaven. <span
id="fr_244"></span>[379-1](#fn_244) \[2\] They declare further that this
is not easily comprehended by men because there are few who are in
genuine marriage love, and those who are not in it know nothing whatever
of the interior delight that is in that love, knowing only the delight
of lust, and this delight is changed into what is undelightful after
living together a short time; while the delight of true marriage love
not only endures to old age in the world, but after death becomes the
delight of heaven and is there filled with an interior delight that
grows more and more perfect to eternity. They said also that the
varieties of blessedness of true marriage love could be enumerated even
to many thousands, not even one of which is known to man, or could enter
into the comprehension of any one who is not in the marriage of good and
truth from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="380.">380.</span></span>

The love of dominion of one over the other entirely takes away marriage
love and its heavenly delight, for as has been said above, marriage love
and its delight consists in the will of one being that of the other, and
this mutually and reciprocally. This is destroyed by love of dominion in
marriage, since he that domineers wishes his will alone to be in the
other, and nothing of the other's will to be reciprocally in himself,
which destroys all mutuality, and thus all sharing of any love and its
delight one with the other. And yet this sharing and consequent
conjunction are the interior delight itself that is called blessedness
in marriage. This blessedness, with everything that is heavenly and
spiritual in marriage love, is so completely extinguished by love of
dominion as to destroy even all knowledge of it; and if that love were
referred to it would be held in such contempt that any mention of
blessedness from that source would excite either laughter or anger.
\[2\] When one wills or loves what the other wills or loves each has
freedom, since all freedom is from love; but where there is dominion no
one has freedom; one is a servant, and the other who rules is also a
servant, for he is led as a servant by the lust of ruling. But all this
is wholly beyond the comprehension of one who does not know what the
freedom of heavenly love is. Nevertheless from what has been said above
about the origin and essence of marriage love it can be seen that so far
as dominion enters, minds are not united but divided. Dominion
subjugates, and a subjugated mind has either no will or an opposing
will. If it has no will it has also no love; and if it has an opposing
will there is hatred in place of love. \[3\] The interiors of those who
live in such marriage are in mutual collision and strife, as two
opposites are wont to be, however their exteriors may be restrained and
kept quiet for the sake of tranquillity. The collision and antagonism of
the interiors of such are disclosed after their death, when commonly
they come together and fight like enemies and tear each other; for they
then act in accordance with the state of the interiors. Frequently I
have been permitted to see them fighting and tearing one another,
sometimes with great vengeance and cruelty. For in the other life
everyone's interiors are set at liberty; and they are no longer
restrained by outward bounds or by worldly considerations, everyone then
being just such as he is interiorly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="381.">381.</span></span>

To some a likeness of marriage love is granted. Yet unless they are in
the love of good and truth there is no marriage love, but only a love
which from several causes appears like marriage love, namely, that they
may secure good service at home; that they may be free from care, or at
peace, or at ease; that they may be cared for in sickness or in old age;
or that the children whom they love may be attended to. Some are
constrained by fear of the other consort, or by fear of the loss of
reputation, or other evil consequences, and some by a controlling lust.
Moreover, in the two consorts marriage love may differ, in one there may
be more or less of it, in the other little or none; and because of this
difference heaven may be the portion of one and hell the portion of the
other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="382.">382.</span></span>

\[a.\] In the inmost heaven there is genuine marriage love because the
angels there are in the marriage of good and truth, and also in
innocence. The angels of the lower heavens are also in marriage love,
but only so far as they are in innocence; for marriage love viewed in
itself is a state of innocence; and this is why consorts who are in the
marriage love enjoy heavenly delights together, which appear before
their minds almost like the sports of innocence, as between little
children; for everything delights their minds, since heaven with its joy
flows into every particular of their lives. For the same reason marriage
love is represented in heaven by the most beautiful objects. I have seen
it represented by a maiden of indescribable beauty encompassed with a
bright white cloud. It is said that the angels in heaven have all their
beauty from marriage love. Affections and thought flowing from that love
are represented by diamond-like auras with scintillations as if from
carbuncles and rubies, which are attended by delights that affect the
interiors of the mind. In a word, heaven itself is represented in
marriage love, because heaven with the angels is the conjunction of good
and truth, and it is this conjunction that makes marriage love. 382.
\[b.\] Marriages in heaven differ from marriages on the earth in that
the procreation of offspring is another purpose of marriages on the
earth, but not of marriages in heaven, since in heaven the procreation
of good and truth takes the place of procreation of offspring. The
former takes the place of the latter because marriage in heaven is a
marriage of good and truth (as has been shown above); and as in that
marriage good and truth and their conjunction are loved above all things
so these are what are propagated by marriages in heaven. And because of
this, in the Word births and generations signify spiritual births and
generations, which are births and generations of good and truth; mother
and father signify truth conjoined to good, which is what procreates;
sons and daughters signify the truths and goods that are procreated; and
sons-in-law and daughters-in-law conjunction of these, and so on. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[382-1](#fn_245) All this makes clear that marriages
in heaven are not like marriages on earth. In heaven marryings are
spiritual, and cannot properly be called marryings, but conjunctions of
minds from the conjunction of good and truth. But on earth there are
marryings, because these are not of the spirit alone but also of the
flesh. And as there are no marryings in heaven, consorts there are not
called husband and wife; but from the angelic idea of the joining of two
minds into one, each consort designates the other by a name signifying
one's own, mutually and reciprocally. This shows how the Lord's words in
regard to marrying and giving in marriage (Luke 20:35, 36), are to be
understood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="383.">383.</span></span>

I have also been permitted to see how marriages are contracted in the
heavens. As everywhere in heaven those who are alike are united and
those who are unlike are separated, so every society in heaven consists
of those who are alike. Like are brought to like not by themselves but
by the Lord (see above, n. 41, 43, 44, seq.); and equally consort to
consort whose minds can be joined into one are drawn together; and
consequently at first sight they inmostly love each other, and see
themselves to be consorts, and enter into marriage. For this reason all
marriages in heaven are from the Lord alone. They have also marriage
feasts; and these are attended by many; but the festivities differ in
different societies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="384.">384.</span></span>

Marriages on the earth are most holy in the sight of the angels of
heaven because they are seminaries of the human race, and also of the
angels of heaven (heaven being from the human race, as already shown
under that head), also because these marriages are from a spiritual
origin, namely, from the marriage of good and truth, and because the
Lord's Divine flows especially into marriage love. Adulteries on the
other hand are regarded by the angels as profane because they are
contrary to marriage love; for as in marriages the angels behold the
marriage of good and truth, which is heaven, so in adulteries they
behold the marriage of falsity and evil, which is hell. If, then, they
but hear adulteries mentioned they turn away. And this is why heaven is
closed up to man when he commits adultery from delight; and when heaven
is closed man no longer acknowledges the Divine nor any thing of the
faith of church. <span id="fr_246"></span>[384-1](#fn_246) That all who
are in hell are antagonistic to marriage love I have been permitted to
perceive from the sphere exhaling from hell, which was like an unceasing
endeavor to dissolve and violate marriages; which shows that the
reigning delight in hell is the delight of adultery, and the delight of
adultery is a delight in destroying the conjunction of good and truth,
which conjunction makes heaven. From this it follows that the delight of
adultery is an infernal delight directly opposed to the delight of
marriage, which is a heavenly delight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="385.">385.</span></span>

There were certain spirits who, from a practice acquired in the life of
the body, infested me with peculiar craftiness, and this by a very
gentle wave-like influx like the usual influx of well disposed spirits;
but I perceived that there was craftiness and other like evils in them
prompting them to ensnare and deceive. Finally, I talked with one of
them who, I was told, had been when he lived in the world the leader of
an army; and perceiving that there was a lustfulness in the ideas of his
thought I talked with him about marriage, using spiritual speech with
representatives, which fully expresses all that is meant and many things
in a moment. He said that in the life of the body he had regarded
adulteries as of no account. But I was permitted to tell him that
adulteries are heinous, although to those like himself they do not
appear to be such, and even appear permissible, on account of their
seductive and enticing delights. That they are heinous he might know
from the fact that marriages are the seminaries of the human race, and
thus also the seminaries of the heavenly kingdom; consequently they must
on no account be violated, but must be esteemed holy. This he might know
from the fact, which he ought to know because of his being in the other
life and in a state of perception, that marriage love descends from the
Lord through heaven, and from that love, as from a parent, mutual love,
which is the foundation of heaven is derived; and again from this, that
if adulterers merely draw near to heavenly societies they perceive their
own stench and cast themselves down therefrom towards hell. At least he
must have known that to violate marriages is contrary to Divine laws,
and contrary to the civil laws of all kingdoms, also contrary to the
genuine light of reason, because it is contrary to both Divine and human
order; not to mention other considerations. But he replied that he had
not so thought in the life of the body. He wished to reason about
whether it were so, but was told that truth does not admit of such
reasonings; for reasonings defend what one delights in, and thus one's
evils and falsities; that he ought first to think about the things that
had been said because they are truths; or at least think about them from
the principle well known in the world, that no one should do to another
what he is unwilling that another should do to him; thus he should
consider whether he himself would not have detested adulteries if any
one had in that way deceived his wife, whom he had loved as everyone
loves in the first period of marriage, and if in his state of wrath he
had expressed himself on the subject; also whether being a man of talent
he would not in that case have confirmed himself more decidedly than
others against adulteries, even condemning them to hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="386.">386.</span></span>

I have been shown how the delights of marriage love advance towards
heaven, and the delights of adultery towards hell. The advance of the
delights of marriage love towards heaven is into states of blessedness
and happiness continually increasing until they become innumerable and
ineffable, and the more interiorly they advance the more innumerable and
more ineffable they become, until they reach the very states of
blessedness and happiness of the inmost heaven, or of the heaven of
innocence, and this through the most perfect freedom; for all freedom is
from love, thus the most perfect freedom is from marriage love, which is
heavenly love itself. On the other hand, the advance of adultery is
towards hell, and by degrees to the lowest hell, where there is nothing
but what is direful and horrible. Such a lot awaits adulterers after
their life in the world, those being meant by adulterers who feel a
delight in adulteries, and no delight in marriages.

<span class="margnote"><span id="387.">387.</span></span>

THE EMPLOYMENTS OF ANGELS IN HEAVEN. It is impossible to enumerate the
employments in the heavens, still less to describe them in detail, but
something may be said about them in a general way; for they are
numberless, and vary in accordance with the functions of the societies.
Each society has its peculiar function, for as societies are distinct in
accordance with goods (see above, n. 41), so they are distinct in
accordance with uses, because with all in the heavens goods are goods in
act, which are uses. Everyone there performs a use, for the Lord's
kingdom is a kingdom of uses. <span id="fr_247"></span>[387-1](#fn_247)

<span class="margnote"><span id="388.">388.</span></span>

In the heavens as on the earth there are many forms of service, for
there are ecclesiastical affairs, there are civil affairs, and there are
domestic affairs. That there are ecclesiastical affairs is evident from
what has been said and shown above, where Divine worship is treated of
(n. 221-227); civil affairs, where governments in heaven are treated of
(n. 213-220); and domestic affairs, where the dwellings and homes of
angels are treated of (n. 183-190); and marriages in heaven (n.
366-368); all of which show that in every heavenly society there are
many employments and services.

<span class="margnote"><span id="389.">389.</span></span>

All things in the heavens are organized in accordance with Divine order,
which is everywhere guarded by the services performed by angels, those
things that pertain to the general good or use by the wiser angels,
those that pertain to particular uses by the less wise, and so on. They
are subordinated just as uses are subordinated in the Divine order; and
for this reason a dignity is connected with every function according to
the dignity of the use. Nevertheless, an angel does not claim dignity to
himself, but ascribes all dignity to the use; and as the use is the good
that he accomplishes, and all good is from the Lord, so he ascribes all
dignity to the Lord. Therefore he that thinks of honor for himself and
subsequently for the use, and not for the use and subsequently for
himself, can perform no function in heaven, because this is looking away
backwards from the Lord, and putting self in the first place and use in
the second. When use is spoken of the Lord also is meant, because, as
has just been said, use is good, and good is from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="390.">390.</span></span>

From this it may be inferred what subordinations in the heavens are,
namely, that as any one loves, esteems, and honors the use he also
loves, esteems, and honors the person with whom the use is connected;
also that the person is loved, esteemed and honored in the measure in
which he ascribes the use to the Lord and not to himself; for to that
extent he is wise, and the uses he performs he performs from good.
Spiritual love, esteem, and honor are nothing else than the love,
esteem, and honor of the use in the person, together with the honor to
the person because of the use, and not honor to the use because of the
person. This is the way, moreover, in which men are regarded when they
are regarded from spiritual truth, for one man is then seen to be like
another, whether he be in great or in little dignity, the only
perceptible difference being a difference in wisdom; and wisdom is
loving use, that is, loving the good of a fellow citizen, of society, of
one's country, and of the church. It is this that constitutes love to
the Lord, because every good that is a good of use is from the Lord; and
it constitutes also love towards the neighbor, because the neighbor
means the good that is to be loved in a fellow citizen, in society, in
one's country, and in the church, and that is to be done in their
behalf. <span id="fr_248"></span>[390-1](#fn_248)

<span class="margnote"><span id="391.">391.</span></span>

As all the societies in the heavens are distinct in accordance with
their goods (as said above, n. 41, seq.) so they are distinct in
accordance with their uses, goods being goods in act, that is, goods of
charity which are uses. Some societies are employed in taking care of
little children; others in teaching and training them as they grow up;
others in teaching and training in like manner the boys and girls that
have acquired a good disposition from their education in the world, and
in consequence have come into heaven. There are other societies that
teach the simple good from the Christian world, and lead them into the
way to heaven; there are others that in like manner teach and lead the
various heathen nations. There are some societies that defend from
infestations by evil spirits the newly arrived spirits that have just
come from the world; there are some that attend upon the spirits that
are in the lower earth; also some that attend upon spirits that are in
the hells, and restrain them from tormenting each other beyond
prescribed limits; and there are some that attend upon those who are
being raised from the dead. In general, angels from each society are
sent to men to watch over them and to lead them away from evil
affections and consequent thoughts, and to inspire them with good
affections so far as they will receive them in freedom; and by means of
these they also direct the deeds or works of men by removing as far as
possible evil intentions. When angels are with men they dwell as it were
in their affections; and they are near to man just in the degree in
which he is in good from truths, and are distant from him just in the
degree in which his life is distant from good. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[391-1](#fn_249) But all these employments of angels
are employments of the Lord through the angels, for the angels perform
them from the Lord and not from themselves. For this reason, in the Word
in its internal sense "angels" mean, not angels, but something belonging
to the Lord; and for the same reason angels are called "gods" in the
Word. <span id="fr_250"></span>[391-2](#fn_250)

<span class="margnote"><span id="392.">392.</span></span>

These employments of the angels are their general employments; but each
one has his particular charge; for every general use is composed of
innumerable uses which are called mediate, ministering, and subservient
uses, all and each coordinated and subordinated in accordance with
Divine order, and taken together constituting and perfecting the general
use, which is the general good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="393.">393.</span></span>

Those are concerned with ecclesiastical affairs in heaven who in the
world loved the Word and eagerly sought in it for truths, not with honor
or gain as an end, but uses of life both for themselves and for others.
These in heaven are in enlightenment and in the light of wisdom in the
measure of their love and desire for use; and this light of wisdom they
receive from the Word in heaven, which is not a natural Word, as it is
in the world, but a spiritual Word (see above, n. 259.) These minister
in the preaching office; and in accordance with Divine order those are
in higher positions who from enlightenment excel others in wisdom. \[2\]
Those are concerned with civil affairs who in the world loved their
country, and loved its general good more than their own, and did what is
just and right from a love for what is just and right. So far as these
from the eagerness of love have investigated the laws of justice and
have thereby become intelligent, they have the ability to perform such
functions in heaven, and they perform these in that position or degree
that accords with their intelligence, their intelligence being in equal
degree with their love of use for the general good. \[3\] Furthermore,
there are in heaven more functions and services and occupations than can
be enumerated; while in the world there are few in comparison. But
however many there may be that are so employed, they are all in the
delight of their work and labor from a love of use, and no one from a
love of self or of gain; and as all the necessaries of life are
furnished them gratuitously they have no love of gain for the sake of a
living. They are housed gratuitously, clothed gratuitously, and fed
gratuitously. Evidently, then, those that have loved themselves and the
world more than use have no lot in heaven; for his love or affection
remains with everyone after his life in the world, and is not extirpated
to eternity (see above, n. 563).

<span class="margnote"><span id="394.">394.</span></span>

In heaven everyone comes into his own occupation in accordance with
correspondence, and the correspondence is not with the occupation but
with the use of each occupation (see above, n. 112); for there is a
correspondence of all things (see n. 106). He that in heaven comes into
the employment or occupation corresponding to his use is in much the
same condition of life as when he was in the world; since what is
spiritual and what is natural make one by correspondences; yet there is
this difference, that he then comes into an interior delight, because
into spiritual life, which is an interior life, and therefore more
receptive of heavenly blessedness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="395.">395.</span></span>

HEAVENLY JOY AND HAPPINESS. Hardly any one at present knows what heaven
is or what heavenly joy is. Those who have given any thought to these
subjects have had so general and so gross an idea about them as scarcely
to amount to anything. From spirits that have come from the world into
the other life I have been able to learn fully what idea they had of
heaven and heavenly joy; for when left to themselves, as they were in
the world, they think as they then did. There is this ignorance about
heavenly joy for the reason that those who have thought about it have
formed their opinion from the outward joys pertaining to the natural
man, and have not known what the inner and spiritual man is, nor in
consequence the nature of his delight and blessedness; and therefore
even if they had been told by those who are in spiritual or inward
delight what heavenly joy is, would have had no comprehension of it, for
it could have fallen only into an idea not yet recognized, thus into no
perception; and would therefore have been among the things that the
natural man rejects. Yet everyone can understand that when a man leaves
his outer or natural man he comes into the inner or spiritual man, and
consequently can see that heavenly delight is internal and spiritual,
not external and natural; and being internal and spiritual, it is more
pure and exquisite, and affects the interiors of man which pertain to
his soul or spirit. From these things alone everyone may conclude that
his delight is such as the delight of his spirit has previously been and
that the delight of the body, which is called the delight of the flesh,
is in comparison not heavenly; also that whatever is in the spirit of
man when he leaves the body remains after death, since he then lives a
man-spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="396.">396.</span></span>

All delights flow forth from love, for that which a man loves he feels
to be delightful. No one has any delight from any other source. From
this it follows that such as the love is such is the delight. The
delights of the body or of the flesh all flow forth from the love of
self and love of the world; consequently they are lusts and their
pleasures; while the delights of the soul or spirit all flow forth from
love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor, consequently they are
affections for good and truth and interior satisfactions. These loves
with their delights flow in out of heaven from the Lord by an inner way,
that is, from above, and affect the interiors; while the former loves
with their delights flow in from the flesh and from the world by an
external way, that is, from beneath, and affect the exteriors. Therefore
as far as the two loves of heaven are received and make themselves felt,
the interiors of man, which belong to his soul or spirit and which look
from the world heavenwards, are opened, while so far as the two loves of
the world are received and make themselves felt, his exteriors, which
belong to the body or flesh and look away from heaven towards the world,
are opened. As loves flow in and are received their delights also flow
in, the delights of heaven into the interiors and the delights of the
world into the exteriors, since all delight, as has just been said
above, belongs to love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="397.">397.</span></span>

Heaven in itself is so full of delights that viewed in itself it is
nothing else than blessedness and delight; for the Divine good that
flows forth from the Lord's Divine love is what makes heaven in general
and in particular with everyone there, and the Divine love is a longing
for the salvation of all and the happiness of all from inmosts and in
fullness. Thus whether you say heaven or heavenly joy it is the same
thing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="398.">398.</span></span>

The delights of heaven are both ineffable and innumerable; but he that
is in the mere delight of the body or of the flesh can have no knowledge
of or belief in a single one of these innumerable delights; for his
interiors, as has just been said, look away from heaven towards the
world, thus backwards. For he that is wholly in the delight of the body
or of the flesh, or what is the same, in the love of self and of the
world, has no sense of delight except in honor, in gain, and in the
pleasures of the body and the senses; and these so extinguish and
suffocate the interior delights that belong to heaven as to destroy all
belief in them; consequently he would be greatly astonished if he were
told that when the delights of honor and of gain are set aside other
delights are given, and still more if he were told that the delights of
heaven that take the place of these are innumerable, and are such as
cannot be compared with the delights of the body and the flesh, which
are chiefly the delights of honor and of gain. All this makes clear why
it is not known what heavenly joy is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="399.">399.</span></span>

One can see how great the delight of heaven must be from the fact that
it is the delight of everyone in heaven to share his delights and
blessings with others; and as such is the character of all that are in
the heavens it is clear how immeasurable is the delight of heaven. It
has been shown above (n. 268), that in the heavens there is a sharing of
all with each and of each with all. Such sharing goes forth from the two
loves of heaven, which are, as has been said, love to the Lord and love
towards the neighbor; and to share their delights is the very nature of
these loves. Love to the Lord is such because the Lord's love is a love
of sharing everything it has with all, since it wills the happiness of
all. There is a like love in everyone of those who love the Lord,
because the Lord is in them; and from this comes the mutual sharing of
the delights of angels with one another. Love towards the neighbor is of
such a nature, as will be seen in what follows. All this shows that it
is the nature of these loves to share their delights. It is otherwise
with the loves of self and of the world. The love of self takes away
from others and robs others of all delight, and directs it to itself,
for it wishes well to itself alone; while the love of the world wishes
to have as its own what belongs to the neighbor. Therefore these loves
are destructive of the delights of others; or if there is any
disposition to share, it is for the sake of themselves and not for the
sake of others. Thus in respect to others it is the nature of those
loves not to share but to take away, except so far as the delights of
others have some relation to self. That the loves of self and of the
world, when they rule, are such I have often been permitted to perceive
by living experience. Whenever the spirits that were in these loves
during their life as men in the world drew near, my delight receded and
vanished; and I was told that at the mere approach of such to any
heavenly society the delight of those in the society diminished just in
the degree of their proximity; and what is wonderful, the evil spirits
are then in their delight. All this indicates the state of the spirit of
such a man while he is in the body, since it is the same as it is after
it is separated from the body, namely, that it longs for or lusts after
the delights or goods of another, and finds delight so far as it secures
them. All this makes clear that the loves of self and of the world tend
to destroy the joys of heaven, and are thus direct opposites of heavenly
loves, which desire to share.

<span class="margnote"><span id="400.">400.</span></span>

But it must be understood that the delight of those who are in the loves
of self and of the world, when they draw near to any heavenly society,
is the delight of their lust, and thus is directly opposite to the
delight of heaven. And such enter into this delight of their lust in
consequence of their taking away and dispelling heavenly delight in
those that are in such delight. When the heavenly delight is not taken
away or dispelled it is different, for they are then unable to draw
near; for so far as they draw near they bring upon themselves anguish
and pain; and for this reason they do not often venture to come near.
This also I have been permitted to learn by repeated experience,
something of which I would like to add. \[2\] Spirits who go from this
world into the other life desire more than any thing else to get into
heaven. Nearly all seek to enter, supposing that heaven consists solely
in being admitted and received. Because of this desire they are brought
to some society of the lowest heaven. But as soon as those who are in
the love of self and of the world draw near the first threshold of that
heaven they begin to be distressed and so tortured inwardly as to feel
hell rather than heaven to be in them; and in consequence they cast
themselves down headlong therefrom, and do not rest until they come into
the hells among their like. \[3\] It has also frequently occurred that
such spirits have wished to know what heavenly joy is, and having heard
that it is in the interiors of angels, they have wished to share in it.
This therefore was granted; for whatever a spirit who is not yet in
heaven or hell wishes is granted if it will benefit him. But as soon as
that joy was communicated they began to be so tortured as not to know
how to twist or turn because of the pain. I saw them thrust their heads
down to their feet and cast themselves upon the ground, and there writhe
into coils like serpents, and this in consequence of their interior
agony. Such was the effect produced by heavenly delight upon those who
are in the delights of the love of self and of the world; and for the
reason that these loves are directly opposite to heavenly loves, and
when opposite acts against opposite such pain results. And since
heavenly delight enters by an inward way and flows into the contrary
delight, the interiors which are in the contrary delight are twisted
backwards, thus into the opposite direction, and the result is such
tortures. \[4\] They are opposite for the reason given above, that love
to the Lord and love to the neighbor wish to share with others all that
is their own, for this is their delight, while the loves of self and of
the world wish to take away from others what they have, and take it to
themselves; and just to the extent that they are able to do this they
are in their delight. From this, too, one can see what it is that
separates hell from heaven; for all that are in hell were, while they
were living in the world, in the mere delights of the body and of the
flesh from the love of self and of the world; while all that are in the
heavens were, while they lived in the world, in the delights of the soul
and spirit from love to the Lord and love to the neighbor; and as these
are opposite loves, so the hells and the heavens are entirely separated,
and indeed so separated that a spirit in hell does not venture even to
put forth a finger from it or raise the crown of his head, for if he
does this in the least he is racked with pain and tormented. This, too,
I have frequently seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[352-1](hh08.htm#fr_226) It is the part of the
wise to see and perceive whether a thing is true before it is confirmed
and not merely to confirm what is said by others (n. 1017, 4741, 7012,
7680, 7950). Only those can see and perceive whether a thing is true
before it is confirmed who are affected by truth for the sake of truth
and for the sake of life (n. 8521). The light of confirmation is not
spiritual light but natural light, and is even sensual light which the
wicked may have (n. 8780). All things, even falsities, may be so
confirmed as to appear like truths (n. 2477, 2480, 5033, 6865, 8521).

<span id="fn_227"></span>[353-1](hh08.htm#fr_227) The sensual is the
outmost of man's life, clinging to and inhering in his bodily part (n.
5077, 5767, 9212, 9216, 9331, 9730). He is called a sensual man who
forms all his judgments and conclusions from the bodily senses, and who
believes nothing except what he sees with his eyes and touches with his
hands (n. 5094, 7693). Such a man thinks in things outermost and not
interiorly in himself (n. 5089, 5094, 6564, 7693). His interiors are so
closed up that he sees nothing of Divine truth (n. 6564, 6844, 6845). In
a word he is in gross natural light and thus perceives nothing that is
from the light of heaven (n. 6201, 6310, 6564, 6598, 6612, 6614, 6622,
6624, 6844, 6845). Therefore he is inwardly opposed to all things
pertaining to heaven and the church (n. 6201, 6310, 6844, 6845, 6948,
6949). The learned that have confirmed themselves against the truths of
the church are sensual (n. 6316). A description of the sensual man (n.
10236).

<span id="fn_228"></span>[353-2](hh08.htm#fr_228) Sensual men reason
keenly and cunningly, since they place all intelligence in speaking from
the bodily memory (n. 195, 196, 5700, 10236). But they reason from the
fallacies of the senses (n. 5084, 6948, 6949, 7693). Sensual men are
more cunning and malicious than others (n. 7693, 10236). By the ancients
such were called serpents of the tree of knowledge (n. 195-197, 6398,
6949, 10313).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[355-1](hh08.htm#fr_229) Knowledges belong to
the natural memory that man has while he is in the body (n. 5212, 9922).
Man carries with him after death his whole natural memory (n. 2475) from
experience (n. 2481-2486). But he is not able, as he was in the world,
to draw anything out of that memory, for several reasons (n. 2476, 2477,
2479).

<span id="fn_230"></span>[356-1](hh08.htm#fr_230) Most beautiful colors
are seen in heaven (n. 1053, 1624). Colors in heaven are from the light
there, and are modifications or variegations of that light (n. 1042,
1043, 1053, 1624, 3993, 4530, 4742, 4922). Thus they are manifestations
of truth from good, and they signify such things as pertain to
intelligence and wisdom (n. 4530, 4677, 4922, 9466). EXTRACTS FROM THE
ARCANA COELESTIA RESPECTING KNOWLEDGES. \[In these extracts scientia,
scientificum and cognitio are alike rendered knowledge, because any
distinction between them intended by the author is not sufficiently
obvious to be uniformly indicated in English. - Tr.\] Man ought to be
fully instructed in knowledges \[scientiis et cognitionibus\], since by
means of them he learns to think \[cogitare\], afterwards to understand
what is true and good, and finally to be wise (n. 129, 1450, 1451, 1453,
1548, 1802). Knowledges \[scientifica\] are the first things on which
the life of man, civil, moral, and spiritual, is built and founded, and
they are to be learned for the sake of use as an end (n. 1489, 3310).
Knowledges \[cognitiones\] open the way to the internal man, and
afterwards conjoin that man with the external in accordance with uses
(n. 1563, 1616). The rational faculty has its birth by means of
knowledges \[scientias et cognitiones\] (n. 1895, 1900, 3086). But not
by means of knowledges \[cognitiones\] themselves, but by means of
affection for the uses derived from them (n. 1895). \[2\] There are
knowledges \[scientifica\] that give entrance to Divine truths, and
knowledges \[scientifica\] that do not (n. 5213). Empty knowledges
\[scientifica\] are to be destroyed (n. 1489, 1492, 1499, 1581). Empty
knowledges \[scientifica\] are such as have the loves of self and of the
world as an end, and sustain those loves, and withdraw from love to God
and love towards the neighbor, because such knowledges close up the
internal man, even to the extent that man becomes unable to receive any
thing from heaven (n. 1563, 1600). Knowledges \[scientifica\] are means
to becoming wise and means to becoming insane and by them the internal
man is either opened or closed, and thus the rational is either enriched
or destroyed (n. 4156, 8628, 9922). \[3\] The internal man is opened and
gradually perfected by means of knowledges \[scientifica\] if man has
good use as an end, especially use that looks to external life (n.
3086). Then knowledges \[scientificis\], which are in the natural man,
are met by spiritual and heavenly things from the spiritual man, and
these adopt such of them as are suitable (n. 1495). Then the uses of
heavenly life are drawn forth by the Lord and perfected and raised up
out of the knowledges \[scientificis\] in the natural man by means of
the internal man (n. 1895, 1896, 1900, 1901, 1902, 5871, 5874, 5901).
While incongruous and opposing knowledges \[scientifica\] are rejected
to the sides and banished (n. 5871, 5886, 5889). \[4\] The sight of the
internal man calls forth from the knowledges \[scientificis\] of the
external man only such things as are in accord with its love (n. 9394).
As seen by the internal man what pertains to the love is at the center
and in brightness, but what is not of the love is at the sides and in
obscurity (n. 6068, 6084). Suitable knowledges \[scientifica\] are
gradually implanted in man's loves and as it were dwell in them (n.
6325). If man were born into love towards the neighbor he would be born
into intelligence, but because he is born into the loves of self and of
the world he is born into total ignorance (n. 6323, 6325). Knowledge
\[scientia\], intelligence, and wisdom are sons of love to God and of
love towards the neighbor (n. 1226, 2049, 2116). \[5\] It is one thing
to be wise, another thing to understand, another to know \[scire\], and
another to do; nevertheless, in those that possess spiritual life these
follow in order, and exist together in doing or deeds (n. 10331). Also
it is one thing to know \[scire\], another to acknowledge, and another
to have faith (n. 896). \[6\] Knowledges \[scientifica\], which pertain
to the external or natural man, are in the light of the world, but
truths that have been made truths of faith and of love, and have thus
acquired life, are in the light of heaven (n. 5212). The truths that
have acquired spiritual life are comprehended by means of natural ideas
(n. 5510). Spiritual influx is from the internal or spiritual man into
the knowledges \[scientifica\] that are in the external or natural man
(n. 1940, 8005). Knowledges \[scientifica\] are receptacles, and as it
were vessels, for the truth and good that belong to the internal man (n.
1469, 1496, 3068, 5489, 6004, 6023, 6052, 6071, 6077, 7770, 9922).
Knowledges \[scientifica\] are like mirrors in which the truths and
goods of the internal man appear as an image (n. 5201). There they are
together as in their outmost (n. 5373, 5874, 5886, 5901, 6004, 6023,
6052, 6071). \[7\] Influx is not physical but spiritual, that is, influx
is from the internal man into the external, thus into the knowledges of
the external; and not from the external into the internal, thus not from
the knowledges \[scientificis\] of the external into truths of faith (n.
3219, 5119, 5259, 5427, 5428, 5478, 6322, 9110). A beginning must be
made from the truths of doctrine of the church, which are from the Word,
and those truths must first be acknowledged, and then it is permissible
to consult knowledges \[scientifica\] (n. 6047). Thus it is permissible
for those who are in an affirmative state in regard to truths of faith
to confirm them intellectually by means of knowledges \[scientifica\],
but not for those who are in a negative state (n. 2568, 2588, 4760,
6047). He that will not believe Divine truths until he is convinced by
means of knowledges \[scientificis\] will never believe (n. 2094, 2832).
To enter from knowledge \[scientificis\] into the truths of faith is
contrary to order (n. 10236). Those who do so become demented respecting
the things of heaven and the church (n. 128, 129, 130). They fall into
the falsities of evil (n. 232, 233, 6047). In the other life when they
think about spiritual matters they become as it were drunken (n. 1072).
More respecting the character of such (n. 196). Examples showing that
things spiritual cannot be comprehended when entered into through
knowledges \[scientifica\] (n. 233, 2094, 2196, 2203, 2209). In
spiritual things many of the learned are more demented than the simple,
for the reason that they are in a negative state, which they confirm by
means of the knowledges \[scientifica\] which they have continually and
in abundance before their sight (n. 4760, 8629). \[8\] Those who reason
from knowledges \[scientificis\] against the truths of faith reason
keenly because they reason from the fallacies of the senses, which are
engaging and convincing, because they cannot easily be dispelled (n.
5700). What things are fallacies of the senses, and what they are (n.
5084, 5094, 6400, 6948). Those that have no understanding of truth, and
also those that are in evil, are able to reason about the truths and
goods of faith, but are not able to understand them (n. 4214).
Intelligence does not consist in merely confirming dogma but in seeing
whether it is true or not before it is confirmed (n. 4741, 6047). \[9\]
Knowledges \[scientiae\] are of no avail after death, but only that
which man has imbibed in his understanding and life by means of
knowledges \[scientias\] (n. 2480). Still all knowledge \[scientifica\]
remains after death, although it is quiescent (n. 2476-2479, 2481-2486).
\[10\] Knowledge \[scientifica\] with the evil are falsities, because
they are adapted to evils, but with the good the same knowledges are
truths, because applied to what is good (n. 6917). True knowledges
\[scientifica\] with the evil are not true, however much they may appear
to be true when uttered, because there is evil within them (n. 10331).
\[11\] An example of the desire to know \[sciendi\], which spirits have
(n. 1974). Angels have an illimitable longing to know \[sciendi\] and to
become wise, since learning \[scientia\], intelligence, and wisdom are
spiritual food (n. 3114, 4459, 4792, 4976, 5147, 5293, 5340, 5342, 5410,
5426, 5576, 5582, 5588, 5655, 6277, 8562, 9003). The knowledge
\[scientia\] of the ancients was the knowledge \[scientia\] of
correspondences and representations, by which they gained entrance into
the knowledge \[cognitionem\] of spiritual things; but that knowledge
\[scientia\] at this day is wholly lost (n. 4749, 4844, 4964, 4965).
\[12\] For spiritual truths to be comprehended the following universals
must be known \[scientur\]. (i) All things in the universe have relation
to good and truth and to their conjunction that they may be anything,
thus to love and faith and their conjunction. (ii) Man has understanding
and will; and the understanding is the receptacle of truth and the will
of good; and all things in man have relation to these two and to their
conjunction, as all things have relation to truth and good and their
conjunction. (iii) There is an internal man and an external man, which
are as distinct from each other as heaven and the world are, and yet for
a man to be truly a man, these must make one. (iv) The internal man is
in the light of heaven, and the external man is in the light of the
world; and the light of heaven is Divine truth itself, from which is all
intelligence. (v) Between the things in the internal man and those in
the external there is a correspondence, therefore the different aspect
they present is such that they can be distinguished only by means of a
knowledge \[scientiam\] of correspondences. Unless these and many other
things are known \[scientur\], nothing but incongruous ideas of
spiritual and heavenly truths can be conceived and formed; therefore
without these universals the knowledges \[scientifica et cognitiones\]
of the natural man can be of but little service to the rational man for
understanding and growth. This makes clear how necessary knowledges
\[scientifica\] are.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[358-1](hh08.htm#fr_231) It is frequently said
in the Word that man will be judged and will be rewarded according to
his deeds and works (n. 3934). By "deeds and works" deeds and works in
their internal form are meant, not in their external form, since good
works in external form are likewise done by the wicked, but in internal
and external form together only by the good (n. 3934, 6073). Works, like
all activities, have their being and outgo \[esse et existere\] and
their quality from the interiors of man, which pertain to his thought
and will, since they proceed from these; therefore such as the interiors
are such are the works (n. 3934, 8911, 10331). That is, such as the
interiors are in regard to love and faith (n. 3934, 6073, 10331, 10332).
Thus works contain love and faith, and are love and faith in effect (n.
10331). Therefore to be judged and rewarded in accordance with deeds and
works, means in accordance with love and faith (n. 3147, 3934, 6073,
8911, 10331, 10332). So far as works look to self and the world they are
not good, but they are good so far as they look to the Lord and the
neighbor (n. 3147).

<span id="fn_232"></span>[359-1](hh08.htm#fr_232) All evils are from the
love of self and of the world (n. 1307, 1308, 1321, 1594, 1691, 3413,
7255, 7376, 7488, 7490, 8318, 9335, 9348, 10038, 10742). These are
contempt of others, enmities, hatred, revenge, cruelty, deceit (n. 6667,
7370-7374, 9348, 10038, 10742). Into such loves man is born, thus in
them are his inherited evils (n. 694, 4317, 5660).

<span id="fn_233"></span>[360-1](hh08.htm#fr_233) Charity towards the
neighbor is doing what is good, just, and right, in every work and every
employment (n. 8120-8122). Thus charity towards the neighbor extends to
all things and each thing that a man thinks, wills, and does (n. 8124).
A life of piety apart from a life of charity is of no avail, but
together they are profitable for all things (n. 8252, 8253).

<span id="fn_234"></span>[361-1](hh08.htm#fr_234) Every good has its
delight from use and in accordance with use (n. 3049, 4984, 7038); also
its quality; and in consequence such as the use is such is the good (n.
3049). All the happiness and delight of life is from uses (n. 997). In
general, life is a life of uses (n. 1964). Angelic life consists in the
goods of love and charity, thus in performing uses (n. 454). The ends
that man has in view, which are uses, are the only things that the Lord,
and thus the angels, consider (n. 1317, 1645, 5844). The kingdom of the
Lord is a kingdom of uses (n. 454, 696, 1103, 3645, 4054, 7038).
Performing uses is serving the Lord (n. 7038). Everyone's character is
such as are the uses he performs (n. 4054, 6315); illustrated (n. 7038).

<span id="fn_235"></span>[364-1](hh08.htm#fr_235) There can be no mercy
apart from means, but only mercy through means, that is, to those who
live in accordance with the commandments of the Lord; such the Lord by
His mercy leads continually in the world, and afterwards to eternity (n.
8700, 10659).

<span id="fn_236"></span>[364-2](hh08.htm#fr_236) Dignities and riches
are not real blessings, therefore they are granted both to the wicked
and to the good (n. 8939, 10775, 10776). The real blessing is reception
of love and faith from the Lord, and conjunction thereby, for this is
the source of eternal happiness (n. 1420, 1422, 2846, 3017, 3406, 3504,
3514, 3530, 3565, 3584, 4216, 4981, 8939, 10495).

<span id="fn_237"></span>[365-1](hh08.htm#fr_237) "Garments" signify
truths, thus knowledges (n. 1073, 2576, 5319, 5954, 9212, 9216, 9952,
10536). "Purple" signifies celestial good (n. 9467). "Fine linen"
signifies truth from a celestial origin (n. 5319, 9469, 9744).

<span id="fn_238"></span>[365-2](hh08.htm#fr_238) A "camel" signifies in
the Word the knowing faculty and knowledge in general (n. 3048, 3071,
3143, 3145). What is meant by "needlework, working with a needle," and
therefore by a "needle" (n. 9688). To enter from knowledge into the
truths of faith is contrary to Divine order (n. 10236). Those that do
this become demented in respect to the thing of heaven and the church
(n. 128-130, 232, 233, 6047). And in the other life, when they think
about spiritual things they become as it were drunken (n. 1072). Further
about such (n. 196). Examples showing that when spiritual things are
entered into through knowledges they cannot be comprehended (n. 233,
2094, 2196, 2203, 2209). It is permissible to enter from spiritual truth
into knowledges which pertain to the natural man, but not the reverse,
because there can be spiritual influx into the natural, but not natural
influx into the spiritual (n. 3219, 5119, 5259, 5427, 5428, 5478, 6322,
9110). The truths of the word and of the church must first be
acknowledged, after which it is permissible to consider knowledges, but
not before (n. 6047).

<span id="fn_239"></span>[367-1](hh08.htm#fr_239) It is not known at
this day what marriage love is, or whence it is (n. 2727). Marriage love
is willing what another wills, thus willing mutually and reciprocally
(n. 2731). Those that are in marriage love dwell together in the inmosts
of life (n. 2732). It is such a union of two minds that from love they
are one (n. 10168, 10169). For the love of minds, which is spiritual
love, is a union (n. 1594, 2057, 3939, 4018, 5807, 6195, 7081-7086,
7501, 10130).

<span id="fn_240"></span>[368-1](hh08.htm#fr_240) In the Word "young
men" signify understanding of truth, or the intelligent (n. 7668). "Men"
have the same signification (n. 158, 265, 749, 915, 1007, 2517, 3134,
3236, 4823, 9007). "Woman" signifies affection for good and truth (n.
568, 3160, 6014, 7337, 8994); likewise the church (n. 252, 253, 749,
770); "wife" has the same signification (n. 252, 253, 409, 749, 770);
with what difference (n. 915, 2517, 3236, 4510, 4823). In the highest
sense "husband and wife" are predicated of the Lord and of His
conjunction with heaven and the church (n. 7022). A "virgin" signifies
affection for good (n. 3067, 3110, 3179, 3189, 6729, 6742); likewise the
church (n. 2362 3081, 3963, 4638, 6729, 6775, 6788).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[371-1](hh08.htm#fr_241) The origin, cause, and
essence of true marriage love is the marriage of good and truth; thus it
is from heaven (n. 2728, 2729). Respecting angelic spirit, who have a
perception whether there is anything of marriage from the idea of a
conjunction of good and truth (n. 10756). It is with marriage love in
every respect the same as it is with the conjunction of good and truth
(n. 1904, 2173, 2429, 2508, 3101, 3102, 3155, 3179, 3180, 4358, 5807,
5835, 9206, 9495, 9637). How and with whom the conjunction of good and
truth is effected (n. 3834, 4096, 4097, 4301, 4345, 4353, 4364, 4368,
5365, 7623-7627, 9258). Only those that are in good and truth from the
Lord know what true marriage love is (n. 10171). In the Word "marriage"
signifies the marriage of good and truth (n. 3132, 4434, 4835). The
kingdom of the Lord and heaven are in true marriage love (n. 2737).

<span id="fn_242"></span>[375-1](hh08.htm#fr_242) All things in the
universe, both in heaven and in the world, have relation to good and
truth (n. 2452, 3166, 4390, 4409, 5232, 7256, 10122). And to the
conjunction of these (n. 10555). Between good and truth there is
marriage (n. 1904, 2173, 2508). Good loves truth, and from love longs
for truth and for the conjunction of truth with itself, and from this
they are in a perpetual endeavor to be conjoined (n. 9206, 9207, 9495).
The life of truth is from good (n. 1589, 1997, 2572, 4070, 4096, 4097,
4736, 4757, 4884, 5147, 9667). Truth is the form of good (n. 3049, 3180,
4574, 9154). Truth is to good as water is to bread (n. 4976).

<span id="fn_243"></span>[378-1](hh08.htm#fr_243) Marriages between
those of different religions are not permissible, because there can be
no conjunction of like good and truth in the interiors (n. 8998).

<span id="fn_244"></span>[379-1](hh08.htm#fr_244) As husband and wife
should be one, and should live together in the inmost of life, and as
they together make one angel in heaven, so true marriage love is
impossible between one husband and several wives (n. 1907, 2740). To
marry several wives at the same time is contrary to Divine order (n.
10837). That there is no marriage except between one husband and one
wife is clearly perceived by those who are in the Lord's celestial
kingdom (n. 865, 3246, 9002, 10172). For the reason that the angels
there are in the marriage of good and truth (n. 3246). The Israelitish
nation were permitted to marry several wives, and to add concubines to
wives, but not Christians, for the reason that that nation was in
externals separate from internals, while Christians are able to enter
into internals, thus into the marriage of good and truth (n. 3246, 4837,
8809.)

<span id="fn_245"></span>[382-1](hh08.htm#fr_245) Conceptions,
pregnancies, births, and generations signify those that are spiritual,
that is, such as pertain to good and truth, or to love and faith (n.
613, 1145, 1255, 2020, 2584, 3860, 3868, 4070, 4668, 6239, 8042, 9325,
10249). Therefore generation and birth signify regeneration and rebirth
through faith and love (n. 5160, 5598, 9042, 9845). Mother signifies the
church in respect to truth, and thus the truth of the church; father the
church in respect to good, and thus the good of the church (n. 2691,
2717, 3703, 5581, 8897). Sons signify affections for truth, and thus
truths (n. 489, 491, 533, 2623, 3373, 4257, 8649, 9807). Daughters
signify affections for good, and the goods (n. 489-491, 2362, 3963,
6729, 6775, 6778, 9055). Son-in-law signifies truth associated with
affection for good (n. 2389). Daughter-in-law signifies good associated
with its truth (n. 4843).

<span id="fn_246"></span>[384-1](hh08.htm#fr_246) Adulteries are profane
(n. 9961, 10174). Heaven is closed to adulterers (n. 2750). Those that
have experienced delight in adulteries cannot come into heaven (n. 539,
2733, 2747-2749, 2751, 10175). Adulterers are unmerciful and destitute
of religion (n. 824, 2747, 2748). The ideas of adulterers are filthy (n.
2747, 2748). In the other life they love filth and are in filthy hells
(n. 2755, 5394, 5722). In the Word adulteries signify adulterations of
good, and whoredoms perversions of truth (n. 2466, 2729, 3399, 4865,
8904, 10648).

<span id="fn_247"></span>[387-1](hh08.htm#fr_247) The Lord's kingdom is
a kingdom of uses (n. 454, 696, 1103, 3645, 4054, 7038). Performing uses
is serving the Lord (n. 7038). In the other life all must perform uses
(n. 1103); even the wicked and infernal, but in what manner (n. 696).
All are such as are the uses they perform (n. 4054, 6815); illustrated
(n. 7038). Angelic blessedness consists in the goods of charity, that
is, in performing uses (n. 454).

<span id="fn_248"></span>[390-1](hh08.htm#fr_248) Loving the neighbor is
not loving the person, but loving that which is in him and which
constitutes him (n. 5025, 10336). Those who love the person, and not
that which is in him, and which constitutes him, love equally an evil
man and a good man (n. 3820); and do good alike to the evil and to the
good; and yet to do good to the evil is to do evil to the good and that
is not loving the neighbor (n. 3820, 6703, 8120). The judge who punishes
the evil that they may be reformed, and may not contaminate or injure
the good, loves his neighbor (n. 3820, 8120, 8121). Every individual and
every community also one's country and the church, and in the most
general sense the kingdom of the Lord, are the neighbor, and to do good
to these from a love of good in accord with the quality of their state,
is loving the neighbor; that is, the neighbor is their good, which is to
be consulted (n. 6818-6824, 8123).

<span id="fn_249"></span>[391-1](hh08.htm#fr_249) Of the angels that are
with little children and afterwards with boys, and thus in succession
(n. 2303). Man is raised from the dead by means of angels; from
experiences (n. 168-189). Angels are sent to those who are in hell to
prevent their tormenting each other beyond measure (n. 967). Of the
services rendered by the angels to men on their coming into the other
life (n. 2131). There are spirits and angels with all men and man is led
by the Lord by means of spirits and angels (n. 50, 697, 2796, 2887,
2888, 5846-5866, 5976-5993, 6209). Angels have dominion over evil
spirits (n. 1755).

<span id="fn_250"></span>[391-2](hh08.htm#fr_250) In the Word by angels
something Divine from the Lord is signified (n. 1925, 2821, 3039, 4085,
6280, 8192). In the Word angels are called "gods," because of their
reception of Divine truth and good from the Lord (n. 4295, 4402, 8192,
8301).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 401-450](hh09)
