[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hh09)  [Next](hh11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877854769/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Heaven and Hell*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by John C. Ager
\[1900\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Heaven and Hell

<span class="margnote"><span id="451.">451.</span></span>

This opening state of man's life after death lasts only a few days. How
he is afterwards led from one state to another, and finally either into
heaven or into hell, will be told in what follows. This, too, I have
been permitted to learn by much experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="452.">452.</span></span>

I have talked with some on the third day after their decease, when the
process described above (n. 449, 450) had been completed, especially
with three whom I had known in the world, to whom I mentioned that
arrangements were now being made for burying their bodies; I said, for
burying them; on hearing which they were smitten with a kind of
surprise, saying that they were alive, and that the thing that had
served them in the world was what was being buried. Afterwards they
wondered greatly that they had not believed in such a life after death
while they lived in the body, and especially that scarcely any within
the church so believed. Those that have not believed in the world in any
life of the soul after the life of the body are greatly ashamed when
they find themselves to be alive. But those that have confirmed
themselves in that disbelief seek affiliation with their like, and are
separated from those that have had faith. Such are for the most part
attached to some infernal society, because they have also denied the
divine and have despised the truths of the church; for so far as any one
confirms himself against the eternal life of his soul he confirms
himself also against whatever pertains to heaven and the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="453.">453.</span></span>

MAN AFTER DEATH IS IN A COMPLETE HUMAN FORM It has already been shown in
several previous chapters that the form of the spirit of man is the
human form, that is, that the spirit is a man even in form, especially
where it is shown that every angel has a complete human form (n. 73-77)
that in respect to his interiors every man is a spirit (n. 432-444); and
that the angels in heaven are from the human race (n. 311-317). \[2\]
This can be seen still more clearly from the fact that it is by virtue
of his spirit, and not by virtue of his body that man is a man, and that
the bodily form is added to the spirit in accordance with the spirit's
form, and not the reverse, for it is in accordance with its own form
that the spirit is clothed with a body. Consequently the spirit of man
acts into every part of the body, even the minutest, insomuch that if
any part is not actuated by the spirit, or the spirit is not active in
it, it does not live. Any one can see that this is true from this fact
alone, that thought and will actuate all things and each thing of the
body with such entire command that everything concurs, and any thing
that does not concur is not a part of the body, but is cast out as
something without life; and thought and will belong, not to the body,
but to the spirit of man. \[3\] A spirit that has been loosed from the
body or the spirit in another man, is not visible in the human form to
man, because the body's organ of sight, or its eye, so far as it sees in
the world, is a material organ, and what is material can see only what
is material, while what is spiritual sees what is spiritual. When,
therefore, the material part of the eye becomes darkened and is deprived
of its cooperation with the spiritual, the eye sees spirits in their own
form, which is the human form, not only the spirits that are in the
spiritual world, but also the spirit of another man while it is yet in
its body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="454.">454.</span></span>

The form of the spirit is the human form because man is created in
respect to his spirit in the form of heaven, for all things of heaven
and of the order of heaven are brought together in the things that
constitute the mind of man; <span id="fr_259"></span>[454-1](#fn_259.md)
and from this comes his capacity to receive intelligence and wisdom.
Whether you say the capacity to receive intelligence and wisdom or the
capacity to receive heaven it is the same thing, as can be seen from
what has been shown about the light and heat of heaven (n. 126-140); the
form of heaven (n. 200-212); the wisdom of angels (n. 265-275); and in
the chapter that the form of heaven as a whole and in part reflects a
single man (n. 59-77); and this by virtue of the Divine Human of the
Lord, which is the source of heaven and its form (n. 78-86).

<span class="margnote"><span id="455.">455.</span></span>

That which has now been said can be understood by the rational man, for
he can see it from the connection of causes and from truths in their
order; but it is not understood by a man who is not rational, and for
several reasons, the chief of which is that he has no desire to
understand it because it is opposed to the falsities that he has made
his truths; and he that is unwilling to understand for this reason has
closed to his rational faculty the way to heaven, although that way can
still be opened whenever the will's resistance ceases (see above, n.
424). That man is able to understand truths and be rational whenever he
so wishes has been made clear to me by much experience. Evil spirits
that have become irrational in the world by rejecting the Divine and the
truths of the church, and confirming themselves against them, have
frequently been turned by Divine power towards those who were in the
light of truth, and they then comprehended all things as the angels did,
and acknowledged them to be true, and also that they comprehended them
all. But the moment these spirits relapsed into themselves, and turned
back to the love of their will, they had no comprehension of truths and
affirmed the opposite. \[2\] I have also heard certain dwellers in hell
saying that they knew and perceived that which they did to be evil and
that which they thought to be false; but that they were unable to resist
the delight of their love, that is, their will, and that it is their
will that drives their thought to see evil as good and falsity as truth.
Evidently, then, those that are in falsity from evil have the ability to
understand and be rational, but have no wish to; and they have no wish
to for the reason that they have loved falsities more than truths,
because these agree with the evils in which they are. To love and to
will is the same thing, for what a man wills he loves, and what he loves
he wills. \[3\] Because the state of men is such that they are able to
understand truths if they wish to, I have been permitted to confirm
spiritual truths, which are truths of heaven and the church, even by
reasonings, and this in order that the falsities by which the rational
mind in many has been closed up may be dispersed by reasonings, and thus
the eye may perhaps in some degree be opened; for to confirm spiritual
goods by reasonings is permitted to all that are in truths. Who could
ever understand the Word from the sense of its letter, unless he saw
from an enlightened reason the truths it contains? Is not this the
source of so many heresies from the same Word? <span
id="fr_260"></span>[455-1](#fn_260.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="456.">456.</span></span>

That the spirit of man, when it has been loosed from the body, is still
a man and in a like form, has been proved to me by the daily experience
of many years; for I have seen such and have listened to them a thousand
times, and have talked with them about this fact, that men in the world
do not believe them to be men, and that those that do believe this are
regarded by the learned as simple. Spirits are grieved at heart that
such ignorance still continues in the world, and above all within the
church. \[2\] But this belief they said had emanated chiefly from the
learned, who had thought about the soul from ideas derived from bodily
sense; and from such ideas the only conception they formed of the soul
was as being mere thought; and when this is regarded apart from any
subject as its containant and source it is merely a fleeting breath of
pure ether that must needs be dissipated when the body dies. But as the
church believes from the Word in the immortality of the soul they are
compelled to ascribe to it something vital, such as pertains to thought,
but they deny to it any thing of sense, such as man possesses, until it
has again been joined to the body. On this opinion the doctrine in
regard to the resurrection is based, with the belief that the soul and
body will be joined again at the time of the final judgment. For this
reason when any one thinks about the soul in accordance with this
doctrine and these conjectures, he has no conception that it is a
spirit, and in a human form. And still further, scarcely any one at this
day knows what the spiritual is, and still less that spiritual beings,
as all spirits and angels are, have any human form. \[3\] Consequently,
nearly all that go from this world are greatly surprised to find that
they are alive, and are as much men as before, that they see, hear, and
speak, and that their body enjoys the sense of touch as before, with no
difference whatever (see above, n. 74). And when they cease to be
astonished at themselves they are astonished that the church should know
nothing about this state of men after death, thus nothing about heaven
or hell, when in fact all that have ever lived in the world are in the
other life and live as men. And as they wondered also why this had not
been disclosed to man by visions, being an essential of the faith of the
church, they were told from heaven that although this might have been
done, since nothing is easier when it is the Lord's good pleasure, yet
those that have confirmed themselves in the opposite falsities would not
believe even if they themselves should behold it; also that there is
danger in confirming any thing by visions when men are in falsities, for
they would then first believe and afterwards deny, and thus would
profane the truth itself, since to believe and afterwards deny is to
profane; and those who profane truths are cast down into the lowest and
most grievous of all the hells. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[456-1](#fn_261.md) \[4\] This danger is what is meant
by the Lord's words: He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their
hearts lest they should see with their eyes, and understand with their
heart, and should turn and I should heal them (John 12:40). And that
those that are in falsities would not believe \[even if visions were
given\] is meant by these words: Abraham said to the rich man in hell,
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. But he said, Nay,
father Abraham, but if one came to them from the dead they would be
converted. But Abraham said to him, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they believe though one should rise from the dead
(Luke 16:29-31).

<span class="margnote"><span id="457.">457.</span></span>

When the spirit of man first enters the world of spirits, which takes
place shortly after his resuscitation, as described above, his face and
his tone of voice resemble those he had in the world, because he is then
in the state of his exteriors, and his interiors are not as yet
uncovered. This is man's first state after death. But subsequently his
face is changed, and becomes entirely different, resembling his ruling
affection or ruling love, in conformity with which the interiors of his
mind had been while he was in the world and his spirit while it was in
the body. For the face of a man's spirit differs greatly from the face
of his body. The face of his body is from his parents, but the face of
his spirit is from his affection, and is an image of it. When the life
of the spirit in the body is ended, and its exteriors are laid aside and
its interiors disclosed, it comes into this affection. This is man's
second state. I have seen some that have recently arrived from the
world, and have recognized them from their face and speech; but seeing
them afterwards I did not recognize them. Those that had been in good
affections appeared with beautiful faces; but those that had been in
evil affections with misshapen faces; for man's spirit, viewed in
itself, is nothing but his affection; and the face is its outward form.
Another reason why faces are changed is that in the other life no one is
permitted to counterfeit affections that are not his own, and thus
assume looks that are contrary to his love. All in the other life are
brought into such a state as to speak as they think, and to manifest in
their looks and gestures the inclinations of their will. And because of
this the faces of all become forms and images of their affections; and
in consequence all that have known each other in the world know each
other in the world of spirits, but not in heaven nor in hell (as has
been said above, n. 427). <span id="fr_262"></span>[457-1](#fn_262.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="458.">458.</span></span>

The faces of hypocrites are changed more slowly than those of others,
because by practice they had formed a habit of so managing their
interiors as to imitate good affections; consequently for a long time
they appear not unbeautiful. But as that which they had assumed is
gradually put off, and the interiors of the mind are brought into accord
with the form of their affections, they become after awhile more
misshapen than others. Hypocrites are such as have been accustomed to
talk like angels, but interiorly have acknowledged nature alone and not
the Divine, and have therefore denied what pertains to heaven and the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="459.">459.</span></span>

It should be known that everyone's human form after death is the more
beautiful in proportion as he has more interiorly loved Divine truths
and lived according to them; for everyone's interiors are opened and
formed in accordance with his love and life; therefore the more interior
the affection is the more like heaven it is, and in consequence the more
beautiful the face is. This is why the angels in the inmost heaven are
the most beautiful, for they are forms of celestial love. But those that
have loved Divine truths more exteriorly, and thus have lived in
accordance with them in a more external way, are less beautiful; for
exterior affections only shine forth from their faces; and through these
no interior heavenly love shines, consequently nothing of the form of
heaven as it is in itself. There is seen in the faces of such something
comparatively obscure, not vivified by any thing of interior life
shining through it. In a word, all perfection increases toward interiors
and decreases toward exteriors, and as perfection increases and
decreases so does beauty. I have seen angelic faces of the third heaven
of such radiance that no painter with all his art could possibly give
any such light to his colors as to equal a thousandth part of the
brightness and life that shone forth from their countenances. But the
faces of the angels of the lowest heaven may in some measure be
equalled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="460.">460.</span></span>

In conclusion I will mention a certain arcanum hitherto unknown to any
one, namely, that every good and truth that goes forth from the Lord and
makes heaven is in the human form; and this not only as a whole and in
what is greatest, but also in every part and what is least; also that
this form affects everyone who receives good and truth from the Lord,
and causes everyone who is in heaven to be in the human form in
accordance with his reception of good and truth. It is in consequence of
this that heaven is like itself in general and in particular, and that
the human form is the form of the whole, of every society, and of every
angel (as has been shown in the four chapters from n. 59 to 86); to
which let it be added that it is the form of the least things of thought
derived from heavenly love with the angels. No man, however, can easily
comprehend this arcanum; but it is clearly comprehended by the angels,
because they are in the light of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="461.">461.</span></span>

AFTER DEATH MAN IS POSSESSED OF EVERY SENSE, AND OF ALL THE MEMORY,
THOUGHT, AND AFFECTION, THAT HE HAD IN THE WORLD, LEAVING NOTHING BEHIND
EXCEPT HIS EARTHLY BODY. It has been proved to me by manifold experience
that when man passes from the natural world into the spiritual, as he
does when he dies, he carries with him all his possessions, that is,
everything that belongs to him as a man, except his earthly body. For
when man enters the spiritual world or the life after death, he is in a
body as he was in the world, with no apparent difference, since he
neither sees nor feels any difference. But his body is then spiritual,
and thus separated or purified from all that is earthly; and when what
is spiritual touches or sees what is spiritual, it is just the same as
when what is natural touches or sees what is natural. So when a man has
become a spirit he does not know otherwise than that he is in the same
body that he had in the world and thus does not know that he has died.
\[2\] Moreover, a man's spirit enjoys every sense, both outer and inner,
that he enjoyed in the world; he sees as before, he hears and speaks as
before, smells and tastes, and when touched, he feels the touch as
before; he also longs, desires, craves, thinks, reflects, is stirred,
loves, wills, as before; and one who takes delight in studies, reads and
writes as before. In a word, when a man passes from one life into the
other, or from one world into the other, it is like passing from one
place into another, carrying with him all things that he had possessed
in himself as a man; so that by death, which is only the death of the
earthly body, man cannot be said to have lost anything really his own.
\[3\] Furthermore, he carries with him his natural memory, retaining
everything that he has heard, seen, read, learned, or thought, in the
world from earliest infancy even to the end of life; although the
natural objects that are contained in the memory, since they cannot be
reproduced in the spiritual world, are quiescent, just as they are when
one is not thinking of them. Nevertheless, they are reproduced when the
Lord so wills. But more will be said presently about this memory and its
state after death. A sensual man finds it impossible to believe that
such is the state of man after death, because he cannot comprehend it;
for a sensual man must needs think naturally even about spiritual
things; therefore, any thing that does not appeal to his senses, that
is, that he does not see with his bodily eyes and touch with his hands
(as is said of Thomas, John 20:25, 27, 29) he denies the existence of.
(What the sensual man is may be seen above, n. 267 and notes.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="462.">462.</span></span>

\[a.\] And yet there is a great difference between man's life in the
spiritual world and his life in the natural world, in regard both to his
outer senses and their affections and his inner senses and their
affections. Those that are in heaven have more exquisite senses, that
is, a keener sight and hearing, and also think more wisely than when
they were in the world; for they see in the light of heaven, which
surpasses by many degrees the light of the world (see above, n. 126);
and they hear by means of a spiritual atmosphere, which likewise
surpasses by many degrees the earthly atmosphere (n. 235). This
difference in respect to the outward senses is like the difference
between clear sunshine and dark cloudiness in the world, or between
noonday light and evening shade. For the light of heaven, since it is
Divine truth, enables the eyes of angels to perceive and distinguish
most minute things. \[2\] Moreover, their outer sight corresponds to
their inner sight or understanding; for with angels one sight so flows
into the other as to act as one with it; and this gives them their great
keenness of vision. In like manner, their hearing corresponds to their
perception, which pertains both to the understanding and to the will,
and in consequence they perceive in the tone and words of one speaking
the most minute things of his affection and thought; in the tone what
pertains to his affection, and in the words what pertains to his thought
(see above, n. 234-245). But the rest of the senses with the angels are
less exquisite than the senses of seeing and hearing, for the reason
that seeing and hearing serve their intelligence and wisdom, and the
rest do not; and if the other senses were equally exquisite they would
detract from the light and joy of their wisdom, and would let in the
delight of pleasures pertaining to various appetites and to the body;
and so far as these prevail they obscure and weaken the understanding.
This takes place in the world, where men become gross and stupid in
regard to spiritual truths so far as they indulge the sense of taste and
yield to the allurements of the sense of touch. \[3\] From what has
already been said and shown in the chapter on the wisdom of the angels
of heaven (n. 265-275), it can be seen that the inner senses also of the
angels of heaven, which pertain to their thought and affection, are more
exquisite and perfect than the senses they had in the world. But as
regards the state of those that are in hell as compared with the state
of those in the world there is also a great difference, for as great as
is the perfection and excellence of the outer and inner senses of the
angels in heaven, with those who are in hell the imperfection is equally
great. But the state of these will be treated of hereafter. 462. \[b.\]
That when a man leaves the world he takes with him all his memory has
been shown to me in many ways, and many of the things I have seen and
heard are worthy of mention, some of which I will relate in order. There
were some who denied their crimes and villainies which they had
perpetrated in the world; and in consequence, that they might not be
believed innocent, all their deeds were disclosed and reviewed from
their memory in order, from their earliest to their latest years; these
were chiefly adulteries and whoredoms. \[2\] There were some who had
deceived others by wicked arts and had committed thefts. The deceits and
thefts of these were also enumerated in detail, many of which were known
to scarcely any in the world except themselves. These deeds they
confessed, because they were plainly set forth, with every thought,
intention, pleasure, and fear which occupied their minds at the time.
\[3\] There were others who had accepted bribes, and had rendered venal
judgments, who were similarly explored from their memory and from it
everything they had done from the beginning to the end of their office
was reviewed. Every detail in regard to what and how much they had
received, as well as the time, and their state of mind and intention,
were brought to their recollection and made visibly clear to the number
of many hundreds. This was done with several and what is wonderful, in
some cases their memorandum-books, in which they had recorded these
things, were opened and read before them page by page. \[4\] Others who
had enticed maidens to shame or had violated chastity were called to a
like judgment; and the details of their crimes were drawn forth from
their memory and reviewed. The very faces of the maidens and women were
also exhibited as if present, with the places, words and intentions, and
this as suddenly as when a scene is presented to the sight, the
exhibitions continuing sometimes for hours. \[5\] There was one who had
made light of slandering others; and I heard his slanders recounted in
order, and his defamations, with the very words, and the persons about
whom and before whom they were uttered; all of which were produced and
presented to the very life, although while he lived in the world he had
most carefully concealed everything. \[6\] There was one who had
deprived a relative of his inheritance under a fraudulent pretext; and
he was in like manner convicted and judged; and what is wonderful, the
letters and papers that passed between them were read in my hearing, and
it was said that not a word was lacking. \[7\] The same person shortly
before his death had also secretly poisoned his neighbor. This was
disclosed in this way. He appeared to be digging a trench under his
feet, from which a man came forth as out of a grave, and cried out to
him, "What have you done to me?" Then everything was revealed, how the
poisoner had talked with him in a friendly manner, and had held out the
cup, also what he thought beforehand, and what happened afterwards. When
all this had been disclosed he was sentenced to hell. \[8\] In a word,
to each evil spirit all his evils, villainies, robberies, artifices, and
deceits are made clear, and are brought forth from his very memory, and
his guilt is fully established; nor is there any possible room for
denial, because all the circumstances are exhibited together. Moreover,
I have learned from a man's memory, when it was seen and inspected by
angels, what his thoughts had been for a month, one day after another,
and this without mistake, the thoughts being recalled just as they arose
from day to day. \[9\] From these examples it can be seen that man
carries with him all of his memory, and that nothing can be so concealed
in the world as not to be disclosed after death, which is done in the
presence of many, according to the Lord's words: There is nothing
concealed that shall not be uncovered, and nothing secret that shall not
be known; therefore what ye have spoken in the dark shall be heard in
the light and what ye have spoken in the ear shall be proclaimed on the
housetops (Luke 12:2, 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="463.">463.</span></span>

In disclosing his acts to a man after death, the angels to whom the
office of searching is assigned look into his face, and their search
extends through the whole body, beginning with the fingers of each hand,
and thus proceeding through the whole. As I wondered at this the reason
was given, namely, that as all things of the thought and will are
inscribed on the brain, for their beginnings are there, so are they
likewise inscribed on the whole body, since all things of thought and
will extend from their beginnings into all things of the body and there
terminate as in their outmosts; and this is why the things that are
inscribed on the memory from the will and consequent thought are
inscribed not only on the brain, but also upon the whole man, and there
exist in order in accordance with the order of the parts of the body. It
was thus made clear that man as a whole is such as he is in his will and
its thought, even to the extent that an evil man is his own evil, and a
good man his own good. <span id="fr_263"></span>[463-1](#fn_263.md) This
shows what is meant by the book of man's life spoken of in the Word,
namely, that all things that he has done and all things that he has
thought are inscribed on the whole man, and when they are called forth
from the memory they appear as if read in a book, and when the spirit is
viewed in the light of heaven, they appear as in an image. To all this I
would add something remarkable in regard to the continuance of the
memory after death, by which I was assured that not only things in
general but also the minutest particulars that have entered the memory
remain and are never obliterated. I saw books there containing writings
as in the world, and was told that they were from the memory of those
who wrote, and that there was not a single word lacking in them that was
in a book written by the same person in the world; and thus all the
minutest particulars might be drawn from one's memory, even those that
he had forgotten in the world. And the reason was given, namely, that
man has an external and an internal memory, an external memory belonging
to his natural man, and an internal memory belonging to his spiritual
man; and that every least thing that a man has thought, willed, spoken,
done or even heard and seen, is inscribed on his internal or spiritual
memory; <span id="fr_264"></span>[463-2](#fn_264.md) and that what is there
is never erased, since it is also inscribed on the spirit itself and on
the members of its body, as has been said above; and that the spirit is
thus formed in accordance with the thoughts and acts of its will. I know
that this sounds like a paradox, and is therefore difficult to believe;
but still it is true. Let no one believe, then, that there is any thing
that a man has ever thought in himself or done in secret that can be
concealed after death; but let him believe that all things and each
single thing are then laid open as clear as day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="464.">464.</span></span>

Although the external or natural memory remains in man after death, the
merely natural things in it are not reproduced in the other life, but
only the spiritual things adjoined to the natural by correspondences;
but when these are present to the sight they appear in exactly the same
form as they had in the natural world; for all things seen in the
heavens have just the same appearance as in the world, although in their
essence they are not natural but spiritual (as may be seen in the
chapter on Representatives and Appearances in Heaven, n. 170-176). \[2\]
But the external or natural memory in respect to the things in it that
are derived from the material, and from time and space, and from other
properties of nature, is not serviceable to the spirit in the way that
it was serviceable to it in the world, for whenever man thinks in the
world from his external sensual, and not at the same time from his
internal or intellectual sensual, he thinks naturally and not
spiritually; but in the other life when he is a spirit in the spiritual
world he does not think naturally but spiritually, and to think
spiritually is to think intellectually or rationally. For this reason
the external or natural memory in respect to its material contents is
then quiescent, and only those things that man has imbibed in the world
by means of material things, and has made rational, come into use. The
external memory becomes quiescent in respect to material things because
these cannot then be brought forth, since spirits and angels speak from
those affections and thoughts that are proper to their minds; and are
therefore unable to give expression to any thing that is not in accord
with their affections and thoughts as can be seen in what is said about
the speech of angels in heaven and their speech with man (n. 234-257).
\[3\] Because of this man after death is rational, not in the degree
that he was skilled in languages and sciences in the world, but in the
degree in which he became rational by means of these. I have talked with
many who were believed in the world to be learned because they were
acquainted with ancient languages, such as the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
but had not cultivated their rational faculty by what is written in
those languages. Some of them were seen to be just as simple as those
who knew nothing of those languages, and some even stupid, and yet they
retained the conceit of being wiser than others. \[4\] I have talked
with some who had believed in the world that man is wise in the measure
of the contents of his memory, and who had stored up many things in
their memory, speaking almost solely from the memory, and therefore not
from themselves but from others, and their rationality had not been at
all perfected by means of the things in their memory. Some of these were
stupid and some sottish, not in the least comprehending whether a truth
is true or not, and seizing upon all falsities that are passed off for
truths by those who called themselves learned; for from themselves they
are unable to see any thing, whether it be true or not, and consequently
are unable to see any thing rationally when listening to others. \[5\] I
have also talked with some who had written much in the world on
scientific subjects of every kind, and had thereby acquired a worldwide
reputation for learning. Some of these, indeed, had the ability to
reason about truths, whether they are true or not; and some, when they
had turned to those who were in the light of truth, had some
comprehension that truths are true, but still had no wish to comprehend
them, and therefore when they were in their own falsities, and thus in
themselves, denied them. Some had no more wisdom than the unlearned
common people. Thus each differed from the other according as he had
cultivated his rational faculty by means of the knowledges he had
written about or collated. But those who were opposed to the truths of
the church, and who thought from mere knowledges and confirmed
themselves thereby in falsities, did not cultivate their rational
faculty, but cultivated only an ability to reason, which in the world is
believed to be rationality. But this ability is wholly different from
rationality; it is an ability to prove any thing it pleases, and from
preconceived principles and from fallacies to see falsities and not
truths. Such persons can never be brought to acknowledge truths, since
truths cannot be seen from falsities; but falsities may be seen from
truths. \[6\] The rational faculty of man is like a garden or shrubbery,
or like fresh ground; the memory is the soil, truths known and
knowledges are the seeds, the light and heat of heaven cause them to
grow; without light and heat there is no germination; so is it with the
mind when the light of heaven, which is Divine truth, and the heat of
heaven, which is Divine love, are not admitted; rationality is solely
from these. It is a great grief to the angels that learned men for the
most part ascribe all things to nature, and have thereby so closed up
the interiors of their minds as to be unable to see any thing of truth
from the light of truth, which is the light of heaven. In consequence of
this such in the other life are deprived of their ability to reason that
they may not disseminate falsities among the simple good and lead them
astray; and are sent away into desert places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="465.">465.</span></span>

A certain spirit was indignant because he was unable to remember many
things that he knew in the life of the body, grieving over the lost
pleasure which he had so much enjoyed, but he was told that he had lost
nothing at all, that he still knew each and everything that he had
known, although in the world where he now was no one was permitted to
call forth such things from the memory, and that he ought to be
satisfied that he could now think and speak much better and more
perfectly than before, and that his rational was not now immersed as
before in gross, obscure, material and corporeal things, which are of no
use in the kingdom into which he had now come; also that he now
possessed everything conducive to the uses of eternal life, and that
this is the only way of becoming blessed and happy; and therefore it is
the part of ignorance to believe that in this kingdom intelligence
perishes with the removal or quiescence of the material things in the
memory; for the real fact is that so far as the mind can be withdrawn
from things of sense pertaining to the external man or the body, so far
it is elevated to things spiritual and heavenly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="466.">466.</span></span>

What these two memories are is sometimes presented to view in the other
life in forms not elsewhere seen; for many things which in man take the
form of ideas are there presented as objects of sight. The external
memory there presents the appearance of a callus, the internal the
appearance of a medullary substance like that in the human brain; and
from this what they are can be known. With those that have devoted
themselves in the life of the body to the cultivation of the memory
alone, and have not cultivated their rational faculty, the callosity
appears hard and streaked within as with tendons. With those that have
filled the memory with falsities it appears hairy and rough, because of
the confused mass of things in it. With those that have cultivated the
memory with the love of self and the world as an end it appears glued
together and ossified. With those that have wished to penetrate into
Divine arcana by means of learning, especially of a philosophical kind,
with an unwillingness to believe until convinced by such proofs, the
memory appears like a dark substance, of such a nature as to absorb the
rays of light and turn them into darkness. With those that have
practiced deceit and hypocrisy it appears hard and bony like ebony,
which reflects the rays of light. But with those that have been in the
good of love and the truths of faith there is no such callous
appearance, because their inner memory transmits the rays of light into
the outer; and in its objects or ideas as in their basis or their
ground, the rays terminate and find delightful receptacles; for the
outer memory is the out most of order in which, when goods and truths
are there, the spiritual and heavenly things are gently terminated and
find their seat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="467.">467.</span></span>

Men living in the world who are in love to the Lord and charity toward
the neighbor have with them and in them angelic intelligence and wisdom,
but it is then stored up in the inmosts of the inner memory; and they
are not at all conscious of it until they put off corporeal things. Then
the natural memory is laid asleep and they awake into their inner
memory, and then gradually into angelic memory itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="468.">468.</span></span>

How the rational faculty may be cultivated shall also be told in a few
words. The genuine rational faculty consists of truths and not of
falsities; whatever consists of falsities is not rational. There are
three kinds of truths, civil, moral, and spiritual. Civil truths relate
to matters of judgment and of government in kingdoms, and in general to
what is just and equitable in them. Moral truths pertain to the matters
of everyone's life which have regard to companionships and social
relations, in general to what is honest and right, and in particular to
virtues of every kind. But spiritual truths relate to matters of heaven
and of the church, and in general to the good of love and the truth of
faith. \[2\] In every man there are three degrees of life (see above, n.
267). The rational faculty is opened to the first degree by civil
truths, to the second degree by moral truths, and to the third degree by
spiritual truths. But it must be understood that the rational faculty
that consists of these truths is not formed and opened by man's knowing
them, but by his living according to them; and living according to them
means loving them from spiritual affection; and to love truths from
spiritual affection is to love what is just and equitable because it is
just and equitable, what is honest and right because it is honest and
right, and what is good and true because it is good and true; while
living according to them and loving them from the bodily affection is
loving them for the sake of self and for the sake of one's reputation,
honor or gain. Consequently, so far as man loves these truths from a
bodily affection he fails to become rational, for he loves, not them,
but himself; and the truths are made to serve him as servants serve
their Lord; and when truths become servants they do not enter the man
and open any degree of life in him, not even the first, but merely rest
in the memory as knowledges under a material form, and there conjoin
themselves with the love of self, which is a bodily love. \[3\] All this
shows how man becomes rational, namely, that he becomes rational to the
third degree by a spiritual love of the good and truth which pertain to
heaven and the church; he becomes rational to the second degree by a
love of what is honest and right; and to the first degree by a love of
what is just and equitable. These two latter loves also become spiritual
from a spiritual love of good and truth, because that love flows into
them and conjoins itself to them and forms in them as it were its own
semblance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="469.">469.</span></span>

Spirits and angels, equally with men, have a memory, whatever they hear,
see, think, will and do, remaining with them, and thereby their rational
faculty is continually cultivated even to eternity. Thus spirits and
angels, equally with men, are perfected in intelligence and wisdom by
means of knowledges of truth and good. That spirits and angels have a
memory I have been permitted to learn by much experience, having seen
everything that they have thought and done, both in public and in
private, called forth from their memories when they were with other
spirits; and I have seen those that were in some truth from simple good
imbued with knowledges, and thereby with intelligence, and afterwards
raised up into heaven. But it must be understood that such are not
imbued with knowledges and thereby with intelligence beyond the degree
of affection for good and for truth that they have attained to while in
the world; for such and so much of affection as any spirit or angel had
in the world remains with him; and this affection is afterwards
perfected by being filled out, which goes on to eternity. For everything
is capable of being filled out to eternity, since everything is capable
of infinite variation, thus of enrichment by various things, and
consequently of multiplication and fructification. To any thing good
there is no limit because it is from the Infinite. That spirits and
angels are being perfected unceasingly in intelligence and wisdom by
means of knowledges of truth and good may be seen above, in the chapters
on the wisdom of the angels of heaven (n. 265-275); on the heathen or
people outside the church in heaven (n. 318-328); and on little children
in heaven (n. 329-345); and that this is done to that degree of
affection for good and for truth in which they had been in the world,
and not beyond it, may be seen in n. 349.

<span class="margnote"><span id="470.">470.</span></span>

MAN AFTER DEATH IS SUCH AS HIS LIFE HAD BEEN IN THE WORLD. Every
Christian knows from the Word that one's own life awaits him after
death; for it is there said in many passages that man will be judged and
rewarded according to his deeds and works; and no one who thinks from
good and from real truth can help seeing that he who lives well goes to
heaven and that he who lives wickedly goes to hell. But the evil man is
unwilling to believe that his state after death is according to his life
in the world; he thinks, especially when he is sick, that heaven is
granted to everyone out of pure mercy, whatever his life may have been,
and that this is done in accordance with his faith, which he separates
from life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="471.">471.</span></span>

That man will be judged and rewarded according to his deeds and works is
declared in many passages in the Word, some of which I will here quote:
The Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels and
then He will render unto everyone according to his works (Matt. 16:27).
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; yea, saith the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, for their works follow them (Apoc.
14:13). I will give to everyone according to his works (Apoc. 2:23). I
saw the dead, small and great, standing before God; and the books were
opened and the dead were judged out of the things that were written in
the books according to their works. The sea gave up the dead that were
in it, and death and hell gave up those that were in them, and they were
judged everyone according to their works (Apoc. 20:12, 13). Behold I
come, and My reward is with Me, to give to everyone according to his
works (Apoc. 22:12). Everyone that heareth My words and doeth them I
will liken to a prudent man; but everyone that heareth My words and
doeth them not is likened to a foolish man (Matt. 7:24, 26). Not
everyone that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
the heavens; but he that doeth the will of My Father who is in the
heavens. Many will say unto Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in Thy name, and through Thy name cast out demons, and in Thy
name done many mighty works? But then will I confess to them, I know you
not: depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity (Matt. 7:21-23). Then shall
ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk before Thee; Thou hast taught
in our streets. But He will say, I tell you I know you not, ye workers
of iniquity (Luke 13:25-27). I will recompense them according to their
work and according to the doing of their hands (Jer. 25:14). Jehovah,
whose eyes are open upon all the ways of men, to give to everyone
according to his ways and according to the fruit of his works (Jer.
32:19). I will visit upon his ways and recompense to him his works
(Hosea 4:9). Jehovah doeth with us according to our ways and according
to our works (Zech. 1:6). In foretelling the last judgment the Lord
recounts nothing but works, teaching that those that have done good
works will enter into eternal life, and those that have done evil works
will enter into damnation, as in Matthew (25:32-46), and in many other
passages that treat of the salvation and condemnation of man. It is
clear that works and deeds constitute the outward life of man, and that
the quality of his inward life is made evident in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="472.">472.</span></span>

But by deeds and works, what they are inwardly is here meant, and not
the way they outwardly appear; for everyone knows that every deed and
work goes forth from the man's will and thought; otherwise it would be
nothing but a movement like that of an automaton or image. Consequently,
a deed or work viewed in itself is merely an effect that derives its
soul and life from will and thought, even to the extent that it is
nothing but will and thought in effect, and thus is will and thought in
outward form. From this it follows that a deed or work is in quality
such as are the will and thought that produce it. If the thought and
will are good the deeds and works are good; but if the thought and will
are evil the deeds and works are evil, although in outward form they
appear alike. A thousand men may act alike, that is, may do like deeds,
so alike in outward form as to be almost undistinguishable, and yet each
one regarded in itself be different, because from an unlike will. \[2\]
For example, when one acts honestly and justly with a companion, one
person may do it for the purpose of appearing to be honest and just out
of regard to himself and his own honor; another out of regard to the
world and gain; a third out of regard to reward and merit; a fourth out
of regard to friendship; a fifth from fear of the law and the loss of
reputation or employment; a sixth that he may draw some one to his own
side, even when he is in the wrong; a seventh that he may deceive; and
others from other motives. In all these instances although the deeds are
good in appearance, since it is a good thing to act honestly and justly
with a companion, they are nevertheless evil, because they are done, not
out of regard to honesty and justice and for the love of these, but out
of regard to love of self and the world which are loved; and honesty and
justice are made to serve that love as servants serve a lord, whom the
lord despises and dismisses when they fail to serve him. \[3\] In
outward form those act in a like way who act honestly and justly with a
companion because they love what is honest and just. Some of these act
from the truth of faith or from obedience, because the Word so commands;
some from the good of faith or from conscience, because from a religious
motive; some from good of charity towards the neighbor because his good
should be regarded; some from the good of love to the Lord because good
should be done for the sake of good, as also what is honest and just
should be done for the sake of honesty and justice; and this they love
because it is from the Lord, and because the Divine that goes forth from
the Lord is in it, and consequently regarded in its very essence it is
Divine. The deeds or works of such are inwardly good, and therefore are
outwardly good also; for, as has been said above, deeds or works are
precisely such in quality as the thought and will from which they
proceed, and apart from thought and will they are not deeds and works,
but only inanimate movements. All this explains what is meant in the
Word by works and deeds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="473.">473.</span></span>

As deeds and works are from the will and thought, so are they from the
love and faith, consequently they are such as the love and faith are;
for it is the same thing whether you say one's love or his will, and it
is the same thing whether you say one's faith or his established
thought; for that which a man loves he wills, and that which a man
believes he thinks; and when a man loves what he believes he also wills
it and as far as possible does it. Everyone may know that love and faith
are within man's will and thought, and not outside of them, for love is
what kindles the will, and the thought is what it enlightens in matters
of faith; therefore only those that are able to think wisely are
enlightened, and in the measure of their enlightenment they think what
is true and will it, or what is the same, they believe what is true and
love it. <span id="fr_265"></span>[473-1](#fn_265.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="474.">474.</span></span>

But it must be understood that it is the will that makes the man, while
thought makes the man only so far as it goes forth from the will; and
deeds and works go forth from both; or what is the same, it is love that
makes the man, and faith only so far as it goes forth from love; and
deeds or works go forth from both. Consequently, the will or love is the
man himself, for whatever goes forth belongs to that from which it goes
forth. To go forth is to be brought forth and presented in suitable form
for being perceived and seen. <span id="fr_266"></span>[474-1](#fn_266.md)
All this makes clear what faith is when separated from love, namely,
that it is no faith, but mere knowledge, which has no spiritual life in
it; likewise what a deed or work is apart from love, namely, that it is
not a deed or work of life, but a deed or work of death, which possesses
an appearance of life from an evil love and a belief in what is false.
This appearance of life is what is called spiritual death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="475.">475.</span></span>

Again, it must be understood that in deeds or works the whole man is
exhibited, and that his will and thought or his love and faith, which
are his interiors, are not complete until they exist in deeds or works,
which are his exteriors, for these are the outmosts in which the will
and thought terminate, and without such terminations they are
interminate, and have as yet no existence, that is, are not yet in the
man. To think and to will without doing, when there is opportunity, is
like a flame enclosed in a vessel and goes out; also like seed cast upon
the sand, which fails to grow, and so perishes with its power of
germination. But to think and will and from that to do is like a flame
that gives heat and light all around, or like a seed in the ground that
grows up into a tree or flower and continues to live. Everyone can know
that willing and not doing, when there is opportunity, is not willing;
also that loving and not doing good, when there is opportunity, is not
loving, but mere thought that one wills and loves; and this is thought
separate, which vanishes and is dissipated. Love and will constitute the
soul itself of a deed or work, and give form to its body in the honest
and just things that the man does. This is the sole source of man's
spiritual body, or the body of his spirit; that is, it is formed solely
out of the things that the man does from his love or will (see above, n.
463). In a word, all things of man and his spirit are contained in his
deeds or works. <span id="fr_267"></span>[475-1](#fn_267.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="476.">476.</span></span>

All this makes clear what the life is that awaits man after death,
namely, that it is his love and his faith therefrom, not only in
potency, but also in act; thus that it is his deeds or works, because in
these all things of man's love and faith are contained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="477.">477.</span></span>

It is man's ruling love that awaits him after death, and this is in no
way changed to eternity. Everyone has many loves; but they are all
related to his ruling love, and make one with it or together compose it.
All things of the will that are in harmony with the ruling love are
called loves, because they are loved. These loves are both inner and
outer; some directly connected and some mediately; some nearer and some
more remote; they are subservient in various ways. Taken together they
constitute a kingdom, as it were, such being the order in which they are
arranged in man, although man knows nothing what ever about that
arrangement. And yet something of it is made manifest to him in the
other life, for the spread of his thought and affection there is in
accordance with the arrangement of his loves, his thought and affection
extending into heavenly societies when the ruling love is made up of the
loves of heaven, but into infernal societies when it is made up of the
loves of hell. That all the thought and affection of spirits and of
angels has extension into societies may be seen above, in the chapters
on the wisdom of the angels of heaven, and on the form of heaven which
determines affiliations and communications there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="478.">478.</span></span>

But what has been said thus far appeals only to the thought of the
rational man. That it may also be presented to the perception derived
from the senses, I will add some experiences by which it may be
illustrated and confirmed. First, Man after death is his own love or his
own will. Second, Man continues to eternity such as his will or ruling
love is. Third, The man who has heavenly and spiritual love goes to
heaven, while the man who has corporeal and worldly love, and no
heavenly and spiritual love, goes to hell. Fourth, Unless faith is from
heavenly love it does not endure in man. Fifth, Love in act, that is,
the life of man, is what endures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="479.">479.</span></span>

\(i\) Man after death is his own love or his own will. This has been
proved to me by manifold experience. The entire heaven is divided into
societies according to differences of good of love; and every spirit who
is taken up into heaven and becomes an angel is taken to the society
where his love is; and when he arrives there he is, as it were, at home,
and in the house where he was born; this the angel perceives, and is
affiliated with those there that are like himself. When he goes away to
another place he feels constantly a kind of resistance, and a longing to
return to his like, thus to his ruling love. Thus are affiliations
brought about in heaven; and in a like manner in hell, where all are
affiliated in accordance with loves that are the opposites of heavenly
loves. It has been shown above (n. 41-50 and 200-212) that both heaven
and hell are composed of societies, and that they are all distinguished
according to differences of love. \[2\] That man after death is his own
love might also be seen from the fact that whatever does not make one
with his ruling love is then separated and as it were taken away from
him. From one who is good everything discordant or inharmonious is
separated and as it were taken away, and he is thus let into his own
love. It is the same with an evil spirit, with the difference that from
the evil truths are taken away, and from the good falsities are taken
away, and this goes on until each becomes his own love. This is effected
when the man-spirit is brought into the third state, which will be
described hereafter. When this has been done he turns his face
constantly to his own love, and this he has continually before his eyes,
in whatever direction he turns (see above, n. 123, 124). \[3\] All
spirits, provided they are kept in their ruling love, can be led
wherever one pleases, and are incapable of resistance, however clearly
they may see that this is being done, and however much they may think
that they will resist. They have often been permitted to try whether
they could do anything contrary to their ruling love, but in vain. Their
love is like a bond or a rope tied around them, by which they may be led
and from which they cannot loose themselves. It is the same with men in
the world who are also led by their love, or are led by others by means
of their love; but this is more the case when they have become spirits,
because they are not then permitted to make a display of any other love,
or to counterfeit what is not their own. \[4\] All interaction in the
other life proves that the spirit of man is his ruling love, for so far
any one is acting or speaking in accord with the love of another, to the
same extent is the other plainly present, with full, joyous, and lively
countenance; but when one is speaking or acting contrary to another's
love, to that extent the other's countenance begins to be changed, to be
obscured and undiscernible, until at length he wholly disappears as if
he had not been there. I have often wondered how this could be, for
nothing of the kind can occur in the world; but I have been told that it
is the same with the spirit in man, which when it turns itself away from
another ceases to be within his view. \[5\] Another proof that a spirit
is his ruling love is that every spirit seizes and appropriates all
things that are in harmony with his love, and rejects and repudiates all
that are not. Everyone's love is like a spongy or porous wood, which
imbibes such fluids as promote its growth, and repels others. It is also
like animals of every kind, which know their proper food and seek the
things that agree with their nature, and avoid what disagrees; for every
love wishes to be nourished on what belongs to it, evil love by
falsities and good love by truths. I have sometimes been permitted to
see certain simple good spirits desiring to instruct the evil in truths
and goods; but when the instruction was offered them they fled far away,
and when they came to their own they seized with great pleasure upon the
falsities that were in agreement with their love. I have also seen good
spirits talking together about truths, and the good who were present
listened eagerly to the conversation, but the evil who were present paid
no attention to it, as if they did not hear it. In the world of spirits
ways are seen, some leading to heaven, some to hell, and each to some
particular society. Good spirits go only in the ways that lead to
heaven, and to the society there that is in the good of their love; and
do not see the ways that lead elsewhere; while evil spirits go only in
the ways that lead to hell, and to the society there that is in the evil
of their love; and do not see the ways that lead elsewhere; or if they
see them have no wish to enter them. In the spiritual world these ways
are real appearances, which correspond to truths or falsities; and this
is why ways have this signification in the Word. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[479-1](#fn_268.md) By this evidence from experience
what has previously been affirmed on the ground of reason is made more
certain, namely, that every man after death is his own love and his own
will. It is said one's own will because everyone's will is his love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="480.">480.</span></span>

\(ii\) Man after death continues to eternity such as his will or ruling
love is. This, too, has been confirmed by abundant experience. I have
been permitted to talk with some who lived two thousand years ago, and
whose lives are described in history, and thus known; and I found that
they continued to be just the same as they were described, that is, in
respect to the love out of which and according to which their lives were
formed. There were others known to history, that had lived seventeen
centuries ago, others that had lived four centuries ago, and three, and
so on, with whom I was permitted to talk; and I found that the same
affection still ruled in them, with no other difference than that the
delights of their love were turned into such things as correspond. The
angels declare that the life of the ruling love is never changed in any
one even to eternity, since everyone is his love; consequently to change
that love in a spirit is to take away or extinguish his life; and for
the reason that man after death is no longer capable of being reformed
by instruction, as in the world, because the outmost plane, which
consists of natural knowledges and affections, is then quiescent and not
being spiritual cannot be opened (see above, n. 464); and upon that
plane the interiors pertaining to the mind and disposition rest as a
house rests on its foundation; and on this account such as the life of
one's love had been in the world such he continues to be to eternity.
The angels are greatly surprised that man does not know that everyone is
such as his ruling love is, and that many believe that they may be saved
by mercy apart from means, or by faith alone, whatever their life may
be; also that they do not know that Divine mercy works by means, and
that it consists in man's being led by the Lord, both in the world and
afterwards to eternity, and that those who do not live in evils are led
by the Divine mercy; and finally that faith is affection for truth going
forth from heavenly love, which is from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="481.">481.</span></span>

\(iii\) The man who has heavenly and spiritual love goes to heaven;
while the man who has corporeal and worldly love and no heavenly and
spiritual love goes to hell. This has been made evident to me from all
whom I have seen taken up into heaven or cast into hell. The life of
those taken up into heaven had been derived from a heavenly and
spiritual love, while the life of those cast into hell had been derived
from a corporeal and worldly love. Heavenly love consists in loving what
is good, honest, and just, because it is good, honest and just, and in
doing this from love; and those that have this love have a life of
goodness, honesty, and justice, which is the heavenly life. Those that
love what is good, honest, and just, for its own sake, and who do this
or live it, love the Lord above all things, because this is from Him;
they also love the neighbor, because this is the neighbor who is to be
loved. <span id="fr_269"></span>[481-1](#fn_269.md) But corporeal love is
loving what is good, honest, and just, not for its own sake but for the
sake of self, because reputation, honor, and gain can thus be acquired.
Such, in what is good, honest, and just, do not look to the Lord and to
the neighbor, but to self and the world, and find delight in fraud; and
the goodness, honesty and justice that spring forth from fraud are evil,
dishonesty, and injustice, and these are what are loved by such in their
practice of goodness, honesty, and justice. \[2\] As the life of
everyone is determined by these different kinds of love, as soon as men
after death enter the world of spirits they are examined to discover
their quality, and are joined to those that are in a like love; those
that are in heavenly love to those that are in heaven, and those that
are in corporeal love to those that are in hell; and after they have
passed through the first and second state they are so separated as to no
longer see or know each other; for each one becomes his own love, both
in respect to his interiors pertaining to his mind, and in respect to
his exteriors pertaining to his face, body, and speech; for everyone
becomes an image of his own love, even in externals. Those that are
corporeal loves appear gross, dusky, black and misshapen; while those
that are heavenly loves appear fresh, bright, fair and beautiful. Also
in their minds and thoughts they are wholly unlike, those that are
heavenly loves being intelligent and wise, while those that are
corporeal loves are stupid and as it were silly. \[3\] When it is
granted to behold the interiors and exteriors of thought and affection
of those that are in heavenly love, their interiors appear like light,
and some like a flamy light, while their exteriors appear in various
beautiful colors like rainbows. But the interiors of those that are in
corporeal love appear as if black, because they are closed up; and the
interiors of some who were interiorly in malignant deceit appear like a
dusky fire. But their exteriors appear of a dirty color, and
disagreeable to the sight. (The interiors and exteriors of the mind and
disposition are made visible in the spiritual world whenever the Lord
pleases.) \[4\] Those that are in corporeal love see nothing in the
light of heaven; to them the light of heaven is thick darkness; but the
light of hell, which is like light from burning coals, is to them as
clear light. Moreover, in the light of heaven their inward sight is so
darkened that they become insane; consequently they shun that light and
hide themselves in dens and caverns, more or less deeply in accordance
with the falsities in them derived from their evils. On the other hand
those who are in heavenly love, the more interiorly and deeply they
enter into the light of heaven, see all things more clearly and all
things appear more beautiful to them, and they perceive truths more
intelligently and wisely. \[5\] Again, it is impossible for those who
are in corporeal love to live at all in the heat of heaven, for the heat
of heaven is heavenly love; but they can live in the heat of hell, which
is the love of raging against others that do not favor them. The
delights of that love are contempt of others, enmity, hatred and
revenge; and when they are in these delights they are in their life, and
have no idea what it is to do good to others from good itself and for
the sake of good itself, knowing only what it is to do good from evil
and for the sake of evil. \[6\] Those who are in corporeal love are
unable to breathe in heaven. When any evil spirit is brought into heaven
he draws his breath like one struggling in a contest; while those that
are in heavenly love have a freer respiration and a fuller life the more
interiorly they are in heaven. All this shows that heaven with man is
heavenly and spiritual love, because on that love all things of heaven
are inscribed; also that hell in man is corporeal and worldly love apart
from heavenly and spiritual love, because on such loves all things of
hell are inscribed. Evidently, then, he whose love is heavenly and
spiritual enters heaven, and he whose love is corporeal and worldly
apart from heavenly and spiritual love enters hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="482.">482.</span></span>

\(iv\) Unless faith is from heavenly love it does not endure in man.
This has been made clear to me by so much experience that if everything
I have seen and heard respecting it were collected, it would fill a
volume. This I can testify, that those who are in corporeal and worldly
love apart from heavenly and spiritual love have no faith whatever, and
are incapable of having any; they have nothing but knowledge or a
persuasion that a thing is true because it serves their love. Some of
those who claimed that they had faith were brought to those who had
faith, and when they communicated with them they perceived that they had
no faith at all; and afterwards they confessed that merely believing
what is true and believing the Word is not faith, but that faith is
loving truth from heavenly love, and willing and doing it from interior
affection. Moreover, they were shown that their persuasion which they
called faith was merely like the light of winter, in which light,
because it has no heat in it, all things on the earth are bound up in
frost, become torpid, and lie buried under the snow. As soon, therefore,
as the light of persuasive faith in them is touched by the rays of the
light of heaven it is not only extinguished but is turned into a dense
darkness, in which no one can see himself; and at the same time their
interiors are so obscured that they can understand nothing at all, and
at length become insane from falsities. Consequently with such, all the
truths that they have known from the Word and from the doctrine of the
church, and have called the truths of their faith, are taken away; and
they imbibe in their place every falsity that is in accord with the evil
of their life. For they are all let down into their loves and into the
falsities agreeing with them; and they then hate and abhor and therefore
reject truths, because they are repugnant to the falsities of evil in
which they are. From all my experience in what pertains to heaven and
hell I can bear witness that all those who from their doctrine have
professed faith alone, and whose life has been evil, are in hell. I have
seen many thousands of them cast down to hell. (Respecting these see the
treatise on The Last Judgment and the Destruction of Babylon.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="483.">483.</span></span>

\(v\) Love in act, that is, the life of man, is what endures. This
follows as a conclusion from what has just been shown from experience,
and from what has been said about deeds and works. Love in act is work
and deed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="484.">484.</span></span>

It must be understood that all works and deeds pertain to moral and
civil life, and therefore have regard to what is honest and right, and
what is just and equitable, what is honest and right pertaining to moral
life, and what is just and equitable to civil life. The love from which
deeds are done is either heavenly or infernal. Works and deeds of moral
and civil life, when they are done from heavenly love, are heavenly; for
what is done from heavenly love is done from the Lord, and everything
done from the Lord is good. But the deeds and works of moral and civil
life when done from infernal love are infernal; for what is done from
this love, which is the love of self and of the world, is done from man
himself, and everything that is done from man himself is in itself evil;
for man regarded in himself, that is, in regard to what is his own, is
nothing but evil. <span id="fr_270"></span>[484-1](#fn_270.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="485.">485.</span></span>

THE DELIGHTS OF EVERY ONE'S LIFE ARE CHANGED AFTER DEATH INTO THINGS
THAT CORRESPOND. It has been shown in the preceding chapter that the
ruling affection or dominant love in everyone continues to eternity. It
shall now be explained how the delights of that affection or love are
changed into things that correspond. Being changed into corresponding
things means into things spiritual that correspond to the natural. That
they are changed into things spiritual can be seen from this, that so
long as man is in his earthly body he is in the natural world, but when
he leaves that body he enters the spiritual world and is clothed with a
spiritual body. It has already been shown that angels, and men after
death, are in a complete human form, and that the bodies with which they
are clothed are spiritual bodies (n. 73-77 and 453-460); also what the
correspondence is of spiritual things with natural (n. 87-115).

<span class="margnote"><span id="486.">486.</span></span>

All the delights that a man has are the delights of his ruling love, for
he feels nothing to be delightful except what he loves, thus especially
that which he loves above all things. It means the same whether you say
the ruling love or that which is loved above all things. These delights
are various. In general, there are as many as there are ruling loves;
consequently as many as there are men, spirits, and angels; for no one's
ruling love is in every respect like that of another. For this reason no
one has a face exactly like that of any other; for each one's face is an
image of his mind; and in the spiritual world it is an image of his
ruling love. In particular, everyone's delights are of infinite variety.
It is impossible for any one delight to be exactly like another, or the
same as another, either those that follow one after another or those
that exist together at the same time, no one ever being the same as
another. Nevertheless, the particular delights in everyone have
reference to his one love, which is his ruling love, for they compose it
and thus make one with it. Likewise all delights in general have
reference to one universally ruling love, which in heaven is love to the
Lord, and in hell is the love of self.

<span class="margnote"><span id="487.">487.</span></span>

Only from a knowledge of correspondences can it be known what spiritual
delights everyone's natural delights are changed into after death, and
what kind of delights they are. In general, this knowledge teaches that
nothing natural can exist without something spiritual corresponding to
it. In particular it teaches what it is that corresponds, and what kind
of a thing it is. Therefore, any one that has this knowledge can
ascertain and know what his own state after death will be, if he only
knows what his love is, and what its relation is to the universally
ruling loves spoken of above, to which all loves have relation. But it
is impossible for those who are in the love of self to know what their
ruling love is, because they love what is their own, and call their
evils goods; and the falsities that they incline to and by which they
confirm their evils they call truths. And yet if they were willing they
might know it from others who are wise, and who see what they themselves
do not see. This however, is impossible with those who are so enticed by
the love of self that they spurn all teaching of the wise. \[2\] On the
other hand, those who are in heavenly love accept instruction, and as
soon as they are brought into the evils into which they were born, they
see them from truths, for truths make evils manifest. From truth which
is from good any one can see evil and its falsity; but from evil none
can see what is good and true; and for the reason that falsities of evil
are darkness and correspond to darkness; consequently those that are in
falsities from evil are like the blind, not seeing the things that are
in light, but shunning them instead like birds of night. <span
id="fr_271"></span>[487-1](#fn_271.md) But as truths from good are light,
and correspond to light (see above, n. 126-134), so those that are in
truths from good have sight and open eyes, and discern the things that
pertain to light and shade. \[3\] This, too, has been proved to me by
experience. The angels in heaven both see and perceive the evils and
falsities that sometimes arise in themselves, also the evils and
falsities in spirits in the world of spirits that are connected with the
hells, although the spirits themselves are unable to see their own evils
and falsities. Such spirits have no comprehension of the good of
heavenly love, of conscience, of honesty and justice, except such as is
done for the sake of self; neither what it is to be led by the Lord.
They say that such things do not exist, and thus are of no account. All
this has been said to the intent that man may examine himself and may
recognize his love by his delights; and thus so far as he can make it
out from a knowledge of correspondences may know the state of his life
alter death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="488.">488.</span></span>

How the delights of everyone's life are changed after death into things
that correspond can be known from a knowledge of correspondences; but as
that knowledge is not as yet generally known I will try to throw some
light on the subject by certain examples from experience. All who are in
evil and who have established themselves in falsities in opposition to
the truths of the church, especially those that have rejected the Word,
flee from the light of heaven and take refuge in caves that appear at
their openings to be densely dark, also in clefts of rocks, and there
they hide themselves; and this because they have loved falsities and
hated truths; for such caves and clefts of rocks, <span
id="fr_272"></span>[488-1](#fn_272.md) well as darkness, correspond to
falsities, as light corresponds to truths. It is their delight to dwell
in such places, and undelightful to dwell in the open country. \[2\]
Those that have taken delight in insidious and secret plots and in
treacherous machinations do the same thing. They are also in such caves;
and they frequent rooms so dark that they are even unable to see one
another; and they whisper together in the ears in corners. Into this is
the delight of their love changed. Those that have devoted themselves to
the sciences with no other end than to acquire a reputation for
learning, and have not cultivated their rational faculty by their
learning, but have taken delight in the things of memory from a pride in
such things, love sandy places, which they choose in preference to
fields and gardens, because sandy places correspond to such studies.
\[3\] Those that are skilled in the doctrines of their own and other
churches, but have not applied their knowledge to life, choose for
themselves rocky places, and dwell among heaps of stones, shunning
cultivated places because they dislike them. Those that have ascribed
all things to nature, as well as those that have ascribed all things to
their own prudence, and by various arts have raised themselves to honors
and have acquired wealth, in the other life devote themselves to the
study of magic arts, which are abuses of Divine order, and find in these
the chief delight of life. \[4\] Those that have adapted Divine truths
to their own loves, and thereby have falsified them, love urinous things
because these correspond to the delights of such loves. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[488-2](#fn_273.md) Those that have been sordidly
avaricious dwell in cells, and love swinish filth and such stenches as
are exhaled from undigested food in the stomach. \[5\] Those that have
spent their life in mere pleasures and have lived delicately and
indulged their palate and stomach, loving such things as the highest
good that life affords, love in the other life excrementitious things
and privies, in which they find their delight, for the reason that such
pleasures are spiritual filth. Places that are clean and free from filth
they shun, finding them undelightful. \[6\] Those that have taken
delight in adulteries pass their time in brothels, where all things are
vile and filthy; these they love, and chaste homes they shun, falling
into a swoon as soon as they enter them. Nothing is more delightful to
them than to break up marriages. Those that have cherished a spirit of
revenge, and have thereby contracted a savage and cruel nature, love
cadaverous substances, and are in hells of that nature; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="489.">489.</span></span>

But the delights of life of those that have lived in the world in
heavenly love are changed into such corresponding things as exist in the
heavens, which spring from the sun of heaven and its light, that light
presenting to view such things as have what is Divine inwardly concealed
in them. The things that appear in that light affect the interiors of
the minds of the angels, and at the same time the exteriors pertaining
to their bodies; and as the Divine light, which is Divine truth going
forth from the Lord, flows into their minds opened by heavenly love, it
presents outwardly such things as correspond to the delights of their
love. It has already been shown, in the chapter on representatives and
appearances in heaven (n. 170-176), and in the chapter on the wisdom of
the angels (n. 265-275), that the things that appear to the sight in the
heavens correspond to the interiors of angels, or to the things
pertaining to their faith and love and thus to their intelligence and
wisdom. \[2\] Having already begun to establish this point by examples
from experience, to make clearer what has been previously said on the
ground of causes of things I will state briefly some particulars
respecting the heavenly delightful things into which the natural
delights of those that have lived in heavenly love in the world are
changed. Those that have loved Divine truths and the Word from an
interior affection, or from an affection for truth itself, dwell in the
other life in light, in elevated places that appear like mountains,
where they are continually in the light of heaven. They do not know what
darkness is, like that of night in the world; they live also in a vernal
temperature; there are presented to their view fields filled with grain
and vine-yards; in their houses everything glows as if from precious
stones; and looking through the windows is like looking through pure
crystal. Such are the delights of their vision; but these same things
are interiorly delightful because of their being correspondences of
Divine heavenly things, for the truths from the Word which they have
loved correspond to fields of grain, vineyards, precious stones,
windows, and crystals. <span id="fr_274"></span>[489-1](#fn_274.md) \[3\]
Those that have applied the doctrinals of the church which are from the
Word immediately to life, are in the inmost heaven, and surpass all
others in their delights of wisdom. In every object they see what is
Divine; the objects they see indeed with their eyes; but the
corresponding Divine things flow in immediately into their minds and
fill them with a blessedness that affects all their sensations. Thus
before their eyes all things seem to laugh, to play, and to live (see
above, n. 270). \[4\] Those that have loved knowledges and have thereby
cultivated their rational faculty and acquired intelligence, and at the
same time have acknowledged the Divine-these in the other life have
their pleasure in knowledges, and their rational delight changed into
spiritual delight, which is delight in knowing good and truth. They
dwell in gardens where flower beds and grass plots are seen beautifully
arranged, with rows of trees round about, and arbors and walks, the
trees and flowers changing from day to day. The entire view imparts
delight to their minds in a general way, and the variations in detail
continually renew the delight; and as everything there corresponds to
something Divine, and they are skilled in the knowledge of
correspondences, they are constantly filled with new knowledges, and by
these their spiritual rational faculty is perfected. Their delights are
such because gardens, flower beds, grass plots, and trees correspond to
sciences, knowledges, and the resulting intelligence. <span
id="fr_275"></span>[489-2](#fn_275.md) \[5\] Those that have ascribed all
things to the Divine, regarding nature as relatively dead and merely
subservient to things spiritual, and have confirmed themselves in this
view, are in heavenly light; and all things that appear before their
eyes are made by that light transparent, and in their transparency
exhibit innumerable variegations of light, which their internal sight
takes in as it were directly, and from this they perceive interior
delights. The things seen within their houses are as if made of
diamonds, with similar variegations of light. The walls of their houses,
as already said, are like crystal, and thus also transparent; and in
them seemingly flowing forms representative of heavenly things are seen
also with unceasing variety, and this because such transparency
corresponds to the understanding when it has been enlightened by the
Lord and when the shadows that arise from a belief in and love for
natural things have been removed. With reference to such things and
infinite others, it is said by those that have been in heaven that they
have seen what eye has never seen; and from a perception of Divine
things communicated to them by those who are there, that they have heard
what ear has never heard. \[6\] Those that have not acted in secret
ways, but have been willing to have all that they have thought made
known so far as civil life would permit, because their thoughts have all
been in accord with what is honest and just from the Divine-these in
heaven have faces full of light; and in that light every least affection
and thought is seen in the face as in its form, and in their speech and
actions they are like images of their affections. Such, therefore, are
more loved than others. While they are speaking the face becomes a
little obscured; but as soon as they have spoken, the things they have
said become plainly manifest all at once in the face. And as all the
objects that exist round about them correspond to their interiors, these
assume such an appearance that others can clearly perceive what they
represent and signify. Spirits that have found delight in clandestine
acts, when they see such at a distance flee from them, and appear to
themselves to creep away from them like serpents. \[7\] Those that have
regarded adulteries as abominable, and have lived in a chaste love of
marriage, are more than all others in the order and form of heaven, and
therefore in all beauty, and continue unceasingly in the flower of
youth. The delights of their love are ineffable, and increase to
eternity; for all the delights and joys of heaven flow into that love,
because that love descends from the conjunction of the Lord with heaven
and with the church, and in general from the conjunction of good and
truth, which conjunction is heaven itself in general, and with each
angel in particular (see above, n. 366-386). What their outward delights
are it is impossible to describe in human words. These are only a few of
the things that have been told me about the correspondences of the
delights of those that are in heavenly love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="490.">490.</span></span>

All this makes evident that everyone's delights are changed after death
into their correspondences, while the love itself continues to eternity.
This is true of marriage love, of the love of justice, honesty, goodness
and truth, the love of sciences and of knowledges, the love of
intelligence and wisdom, and the rest. From these loves delights flow
like streams from their fountain; and these continue; but when raised
from natural to spiritual delights they are exalted to a higher degree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="491.">491.</span></span>

THE FIRST STATE OF MAN AFTER DEATH. There are three states that man
passes through after death before he enters either heaven or hell. The
first state is the state of his exteriors, the second state the state of
his interiors, and the third his state of preparation. These states man
passes through in the world of spirits. There are some, however, that do
not pass through them; but immediately after death are either taken up
into heaven or cast into hell. Those that are immediately taken up into
heaven are those that have been regenerated in the world and thereby
prepared for heaven. Those that have been so regenerated and prepared
that they need simply to cast off natural impurities with the body are
at once taken up by the angels into heaven. I have seen them so taken up
soon after the hour of death. On the other hand, those that have been
inwardly wicked while maintaining an outward appearance of goodness, and
have thus filled up the measure of their wickedness by artifices, using
goodness as a means of deceiving-these are at once cast into hell. I
have seen some such cast into hell immediately after death, one of the
most deceitful with his head downward and feet upward, and others in
other ways. There are some that immediately after death are cast into
caverns and are thus separated from those that are in the world of
spirits, and are taken out from these and put back again by turns. They
are such as have dealt wickedly with the neighbor under civil pretences.
But all these are few in comparison with those that are retained in the
world of spirits, and are there prepared in accordance with Divine order
for heaven or for hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="492.">492.</span></span>

In regard to the first state, which is the state of the exteriors, it is
that which man comes into immediately after death. Every man, as regards
his spirit, has exteriors and interiors. The exteriors of the spirit are
the means by which it adapts the man's body in the world, especially the
face, speech, and movements, to fellowship with others; while the
interiors of the spirit are what belong to its own will and consequent
thought; and these are rarely manifested in face, speech, and movement.
For man is accustomed from childhood to maintain a semblance of
friendship, benevolence, and sincerity, and to conceal the thoughts of
his own will, thereby living from habit a moral and civil life in
externals, whatever he may be internally. As a result of this habit man
scarcely knows what his interiors are, and gives little thought to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="493.">493.</span></span>

The first state of man after death resembles his state in the world, for
he is then likewise in externals, having a like face, like speech, and a
like disposition, thus a like moral and civil life; and in consequence
he is made aware that he is not still in the world only by giving
attention to what he encounters, and from his having been told by the
angels when he was resuscitated that he had become a spirit(n. 450).
Thus is one life continued into the other, and death is merely
transition.

<span class="margnote"><span id="494.">494.</span></span>

The state of man's spirit that immediately follows his life in the world
being such, he is then recognized by his friends and by those he had
known in the world; for this is something that spirits perceive not only
from one's face and speech but also from the sphere of his life when
they draw near. Whenever any one in the other life thinks about another
he brings his face before him in thought, and at the same time many
things of his life; and when he does this the other becomes present, as
if he had been sent for or called. This is so in the spiritual world
because thoughts there are shared, and there is no such space there as
in the natural world (see above, n. 191-199). So all, as soon as they
enter the other life, are recognized by their friends, their relatives,
and those in any way known to them; and they talk with one another, and
afterward associate in accordance with their friendships in the world. I
have often heard that those that have come from the world were rejoiced
at seeing their friends again, and that their friends in turn were
rejoiced that they had come. Very commonly husband and wife come
together and congratulate each other, and continue together, and this
for a longer or shorter time according to their delight in living
together in the world. But if they had not been united by a true
marriage love, which is a conjunction of minds by heavenly love, after
remaining together for a while they separate. Or if their minds had been
discordant and were inwardly adverse, they break forth into open enmity,
and sometimes into combat; nevertheless they are not separated until
they enter the second state, which will be treated of presently.

<span class="margnote"><span id="495.">495.</span></span>

As the life of spirits recently from the world is not unlike their life
in the natural world and as they know nothing about their state of life
after death and nothing about heaven and hell except what they have
learned from the sense of the letter of the Word and preaching from it,
they are at first surprised to find themselves in a body and in every
sense that they had in the world, and seeing like things; and they
become eager to know what heaven is, what hell is, and where they are.
Therefore their friends tell them about the conditions of eternal life,
and take them about to various places and into various companies, and
sometimes into cities, and into gardens and parks, showing them chiefly
such magnificent things as delight the externals in which they are. They
are then brought in turn into those notions about the state of their
soul after death, and about heaven and hell, that they had entertained
in the life of the body, even until they feel indignant at their total
ignorance of such things, and at the ignorance of the church also.
Nearly all are anxious to know whether they will get to heaven. Most of
them believe that they will, because of their having lived in the world
a moral and civil life, never considering that the bad and the good live
a like life outwardly, alike doing good to others, attending public
worship, hearing sermons, and praying; and wholly ignorant that external
deeds and external acts of worship are of no avail, but only the
internals from which the externals proceed. There is hardly one out of
thousands who knows what internals are, and that it is in them that man
must find heaven and the church. Still less is it known that outward
acts are such as the intentions and thoughts are, and the love and faith
in these from which they spring. And even when taught they fail to
comprehend that thinking and willing are of any avail, but only speaking
and acting. Such for the most part are those that go at this day from
the Christian world into the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="496.">496.</span></span>

Such, however, are explored by good spirits to discover what they are,
and this in various ways; since in this the first state the evil equally
with the good utter truths and do good acts, and for the reason
mentioned above, that like the good they have lived morally in outward
respects, since they have lived under governments, and subject to laws,
and have thereby acquired a reputation for justice and honesty, and have
gained favor, and thus been raised to honors, and have acquired wealth.
But evil spirits are distinguished from good spirits chiefly by this,
that the evil give eager attention to whatever is said about external
things, and but little attention to what is said about internal things,
which are the truths and goods of the church and of heaven. These they
listen to, but not with attention and joy. The two classes are also
distinguished by their turning repeatedly in specific directions, and
following, when left to themselves, the paths that lead in those
directions. From such turning to certain quarters and going in certain
ways it is known by what love they are led.

<span class="margnote"><span id="497.">497.</span></span>

All spirits that arrive from the world are connected with some society
in heaven or some society in hell, and yet only as regards their
interiors; and so long as they are in exteriors their interiors are
manifested to no one, for externals cover and conceal internals,
especially in the case of those who are in interior evil. But
afterwards, when they come into the second state, their evils become
manifest, because their interiors are then opened and their exteriors
laid asleep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="498.">498.</span></span>

This first state of man after death continues with some for days, with
some for months, and with some for a year; but seldom with any one
beyond a year; for a shorter or longer time with each one according to
the agreement or disagreement of his interiors with his exteriors. For
with everyone the exteriors and interior must make one and correspond.
In the spiritual world no one is permitted to think and will in one way
and speak and act in another. Everyone there must be an image of his own
affection or his own love, and therefore such as he is inwardly such he
must be outwardly; and for this reason a spirit's exteriors are first
disclosed and reduced to order that they may serve the interiors as a
corresponding plane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="499.">499.</span></span>

THE SECOND STATE OF MAN AFTER DEATH. The second state of man after death
is called the state of his interiors, because he is then let into the
interiors of his mind, that is, of his will and thought; while his
exteriors, which he has been in during his first state, are laid asleep.
Whoever gives any thought to man's life and speech and action can see
that everyone has exteriors and interiors, that is, exterior and
interior thoughts and intentions. This is shown by the fact that in
civil life one thinks about others in accordance with what he has heard
and learned of them by report or conversation; but he does not talk with
them in accordance with his thought; and if they are evil he
nevertheless treats them with civility. That this is so is seen
especially in the case of pretenders and flatterers, who speak and act
in one way and think and will in a wholly different way; also in the
case of hypocrites, who talk about God and heaven and the salvation of
souls and the truths of the church and their country's good and their
neighbor as if from faith and love, although in heart they believe
otherwise and love themselves alone. \[2\] All this makes clear that
there are two kinds of thought, one exterior and the other interior; and
that there are those who speak from exterior thought, while from their
interior thought they have other sentiments, and that these two kinds of
thought are kept separate, since the interior is carefully prevented
from flowing into the exterior and becoming manifest in any way. By
creation man is so formed as to have his interior and exterior thought
make one by correspondence; and these do make one in those that are in
good, for such both think and speak what is good only. But in those that
are in evil interior and exterior thought do not make one, for such
think what is evil and say what is good. With such there is an inversion
of order, for good with them is on the outside and evil within; and in
consequence evil has dominion over good, and subjects it to itself as a
servant, that it may serve it as a means for gaining its ends, which are
of the same nature as their love. With such an end contained in the good
that they seek and do, their good is evidently not good, but is infected
with evil, however good it may appear in outward form to those not
acquainted with their interiors. \[3\] It is not so with those that are
in good. With such order is not inverted; but good from interior thought
flows into exterior thought, and thus into word and act. Into this order
man was created; and in heaven, and in the light of heaven, his
interiors are in this order. And as the light of heaven is the Divine
truth that goes forth from the Lord, and consequently is the Lord in
heaven (n. 126-140), therefore such are led by the Lord. All this has
been said to make known that every man has interior thought and exterior
thought, and that these are distinct from each other. The term thought
includes also the will, for thought is from the will, and thought apart
from willing is impossible. All this makes clear what is meant by the
state of man's exteriors and the state of his interiors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="500.">500.</span></span>

When will and thought are mentioned will includes affection and love,
and all the delight and pleasure that spring from affection and love,
since all these relate to the will as to their subject; for what a man
wills he loves and feels to be delightful or pleasurable; and on the
other hand, what a man loves and feels to be delightful or pleasurable,
that he wills. But by thought is then meant everything by which
affection or love is confirmed, for thought is simply the will's form,
or that whereby what is willed may appear in light. This form is made
apparent through various rational analyses, which have their origin in
the spiritual world and belong properly to the spirit of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[454-1](hh10.htm#fr_259.md) Man is the being into
whom are brought together all things of Divine order, and by creation he
is Divine order in form (n. 4219, 4222, 4223, 4523, 4524, 5114, 6013,
6057, 6605, 6626, 9706, 10156, 10472). So far as a man lives in
accordance with Divine order he is seen in the other life as a man,
complete and beautiful (n. 4839, 6605, 6626).

<span id="fn_260"></span>[455-1](hh10.htm#fr_260.md) The truths of doctrine
of the church derived from the Word must be the starting-point, and
these must first be acknowledged, and afterwards it is permissible to
consult knowledges (n. 6047). Thus it is permissible for those that are
in an affirmative state towards the truths of faith to confirm them
rationally by knowledges, but it is not permissible for those who are in
a negative state (n. 2568, 2588, 4760, 6047). It is in accordance with
Divine order to enter rationally from spiritual truths into knowledges,
which are natural truths, but not to enter from the latter into the
former, because spiritual influx into natural things is possible, but
not natural or physical influx into spiritual things (n. 3219, 5119,
5259, 5427, 5428, 5478, 6322, 9109, 9110).

<span id="fn_261"></span>[456-1](hh10.htm#fr_261.md) Profanation is the
mixing of good and evil and of truth and falsity in man (n. 6348). Only
those can profane truth and good, or the holy things of the Word and the
church, who first acknowledge them, and still more who live according to
them, and who afterwards recede from the belief and reject it, and live
for themselves and the world (n. 593, 1008, 1010, 1059, 3398, 3399,
3898, 4289, 4601, 10284, 10287). If man after repentance of heart
relapses to former evils he profanes, and his latter state is then worse
than his former (n. 8394). Those that have not acknowledged holy things,
still less those that have no knowledge of them, cannot profane them (n.
1008, 1010, 1059, 9188, 10284). The heathen who are out of the church
and do not have the Word cannot profane it (n. 1327, 1328, 2051, 2284).
On this account interior truths were not disclosed to the Jews, for if
they had been disclosed and acknowledged that people would have profaned
them (n. 3398, 4289, 6963). The lot of profaners in the other life is
the worst of all, because not only the good and truth they have
acknowledged, but also their evil and falsity remain, and as these cling
together, the life is rent asunder (n. 571, 582, 6348). Consequently
most careful provision is made by the Lord to prevent profanation (n.
2426, 10287).

<span id="fn_262"></span>[457-1](hh10.htm#fr_262.md) The face is so formed
as to correspond with the interiors (n. 4791-4805, 5695). The
correspondence of the face and its expressions with the affections of
the mind (n. 1568, 2988, 2989, 3631, 4796, 4797, 4800, 5165, 5168, 5695,
9306). With the angels of heaven the face makes one with the interiors
that belong to the mind (n. 4796-4799, 5695, 8250). Therefore in the
Word the face signifies the interiors that belong to the mind, that is,
to the affection and thought (n. 1999, 2434, 3527, 4066, 4796, 5102,
9306, 9546). In what manner the influx from the brain into the face has
been changed in process of time and with it the face itself as regards
its correspondence with the interiors (n. 4326, 8250).

<span id="fn_263"></span>[463-1](hh10.htm#fr_263.md) A good man, spirit, or
angel, is his own good and his own truth, that is, he is wholly such as
his good and truth are (n. 10298, 10367). This is because good is what
makes the will and truth the understanding; and the will and
understanding make everything of life in man, spirit, or angel (n. 3332,
3623, 6065). It is the same thing to say that a man, spirit, or angel is
his own love (n. 6872, 10177, 10284).

<span id="fn_264"></span>[463-2](hh10.htm#fr_264.md) Man has two memories
an outer and an inner, or a natural and a spiritual memory (n.
2469-2494). Man does not know that he has an inner memory (n. 2470,
2471). How far the inner memory surpasses the outer (n. 2473). The
things contained in the outer memory are in the light of the world, but
the things contained in the inner are in the light of heaven (n. 5212).
It is from the inner memory that man is able to think and speak
intellectually and rationally (n. 9394). All things and each thing that
a man has thought, spoken, and done, and that he has seen and heard, are
inscribed on the inner memory (n. 2474, 7398). That memory is the book
of his life (n. 2474, 9386, 9841, 10505). In the inner memory are the
truths that have been made truths of faith, and the goods that have been
made goods of love (n. 5212, 8067). Those things that have become
matters of habit and have come to be things of the life, and have thus
disappeared from the outer memory, are in the inner memory (n. 9394,
9723, 9841). Spirits and angels speak from the inner memory and
consequently have a universal language (n. 2472, 2476, 2490, 2493). The
languages of the world belong to the outer memory (n. 2472, 2476).

<span id="fn_265"></span>[473-1](hh10.htm#fr_265.md) As all things that
exist according to order in the universe have relation to good and
truth, so in man all things have relation to will and understanding (n.
803, 10122). For the reason that the will is a recipient of good and the
understanding a recipient of truth (n. 3332, 3623, 5232, 6065, 6125,
7503, 9300, 9995). It amounts to the same whether you say truth or
faith, for faith belongs to truth and truth belongs to faith; and it
amounts to the same whether you say good or love for love belongs to
good and good belongs to love (n. 4353, 4997, 7179, 10122, 10367). From
this it follows that the understanding is a recipient of faith, and the
will a recipient of love (n. 7179, 10122, 10367). And since the
understanding of man is capable of receiving faith in God and the will
is capable of receiving love to God, man is capable of being conjoined
with God in faith and love, and he that is capable of being conjoined
with God in love and faith can never die (n. 4525, 6323, 9231).

<span id="fn_266"></span>[474-1](hh10.htm#fr_266.md) The will of man is the
very being \[esse\] of his life, because it is the receptacle of love or
good, and the understanding is the outgo \[existere\] of life therefrom,
because it is the receptacle of faith or truth (n. 3619, 5002, 9282).
Thus the life of the will is the chief life of man, and the life of the
understanding proceeds therefrom (n. 585, 590, 3619, 7342, 8885, 9282,
10076, 10109, 10110). In the same way as light proceeds from fire or
flame (n. 6032, 6314). From this it follows that man is man by virtue of
his will and his understanding therefrom (n. 8911, 9069, 9071, 10076,
10109, 10110). Every man is loved and esteemed by others in accordance
with the good of his will and of his understanding therefrom, for he
that wills well and understands well is loved and esteemed; and he that
understands well and does not will well is set aside and despised (n.
8911, 10076). After death man continues to be such as his will is, and
his understanding therefrom (n, 9069, 9071, 9386, 10153). Consequently
after death man continues to be such as his love is, and his faith
therefrom; and whatever belongs to his faith and not also to his love
then vanishes, because it is not in the man, thus not of the man (n.
553, 2364, 10153).

<span id="fn_267"></span>[475-1](hh10.htm#fr_267.md) Interior things flow
in successively into exterior things even down to the extreme or
outmost, and there they come forth and have permanent existence (n. 634,
6451, 6465, 9215, 9216). They not only flow in, but in the outmost they
form the simultaneous, in what order (n. 5897, 6451, 8603, 10099).
Thereby all interior things are held together in connection, and have
permanent existence (n. 9828). Deeds or works are the outmosts which
contain the interiors (n. 10331). Therefore being recompensed and judged
according to deeds and works is being recompensed and judged in
accordance with all things of one's love and faith, or of his will and
thought because these are the interiors contained in deeds and works (n.
3147, 3934, 6073, 8911, 10331, 10332).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[479-1](hh10.htm#fr_268.md) A "way," a "path," a
"road," a "street," and a "broad street," signify truths leading to
good, or falsities leading to evil (n. 627, 2333, 10422). "To sweep \[or
prepare\] a way" means to prepare for the reception of truths (n. 3142).
"To make known the way" means, in respect to the Lord, to instruct in
truths that lead to good (n. 10565).

<span id="fn_269"></span>[481-1](hh10.htm#fr_269.md) In the highest sense,
the Lord is the neighbor, because He is to be loved above all things;
but loving the Lord is loving what is from Him, because He Himself is in
everything that is from Him, thus it is loving what is good and true (n.
2425, 3419, 6706, 6711, 6819, 6823, 8123). Loving what is good and true
which is from the Lord is living in accordance with good and truth, and
this is loving the Lord (n. 10143, 10153, 10310, 10336, 10578, 10645).
Every man and every society, also one's country and the church, and in a
universal sense the Lord's kingdom, are the neighbor, and doing good to
these from a love of good in accord with their state is loving the
neighbor; that is, their good that should be consulted is the neighbor
(n. 6818-6824, 8123). Moral good also, which is honesty, and civil good,
which is justice, are the neighbor; and to act honestly and justly from
the love of honesty and justice is loving the neighbor (n. 2915, 4730,
8120-8123). Thus charity towards the neighbor extends to all things of
the life of man, and loving the neighbor is doing what is good and just,
and acting honestly from the heart, in every function and in every work
(n. 2417, 8121, 8124). The doctrine in the Ancient Church was the
doctrine of charity, and from that they had wisdom (n. 2385, 2417, 3419,
3420, 4844, 6628).

<span id="fn_270"></span>[484-1](hh10.htm#fr_270.md) Man's own consists in
loving himself more than God, and the world more than heaven, and in
making nothing of his neighbor in comparison with himself, thus it
consists in the love of self and of the world (n. 694, 731, 4317). Man
is born into this own, and it is dense evil (n. 210, 215, 731, 874-876,
987, 1047, 2307, 2308, 3518, 3701, 3812, 8480, 8550, 10283, 10284,
10286, 10732). From what is man's own not only every evil but also every
falsity is derived (n. 1047, 10283, 10284, 10286). The evils that are
from what is man's own are contempt for others, enmity, hatred, revenge,
cruelty, deceit (n. 6667, 7370, 7373, 7374, 9348, 10038, 10742). So far
as what is man's own rules, the good of love and the truth of faith are
either rejected or suffocated or perverted (n. 2041, 7491, 7492, 7643,
8487, 10455, 10742). What is man's own is hell in him (n. 694, 8480).
The good that man does from what is his own is not good, but in itself
is evil (n. 8480).

<span id="fn_271"></span>[487-1](hh10.htm#fr_271.md) From correspondence
"darkness" in the Word signifies falsities, and "thick darkness" the
falsities of evil (n. 1839, 1860, 7688, 7711). To the evil the light of
heaven is thick darkness (n. 1861, 6832, 8197). Those that are in the
hells are said to be in darkness because they are in falsities of evil;
of such (n. 3340, 4418, 4531). In the Word "the blind" signify those
that are in falsities and are not willing to be taught (n. 2383, 6990).

<span id="fn_272"></span>[488-1](hh10.htm#fr_272.md) In the word a "hole"
or "the cleft of a rock" signifies obscurity and falsity of faith (n.
10582). Because a "rock" signifies faith from the Lord (n. 8581, 10580);
and a "stone" the truth of faith (n. 114, 643, 1298, 3720, 6426, 8609,
10376).

<span id="fn_273"></span>[488-2](hh10.htm#fr_273.md) The defilements of
truth correspond to urine (n. 5390).

<span id="fn_274"></span>[489-1](hh10.htm#fr_274.md) In the Word a "field
of corn" signifies a state of the reception and growth of truth from
good (n. 9294). "Standing corn" signifies truth in conception (n. 9146),
"Vineyards" signify the spiritual church and the truths of that church
(n. 1069, 9139). "Precious stones" signify the truths of heaven and of
the church transparent from good (n. 114, 9863, 9865, 9868, 9873, 9905).
A "window" signifies the intellectual faculty which pertains to the
internal sight (n. 655, 658, 3391).

<span id="fn_275"></span>[489-2](hh10.htm#fr_275.md) A "garden," a "grove,"
and a "park," signify intelligence (n. 100, 108, 3220), This is why the
ancients celebrated holy worship in groves (n. 2722, 4552). "Flowers"
and "flower beds" signify truths learned and knowledges (n. 9553).
"Herbs," "grasses," and "grass plots" signify truths learned (n. 7571).
"Trees" signify perception and knowledges (n. 103, 2163, 2682, 2722,
2972, 7692).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 501-550](hh11.md)
