[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hh11)  [Next](hh13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877854769/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Heaven and Hell*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by John C. Ager
\[1900\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Heaven and Hell

<span class="margnote"><span id="551.">551.</span></span>

ALL WHO ARE IN THE HELLS ARE IN EVILS AND IN FALSITIES THEREFROM DERIVED
FROM THE LOVES OF SELF AND OF THE WORLD. All who are in the hells are in
evils and in falsities therefrom, and no one there is in evils and at
the same time in truths. In the world evil men for the most part have
some knowledge of spiritual truths, which are the truths of the church,
having been taught them from childhood and later by preaching and by
reading the Word; and afterwards they have talked about them. Some have
even led others to believe that they are Christians at heart because of
their knowing how to talk with pretended affection in harmony with the
truth, also how to act uprightly as if from spiritual faith. But those
of this class whose interior thoughts have been hostile to these truths,
and who have refrained from doing the evils that were in harmony with
their thoughts only because of the civil laws, or with a view to
reputation, honors, and gain, are all of them evil in heart, and are in
truths and goods not in respect to their spirit but only in respect to
their body; and consequently, when their externals are taken away from
them in the other life, and their internals which pertain to their
spirit are revealed, they are wholly in evils and falsities, and not at
all in truths and goods; and it is thus made clear that truths and goods
resided only in their memory merely as things known about, and that they
brought them forth therefrom when talking, putting on a semblance of
good seemingly from spiritual love and faith. When such are let into
their internals and thus into their evils they are no longer able to
speak what is true, but only what is false; since they speak from evils;
for to speak what is true from evils is then impossible, since the
spirit is nothing but his own evil, and from evil what is false goes
forth. Every evil spirit is reduced to this state before he is cast into
hell (see above, n. 499-512). This is called being vastated in respect
to truths and goods. <span id="fr_283"></span>[551-1](#fn_283.md) Vastation
is simply being let into one's internals, that is, into what is the
spirit's own, or into the spirit itself (see above, n. 425).

<span class="margnote"><span id="552.">552.</span></span>

When man after death comes into this state he is no longer a man-spirit,
as he was in his first state (of which above, n. 491-498), but is truly
a spirit; for he is truly a spirit who has a face and body that
correspond to his internals which pertain to his mind, that is, has an
external form that is a type or effigy of his internals. A spirit is
such after he has passed through the first and second states spoken of
above; consequently when he is looked upon his character is at once
known, not only from his face and from his body, but also from his
speech and movements; and as he is then in himself he can be nowhere
else than where his like are. \[2\] For in the spiritual world there is
a complete sharing of affections and their thoughts, and in consequence
a spirit is conveyed to his like as if of himself, since it is done from
his affection and its delight. In fact, he turns himself in that
direction; for thus he inhales his own life or draws his breath freely,
which he cannot do when he turns another way. It must be understood that
this sharing with others in the spiritual world is effected in
accordance with the turning of the face, and that each one has
constantly before his face those who are in a love like his own, and
this in every turning of the body (see above, n. 151) \[3\] In
consequence of this all infernal spirits turn themselves away from the
Lord toward the densely dark body and the dark body that are there in
place of the sun and moon of this world, while all the angels of heaven
turn themselves to the Lord as the sun of heaven and as the moon of
heaven (see above, n. 123, 143, 144, 151). From all this it is clear
that all who are in the hells are in evils and in falsities therefrom;
also that they are turned to their own loves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="553.">553.</span></span>

All spirits in the hells, when seen in any light of heaven, appear in
the form of their evil; for everyone there is an image of his evil,
since his interiors and his exteriors act as a one, the interiors making
themselves visible in the exteriors, which are the face, body, speech
and movements; thus the character of the spirit is known as soon as he
is seen. In general evil spirits are forms of contempt of others and of
menaces against those who do not pay them respect; they are forms of
hatreds of various kinds, also of various kinds of revenge. Fierceness
and cruelty from their interiors show through these forms. But when they
are commended, venerated, and worshiped by others their faces are
restrained and take on an expression of gladness from delight. \[2\] It
is impossible to describe in a few words how all these forms appear, for
no one is like another, although there is a general likeness among those
who are in the same evil, and thus in the same infernal society, from
which, as from a plane of derivation, the faces of all are seen to have
a certain resemblance. In general their faces are hideous, and void of
life like those of corpses; the faces of some are black, others fiery
like torches, others disfigured with pimples, warts, and ulcers; some
seem to have no face, but in its stead something hairy or bony; and with
some only the teeth are seen; their bodies also are monstrous; and their
speech is like the speech of anger or of hatred or of revenge; for what
everyone speaks is from his falsity, while his tone is from his evil. In
a word, they are all images of their own hell. \[3\] I have not been
permitted to see what the form of hell itself in general is; I have only
been told that as the entire heaven in one complex reflects a single man
(n. 59-67), so the entire hell in one complex reflects a single devil,
and might be exhibited in an image of a single devil (see above, n.
544). But the forms of particular hells or infernal societies I have
often been permitted to see; for at their entrances, which are called
the gates of hell, a monster commonly appears that represents in a
general way the form of those within. The fierce passions of those who
dwell there are represented at the same time in horrible and hideous
ways that I forbear to describe. \[4\] But it must be understood that
this is the way infernal spirits appear in the light of heaven, while
among themselves they appear as men. This is of the Lord's mercy, that
they may not appear as loathsome to one another as they appear before
the angels. But this appearance is a fallacy, for as soon as any ray of
light from heaven is let in, their human forms appear changed into
monstrous forms, such as they are in themselves (as has been described
above). For in the light of heaven everything appears as it is in
itself. For this reason they shun the light of heaven and cast
themselves down into their own light, which is like that from lighted
coals, and in some cases like that from burning sulphur; but this light
also is turned into mere thick darkness when any light from heaven flows
in upon it. This is why the hells are said to be in thick darkness and
in darkness; and why "thick darkness" and "darkness" signify falsities
derived from evil, such as are in hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="554.">554.</span></span>

From an inspection of these monstrous forms of spirits in the hells
(which, as I have said, are all forms of contempt of others and of
menaces against those who do not pay them honor and respect, also forms
of hatred and revenge against those who do not favor them), it became
evident that in general they were all forms of the love of self and the
love of the world; and that the evils of which these are the specific
forms have their origin in these two loves. Moreover, I have been told
from heaven, and it has been proved to me by much experience, that these
two loves, the love of self and the love of the world, rule in the hells
and constitute the hells as love to the Lord and love towards the
neighbor rule in the heavens and constitute the heavens; also that the
two loves that are the loves of hell and the two loves that are the
loves of heaven are diametrically opposite to each other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="555.">555.</span></span>

At first I wondered how it is that love of self and love of the world
could be so diabolical, and how those who are in these loves could be
such monsters in appearance; for in the world not much thought is given
to love of self, but only to that elated state of mind in external
matters which is called haughtiness, and that alone, being so apparent
to the sight, is regarded as love of self. Furthermore, love of self,
when it is not so displayed, is believed in the world to be the very
fire of life by which man is stimulated to seek employment and to
perform uses, and if he found no honor or glory in these his mind would
grow torpid. It is asked, Who has ever done any worthy, useful, and
distinguished deed except for the sake of being praised and honored by
others, or regarded with esteem and honor by others? And can this be
from any other source than the fire of love for glory and honor,
consequently for self. For this reason, it is unknown in the world that
love of self, regarded in itself, is the love that rules in hell and
constitutes hell in man. This being so I will first describe what the
love of self is, and then will show that all evils and their falsities
spring from that love as their fountain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="556.">556.</span></span>

The love of self is wishing well to oneself alone, and to others only
for the sake of self, even to the church, one's country, or any human
society. It consists also in doing good to all these solely for the sake
of one's own reputation, honor, and glory; and unless these are seen in
the uses he performs in behalf of others he says in his heart, How does
it concern me? Why should I do this? What shall I get from it? and
therefore he does not do it. Evidently, then, he who is in the love of
self does not love the church or his country or society, nor any use,
but himself alone. His delight is solely the delight of the love of
self; and as the delight that comes forth from his love is what
constitutes the life of man, his life is a life of self; and a life of
self is a life from what is man's own, and what is man's own, regarded
in itself, is nothing but evil. He who loves himself loves also those
who belong to him, that is, in particular, his children and
grandchildren, and in general, all who are at one with him, whom he
calls his. To love these is to love himself, for he regards them as it
were in himself, and himself in them. Among those whom he calls his are
also all who commend, honor, and pay their court to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="557.">557.</span></span>

What love of self is can be seen by comparing it with heavenly love.
Heavenly love consists in loving uses for the sake of uses, or goods for
the sake of goods, which are done by man in behalf of the church, his
country, human society, and a fellow-citizen; for this is loving God and
loving the neighbor, since all uses and all goods are from God, and are
the neighbor who is to be loved. But he who loves these for the sake of
himself loves them merely as servants, because they are serviceable to
him; consequently it is the will of one who is in self-love that the
church, his country, human societies, and his fellow citizens, should
serve him, and not he them, for he places himself above them and places
them beneath himself. Therefore so far as any one is in love of self he
separates himself from heaven, because he separates himself from
heavenly love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="558.">558.</span></span>

\[a.\] Furthermore, so far as any one is in heavenly love, which
consists in loving uses and goods and being moved by delight of heart
when doing them for the sake of the church, country, human society, and
ones fellow-citizens, he is so far led by the Lord, because that love is
the love in which the Lord is, and which is from Him. But so far as any
one is in the love of self, which consists in performing uses and goods
for the sake of himself, so far he is led by himself; and so far as any
one is led by himself he is not led by the Lord. And from this it also
follows that so far as any one loves himself he separates himself from
the Divine, thus also from heaven. To be led by one's self is to be led
by what is one's own; and what is man's own is nothing but evil; for
man's inherited evil consists in loving self more than God, and the
world more than heaven. <span id="fr_284"></span>[558-1](#fn_284.md)
Whenever man looks to himself in the good that he does he is let into
what is his own, that is, into his inherited evils for he then looks
from good to himself and from himself to good, and therefore he presents
an image of himself in his good, and not an image of the Divine. That
this is so has also been proved to me by experience. There are evil
spirits whose dwelling places are in the middle quarter between the
north and the west, beneath the heavens, who are skilled in the art of
leading well-disposed spirits into their nature \[proprium\] and thus
into evils of various kinds. This they do by leading them into thoughts
about themselves, either openly by praises and honors, or secretly by
directing their affections to themselves; and so far as this is done
they turn the faces of the well-disposed spirits away from heaven, and
to the same extent they obscure their understanding and call forth evils
from what is their own.  <span id="fr_285"></span>[558-2](#fn_285.md) Man's
own, which he derives by inheritance from his parents, is nothing but
dense evil (n. 210, 215, 731, 876, 987, 1047, 2307, 2308, 3518, 3701,
3812, 8480, 8550, 10283, 10284, 10286, 10731). Man's own is loving self
more than God, and the world more than heaven, and making nothing of
one's neighbor in comparison with oneself, except for the sake of self,
that is one's own self; thus it consists in love of self and of the
world (n. 694, 731, 4317, 5660). All evils flow from the love of self
and the love of the world when these predominate (n. 1307, 1308, 1321,
1594, 1691, 3413, 7255, 7376, 7488, 7489, 8318, 9335, 9348, 10038,
10742). These evils are contempt of others, enmity, hatred, revenge,
cruelty, deceit (n. 6667, 7370, 7374, 9348, 10038, 10742). From these
evils all falsity flows (n. 1047, 10283, 10284, 10286). 558. \[b.\] That
the love of self is the opposite of love to the neighbor can be seen
from the origin and essence of both. The love of the neighbor of one who
is in the love of self begins with oneself, for he claims that everyone
is neighbor to himself; and it goes forth from him as its center to all
who make one with him, diminishing in accordance with the degree of
their conjunction with him by love. All outside of this circle are
regarded as of no account; and those who are opposed to those in the
circle and to their evils are accounted as enemies, whatever their
character may be, however wise, upright, honest, or just. But spiritual
love to the neighbor begins with the Lord, and goes forth from Him as
its center to all who are conjoined to Him by love and faith, going
forth in accordance with the quality of their love and faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="559.">559.</span></span>

Again, love of self is such that so far as the reins are given it, that
is, so far as external bonds are removed, which are fears of the law and
its penalties, and of the loss of reputation, honor, gain, employment,
and life, so far it rushes on until it finally longs to rule not only
over the entire world but also over the entire heaven, and over the
Divine Himself, knowing no limit or end. This propensity lurks hidden in
everyone who is in love of self, although it is not manifest to the
world, where it is held in check by such bonds as have been mentioned.
Everyone can see examples of this in potentates and kings who are
subject to no such restraints and bonds, but rush on and subjugate
provinces and kingdoms so far as they are successful, and aspire to
power and glory without limit; and still more strikingly in the Babylon
of this day, which has extended its dominion into heaven, and has
transferred to itself all the Divine power of the Lord, and continually
lusts for more. That such men, when they have entered after death the
other life, are directly opposed to the Divine and to heaven, and are on
the side of hell, can be seen in the little work on The Last Judgment
and the Destruction of Babylon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="560.">560.</span></span>

Picture to yourself a society of such persons, all of whom love
themselves alone and love others only so far as they make one with
themselves, and you will see that their love is precisely like the love
of thieves for each other, who embrace and call one another friends so
long as they are acting together; but when they cease to act together
and discard their subordination to one another, they rise up against and
murder one another. When the interiors or the minds of such are explored
they will be seen to be full of bitter hatred one against another, and
at heart will laugh at all justice and honesty, and likewise at the
Divine, which they reject as of no account. This is still more evident
in the societies of such in the hells treated of below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="561.">561.</span></span>

The interiors pertaining to the thoughts and affections of those who
love themselves above all things are turned towards themselves and the
world, and thus are turned away from the Lord and from heaven; and
consequently they are obsessed with evils of every kind, and the Divine
cannot flow in; for if it does flow in it is instantly submerged in
thoughts of self, and is defiled, and is also mingled with the evils
that flow from what is their own. This is why all such in the other life
look backwards away from the Lord, and towards the densely dark body
that is there in the place of the sun of the world, and is diametrically
opposite to the sun of heaven, which is the Lord (see above, n. 123).
"Thick darkness" signifies evil, and the "sun of the world" the love of
self. <span id="fr_286"></span>[561-1](#fn_286.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="562.">562.</span></span>

The evils of those who are in the love of self are, in general, contempt
of others, envy, enmity against all who do not favor them, and
consequent hostility, hatred of various kinds, revenge, cunning, deceit,
unmercifulness, and cruelty; and in respect to religious matters there
is not merely a contempt for the Divine and for Divine things, which are
the truths and goods of the church, but also hostility to them. When man
becomes a spirit this hostility is turned into hatred; and then he not
only cannot endure to hear these truths and goods mentioned, he even
burns with hatred against all who acknowledge and worship the Divine. I
once talked with a certain spirit who in the world had been a man in
authority, and had loved self to an unusual degree; and when he simply
heard some one mention the Divine, and especially when he heard him
mention the Lord, he was so excited by hatred arising from anger as to
burn with the desire to kill; and when the reins of his love were
loosened he wished to be the devil himself, that from his love of self
he might continually infest heaven. This is the desire also of some of
the Papist religion when they perceive in the other life that the Lord
has all power and they have none.

<span class="margnote"><span id="563.">563.</span></span>

Certain spirits were seen by me in the western quarter towards the
south, who said that they had been in positions of great dignity in the
world, and that they deserved to be more highly esteemed than others and
to rule over others. Their interior character was explored by angels,
and it was found that in their offices in the world they had not looked
to uses but to themselves, and thus that they had set themselves before
uses. But as they were very eager and importunate to be set over others
they were allowed to associate with those who were consulting about
matters of great importance; but it was perceived that they were unable
to give any thought to the business under discussion, or to see matters
as they are in themselves, or to speak with reference to the use of the
thing, but were able to speak only with reference to self, and that they
wished to act from what is pleasing on the ground of favor. They were
therefore dismissed from that duty, and left to seek employment for
themselves elsewhere. Therefore they went further into the western
quarter, where they were received here and there, but everywhere were
told that they thought only of themselves, and of no business except
with reference to self, and for this reason were stupid and like merely
sensual corporeal spirits. On this account wheresoever they went they
were sent away. Some time afterwards they were seen reduced to a
destitute state and asking alms. Thus it was made clear that those who
are in the love of self, however from the fire of that love they may
seem to speak in the world wisely, speak merely from the memory, and not
from any rational light. Therefore in the other life, when they are no
longer permitted to bring forth the things of the natural memory, they
are more stupid than others, and for the reason that they are separated
from the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="564.">564.</span></span>

There are two kinds of dominion, one of love towards the neighbor and
the other of love of self. These two dominions in their essence are
direct opposites. One who rules from love towards the neighbor wills
good to all, and loves nothing so much as uses, that is, serving others;
which is willing good to others and performing uses, either to the
church, or to the country, or to society, or to a fellow citizen. This
is his love and the delight of his heart. Moreover, so far as he is
exalted to dignities above others he rejoices, not for the sake of the
dignities but for the sake of the uses he is then able to perform in
greater abundance and of a higher order. Such dominion exists in the
heavens. \[2\] But one who rules from the love of self wills good to no
one except himself; the uses he performs are for the sake of his own
honor and glory, which to him are the only uses; his end in serving
others is that he may himself be served, honored, and permitted to rule;
he seeks dignities not for the sake of the good offices he may render to
his country and the church, but that he may gain eminence and glory and
thereby the delight of his heart. \[3\] Moreover this love of dominion
continues with everyone after his life in the world. Those that have
ruled from love towards the neighbor are entrusted with authority in the
heavens; but then it is not they who rule, but the uses which they love;
and when uses rule the Lord rules. But those who have ruled while in the
world are in hell, and are there vile slaves. I have seen those who had
power in the world, but who exercised dominion from love of self, cast
out among the most vile, and some among those who are in excrementitious
places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="565.">565.</span></span>

But in respect to the love of the world: it is a love opposed to
heavenly love in a less degree than love of self, because the evils
hidden within it are lesser evils. The love of the world consists in
one's desiring to secure to himself, by any kind of artifice, the wealth
of others, and in setting his heart upon riches, and permitting the
world to draw him and lead him away from spiritual love, which is love
towards the neighbor, and thus from heaven and from the Divine. But this
love is manifold. There is a love of wealth for the sake of being
exalted to honors, when these alone are loved. There is a love of honors
and dignities with a view to the increase of wealth. There is a love of
wealth for the sake of various uses that give delight in the world.
There is a love of wealth merely for the sake of wealth, which is a
miserly love; and so on. The end for the sake of which wealth is sought
is called its use; and it is the end or use that gives to love its
quality; for the love is such as is the end in view, and all other
things merely serve it as means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="566.">566.</span></span>

WHAT HELL FIRE IS AND WHAT THE GNASHING OF TEETH IS. What eternal fire
is, and what the gnashing of teeth is, which are mentioned in the Word
in reference to those who are in hell, scarcely any one as yet has
known, because the contents of the Word have been thought about only in
a material way, and nothing has been known about its spiritual sense. So
fire has been understood by some to mean material fire, by others to
mean torment in general, by others remorse of conscience, and others
have held that it is mentioned merely to excite terror in the wicked.
Likewise some have supposed the gnashing of teeth to mean actual
gnashing, and some only a horror, such as is excited when such a
collision of teeth is heard. But any one who is acquainted with the
spiritual meaning of the Word may know what eternal fire is, and what
the gnashing of teeth is; for every expression and every meaning of the
expressions in the Word contains a spiritual meaning, since the Word in
its bosom is spiritual; and what is spiritual can be set before man only
in natural forms of expression, because man is in the natural world and
thinks from the things of that world. Therefore it shall now be told
what is meant by "eternal fire" and "the gnashing of teeth" into which
the spirits of evil men enter after death, or which their spirits, then
in the spiritual world, endure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="567.">567.</span></span>

There are two origins of heat, one the sun of heaven which is the Lord,
and the other the sun of the world. The heat that is from the sun of
heaven, that is, the Lord, is spiritual heat; and this in its essence is
love (see above, n. 126-140); but the heat from the sun of the world is
natural heat, and this in its essence is not love, but serves spiritual
heat or love as a receptacle. Evidently love in its essence is heat,
since it is love, in accord with its degree and quality, that gives heat
to the mind, and thence to the body; and this man experiences as well in
the winter as in the summer. The heating of the blood is from the same
source. That the natural heat that springs from the sun of the world
serves spiritual heat as a receptacle is evident from the heat of the
body, which is excited by the heat of its spirit, and is a kind of
substitute for that heat in the body. It is especially evident from the
spring and summer heat in animals of every kind which then annually
renew their loves. \[2\] It is not the natural heat that produces this
effect, but it disposes their bodies to receive the heat that flows into
them from the spiritual world; for the spiritual world flows into the
natural as cause into effect. Whoever believes that natural heat
produces these loves is much deceived, for influx is from the spiritual
world into the natural world, and not from the natural world into the
spiritual; and as all love belongs to the life itself it is spiritual.
\[3\] Again, he who believes that any thing comes forth in the natural
world without influx from the spiritual world is deceived, for what is
natural comes forth and continues to exist only from what is spiritual.
Furthermore, the subjects of the vegetable kingdom derive their
germinations from influx out of the spiritual world. The natural heat of
spring time and summer merely disposes the seeds into their natural
forms by expanding and opening them so that influx from the spiritual
world can there act as a cause. These things are mentioned to make clear
that there are two kinds of heat, spiritual heat and natural heat; and
that spiritual heat is from the sun of heaven and natural heat from the
sun of the world, and that influx and consequent cooperation produce the
effects that appear before the eyes in the world. <span
id="fr_287"></span>[567-1](#fn_287.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="568.">568.</span></span>

Spiritual heat in man is the heat of his life, because, as was said
above, it is in its essence love. This heat is what is meant in the Word
by "fire," love to the Lord and love towards the neighbor by "heavenly
fire," and love of self and love of the world by "infernal fire."

<span class="margnote"><span id="569.">569.</span></span>

Infernal fire or love springs from a like origin as heavenly fire or
love, namely, the sun of heaven, or the Lord; but it is made infernal by
those who receive it. For all influx from the spiritual world varies in
accordance with reception, that is, in accordance with the forms into
which it flows, just as it is with the heat and light from the sun of
the world. The heat from that sun flowing into shrubberies and beds of
flowers produces vegetation, and draws forth grateful and sweet odors;
but the same heat flowing into excrementitious and decaying substances
produces putrefactions, and draws forth rank and disgusting stenches. In
like manner the light from the same sun produces in one subject
beautiful and pleasing colors, in another unbeautiful and disagreeable
colors. The same is true of the heat and light from the sun of heaven,
which is love. When the heat, or love, from that sun flows into good, as
it does in good men and angels, it makes their good fruitful; but when
it flows into the evil it produces a contrary effect, for their evils
either suffocate it or pervert it. In like manner when the light of
heaven flows into the truths of good it imparts intelligence and wisdom;
but when it flows into the falsities of evil it is turned into
insanities and phantasies of various kinds. Thus in every instance the
result is in accordance with reception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="570.">570.</span></span>

As infernal fire is the love of self and of the world it is also every
lust of these loves, since lust is love in its continuity, for what a
man loves he continually lusts after. Infernal fire is also delight,
since what a man loves and lusts after he perceives, when he obtains it,
to be delightful. Man's delight of heart is from no other source.
Infernal fire, therefore, is the lust and delight that spring from these
two loves as their origins. The evils flowing from these loves are
contempt of others, enmity, and hostility against those who do not favor
them, envy, hatred, and revenge, and from these fierceness and cruelty;
and in respect to the Divine they are denial and consequent contempt,
derision, and detraction of the holy things of the church; and after
death, when man becomes a spirit, these evils are changed to anger and
hatred against these holy things (see above, n. 562). And as these evils
breathe forth continually the destruction and murder of those whom they
account as enemies, and against whom they burn with hatred and revenge,
so it is the delight of their life to will to destroy and kill, and so
far as they are unable to do this, to will to do mischief, to injure,
and to exercise cruelty. \[2\] Such is the meaning of "fire" in the
Word, where the evil and the hells are treated of, some passages from
which I will here quote in the way of proof: Everyone is a hypocrite and
an evil doer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For wickedness burneth as
the fire; it devoureth the briers and thorns, and kindleth in the
thickets of the forests, and they roll upward in the rising of smoke;
and the people is become like food for fire; no man spareth his brother
(Isa. 9:17-19). I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth
blood and fire, and pillars of smoke; the sun shall be turned into
darkness (Joel 2:30, 31). The land shall become burning pitch; it shall
not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up forever
(Isa. 34:9, 10). Behold the day cometh burning as a furnace, and all the
proud and every worker of wickedness shall be stubble; and the day that
cometh shall set them on fire (Mal. 4:1). Babylon is become a habitation
of demons. They cried out as they saw the smoke of her burning. Her
smoke goeth up unto the ages of the ages (Apoc. 18:2, 18; 19:3). He
opened the pit of the abyss, and there went up a smoke out of the pit as
the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun was darkened, and the air, by
the smoke of the pit (Apoc. 9:2). Out of the mouth of the horses went
forth fire and smoke and brimstone; by these was the third part of men
killed, by the fire and by the smoke and by the brimstone (Apoc. 4:17,
18). If any one adores the beast he shall drink of the wine of the wrath
of God mixed with unmixed wine in the cup of His anger, and shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone (Apoc. 16:9, 10). The fourth angel
poured out his bowl upon the sun; and it was given unto it to scorch men
with fire; therefore men were scorched with great heat (Apoc. 16:8, 9).
They were cast into a lake burning with fire and brimstone (Apoc. 19:20;
20:14, 15; 21:8). Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be
hewn down and cast into the fire (Matt. 3:10; Luke 3:9). The Son of man
shall send His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all
things that cause stumbling and them that do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire (Matt. 13:41, 42, 50). The King shall say to
them that are on the left hand, Depart from Me, ye cursed, into eternal
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels (Matt. 25:41). They shall be
sent into everlasting fire, into the hell of fire, where their worm
shall not die, and the fire shall not be quenched (Matt. 18:8, 9; Mark
9:43-49). The rich man in hell said to Abraham that he was tormented in
flame (Luke 16:24). In these and in many other passages "fire" means the
lust pertaining to love of self and love of the world, and the "smoke"
therefrom means falsity from evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="571.">571.</span></span>

As the lust of doing the evils that are from the love of self and of the
world is meant by "infernal fire," and as such is the lust of all in the
hells (as shown in the foregoing chapter) so when the hells are opened
there is an appearance of fire with smoke, such as is seen in
conflagrations, a dense fire from the hells where the love of self
prevails, and a flaming fire from the hells where love of the world
prevails. But when the hells are closed this fiery appearance is not
seen, but in its place there is a kind of obscurity like a condensation
of smoke; although the fire still rages within, as can be seen by the
heat exhaling therefrom, which is like the heat from the burnt ruins
after a fire, and in some places like the heat from a heated furnace, in
others like the heat from a hot bath. When this heat flows into man it
excites lusts in him, and in evil men hatred and revenge, and in the
sick insanities. Such is the fire or such the heat that affects those
who are in the above-mentioned loves, because in respect to their spirit
they are attached to those hells, even while living in the body. But it
must be understood that those who are in the hells are not in fire; the
fire is an appearance; those there are conscious of no burning, but only
of a warmth like that which they had felt when in the world. This
appearance of fire is from correspondence, since love corresponds to
fire, and all things seen in the spiritual world are seen in accordance
with correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="572.">572.</span></span>

It must be noted that this infernal fire or heat is changed into intense
cold when heat from heaven flows in; and those who are in it then shiver
like those seized with chills and fever, and are inwardly distressed;
and for the reason that they are in direct opposition to the Divine; and
the heat of heaven (which is Divine love) extinguishes the heat of hell
(which is the love of self), and with it the fire of their life; and
this is the cause of such cold and consequent shivering and distress.
This is accompanied by thick darkness and by infatuation and mutual
blindness therefrom. But this rarely happens, and only when outbreaks
that have increased beyond measure need to be repressed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="573.">573.</span></span>

Since infernal fire means every lust for doing evil that flows forth
from the love of self, this fire means also such torment as exists in
the hells. For the lust from that love is a lust for injuring others who
do not honor, venerate and worship oneself; and in proportion to the
anger thereby excited, and the hatred and revenge from that anger, is
there a lust for venting one's rage upon them. When such lust is active
in everyone in a society, and is restrained by no external bond, such as
the fear of the law, and of the loss of reputation, honor, gain, and
life, everyone from the impulse of his own evil rushes upon another; and
so far as he prevails subjugates the rest and subjects them to his
dominion, and vents his rage with delight upon those who do not submit
themselves. This delight is so intimately united with the delight of
bearing rule that they exist in the same measure, since the delight of
doing harm is contained in all enmity, envy, hatred, and revenge, which
as said above, are the evils of that love. All the hells are such
societies, and in consequence everyone there bears hatred in his heart
against others, and from hatred bursts forth into cruelty so far as he
has power. These cruelties and their torments are also meant by infernal
fire, since they are the effects of lusts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="574.">574.</span></span>

It has been shown above (n. 548) that an evil spirit casts himself into
hell of his own accord. It shall now be told in a few words how this
comes about, when yet there are in hell such torments. From every hell
there exhales a sphere of the lusts of those who are in it. Whenever
this sphere is perceived by one who is in a like lust he is affected at
heart and filled with delight, for lust and its delight make one, since
whatever one lusts after is delightful to him; and because of this a
spirit turns himself hellwards, and from delight of heart lusts to go
thither, since he does not yet know that such torments exist there,
although he who knows it still lusts to go there. For no one in the
spiritual world can resist his lust, because his lust belongs to his
love, and his love belongs to his will, and his will belongs to his
nature, and everyone there acts from his nature. \[2\] When, therefore,
a spirit of his own accord and from his freedom drifts towards his hell
and enters it, he is received at first in a friendly manner, which makes
him believe that he has come among friends. But this continues for a few
hours only. In the meanwhile he is explored in respect to his astuteness
and consequent ability; and when this has been done they begin to infest
him, and this by various methods, and with gradually greater severity
and vehemence. This is accomplished by introducing him more interiorly
and deeply into hell; for the more interior and deeper the hell the more
malignant are the spirits. After these infestations they begin to treat
him cruelly by punishments, and this goes on until he is reduced to the
condition of a slave. \[3\] But rebellious movements are continually
springing up there, since everyone wishes to be greatest, and burns with
hatred against the others; and in consequence new uprisings occur, and
thus one scene is changed into another, and those who are made slaves
are delivered that they may assist some new devil to subjugate others;
and again those who refuse to submit and render implicit obedience are
tormented in various ways; and so on continually. Such torments are the
torments of hell, which are called hell fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="575.">575.</span></span>

Gnashing of teeth is the continual contention and combat of falsities
with each other, consequently of those who are in falsities, joined with
contempt of others, with enmity, mockery, ridicule, blaspheming; and
these evils burst forth into lacerations of various kinds; since
everyone fights for his own falsity and calls it truth. These
contentions and combats are heard outside of these hells like the
gnashings of teeth; and are also turned into gnashings of teeth when
truths from heaven flow in among them. In these hells are all who have
acknowledged nature and have denied the Divine. In the deeper of these
hells are those that have confirmed themselves in such denials. As such
are unable to receive any thing of light from heaven, and are thus
unable to see any thing inwardly in themselves, they are for the most
part corporeal sensual spirits, who believe nothing except what they see
with their eyes and touch with their hands. Therefore all the fallacies
of the senses are truths to them; and it is from these that they
dispute. This is why their contentions are heard as gnashings of teeth;
for in the spiritual world all falsities give a grating sound, and the
teeth correspond to the outmost things in nature and to the outmost
things in man, which are corporeal sensual. <span
id="fr_288"></span>[575-1](#fn_288.md) (That there is gnashing of teeth in
the hells may be seen in Matthew 8:12; 13:42, 50; 22:13; 24:51; 25:30;
Luke 13:28.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="576.">576.</span></span>

THE MALICE AND HEINOUS ARTIFICES OF INFERNAL SPIRITS In what way spirits
are superior to men everyone can see and comprehend who thinks
interiorly and knows any thing of the operation of his own mind; for in
his mind he can consider, evolve, and form conclusions upon more
subjects in a single moment than he can utter or express in writing in
half an hour. This shows the superiority of man when he is in his
spirit, and therefore when he becomes a spirit. For it is the spirit
that thinks, and it is the body by which the spirit expresses its
thoughts in speech or writing. In consequence of this, when man after
death becomes an angel he is in intelligence and wisdom ineffable in
comparison with his intelligence and wisdom while he lived in the world;
for while he lived in the world his spirit was bound to his body, and
was thereby in the natural world; and therefore whatever he thought
spiritually flowed into natural ideas, which are comparatively general,
gross, and obscure, and which are incapable of receiving innumerable
things that pertain to spiritual thought; and which infold spiritual
thought in the obscurities that arise from worldly cares. It is
otherwise when the spirit is released from the body and comes into its
spiritual state, which takes place when it passes out of the natural
world into the spiritual world to which it belongs. From what has
already been said it is evident that the state of its thoughts and
affections is then immeasurably superior to its former state. Because of
this the thoughts of angels are ineffable and inexpressible, and are
therefore incapable of entering into the natural thoughts of man; and
yet every angel was born a man, and has lived as a man, and he then
seemed to himself to be no wiser than any other like man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="577.">577.</span></span>

In the same degree in which angels have wisdom and intelligence infernal
spirits have malice and cunning; for the case is the same, since the
spirit of man when released from the body is in his good or in his evil
- if an angelic spirit in his good, and if an infernal spirit in his
evil. Every spirit is his own good or his own evil because he is his own
love, as has been often said and shown above. Therefore as an angelic
spirit thinks, wills, speaks, and acts, from his good, an infernal
spirit does this from his evil; and to think, will, speak, and act from
evil itself, is to think, will, speak, and act from all things included
in the evil. \[2\] So long as man lived in the body it was different,
since the evil of the spirit was then under the restraints that every
man feels from the law, from hope of gain, from honor, from reputation,
and from the fear of losing these; and therefore the evil of his spirit
could not then burst forth and show what it was in itself. Moreover, the
evil of the spirit of man then lay wrapped up and veiled in outward
probity, honesty, justice, and affection for truth and good, which such
a man professes and counterfeits for the sake of the world; and under
these semblances the evil has lain so concealed and obscured that he
himself scarcely knew that his spirit contained so much malice and
craftiness, that is, that in himself he was such a devil as he becomes
after death, when his spirit comes into itself and into its own nature.
\[3\] Such malice then manifests itself as exceeds all belief. There are
thousands of evils that then burst forth from evil itself, among which
are such as cannot be described in the words of any language. What they
are has been granted me to know and also to perceive by much experience,
since it has been granted me by the Lord to be in the spiritual world in
respect to my spirit and at the same time in the natural world in
respect to my body. This I can testify, that their malice is so great
that it is hardly possible to describe even a thousandth part of it; and
so great that if man were not protected by the Lord he could never be
rescued from hell; for with every man there are spirits from hell as
well as angels from heaven (see above, n. 292, 293); and yet the Lord
cannot protect man unless he acknowledges the Divine and lives a life of
faith and charity; for otherwise man turns himself away from the Lord
and turns himself to infernal spirits, and thus his spirit becomes
imbued with a malice like theirs. \[4\] Nevertheless, man is continually
withdrawn by the Lord from the evils that he attaches and as it were
attracts to himself by his affiliation with infernal spirits. If he is
not withdrawn by the internal bonds of conscience, which he fails to
receive if he denies a Divine, he is nevertheless withdrawn by external
bonds, which are, as said above, fears in respect to the law and its
penalties, and fears of the loss of gain and the deprivation of honor
and reputation. In fact, such a man may be withdrawn from evils by means
of the delights of his love and through fear of the loss or deprivation
of those delights; but he cannot be led thereby into spiritual goods.
For as soon as such a man is led into these he begins to give his
thought to pretenses and devices by simulating or counterfeiting what is
good, honest, and just, for the purpose of persuading and thus
deceiving. Such cunning adjoins itself to the evil of his spirit and
gives form to it, causing his evil to be of the same nature as itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="578.">578.</span></span>

Those are the worst of all who have been in evils from love of self and
at the same time inwardly in themselves have acted from deceit; for
deceit penetrates more deeply into the thoughts and intentions than
other evils, and infects them with poison and thus wholly destroys the
spiritual life of man. Most of these spirits are in the hells behind the
back, and are called genii; and there they delight to make themselves
invisible, and to flutter about others like phantoms secretly infusing
evil into them, which they spread around like the poison of a viper.
These are more direfully tormented than others. But those who are not
deceitful, and who have not been so filled with malignant craftiness,
and yet are in the evils derived from the love of self, are also in the
hells behind, but in those less deep. On the other hand, those that have
been in evils from the love of the world are in the hells in front, and
are called spirits. These spirits are not such forms of evil, that is,
of hatred and revenge, as those are who are in evils from the love of
self; and therefore do not have such malice and cunning; and in
consequence their hells are milder.

<span class="margnote"><span id="579.">579.</span></span>

I have been permitted to learn by experience what kind of malice those
possess who are called genii. Genii act upon and flow into the
affections, and not the thoughts. They perceive and smell out the
affections as dogs do wild beasts in the forest. Good affections, when
they perceive them in another, they turn instantly into evil affections,
leading and bending them in a wonderful manner by means of the other's
delights; and this so secretly and with such malignant skill that the
other knows nothing of it, for they most carefully guard against
anything entering into the thought, as thereby they would be manifested.
The seat of these in man is beneath the back part of the head. In the
world they were such as deceitfully captivated the minds of others,
leading and persuading them by the delights of their affections or
lusts. But such spirits are not permitted by the Lord to come near to
any man of whose reformation there is any hope; for they have the
ability not only to destroy the conscience, but also to stir up in man
his inherited evils, which otherwise lie hidden. Therefore to prevent
man's being led into these evils, these hells, by the Lord's provision,
are entirely closed up; and when any man of such a character comes after
death into the other life, he is at once cast into their hell. When the
deceit and craftiness of these spirits are clearly seen they appear as
vipers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="580.">580.</span></span>

The kind of malice infernal spirits possess is evident from their
nefarious arts, which are so many that to enumerate them would fill a
volume, and to describe them would fill many volumes. These arts are
mostly unknown in the world. One kind relates to abuses of
correspondences; a second to abuses of the outmosts of Divine order; a
third to the communication and influx of thoughts and affections by
means of turning towards another, fixing the sight upon another, and by
the instrumentality of other spirits apart from themselves, and spirits
sent out by themselves; a fourth to operations by phantasies; a fifth to
a kind of casting themselves out beyond themselves and consequent
presence elsewhere than where they are in the body; a sixth to
pretenses, persuasion, and lies. The spirit of an evil man enters of
itself into these arts when he is released from his body, for they are
inherent in the nature of the evil in which he then is. By these arts
they torment each other in the hells. But as all of these arts, except
those that are effected by pretenses, persuasions, and lies, are unknown
in the world, I will not here describe them in detail, both because they
would not be comprehended, and because they are too abominable to be
told.

<span class="margnote"><span id="581.">581.</span></span>

The Lord permits torments in the hells because in no other way can evils
be restrained and subdued. The only means of restraining and subduing
evils and of keeping the infernal crew in bonds is the fear of
punishment. It can be done in no other way; for without the fear of
punishment and torment evil would burst forth into madness, and
everything would go to pieces, like a kingdom on earth where there is no
law and there are no penalties.

<span class="margnote"><span id="582.">582.</span></span>

THE APPEARANCE, SITUATION, AND NUMBER OF THE HELLS. In the spiritual
world, that is, in the world where spirits and angels are, the same
objects appear as in the natural world, that is, where men are. In
external appearance there is no difference. In that world plains and
mountains, hills and rocks, and valleys between them are seen; also
waters, and many other things that are seen on earth. And yet all these
things are from a spiritual origin, and all are therefore seen by the
eyes of spirits and angels, and not by the eyes of men, because men are
in the natural world. Spiritual beings see such things as are from a
spiritual origin, and natural beings such things as are from a natural
origin. Consequently man with his eyes can in no way see the objects
that are in the spiritual world unless he is permitted to be in the
spirit, or after death when he becomes a spirit. On the other hand, an
angel or a spirit is unable to see any thing at all in the natural world
unless he is with a man who is permitted to speak with him. For the eyes
of man are fitted to receive the light of the natural world, and the
eyes of angels and spirits are fitted to receive the light of the
spiritual world; although the eyes of the two are exactly alike in
appearance. That the spiritual world is such the natural man cannot
comprehend, and least of all the sensual man, who believes nothing
except what he sees with his bodily eyes and touches with his hands, and
therefore takes in by sight and touch. As his thought is from such
things it is material and not spiritual. Such being the likeness between
the spiritual world and the natural world, man can hardly believe after
death that he is not in the world where he was born, and from which he
has departed. For this reason death is called simply a translation from
one world into another like it. (That the two worlds are thus alike can
be seen above, where representatives and appearances in heaven have been
treated of, n. 170-176.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="583.">583.</span></span>

The heavens are in the higher parts of the spiritual world, the world of
spirits in the lower parts, and under both are the hells. The heavens
are visible to spirits in the world of spirits only when their interior
sight is opened; although they sometimes see them as mists or as bright
clouds. This is because the angels of heaven are in an interior state in
respect to intelligence and wisdom; and for this reason they are above
the sight of those who are in the world of spirits. But spirits who
dwell in the plains and valleys see one another; and yet when they are
separated there, which takes place when they are let into their
interiors, the evil spirits do not see the good spirits; but the good
spirits can see the evil spirits. Nevertheless, the good spirits turn
themselves away from the evil spirits; and when spirits turn themselves
away they become invisible. But the hells are not seen because they are
closed up. Only the entrances, which are called gates, are seen when
they are opened to let in other like spirits. All the gates to the hells
open from the world of spirits, and none of them from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="584.">584.</span></span>

The hells are everywhere, both under the mountains, hills, and rocks,
and under the plains and valleys. The openings or gates to the hells
that are under the mountains, hills, and rocks, appear to the sight like
holes and clefts in the rocks, some extended and wide, and some
straitened and narrow, and many of them rugged. They all, when looked
into, appear dark and dusky; but the infernal spirits that are in them
are in such a luminosity as arises from burning coals. Their eyes are
adapted to the reception of that light, and for the reason that while
they lived in the world they were in thick darkness in respect to Divine
truths, because of their denying them, and were in a sort of light in
respect to falsities because of their affirming them. In this way did
the sight of their eyes become so formed. And for the same reason the
light of heaven is thick darkness to them, and therefore when they go
out of their dens they see nothing. All this makes it abundantly clear
that man comes into the light of heaven just to the extent that he
acknowledges the Divine, and establishes in himself the things of heaven
and the church; and that he comes into the thick darkness of hell just
to the extent that he denies the Divine, and establishes in himself what
is contrary to the truths of heaven and the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="585.">585.</span></span>

The openings or gates to the hells that are beneath the plains and
valleys present to the sight different appearances. Some resemble those
that are beneath the mountains, hills and rocks; some resemble dens and
caverns, some great chasms and whirlpools; some resemble bogs, and some
standing water. They are all covered, and are opened only when evil
spirits from the world of spirits are cast in; and when they are opened
there bursts forth from them either something like the fire and smoke
that is seen in the air from burning buildings, or like a flame without
smoke, or like soot such as comes from a burning chimney, or like a mist
and thick cloud. I have heard that the infernal spirits neither see nor
feel these things, because when they are in them they are as in their
own atmosphere, and thus in the delight of their life; and this for the
reason that these things correspond to the evils and falsities in which
they are, fire corresponding to hatred and revenge, smoke and soot to
the falsities therefrom, flame to the evils of the love of self, and a
mist or thick cloud to falsities from that love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="586.">586.</span></span>

I have also been permitted to look into the hells and to see what they
are within; for when the Lord wills, the sight of a spirit or angel from
above may penetrate into the lowest depths beneath and explore their
character, notwithstanding the coverings. In this way I have been
permitted to look into them. Some of the hells appeared to the view like
caverns and dens in rocks extending inward and then downward into an
abyss, either obliquely or vertically. Some of the hells appeared to the
view like the dens and caves of wild beasts in forests; some like the
hollow caverns and passages that are seen in mines, with caverns
extending towards the lower regions. Most of the hells are threefold,
the upper one appearing within to be in dense darkness, because
inhabited by those who are in the falsities of evil; while the lower
ones appear fiery, because inhabited by those who are in evils
themselves, dense darkness corresponding to the falsities of evil, and
fire to evils themselves. Those that have acted interiorly from evil are
in the deeper hells, and those that have acted exteriorly from evil,
that is, from the falsities of evil, are in the hells that are less
deep. Some hells present an appearance like the ruins of houses and
cities after conflagrations, in which infernal spirits dwell and hide
themselves. In the milder hells there is an appearance of rude huts, in
some cases contiguous in the form of a city with lanes and streets, and
within the houses are infernal spirits engaged in unceasing quarrels,
enmities, fightings, and brutalities; while in the streets and lanes
robberies and depredations are committed. In some of the hells there are
nothing but brothels, disgusting to the sight and filled with every kind
of filth and excrement. Again, there are dark forests, in which infernal
spirits roam like wild beasts and where, too, there are underground dens
into which those flee who are pursued by others. There are also deserts,
where all is barren and sandy, and where in some places there are ragged
rocks in which there are caverns, and in some places huts. Into these
desert places those are cast out from the hells who have suffered every
extremity of punishment, especially those who in the world have been
more cunning than others in undertaking and contriving intrigues and
deceits. Such a life is their final lot.

<span class="margnote"><span id="587.">587.</span></span>

As to the positions of the hells in detail, it is something wholly
unknown even to the angels in heaven; it is known to the Lord alone. But
their position in general is known from the quarters in which they are.
For the hells, like the heavens, are distinguished by their quarters;
and in the spiritual world quarters are determined in accordance with
loves; for in heaven all the quarters begin from the Lord as the sun,
who is the East; and as the hells are opposite to the heavens their
quarters begin from the opposite point, that is, from the west. (On this
see the chapter on the four quarters in heaven, n. 141-153.) \[2\] For
this reason the hells in the western quarter are the worst of all, and
the most horrible, becoming gradually worse and more horrible by degrees
the more remote they are from the east. In the western hells are those
who in the world were in the love of self, and in consequent contempt of
others, and in enmity against those who did not favor them, also in
hatred and revenge against those who did not render them respect and
homage. In the most remote hells in that quarter are those that had
belonged to the Catholic religion, so called, and that had wished to be
worshiped as gods, and consequently had burned with hatred and revenge
against all who did not acknowledge their power over the souls of men
and over heaven. These continue to have the same disposition, that is,
the same hatred and revenge against those who oppose them, that they had
in the world. Their greatest delight is to practice cruelties; but in
the other life this delight is turned against themselves; for in their
hells, with which the western quarter is filled, one rages against
everyone who detracts from his Divine power. (But more will be said
about this in the treatise on The Last Judgment and the Destruction of
Babylon.) \[3\] Nevertheless, no one can know how the hells in that
quarter are arranged, except that the most dreadful hells of that kind
are at the sides towards the northern quarter, and the less dreadful
towards the southern quarter; thus the dreadfulness of the hells
decreases from the northern quarter to the southern, and likewise by
degrees towards the east. Towards the east are the dwelling places of
the haughty, who have not believed in the Divine, and yet have not been
in such hatred and revenge, or in such deceit, as those have who are in
a greater depth in the western quarter. \[4\] In the eastern quarter
there are at present no hells, those that were there having been
transferred to the western quarter in front. In the northern and
southern quarters there are many hells; and in them are those who while
in the world were in love of the world, and in various kinds of evil
therefrom, such as enmity, hostility, theft, robbery, cunning, avarice,
and unmercifulness. The worst hells of this kind are in the northern
quarter, the milder in the southern. Their dreadfulness increases as
they are nearer to the western quarter, and also as they are farther
away from the southern quarter, and decreases towards the eastern
quarter and towards the southern quarter. Behind the hells that are in
the western quarter there are dark forests, in which malignant spirits
roam like wild beasts; and it is the same behind the hells in the
northern quarter. But behind the hells in the southern quarter there are
deserts, which have been described just above. This much respecting the
situation of the hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="588.">588.</span></span>

In regard to the number of the hells, there are as many of them as there
are angelic societies in the heavens, since there is for every heavenly
society a corresponding infernal society as its opposite. That the
heavenly societies are numberless, and are all distinguished in
accordance with the goods of love, charity, and faith, may be seen in
the chapter that treats of the societies of which the heavens consist
(n. 41-50), and in the chapter on the immensity of heaven (n. 415-420).
The like is true, therefore, of the infernal societies, which are
distinguished in accordance with the evils that are the opposites of
those goods. \[2\] Every evil, as well as every good, is of infinite
variety. That this is true is beyond the comprehension of those who have
only a simple idea regarding every evil, such as contempt, enmity,
hatred, revenge, deceit, and other like evils. But let them know that
each one of these evils contains so many specific differences, and each
of these again so many specific or particular differences, that a volume
would not suffice to enumerate them. The hells are so distinctly
arranged in order in accordance with the differences of every evil that
nothing could be more perfectly ordered or more distinct. Evidently,
then, the hells are innumerable, near to and remote from one another in
accordance with the differences of evils generically, specifically, and
particularly. \[3\] There are likewise hells beneath hells. Some
communicate with others by passages, and more by exhalations, and this
in exact accordance with the affinities of one kind or one species of
evil with others. How great the number is of the hells I have been
permitted to realize from knowing that there are hells under every
mountain, hill, and rock, and likewise under every plain and valley, and
that they stretch out beneath these in length and in breadth and in
depth. In a word, the entire heaven and the entire world of spirits are,
as it were, excavated beneath, and under them is a continuous hell. Thus
much regarding the number of the hells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="589.">589.</span></span>

THE EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN HEAVEN AND HELL. For any thing to have existence
there must be an equilibrium of all things. Without equilibrium is no
action and reaction; for equilibrium is between two forces, one acting
and the other reacting, and the state of rest resulting from like action
and reaction is called equilibrium. In the natural world there is an
equilibrium in all things and in each thing. It exists in a general way
even in the atmosphere, wherein the lower parts react and resist in
proportion as the higher parts act and press down. Again, in the natural
world there is an equilibrium between heat and cold, between light and
shade, and between dryness and moisture, the middle condition being the
equilibrium. There is also an equilibrium in all the subjects of the
three kingdoms of nature, the mineral, the vegetable, and the animal;
for without equilibrium in them nothing can come forth and have
permanent existence. Everywhere there is a sort of effort acting on the
one side and reacting on the other. \[2\] All existence or all effect is
produced in equilibrium, that is, by one force acting and another
suffering itself to be acted upon, or when one force by acting flows in,
the other receives and harmoniously submits. In the natural world that
which acts and reacts is called force, and also endeavor \[or effort\];
but in the spiritual world that which acts and reacts is called life and
will. Life in that world is living force, and will is living effort; and
the equilibrium itself is called freedom. Thus spiritual equilibrium or
freedom has its outcome and permanence in the balance between good
acting on the one side and evil reacting on the other side; or between
evil acting on the one side and good reacting on the other side. \[3\]
With the good the equilibrium is between good acting and evil reacting;
but with the evil the equilibrium is between evil acting and good
reacting. Spiritual equilibrium is between good and evil, because the
whole life of man has reference to good and to evil, and the will is the
receptacle. There is also an equilibrium between truth and falsity, but
this depends on the equilibrium between good and evil. The equilibrium
between truth and falsity is like that between light and shade, in that
light and shade affect the objects of the vegetable kingdom only so far
as heat and cold are in them. That light and shade themselves have no
effect, but only the heat that acts through them, is evident from the
fact that light and shade are the same in winter time and in spring
time. This comparison of truth and falsity with light and shade is from
correspondence, for truth corresponds to light, falsity to shade, and
heat to the good of love; in fact, spiritual light is truth, spiritual
shade is falsity, and spiritual heat is good of love (see the chapter
where light and heat in heaven are treated of, n. 126-140).

<span class="margnote"><span id="590.">590.</span></span>

There is a perpetual equilibrium between heaven and hell. From hell
there continually breathes forth and ascends an endeavor to do evil, and
from heaven there continually breathes forth and descends an endeavor to
do good. In this equilibrium is the world of spirits; which world is
intermediate between heaven and hell (see above, n. 421-431). The world
of spirits is in this equilibrium because every man after death enters
first the world of spirits, and is kept there in a state like that which
he was in while in the world, and this would be impossible if there were
not a perfect equilibrium there; for by means of this the character of
everyone is explored, since they then remain in the same freedom as they
had in the world. Spiritual equilibrium is freedom in man and spirit (as
has been said just above, n. 589). What each one's freedom is the angels
recognize by a communication of affections and thoughts therefrom; and
it becomes visible to the sight of angelic spirits by the ways in which
the spirits go. Good spirits there travel in the ways that go towards
heaven, but evil spirits in the ways that go towards hell. Ways actually
appear in that world; and that is the reason why ways in the Word
signify the truths that lead to good, or in the opposite sense the
falsities that lead to evil; and for the same reason going, walking, and
journeying in the Word signify progressions of life. <span
id="fr_289"></span>[590-1](#fn_289.md) Such ways I have often been
permitted to see, also spirits going and walking in them freely, in
accord with their affections and thoughts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="591.">591.</span></span>

Evil continually breathes forth and ascends out of hell, and good
continually breathes forth and descends out of heaven, because everyone
is encompassed by a spiritual sphere; and that sphere flows forth and
pours out from the life of the affections and the thoughts
therefrom. <span id="fr_290"></span>[591-1](#fn_290.md) And as such a
sphere flows forth from every individual, it flows forth also from every
heavenly society and from every infernal society, consequently from all
together, that is, from the entire heaven and from the entire hell. Good
flows forth from heaven because all there are in good; and evil flows
forth from hell because all there are in evil. The good that is from
heaven is all from the Lord; for the angels in the heavens are all
withheld from what is their own, and are kept in what is the Lord's own,
which is good itself. But the spirits in the hells are all in what is
their own, and everyone's own is nothing but evil; and because it is
nothing but evil it is hell. <span id="fr_291"></span>[591-2](#fn_291.md)
Evidently, then, the equilibrium in which angels are kept in the heavens
and spirits in the hells is not like the equilibrium in the world of
spirits. The equilibrium of angels in the heavens exists in the degree
in which they have been willing to be in good, or in the degree in which
they have lived in good in the world, and thus also in the degree in
which they have held evil in aversion; but the equilibrium of spirits in
hell exists in the degree in which they have been willing to be in evil,
or have lived in evil in the world, and thus in heart and spirit have
been opposed to good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="592.">592.</span></span>

Unless the Lord ruled both the heavens and the hells there would be no
equilibrium; and if there were no equilibrium there would be no heaven
or hell; for all things and each thing in the universe, that is, both in
the natural world and in the spiritual world, endure by means of
equilibrium. Every rational man can see that this is true. If there were
a preponderance on one part and no resistance on the other would not
both perish? So would it be in the spiritual world if good did not react
against evil and continually restrain its uprising; and unless this were
done by the Divine Itself both heaven and hell would perish, and with
them the whole human race. It is said unless the Divine Itself did this,
because the self of everyone, whether angel, spirit, or man, is nothing
but evil (see above, n. 591); consequently neither angels nor spirits
are able in the least to resist the evils continually exhaling from the
hells, since from self they all tend towards hell. It is evident, then,
that unless the Lord alone ruled both the heavens and the hells no one
could ever be saved. Moreover, all the hells act as one; for evils in
the hells are connected as goods are in the heavens; and the Divine
alone, which goes forth solely from the Lord, is able to resist all the
hells, which are innumerable, and which act together against heaven and
against all who are in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="593.">593.</span></span>

The equilibrium between the heavens and the hells is diminished or
increased in accordance with the number of those who enter heaven and
who enter hell; and this amounts to several thousands daily. The Lord
alone, and no angel, can know and perceive this, and regulate and
equalize it with precision; for the Divine that goes forth from the Lord
is omnipresent, and sees everywhere whether there is any wavering, while
an angel sees only what is near himself, and has no perception in
himself of what is taking place even in his own society.

<span class="margnote"><span id="594.">594.</span></span>

How all things are so arranged in the heavens and in the hells that each
and all of those who are there may be in their equilibrium, can in some
measure be seen from what has been said and shown above respecting the
heavens and the hells, namely, that all the societies of heaven are
distinctly arranged in accordance with goods and their kinds and
varieties, and all the societies of hell in accordance with evils, and
their kinds and varieties; and that beneath each society of heaven there
is a society of hell corresponding to it from opposition, and from this
opposing correspondence equilibrium results; and in consequence of this
the Lord unceasingly provides that no infernal society beneath a
heavenly society shall gain any preponderance, and as soon as it begins
to do so it is restrained by various means, and is reduced to an exact
measure of equilibrium. These means are many, only a few of which I will
mention. Some of these means have reference to the stronger presence of
the Lord; some to the closer communication and conjunction of one or
more societies with others; some to the casting out of superabundant
infernal spirits into deserts; some to the transference of certain
spirits from one hell to another; some to the reducing of those in the
hells to order, and this also is effected in various ways; some to the
screening of certain hells under denser and thicker coverings, also
letting them down to greater depths; besides other means; and still
others that are employed in the heavens above the hells. All this has
been said that it may in some measure be perceived that the Lord alone
provides that there shall be an equilibrium everywhere between good and
evil, thus between heaven and hell; for on such equilibrium the safety
of all in the heavens and of all on the earth rests.

<span class="margnote"><span id="595.">595.</span></span>

It should be known that the hells are continually assaulting heaven and
endeavoring to destroy it, and that the Lord continually protects the
heavens by withholding those who are in it from the evils derived from
their self, and by holding them in the good that is from Himself. I have
often been permitted to perceive the sphere that flows forth from the
hells, which was wholly a sphere of effort to destroy the Divine of the
Lord, and thus heaven. The ebullitions of some hells have also at times
been perceived, which were efforts to break forth and to destroy. But on
the other hand the heavens never assault the hells, for the Divine
sphere that goes forth from the Lord is a perpetual effort to save all;
and as those who are in the hells cannot be saved, (since all who are
there are in evil and are antagonistic to the Divine of the Lord,) so as
far as possible outrages in the hells are subdued and cruelties are
restrained to prevent their breaking out beyond measure one against
another. This also is effected by innumerable ways in which the Divine
power is exercised.

<span class="margnote"><span id="596.">596.</span></span>

There are two kingdoms into which the heavens are divided, the celestial
kingdom and the spiritual kingdom (of which see above, n. 20-28). In
like manner the hells are divided into two kingdoms, one of which is
opposite to the celestial kingdom and the other opposite to the
spiritual kingdom. That which is opposite to the celestial kingdom is in
the western quarter, and those who are in it are called genii; and that
which is opposite to the spiritual kingdom is in the northern and
southern quarters, and those which are in it are called spirits. All who
are in the celestial kingdom are in love to the Lord, and all who are in
the hells opposite to that kingdom are in the love of self; while all
who are in the spiritual kingdom are in love towards the neighbor, and
all who are in the hells opposite to that kingdom are in love of the
world. Evidently, then, love to the Lord and the love of self are
opposites; and in like manner love towards the neighbor and love of the
world are opposites. The Lord continually provides that there shall be
no outflowing from the hells that are opposite the Lord's celestial
kingdom towards those who are in the spiritual kingdom; for if this were
done the spiritual kingdom would perish (for the reason given above, n.
678, 579). These are the two general equilibriums that are unceasingly
maintained by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="597.">597.</span></span>

BY MEANS OF THE EQUILIBRIUM BETWEEN HEAVEN AND HELL MAN IS IN FREEDOM.
The equilibrium between heaven and hell has now been described, and it
has been shown that it is an equilibrium between the good that is from
heaven and the evil that is from hell, thus that it is a spiritual
equilibrium, which in its essence is freedom. A spiritual equilibrium in
its essence is freedom because it is an equilibrium between good and
evil, and between truth and falsity, and these are spiritual. Therefore
to be able to will either what is good or what is evil and to think
either what is true or what is false, and to choose one in preference to
the other, is the freedom which is here treated of. This freedom is
given to every man by the Lord, and is never taken away; in fact, by
virtue of its origin it is not man's but the Lord's, since it is from
the Lord. Nevertheless, it is given to man with his life as if it were
his; and this is done that man may have the ability to be reformed and
saved; for without freedom there can be no reformation or salvation.
With any rational intuition any one can see that it is a part of man's
freedom to be able to think wrongly or rightly, sincerely or
insincerely, justly or unjustly; also that he is free to speak and act
rightly, honestly, and justly; but not to speak and act wrongly,
insincerely, and unjustly, because of the spiritual, moral, and civil
laws whereby his external is held in restraint. Evidently, then, it is
man's spirit, which thinks and wills, that is in freedom, and not his
external which speaks and acts, except in agreement with the above
mentioned laws.

<span class="margnote"><span id="598.">598.</span></span>

Man cannot be reformed unless he has freedom, for the reason that he is
born into evils of every kind; and these must be removed in order that
he may be saved; and they cannot be removed unless he sees them in
himself and acknowledges them, and afterwards ceases to will them, and
finally holds them in aversion. Not until then are they removed. And
this cannot be done unless man is in good as well as in evil, since it
is from good that he is able to see evils, while from evil he cannot see
good. The spiritual goods that man is capable of thinking he learns from
childhood by reading the Word and from preaching; and he learns moral
and civil good from his life in the world. This is the first reason why
man ought to be in freedom. \[2\] Another reason is that nothing is
appropriated to man except what is done from an affection of his love.
Other things may gain entrance, but no farther than the thought, not
reaching the will; and whatever does not gain entrance into the will of
man does not become his, for thought derives what pertains to it from
memory, while the will derives what pertains to it from the life itself.
Only what is from the will, or what is the same, from the affection of
love, can be called free, for whatever a man wills or loves that he does
freely; consequently man's freedom and the affection of his love or of
his will are a one. It is for this reason that man has freedom, in order
that he may be affected by truth and good or may love them, and that
they may thus become as if they were his own \[3\] In a word, whatever
does not enter into man's freedom has no permanence, because it does not
belong to his love or will, and what does not belong to man's love or
will does not belong to his spirit; for the very being \[esse\] of the
spirit of man is love or will. It is said love or will, since a man
wills what he loves. This, then, is why man can be reformed only in
freedom. But more on the subject of man's freedom may be seen in the
Arcana Coelestia in the passages referred to below.

<span class="margnote"><span id="599.">599.</span></span>

In order that man may be in freedom, to the end that he may be reformed,
he is conjoined in respect to his spirit both with heaven and with hell.
For with every man there are spirits from hell and angels from heaven.
It is by means of hell that man is in his own evil, while it is by means
of angels from heaven that man is in good from the Lord; thus is he in
spiritual equilibrium, that is, in freedom. That angels from heaven and
spirits from hell are joined to every man may be seen in the chapter on
the conjunction of heaven with the human race (n. 291-302).

<span class="margnote"><span id="600.">600.</span></span>

It must be understood that the conjunction of man with heaven and with
hell is not a direct conjunction with them, but a mediate conjunction by
means of spirits who are in the world of spirits. These spirits, and
none from hell itself or from heaven itself, are with man. By means of
evil spirits in the world of spirits man is conjoined with hell, and by
means of good spirits there he is conjoined with heaven. Because of this
the world of spirits is intermediate between heaven and hell, and in
that world is equilibrium itself. (That the world of spirits is
intermediate between heaven and hell may be seen in the chapter on the
world of spirits, n. 421-431; and that the essential equilibrium between
heaven and hell is there may be seen in the preceding chapter, n.
589-596.) From all this the source of man's freedom is evident.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_283"></span>[551-1](hh12.htm#fr_283.md) Before the evil are
cast down into hell they are devastated of truths and goods, and when
these have been taken away they are of themselves carried into hell (n.
6977, 7039, 7795, 8210, 8232, 9330). The Lord does not devastate them,
but they devastate themselves (n. 7643, 7926). Every evil has in it what
is false; therefore those who are in evil are also in falsity, although
some do not know it (n. 7577, 8094). Those who are in evil must needs
think what is false when they think from themselves (n. 7437). All who
are in hell speak falsities from hell (n. 1695, 7351, 7352, 7357, 7392,
7689).

<span id="fn_284"></span>[558-1](hh12.htm#fr_284.md) Evidently, then, the
love of the neighbor that has its beginning in man is the opposite of
the love to the neighbor that has its beginning in the Lord; and the
former proceeds from evil because it proceeds from what is man's own,
while the latter proceeds from good because it proceeds from the Lord,
who is good itself. Evidently, also, the love of the neighbor that
proceeds from man and from what is his own is corporeal, while the love
to the neighbor that proceeds from the Lord is heavenly. In a word, in
the man in whom love of self prevails that love constitutes the head,
and heavenly love constitutes the feet. On that love he stands; and if
it does not serve him he tramples it under foot. This is the cause of
the appearance that those who are cast down into hell fall with the head
downward towards hell, and with the feet upwards towards heaven (see
above, n. 548).

<span id="fn_285"></span>[558-2](hh12.htm#fr_285.md) Those who do not know
what it is to love the neighbor imagine every man to be a neighbor, and
that good is to be done to everyone who is in need of help (n. 6704).
They also believe that everyone is neighbor to himself, and thus that
love to the neighbor begins with self (n. 6933). Those who love
themselves above all things, that is, with whom self-love prevails, also
make love to the neighbor to begin with themselves (n. 6710). In what
manner everyone is neighbor to himself, explained (n. 6933-6938). But
those who are Christians and who love God above all things make love to
the neighbor to begin with the Lord, because He is to be loved above all
things (n. 6706, 6711, 6819, 6824). The distinctions of neighbor are as
many as the distinctions of good from the Lord, and there should be
distinction in doing good to everyone in accordance with the quality of
his state, and this is a matter of Christian prudence (n. 6707, 6709,
6711, 6818). These distinctions are innumerable, and for this reason the
ancients, who knew what is meant by the neighbor, reduced the exercises
of charity into classes, which they denoted by suitable names, and from
this knew in what respect everyone was a neighbor, and in what manner
good was to be done to everyone with prudence (n. 2417, 6628, 6705,
7259-7262). The doctrine in the ancient churches was the doctrine of
charity towards the neighbor, and from this they had wisdom (n. 2417,
2385, 3419, 3420, 4844, 6628).

<span id="fn_286"></span>[561-1](hh12.htm#fr_286.md) "The sun of the world"
signifies the love of self (n. 2441). In this sense "to worship the sun"
signifies to worship those things that are antagonistic to heavenly love
and to the Lord (n. 2441, 10584). "The sun's growing hot" means an
increasing lust of evil (n. 8487).

<span id="fn_287"></span>[567-1](hh12.htm#fr_287.md) There is an influx
from the spiritual world into the natural world (n. 6053-6058,
6189-6215, 6307-6327, 6466-6495, 6598-6626). There is also an influx
into the lives of animals (n. 5850). And into the subjects of the
vegetable kingdom (n. 3648). This influx is a continual endeavor to act
in accordance with the Divine order (n. 6211 at the end).

<span id="fn_288"></span>[575-1](hh12.htm#fr_288.md) The correspondence of
the teeth (n. 5565-5568). Those who are purely sensual and have scarcely
anything of spiritual light correspond to the teeth (n. 5565). In the
Word a tooth signifies the sensual, which is the outmost of the life of
man (n. 9052, 9062). Gnashing of teeth in the other life comes from
those who believe that nature is everything and the Divine nothing (n.
5568).

<span id="fn_289"></span>[590-1](hh12.htm#fr_289.md) In the word "to
journey," as well as "to go," signifies progression of life (n. 3335,
4375, 4554, 4585, 4882, 5493, 5605, 5996, 8181, 8345, 8397, 8417, 8420,
8557). "To go (and to walk) with the Lord" means to receive spiritual
life, and to live with Him (n. 10567). "To walk" means to live (n. 519,
1794, 8417, 8420).

<span id="fn_290"></span>[591-1](hh12.htm#fr_290.md) A spiritual sphere,
which is a sphere of life, flows forth and pours forth from every man,
spirit, and angel, and encompasses him (n. 4464, 5179, 7454, 8630). It
flows forth from the life of their affections and thoughts (n. 2489,
4464, 6206). The quality of spirits is recognized at a distance from
their spheres (n. 1048, 1053, 1316, 1504). Spheres from the evil are the
opposites of spheres from the good (n. 1695, 10187, 10312). Such spheres
extend far into angelic societies in accordance with the quality and
quantity of good (n. 6598-6613, 8063, 8794, 8797). And into infernal
societies in accordance with the quality and quantity of evil (n. 8794).

<span id="fn_291"></span>[591-2](hh12.htm#fr_291.md) Man's self is nothing
but evil (n. 210, 215, 731, 874-876, 987, 1047, 2307, 2308, 3518, 3701,
3812, 8480, 8550, 10283, 10284, 10286, 10732). Man's self is hell in him
(n. 684, 8480).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 601-603](hh13.md)
