<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbg03)  [Next](sbg05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103498/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita*, English translation and commentary by Swami
Swarupananda, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### MEDITATION

1\. Om! O Bhagavad-Gitâ, with which Pârtha was enlightened by the Lord
Nârâyana Himself and which was incorporated in the Mahâbhârata by the
ancient sage Vyâsa,—the Blessed Mother, the Destroyer of rebirth,
showering down the nectar of Advaita, and consisting of

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

eighteen chapters,—upon Thee, O Bhagavad-Gitâ! O Loving Mother! I
meditate.

2\. Salutation to thee, O Vyâsa, of mighty intellect and with eyes large
like the petals of full-blown lotuses, by whom was lighted the lamp of
wisdom, full of the Mahâbhârata-oil.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

3\. Salutation to Krishna, the holder of the Jnânamudrâ, granter of
desires of those who take refuge in Him, the milker of the Gitâ-nectar,
in whose hand is the cane for driving cows.

4\. All the Upanishads are the cows, the Son of the cowherd is the
milker, Pârtha is the calf, men of purified intellect are the drinkers
and the supreme nectar Gitâ is the milk.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

5\. I salute Krishna, the Guru of the Universe, God, the son of
Vasudeva, the Destroyer of Karma and Chânura, the supreme bliss of
Devaki.

6\. The battle-river, with Bhishma and Drona as its banks, and
Jayadratha as the water, with the king of Gândhâra as the blue
water-lily, and Shalya as the shark, with Kripa as the current and

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Karna as the
breakers, with Ashvatthâmâ and Vikarna as terrible Makaras and
Duryodhana as the whirlpool in it,—was indeed crossed over by the
Pândavas, with Keshava as the ferry-man.

7\. May the taintless lotus of the Mahâbhârata, growing on the waters of
the words of Parâshara's son, having the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gitâ as its strong
sweet fragrance, with many a narrative as its stamens, fully opened by
the discourses on Hari and drunk joyously day after day by the Bhramara
of the good and the pure in the world,—be productive of the supreme good
to him who is eager to destroy the taint of Kali!

8\. I salute that All-bliss Mâdhava whose compassion makes the mute
eloquent and the cripple cross mountains.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

9\. Salutation to that God Whom the creator Brahmâ, Varuna, Indra, Rudra
and the Maruts praise with divine hymns; Whom the singers of Sâma sing,
by the Vedas, with their full complement of parts, consecutive sections
and Upanishads; Whom the Yogis see with their minds absorbed in Him
through perfection in meditation, and Whose limit the hosts of Devas and
Asuras know not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Invocation](sbg05)

</div>
