<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbg16)  [Next](sbg18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766103498/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita*, English translation and commentary by Swami
Swarupananda, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

### TWELFTH CHAPTER

Arjuna said:

1\. Those devotees who, ever-steadfast, thus worship Thee, and those
also who worship the Imperishable, the Unmanifested,—which of them are
better versed in Yoga? <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265)

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

The Blessed Lord said:

2\. Those who, fixing their mind on Me, worship Me, ever-steadfast, and
endowed with supreme Shraddhâ, they in My opinion are the best versed in
Yoga.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

3-4. But those also, who worship the Imperishable, the Indefinable, the
Unmanifested, the Omnipresent, the Unthinkable, the Unchangeable, the
Immovable, the Eternal,—having subdued all the senses, even-minded
everywhere, engaged in the welfare of all beings, verily, they reach
only Myself. <span id="fr_266"></span>[3](#fn_266)

5\. Greater is their trouble whose minds are set on the Unmanifested;
for the goal of the Unmanifested is very hard for the embodied to
reach. <span id="fr_267"></span>[5](#fn_267)

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

6-7. But those who worship Me, resigning all actions in Me, regarding Me
as the Supreme Goal, meditating on Me with single-minded Yoga,—to these
whose

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

mind is set on Me, verily, I become ere long, O son of Prithâ, the
Saviour out of the ocean of the mortal Samsâra. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[6](#fn_268)

8\. Fix thy mind on Me only, place thy intellect in Me: (then) thou
shalt no doubt live in Me hereafter. <span
id="fr_269"></span>[8](#fn_269)

9\. If thou art unable to fix thy mind

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

steadily on Me, then by Abhyâsa-Yoga do thou seek to reach Me, O
Dhananjaya. <span id="fr_270"></span>[9](#fn_270)

10\. If also thou art unable to practise Abhyâsa, be thou intent on
doing actions -for My sake. Even by doing actions for My sake, thou
shalt attain perfection.

11\. If thou art unable to do even

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

this, then taking refuge in Me, abandon the fruit of all action,
self-controlled. <span id="fr_271"></span>[11](#fn_271)

12\. Better indeed is knowledge than (blind) Abhyâsa; meditation (with
knowledge) is more esteemed than (mere) knowledge; than meditation the
renunciation

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

of the fruit of action; peace immediately follows renunciation. <span
id="fr_272"></span>[12](#fn_272)

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

13-14. He who hates no creature, and is friendly and compassionate
towards all, who is free from the feelings of 'I and mine,' even-minded
in pain and pleasure, forbearing, ever content, steady in meditation,
self-controlled, and possessed of firm conviction, with mind and
intellect fixed on Me,—he who is thus devoted to Me, is dear to Me.

15\. He by whom the world is not agitated and who cannot be agitated by
the world, who is freed from joy, envy, fear and anxiety,—he is dear to
Me.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

16\. He who is free from dependence, who is pure, prompt, unconcerned,
untroubled, renouncing every undertaking,—he who is thus devoted to Me,
is dear to Me. <span id="fr_273"></span>[16](#fn_273)

17\. He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires,
renouncing good and evil, full of devotion, he is dear to Me. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[17](#fn_274)

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

18-19. He who is the same to friend and foe, and also in honour and
dishonour; who is the same in heat and cold, and in pleasure and pain;
who is free from attachment; to whom censure and praise are equal; who
is silent, content with anything, homeless, steady-minded, full of
devotion,—that man is dear to Me. <span id="fr_275"></span>[18](#fn_275)

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

20\. And they who follow this Immortal Dharma, as described above,
endued with Shraddhâ, regarding Me as the Supreme Goal, and
devoted,—they are exceedingly dear to Me.

The end of the twelfth chapter designated, <span class="smallcaps">The
Way of Devotion</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_265"></span>[276:1](sbg17.htm#fr_265) *Thus:* as declared
in the last preceding verse (xi. 55).

*The Unmanifested*—Avyaktam—*i.e.*, That which is incomprehensible to
the senses, as devoid of all Upâdhis.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[278:3](sbg17.htm#fr_266) *Worship*—Upâsanâ—is
approaching the object of worship by way of meditating on it, in
accordance with the teachings of the Shâstras and the Guru, and dwelling
steadily in the current of that one thought, even as a thread of oil
poured from one vessel to another.

*Unchangeable*—Kutastha: lit., remaining like a mass. He who is seated
in Mâyâ as its Witness.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[278:5](sbg17.htm#fr_267) <span
id="page_279">p. 279</span> *The embodied*—Those who are attached to, or
have identified themselves with, their bodies.

No comparison between the worshippers of the qualified and unqualified
Brahman is meant here—since by the context, both reach the same goal.
The path of the qualified Brahman is described as superior only because
it is easier. The path of the unqualified Brahman is harder, because of
the necessity of having to abandon all attachment to the body, from the
very beginning of the practice.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[280:6](sbg17.htm#fr_268) *Mortal Samsâra:* The
round of birth and death.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[280:8](sbg17.htm#fr_269) *Mind*—Manas: purpose
and thought.

*Intellect*—the faculty which resolves and determines.

*Live in Me*—as My Self.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[281:9](sbg17.htm#fr_270) *Abhyâsa-Yoga:* the
practice of repeatedly withdrawing the mind from the objects to which it
wanders, and trying to fix it on one thing.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[282:11](sbg17.htm#fr_271) In the preceding
Slokas,—first, the concentration of the mind on the Lord is enjoined; in
case of inability to do that, Abhyâsa-Yoga is advised; if one finds that
to be too hard, the performance of actions for the sake of the Lord
alone, has been taught. Those who cannot do this even, who want to do
things impelled by personal or other desires, are directed to give up
the fruits of those actions to the Lord—*i.e.*, not to anticipate, dwell
or build on, or care for, the results, knowing them to be dependent upon
the Lord. Those who cannot control their desire for work are taught to
practise: indifference to the effects thereof.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[283:12](sbg17.htm#fr_272) Renunciation of the
fruit of all action, as a means to the attainment of Bliss, is merely
extolled here by the declaration of the superiority of one over another.
Wherefore? Because it constitutes a common factor which immediately
precedes Peace, both in the case of the man of wisdom who is steadily
engaged in devout contemplation, and also of the ignorant one who,
unable to tread the paths taught before, takes it up as the easiest
means to Bliss.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[285:16](sbg17.htm#fr_273) *Free from
dependence*—on the body, the senses, the sense-objects, and their mutual
connections.

Prompt: able to decide rightly and immediately in matters demanding
prompt action.

*Every undertaking*—calculated to secure objects of desire, whether of
this world or of the next.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[285:17](sbg17.htm#fr_274) *Hates:* Frets at
receiving anything undesirable.

*Grieves*—at parting with a beloved object.

*Desires*—the unattained.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[286:18](sbg17.htm#fr_275) *Content with
anything, homeless:* content with the bare means of bodily sustenance.
Says the Mahabharata,—<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

"Who is clad with anything, who is fed on any food, who lies down
anywhere, him the gods call a Brâhman."—*Shanti Parva*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirteenth Chapter. The Discrimination of the Kshetra and the
Kshetrajna](sbg18)

</div>
