[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto18) 
[Next](aoto20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XIV

#### ULYSSES IN THE HUT OF EUMÆUS.

Ulysses followed a steep path that led from the harbour through the
forest and over the top of the mountain, till he reached the hut of
Eumæus, who was the most thrifty servant he had, and had built a number
of fine yards and pigstyes during his master's absence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14:5">5</span></span> Ulysses found
him sitting at the door of his hut, which had been built high up in a
place that could been seen from far; he had his four fierce dogs about
him, and was cutting himself out a pair of sandal shoes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14:29">29</span></span> The dogs
flew at Ulysses, and it was all Eumæus could do to check them; "They
were like," said he, "to have made an

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

end of you, which would have got me into a scrape, and I am in sorrow
enough already through the loss, which I deplore without ceasing, of the
best of masters. But come in, have something to eat, and then tell me
your story."

On this he brought him inside, threw some brushwood on <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:48">48</span></span> the floor, and
spread a goat's skin over it for Ulysses to lie on. "I cannot do much
for you," he said; "servants go in fear when they have young lords over
them, as I now have, for my good old master went to Troy with Agamemnon
and I shall never see him again."

He then went out and killed two sucking pigs, singed them, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:72">72</span></span> cut them up, put
the pieces of meat on skewers to roast on the embers, and brought them
smoking hot, skewers and all, to Ulysses, who floured them. "Eat," said
the swineherd, "a dish of servant's pork; the fuller grown meat has to
go down to the suitors." He then explained how rich Ulysses was.

"And who, pray," said Ulysses, "was this noble master of <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:115">115</span></span> yours? You say
that he fell at Troy, and in that case I might be able to give you news
of him."

"That," answered Eumæus, "may not be: people are <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:121">121</span></span> always coming
and flattering my poor mistress with false hopes, but they are all
liars. My master Ulysses is dead and gone, and I shall never see another
like him. I cannot bear even to mention his name."

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "do not be too hard of belief. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:148">148</span></span> I swear by this
hearth to which I am now come, that Ulysses will return before the
present month is over. If he comes you shall give me a shirt and cloak,
but I will take nothing till then."

"My friend," said Eumæus, "say not another word. You <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:165">165</span></span> will never get
your shirt and cloak. Now, moreover, I am as anxious about his son
Telemachus as I have been about Ulysses himself; for he is gone to
Pylos, and the suitors are lying in wait for him on his return. Let us,
however, say no more about him now; tell me, rather, about yourself, who
you are and how you came here."

Then Ulysses told him a long lying story about his adventures <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_14:191">191</span></span> in Crete: how he
was compelled to go to Troy in joint

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

command with Idomeneus over the Cretan forces; how he made a descent on
Egypt, got taken prisoner, acquired wealth, and afterwards was inveigled
into going to Libya; how on the voyage thither, after leaving Crete, the
ship was wrecked and he was cast on the coast of Thesprotia. "Here it
was," he continued, "that I heard of Ulysses from King Pheidon, who was
expecting him back daily from Dodona, where he had been to consult the
oracle; he told me Ulysses was to return to Ithaca immediately, but
there was a ship bound for Dulichium, and the king sent me on board it
before Ulysses returned from Dodona. The sailors on this ship resolved
to sell me as a slave, and bound me; but they landed on the coast of
Ithaca, where I gave them the slip, and found my way to your hut."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14:360">360</span></span> "Poor
man," answered the swineherd, "but you will never get me to believe
about Ulysses. Why should you tell me such lies? I have heard these
stories too often, and will never believe them again."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14:390">390</span></span> Ulysses
tried still further to convince him, but it was no use, and presently
the under swineherds came back with the pigs that had been out feeding,
and Eumæus told them to kill the best pig they had, and get supper
ready, which they accordingly did. He was a good man and mindful of his
duties to the gods, so when the pig was killed he threw some of its
bristles into the fire and prayed heaven for the return of Ulysses. Then
they supped and went to bed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_14:457">457</span></span> Now it was
a wild rough night, and after they had lain down, Ulysses, fearing that
he might be cold, told another lying story of an adventure he had had at
Troy in company with Ulysses, by means of which Eumæus was induced to
cover him over with a spare cloak of his own. Then the swineherd went
out to pass the night with the pigs—and Ulysses was pleased at seeing
how well he looked after his property, though he believed his master to
be absent. First he slung his sword over his shoulders, and put on a
thick cloak to keep out the wind; he also took the skin of a well-fed
goat, and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he
went to his rest where the pigs were camped under an overhanging rock
that sheltered them from the North Wind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XV. Telemachus Returns](aoto20)
