[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto16) 
[Next](aoto18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XII

#### THE SIRENS—SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS—THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.

"As soon as we were clear of the river Oceanus, we got out into the open
and reached the Ææan island, where there is dawn and sunrise. There we
landed, camped down upon the beach, and waited till morning came. At
daybreak I sent my men to fetch the body of Elpenor, which we burned and
buried. We built a barrow over him, and in it we fixed the oar with
which he had been used to row.

"When Circe heard that we had returned, she came down <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:16">16</span></span> with her maids,
bringing bread and wine. 'To-day,' she said, 'eat and drink, and
to-morrow go on your way.'

"We agreed to this, and feasted the live-long day to the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:28">28</span></span> going down of the
sun, but at nightfall Circe took me aside, and told me of the voyage
that was before us. 'You will first,' said she, 'come to the island of
the two Sirens, who sit in a field of flowers, and warble all who draw
near them to death with the sweetness of their song. Dead men's bones
are lying strewn all round them; still, if you would hear them, you can
stop your men's ears with wax and bid them bind you to a cross-plank on
the mast.

"'As regards the next point that you will reach I can give <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:55">55</span></span> you no definite
instructions as to which of two courses you must take. You must do the
best you can. I can only put the alternatives before you. I refer to the
cliffs which the gods call "the wanderers," and which close in on
anything that would pass through them—even upon the doves that are
bringing ambrosia to Father Jove. The sea moreover is strewn with
wreckage from ships which the waves and hurricanes of fire have
destroyed.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:73">73</span></span> "'Of the two
rocks, <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) the one rises in a peak to
heaven, and is overhung at all times with a dark cloud that never leaves
it. It looks towards the West, and there is a cave in it, higher than an
arrow can reach. In this sits Scylla yelping with a squeaky voice like
that of a young hound, but she is an awful monster with six long necks
and six heads with three rows of teeth in each; whenever a ship passes,
she springs out and snatches up a man in each mouth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:102">102</span></span> "'The
other rock is lower, but they are so close that you can shoot an arrow
from the one to the other. \[On it there is <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_12:103">103</span></span> a fig-tree in full leaf\]. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[†](#fn_26) Underneath it is the terrible whirlpool of
Charybdis, which sucks the water down and vomits it out again three
times a day. If you are there when she is sucking, not even Neptune can
save you; so hug the Scylla side, for you had better lose six men than
your whole crew.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:127">127</span></span> "'You will
then arrive at the Thrinacian island, where you will see the cattle of
the sun (and also his sheep) in charge of <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_12:132">132</span></span> the two nymphs Lampetie and Phaëthusa.
If you leave these flocks unharmed, after much trouble you will yet
reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, you will lose your men, and though
you may get home after all, it will be late.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:142">142</span></span> "Here she
ended, and at break of day we set out, with a fair wind which Circe sent
us. I then told my men about the two Sirens, but had hardly done so
before we were at the island itself, whereon it fell a dead calm. I
kneaded wax and stopped the men's ears; they bound me to a cross-plank
on the mast; I heard the Sirens sing, and when I struggled to free
myself they bound me still tighter. So we passed the island by.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:201">201</span></span> "Shortly
after this I saw smoke and a great wave ahead, and heard a dull thumping
sound. The sea was in an uproar, and my men were so frightened that they
loosed hold of their

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

oars, till I put heart into them, bade them row their hardest, and told
the steersman to hug the Scylla side. But I said nothing about Scylla,
though I kept straining my eyes all over her rock to see if I could espy
her.

"So there we were, with Scylla on the one hand and dread <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:234">234</span></span> Charybdis on the
other. We could see the sea seething as in a cauldron, and the black
ooze at the bottom with a wall of whirling waters careering round it.
While my men were pale with fear at this awful sight, Scylla shot out
her long necks and swooped down on six of them. I could see their poor
hands and feet struggling in the air as she bore them aloft, and hear
them call out my name in one last despairing cry. This was the most
horrid sight that I saw in all my voyages.

"Having passed the cliffs, <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27) and
Scylla and Charybdis, we <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_12:260">260</span></span> came to the Thrinacian island, and from
my ship I could hear the cattle lowing, and the sheep bleating. Then,
remembering the warning that Tiresias and Circe had given me, I bade my
men give the island a wide berth. But Eurylochus was insolent, and sowed
disaffection among them, so that I was forced to yield and let them land
for the night, after making them swear most solemnly that they would do
the cattle no harm. We camped, therefore, on the beach near a stream.

"But in the third watch of the night there came up a great <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:312">312</span></span> gale, and in the
morning we drew our ship ashore and left her in a large cave wherein the
sea nymphs meet and hold their dances. I then called my men together,
and again warned them.

"It blew a gale from the South for a whole month, except <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_12:325">325</span></span> when the wind
shifted to the East, and there was no other wind save only South and
East. As long as the corn and wine which Circe had given us held out, my
men kept their word, but after a time they began to feel the pangs of
hunger, and I went apart to pray heaven to take compassion upon us. I
washed my hands and prayed, and when I had done so, I fell asleep.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:339">339</span></span> "Meanwhile
Eurylochus set my men on to disobey me, and they drove in some of the
cattle and killed them. When I woke, and had got nearly back to the
ship, I began to smell roast meat and knew full well what had happened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:374">374</span></span> "The nymph
Lampetie went immediately and told the Sun what my men had done. He was
furious, and threatened Jove that if he was not revenged he would never
shine in heaven again but would go down and give his light among the
dead. 'All day long,' said he, 'whether I was going up heaven or down,
there was nothing I so dearly loved to look upon as those cattle.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:385">385</span></span> "Jove told
him he would wreck our ship as soon as it was well away from land, and
the Sun said no more. I know all this because Calypso told me, and she
had it from Mercury.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:397">397</span></span> "My men
feasted six days—alarmed by the most awful prodigies; for the skins of
the cattle kept walking about, and the joints of meat lowed while they
were being roasted. On the seventh day the wind dropped and we got away
from the island, but as soon as we were out of sight of land a sudden
squall sprang up, during which Jove struck our ship with his
thunderbolts and broke it up. All my men were drowned, and so too should
I have been, had I not made myself a raft by lashing the mast (which I
found floating about) and the ship's keel together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:426">426</span></span> \["The
wind, which during the squall came from the West, now changed to the
South, and blew all night, so that by morning I was back between Scylla
and Charybdis again. My raft got carried down the whirlpool, but I clung
on to the boughs of the fig tree, for a weary weary while, during which
I felt as impatient as a magistrate who is detained in court by
troublesome cases when he wants to get home to dinner. But in the course
of time my raft worked its way out again, and when it was underneath me
I dropped on to it and was carried out of the pool. Happily for me Jove
did not let Scylla see me.\] <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_12:447">447</span></span> "Thence I
was borne along for nine days in the sea, and was

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

taken to the Ogygian island of Calypso. I told you about this yesterday
and will not repeat it, for I hate saying the same thing twice over."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[54:\*](aoto17.htm#fr_25) The want of coherence
here is obvious, but as it is repeated when Ulysses ought to come to the
wandering cliffs (which he never does) it must be referred to a *lacuna*
not in the text, but in the writer's sources of information—of which she
seems fully aware.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[54:†](aoto17.htm#fr_26) I suppose this line to
have been added when lines 426-446 of this book were added.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[55:\*](aoto17.htm#fr_27) The wandering cliffs
are certainly intended, for when Ulysses is recapitulating his
adventures in Book xxiii. he expressly mentions having reached the,
πλαγκτὰς πέτρας, just after the Sirens, and before Scylla and Charybdis
(xxiii. 327). The writer is determined to have them in her story however
little she may know about them.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[56:\*](aoto17.htm#fr_28) I incline to think
that these lines are an after thought, added by the writer herself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIII. Ulysses is Taken Back to Ithaca](aoto18)
