[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto12) 
[Next](aoto14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book VIII

#### THE PHÆACIAN GAMES AND BANQUET IN HONOUR OF ULYSSES.

When morning came Alcinous called an assembly of the Phæacians, and
Minerva went about urging every one to come

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and see the wonderful stranger. She also gave Ulysses a more imposing
presence that he might impress the people favourably. When the Phæacians
were assembled Alcinous said:—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:28">28</span></span> "I do not
know who this stranger is, nor where he comes from; but he wants us to
send him to his own home, and no guest of mine was ever yet able to
complain that I did not send him home quickly enough. Let us therefore
fit out a new ship with a crew of fifty-two men, and send him. The crew
shall come to my house and I will find them in food which they can cook
for themselves. The aldermen and councillors shall be feasted inside the
house. I can take no denial, and we will have Demodocus to sing to us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:46">46</span></span> The ship and
crew were immediately found, and the sailors with all the male part of
the population swarmed to the house of Alcinous till the yards and barns
and buildings were crowded. The king provided them with twelve sheep,
eight pigs and two bullocks, which they killed and cooked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:62">62</span></span> The leading
men of the town went inside the inner courtyard; Pontonous, the *major
domo*, conducted the blind bard Demodocus to a seat which he set near
one of the bearing-posts that supported the roof of the cloisters, hung
his lyre on a peg over his head, and shewed him how to feel for it with
his hands. He also set a table close by him with refreshments on it, to
which he Could help himself whenever he liked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:72">72</span></span> As soon as
the guests had done eating Demodocus began to sing the quarrel between
Ulysses and Achilles before Troy, a lay which at the time was famous.
This so affected Ulysses that he kept on weeping as long as the bard
sang, and though he was able to conceal his tears from the company
generally, Alcinous perceived his distress and proposed that they should
all now adjourn to the athletic sports—which were to consist mainly of
boxing, wrestling, jumping, and foot racing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:105">105</span></span> Demodocus,
therefore, hung the lyre on its peg and was led out to the place where
the sports were to be held. The whole town flocked to see them.
Clytoneüs won the foot race, Euryalus took the prize for wrestling,
Amphialus was the best jumper, Elatreus the best disc-thrower, and
Alcinous’ son Laodamas the best boxer.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Laodamas and Euryalus then proposed that Ulysses should <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:131">131</span></span> enter himself for
one of the prizes. Ulysses replied that he was a stranger and a
suppliant; moreover, he had lately gone through great hardships, and
would rather be excused.

Euryalus on this insulted Ulysses, and said that he supposed <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:158">158</span></span> he was some
grasping merchant who thought of nothing but his freights. "You have
none of the look," said he, "of an athlete about you."

Ulysses was furious, and told Euryalus that he was a good-looking <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:164">164</span></span> young fool. He
then took up a disc far heavier than those which the Phæacians were in
the habit of throwing. <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) The disc
made a hurtling sound as it passed through the air, and easily surpassed
any throw that had been made yet. Thus encouraged he made another long
and very angry speech, in which he said he would compete with any
Phæacian in any contest they chose to name, except in running, for he
was still so much pulled down that he thought they might beat him here.
"Also," he said, "I will not compete in anything with Laodamas. He is my
host's son, and it is a most unwise thing for a guest to challenge any
member of his host's family. A man must be an idiot to think of such a
thing."

"Sir," said Alcinous, "I understand that you are displeased <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:236">236</span></span> at some remarks
that have fallen from one of our athletes, who has thrown doubt upon
your prowess in a way that no gentleman would do. I hear that you have
also given us a general challenge. I should explain that we are not
famous for our skill in boxing or wrestling, but are singularly fleet
runners and bold mariners. We are also much given to song and dance, and
we like warm baths and frequent changes of linen. So now come forward
some of you who are the nimblest dancers, and show the stranger how much
we surpass other nations in all graceful accomplishments. Let some one
also bring Demodocus's lyre from my house where he has left it."

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:256">256</span></span> The lyre
was immediately brought, the dancers began to dance, and Ulysses admired
the merry twinkling of their feet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:266">266</span></span> While they
were dancing Demodocus sang the intrigue between Mars and Venus in the
house of Vulcan, and told how Vulcan took the pair prisoners. All the
gods came to see <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_8:324">324</span></span> them; but the goddesses were modest and
would not come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:373">373</span></span> Alcinous
then made Halius and Laodamas have a game at ball, after which Ulysses
expressed the utmost admiration of their skill. Charmed with the
compliment Ulysses had paid his sons, the king said that the twelve
aldermen (with himself, which would make thirteen) must at once give
Ulysses a shirt and cloak and a talent of gold, so that he might eat his
supper with a light heart. As for Euryalus, he must not only make a
present, but apologise as well, for he had been rude.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:398">398</span></span> Euryalus
admitted his fault, and gave Ulysses his sword with its scabbard, which
was of new ivory. He said Ulysses would find it worth a great deal of
money to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:412">412</span></span> Ulysses
thanked him, wished him all manner of good fortune, and said he hoped
Euryalus would not feel the want of the sword which he had just given
him along with his apology.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:417">417</span></span> Night was
now falling, they therefore adjourned to the house of Alcinous. Here the
presents began to arrive, whereon the king desired Arēte to find Ulysses
a chest in which to stow them, and to put a shirt and clean cloak in it
as his own contribution; he also declared his intention of giving him a
gold cup. <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) Meanwhile, he said that
Ulysses had better have a warm bath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_8:433">433</span></span> The bath
was made ready. Arēte packed all the gold and presents which the
Phæacian aldermen had sent, as also the shirt and tunic from Alcinous.
Arēte told Ulysses to see to the fastening, lest some one should rob him
while he was <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_8:445">445</span></span> asleep on the ship; Ulysses therefore
fastened the lid on to

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the chest with a knot which Circe had taught him. He then went into the
bath room—very gladly, for he had not had a bath since he left Calypso,
who as long as he was with her had taken as good care of him as though
he had been a god.

As he came from the bath room Nausicaa was standing by <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:457">457</span></span> one of the
bearing-posts that supported the roof of the cloisters and bade him
farewell, reminding him at the same time that it was she who had been
the saving of him—a fact which Ulysses in a few words gracefully
acknowledged.

He then took his seat at table, and after dinner, at his <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:469">469</span></span> request,
Demodocus sang the Sack of Troy and the Sally of the Achæans from the
Wooden Horse. This again so affected him that he could not restrain his
tears, which, however, Alcinous again alone perceived.

The king, therefore, made a speech in which he said that <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_8:536">536</span></span> the stranger
ought to tell them his name. He must have one, for people always gave
their children names as soon as they were born. He need not be uneasy
about his escort. All he had to do was to say where he wanted to go, and
the Phæacian ships were so clever that they would take him there of
their own accord. Nevertheless he remembered hearing his father
Nausithous say, that one day Neptune would be angry with the Phæacians
for giving people escorts so readily, and had said he would wreck one of
their ships as it was returning, and would also bury their city under a
high mountain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[39:\*](aoto13.htm#fr_20) It is a little odd
that this disc should have been brought, considering that none such were
used by the Phæacians. We must suppose that Minerva put it in along with
the others, and then shed a thick darkness over it, which prevented the
attendants from noticing it.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[40:\*](aoto13.htm#fr_21) Alcinous never seems
to have got beyond saying that he was going to give the cup; he never
gives it, nor yet the talent—the familiar an ὣσ εἰπὼν ἐν χερσὶ τίθει
κ.τ.λ. is noticeably absent. He found the chest, and he took a great
deal of pains about stowing the presents in the ship that was to take
Ulysses to Ithaca (see xiii. 18, &c.), but here his contributions seem
to have ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX. The Voyages of Ulysses: Cicons, Lotus Eaters, and the
Cyclops](aoto14)
