[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto40) 
[Next](aoto42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

### Chapter XIV

### THAT THE ILIAD WHICH THE WRITER OF THE ODYSSEY KNEW WAS THE SAME AS WHAT WE NOW HAVE.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> remains for me to show that the writer
of the "Odyssey" had the "Iliad" before her to all intents and purposes
as we now have it, and to deal with the manner in which the poem grew
under her hands.

In my own copies of the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" I have underlined all the
passages that are common to both poems, giving the references. It is
greatly to be wished that one or other of our University presses would
furnish us with an "Odyssey" in which all the Iliadic passages are
printed in a slightly different type and with a reference, somewhat in
the style of the extracts from "Il." <span class="smallcaps">I</span>.
and <span class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>. here given. The passages are to
be found at the end of Dunbar's *Concordance to the Odyssey*, but the
marking of them as they occur in the course of the poem will be more
instructive. In my translations of the poems (now finished) I have
translated identical passages as nearly as possible in identical words.
In the "Odyssey" I propose to print them in another type and give the
references to the "Iliad." In the translation of the "Iliad" there is no
use in doing this, for no one supposes that Homer took anything from the
"Odyssey." The publication, however, of these translations must, I fear,
be postponed, but I will give in this Chapter as many instances as I
think will be sufficient to satisfy the reader that the "Iliad" of the
writer of the "Odyssey" was our own "Iliad."

I will begin by giving two passages from the "Iliad," one from Book
<span class="smallcaps">I</span>., and the other from Book <span
class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>., the references in all cases being to the
"Odyssey." These are perhaps fuller of lines adopted by the writer of
the "Odyssey" than any others in the "Iliad," though there are some that
run them closely. Lines or parts of lines in the smaller type do not
occur in the "Odyssey."

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

The first passage that I will call attention to is "Iliad" <span
class="smallcaps">I</span>. 455-485, which is as follows:—

<span id="img_23300"></span> ![Extended quote from Iliad (&lt;span
style=](img/23300.jpg)

I should perhaps tell the reader that the first Book of the "Iliad" is
one of the few which modern criticism allows to remain in the possession
of the poet who wrote what Professor Jebb calls the "primary" "Iliad."

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

The second of the two passages above referred to is "Iliad" <span
class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>. 621-651, which runs:—

<span id="img_23400"></span> ![Extended quote from Iliad (&lt;span
style=](img/23400.jpg)

Professor Jebb is disposed to attribute "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>. to the writer of "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">IX</span>., which he does not ascribe to Homer. I
regret that I can go no further with him than that "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>. and "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">IX</span>. are by the same hand.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

It is beyond my scope to point out the slight and perfectly unimportant
variations from the "Iliad" which are found in some of the Odyssean
lines to which I have given a reference; they are with hardly an
exception such as are occasioned by difference of context. Though
unimportant they are not uninteresting, but I must leave them for the
reader to examine if he feels inclined to do so,

He will observe that some lines are nearly and some quite common to the
two extracts above given, and I should add that not a few other lines
are repeated elsewhere in the "Iliad," but enough remains that is
peculiar to either of the two extracts to convince me that the writer of
the "Odyssey" knew them both. And not only this, but they seem to have
risen in her mind as spontaneously, and often no doubt as unconsciously,
as passages from the Bible, Prayer-book, and Shakespeare do to
ourselves.

If, then, we find the writer so familiar with two such considerable
extracts from the first and last Books of the "Iliad"—for I believe the
reader will feel no more doubt than I do, that she knew them, and was
borrowing from them—can we avoid thinking it probable that she was
acquainted, to say the least of it, with the intermediate Books? Such
surely should be the most natural and least strained conclusion to
arrive at, but I will proceed to chew that she knew the intermediate
Books exceedingly well.

I pass over the way in which Mentor's name is coined from Nestor's
(*cf*. "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 76-77 and "Od." ii. 224,
225, and 228), and will go on to the striking case of Ulysses’ servant
Eurybates. In "Od." xix. 218, 219 Penelope has asked Ulysses (who is
disguised so that she does not recognise him) for details as to the
followers Ulysses had with him on his way to Troy, and Ulysses answers
that he had a servant named Eurybates who was hunched in the shoulders
(xix. 247). Turning to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 184 we
find that Ulysses had a servant from Ithaca named Eurybates, but he does
not seem to have been hunched in the shoulders; on reading further,
however, we immediately come to Thersites, "whose shoulders were hunched
over his chest" ("Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 217, 218). Am
I too hasty in concluding that the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

writer of the "Odyssey," wanting an additional detail for Penelope's
greater assurance, and not finding one in the "Iliad," took the
hunchiness off the back of the next man to him and set it on to the back
of Eurybates? I do not say that no other hypothesis can be framed in
order to support a different conclusion, but I think the one given above
will best commend itself to common sense; and the most natural inference
from it is that the writer of the "Odyssey" knew at any rate part of
"Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. much as we have it now.

I often wondered why Menelaus should have been made to return on the
self-same day as that on which Orestes was holding the funeral feast of
Ægisthus and Clytemnestra; the Greek which tells us that he did so
runs:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

αὐτῆμαρ δέ οἱ ἦλθε βοὴν ἀγαθὸς Μενέλαος ("Od." iii. 311).

</div>

I did not find the explanation till I remembered that in "Iliad" II.
408, when Agamemnon has been inviting the Achæan chieftains to a
banquet, he did not ask Menelaus, for Menelaus came of his own accord:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

αὐτόματος δέ οἱ ἦλθε βοὴν ἀγαθὸς Μενέλαος,

</div>

on remembering this I observed that it would be less trouble to make
Menelaus come home on the very day of Ægisthus’ funeral feast than to
alter αὐτόματος in any other way which would leave the rest of the line
available. I should be ashamed of the writer of the "Odyssey" for having
done this, unless I believed it to be merely due to unconscious
cerebration. That the Odyssean and Iliadic lines are taken the one from
the other will approve itself to the instincts of any one who is
accustomed to deal with literary questions at all, and it is not
conceivable that Menelaus should, in the "Iliad," have been made to come
uninvited because in the "Odyssey" he happened to come back on the very
day when Orestes was holding Ægisthus’ funeral feast; the Iliadic
context explains why Menelaus came uninvited—it was because he knew that
Agamemnon was too busy to invite him. I infer, therefore, that the
writer of the "Odyssey" again shows herself familiar with a part of
"Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

I can see no sufficient reason for even questioning that the catalogues
of the Achæan and Trojan forces in the second Book of the "Iliad" were
part of the "Iliad" as it left Homer's hands. They are wanted so as to
explain who the people are of whom we are to hear in the body of the
poem; their position is perfectly natural; the Achæan catalogue is
prepared in Nestor's speech (n. 360-368); Homer almost tells us that he
has had assistance in compiling it, for he invokes the Muse, as he does
more than once in later Books, and declares that he knows nothing of his
own knowledge, but depends entirely upon what has been told him <span
id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87); the lines quoted or alluded to in the
"Odyssey" are far too marked to allow of our doubting that the writer
knew both catalogues familiarly; I cannot within my limits give them,
but would call the reader's attention to "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. 488, *cf*. "Od." iv. 240; to the
considering Sparta and Lacedæmon as two places ("Il." <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. 581, 582) which the writer of the "Odyssey"
does (iv. 10), though she has abundantly shown that she knew them to be
but one; to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 601, *cf*. "Od."
iii. 386; to the end of line 614, θαλάσσια ἔργα μεμήλει, *cf*. "Od." v.
67, θαλάσσια ἔργα μέμηλεν; to 670, *cf*. "Od." ii. 12; to 673, 674,
*cf*. "Od." xi. 469, 470; to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>.
706, αὐτοκασίγντος, which must surely be parent of the line
αὐτοκασιγνήτη ὀλοόφρονος Αἰήταο, "Od." x. 137; to "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. 707, ὁπλότερος γένεῇ· ὁ δ᾽ ἅμα πρότερος καὶ
ἀρείωον, *cf*. "Od." xix. 184, where the same line occurs; to "Il."
<span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 721, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἐν νήσῳ κεῖτο κρατέῤ
ἄλγεα πάσχων, *cf*. "Od." v. 13, where the same line occurs, but with
κεῖται instead of κεῖτο to suit the context; *cf*. also "Od." v. 395,
where we find πατρός, ὃς ἐν νούσῳ κεῖται, κρατέῤ ἄλγεα πάσχων, a line
which shows how completely the writer of the "Odyssey" was saturated
with the "Iliad"; to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 755,
Στυγὸς ὕδατός ἐστιν ἀπορρώξ, *cf*. "Od." x. 514, where the same words
end the line; to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 774, δίσκοισιν
τέρποντο καὶ αἰγανέῃσιν ἱέντες *cf*. "Od." iv. 626, and xvii. 168, where
the same line occurs; to "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 776,
where the horses of the Myrmidons are spoken of as λωτὸν ἐρεπτόμενοι,
*cf*. "Od." ix. 97, where the same words

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

are used for Ulysses’ men when with the Lotus-eaters; to "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. 873, νήπιος, οὐδέ τί οἱ τό γ᾽ ἐπήρκεσε
λυγρὸν ὄλεθρον, *cf*. "Od." iv. 292, ἄλγιον, οὐ γάρ οἵ τι τά γ᾽ ἤρκεσε
λυγρὸν ὄλεθρον.

None of the passages above quoted or referred to are to be found
anywhere else in the "Iliad," so that if from the "Iliad" at all, they
are from the catalogues. But having already shown, as I believe, that
the writer of the "Odyssey" knew lines 76, 77, 78, 184, 216, 217, and
408 of Book <span class="smallcaps">II</span>., and accepting the rest
of the Book as written by Homer, with or without assistance, I shall not
argue further in support of my contention that the whole Book <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. was known to, and occasionally borrowed
from, by the writer of the "Odyssey."

Perhaps the prettiest example of unconscious cerebration in the
"Odyssey" is to be found in the opening line of "Od." iii., which runs
ἠέλιος δ᾽ ἀνόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα λίμνην, which is taken from "Il."
<span class="smallcaps">V</span>. 20, Ἰδαῖος δ᾽ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν
περικαλλέα δίφρον. One is at a loss to conceive how a writer so
apparently facile should drift thus on to an Iliadic line of such
different signification except as the result of saturation. It is
inconceivable that she should have cast about for a line to say that the
sun was rising, and thought that Idæus jumping off his chariot would do.
She again has this line in her mind when in Book xxii. 95 she writes
Τηλέμαχος δ᾽ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν δολιχόσκιον ἔγχος.

The same kind of unconscious cerebration evidenced by the lines last
referred to leads her sometimes to repeat lines of her own in a strange
way, without probably being at all aware of it. As for example:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

          βασιλῆες……εἰσὶ καὶ ἄλλοι  
πολλοὶ ἐν ἀμφιάλῳ Ἰθάκῃ νέοι ἠδὲ παλαιοί,  
                               (i. 394, 395).

</div>

This passage in the following Book becomes:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                                      εἰσὶ δὲ νῆες  
πολλαὶ ἐν ἀμφιάλῳ Ἰθάκῃ νέαι ἠδὲ παλαιαί·  
                                (ii. 292, 293).

</div>

Another similar case is that of the famous line about

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sisyphus’ stone
bounding down hill in a string of dactyls, "Od." xi. 598, it runs:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

αὖτις ἔπειτα πέδονδε κυλίνδετο λᾶας ἀναιδής.

</div>

"The cruel stone came bounding down again on to the plain." I believe
this to be nothing but an unconscious adaptation from the one dactylic
line that I can remember in the "Iliad," I mean:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἀμφοτέρω δὲ τένοντε καὶ ὀστέα λᾶας ἀναιδὴς  
ἄχρις ἀπηλοίησεν.  
                                      "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">IV</span>. 521, 522.

</div>

"The cruel stone shattered the bones of the ancle, tendons and all."
Granted (which is very doubtful) that there may be an accommodation of
sound to sense in the Odyssean line, I contend that the suggestion came
from the Iliadic line.

I would gladly go through the whole "Iliad" calling attention to the use
the writer of the "Odyssey" has made of it, but to do this would require
hardly less than a book to itself. I will therefore ask the reader to
accept my statement that no one Book in the "Iliad" shows any marked
difference from the others as regards the use that has been made of it,
and will limit myself to those Books that have been most generally
declared to be later additions—I mean Book <span
class="smallcaps">X</span>. and Book <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>.—for I consider that I have already
sufficiently shown the writer of the "Odyssey" to have known Books <span
class="smallcaps">I</span>., <span class="smallcaps">XXIV</span>., and
the Catalogues in Book <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. It may be
well, however, to include Book <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. in my
examination, for this is one of the most undoubted, and it will be
interesting to note that the writer of the "Odyssey" has both the most
doubted and undoubted Books equally at her fingers’ ends. I shall only
call attention to passages that do not occur more than once in the
"Iliad," and will omit the very numerous ones that may be considered as
common form.

In "Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 141, 142 we find:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τίφθ᾽ οὕτω;……  
Νύκτα δἰ ἀμβροσίην, and in "Od." ix 403, 404.  
τίπτε τόσον……  
Νύκτα δἰ ἀμβροσίην.

</div>

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

In "Il." x. 142, ὅτι δὴ χρειὼ τόσον ἵκει; *cf*. "Od." ii. 28, τίνα χρειὼ
τόσον ἵκει.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 158 begins with the words λὰξ
ποδὶ κίνησας. So also does "Od." xv. 45;

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 214 has, ὅσσοι γὰρ νήσεειυ
ἐπικρατέουσιν ἄριστοι, this line is found "Od." i.: 245, xvi; 122, xix.
130, but with νήσοισιν instead of νήεσσιν.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 220 ends with ὀτρύνει κραδίη καὶ
θυμὸς ἀγήνωρ, so also does "Od." xviii. 61.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 221 has ἀνδρῶν δυσμενέων δῦναι
στράτον ἐγγὺς ἐόντων; *cf*. "Od." iv. 246, ἀνδρῶν δυσμενέων κατέδυ πόλιν
εὐρυάγυιαν·

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 243, 244 have, πῶς ἂν ἔπειτ᾽
Ὀδυσῆος ἐγὼ θείοιο λαθοίμην, οὗ περὶ μὲν………

In "Od." i. 65, 66 we find the same words only with ὅς instead of οὖ.
This is a very convincing case, for the ἔπειτα, which is quite natural
in the Iliadic line, is felt to be rather out of place in the Odyssean
one, and makes it plain that the Odyssean passage was taken from the
Iliadic, not *vice versâ*.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 255 ends with μενοπτόλεμος
Θρασυμήδης, so also does "Od." iii. 442.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 278, 279,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

………ἥ τέ μοι αἰεὶ  
ἐν πάντεσσι πόνοισι παρίστασαι……

</div>

*cf*. "Od." xiii. 300,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

………ἥ τέ τοι αἰεὶ  
ἐν πάντεσσι πόνοισι παρίσταμαι……

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 292-295,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

σοὶ δ᾽ αὖ ἐγὼ ῥέξω βοῦν ἦνιν εὐρυμέτωοπον  
ἀδμήτην, ἣ οὔ πω ὑπὸ ζυγὸν ἤγαγεν ἀνήρ.  
τήν τοι ἐγὼ ῥέξω χρυσὸν κέρασιν περιχεύας.  
ὣς ἔφαν εὐχόμενοι, τῶν δ᾽ ἔκλυε Παλλὰς Ἀθήνη.

</div>

The first three of these four lines is repeated verbatim in "Od." iii.
382-384. In "Od." iii. 385 the fourth line becomes

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ὣς ἔφατ᾽ εὐχόμεος τοῦ δ᾽ ἔκλυε Παλλὰς Ἀθήνη.

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 351……ὅσσον τ᾽ ἐπὶ οὖρα πέλονται
ἡμιόνων, *cf*. "Od." viii. 124 ὅσσον τ᾽ ἐν νείῳ οὖρον πέλει ἡμιόνοιιν.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 400, τὸν δ᾽ ἐπιμειδήσας προσέφη
πολύμητις Ὀδύσσευς this line occurs "Od." xxii. 371.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 429 ends with δῖοί τε Πελασγοί,
so also does "Od." xix. 177.x

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 457, φθεγγομένου δ᾽ ἄρα τοῦ γε
κάρη κονίῃσιν ἐμίχθη, this line is found '"Od." xxii. 329.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 534, ψεύσομαι ἦ ἔτυμον ἐρέω;
κέλεται δέ με θυμός. In "Od." iv. 140 this line is found.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 556, ῥεῖα θεός γ᾽ ἐθέλων καί,
κ.τ.λ. *Cf*. "Od." iii. 231.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. 556, ἔς ῥ᾽ ἀραμίνθους βάντες
εὐξέωτας λούσαντο. See "Od." iv. 48, xvii. 87.

Here, then, are seventeen apparent quotations from Book x., omitting any
claim on lines which, though they are found in the "Odyssey," are also
found in other Books of the "Iliad," from which, and not from Book X.,
it may be alleged that the writer of the "Odyssey" took them. This makes
the writer of the "Odyssey" to have taken about one line in every 33 of
the 579 lines of which Book <span class="smallcaps">X</span>. consists.
Disciples of Wolf—no two of whom, however, are of the same opinion, so
it is hard to say who they are—must either meet my theory that the
"Odyssey" is all written at one place, by one hand, and in the eleventh
century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, with stronger weapons than
during the last six years they have shown any signs of possessing, or
they must full back on some Laputan-manner-of-making-books theory, which
they will be able to devise better than I can.

I do not forget that the opponents of the genuineness of "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">X</span>. may contend that the passages above given
were taken from the "Odyssey," but this contention should not be urged
in respect of Book X. more than in respect of the other Books, which are
all of them equally replete with passages that are found in the
"Odyssey," and in the case given above of "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">X</span>. 243, 244 and "Od." i. 65, 66, it is not easy
to doubt that the Iliadic passage is the original, and the Odyssean the
copy;

I will now deal with the undoubted Book <span
class="smallcaps">XI</span>., omitting as in the case of Book X. all
lines that occur in other Books, unless I call special attention to
them.

The first two lines of Book <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. are
identical with the first two of Book v. of the "Odyssey," but "Il."
<span class="smallcaps">XI</span>, 2 occurs also in "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XIX</span>. 2.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 42, 43,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἵππουριν· δεινὸν δὲ λόφος καθύπερθεν ἔνευεν,  
εἵλετο δ᾽ ἄλκιμα δοῦρε δύω, κεκορυθμένα χαλκῷ.

</div>

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

These two lines are found "Od." xxii. 124, 125, but the first of them
occurs three or four times elsewhere in the "Iliad."

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 181,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ τάχ᾽ ἔμελλεν ὑπὸ πτόλιν αἰπύ τε τεῖχος  
ἵξεσθαι τότε δὴ……

</div>

*cf*. "Od." iv. 514, 515,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ τάχ᾽ ἔμελλε Μαλέιαων ὄρος αἰπὺ  
ἵξεσθαι τότε δὴ……

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 201, προέηκε τεῒν τάδε
μυθήσασθαι, *cf*. "Od." iv. 829, where the same words occur.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 253, ἀντικρὺς δὲ διέσχε φαεινοῦ
δουρὸς ἀκωκή. *cf*. "Od." xix. 453, where the same line occurs but with
διῆλθε for διέσχε.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 531, ὣς ἄρα φωνήσας ἵμασεν
καλλίτριχας ἵππους *cf*. "Od." xv. 215, where the same line occurs but
with ἔλασεν instead of ἵμασεν.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 624-639. The mess which
Hecamede cooked for Patroclus and Machaon was surely present to the mind
of the writer of the "Odyssey" when she was telling about the mess which
Circe cooked for Ulysses’ men, "Od." x. 234, 235.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 668, 669

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

………οὐ γὰρ ἐμὴ ἲς  
ἔσθ᾽, οἵη πάρος ἔσκεν ἐνὶ γναμπτοῖσι μέλεσσιν

</div>

*cf*. "Od." xi. 393, 394,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἀλλ᾽ οὐ γάρ οἱ ἔτ᾽ ἦν ἲς ἔμπεδος οὐδέ τι κῖκυς  
οἵη περ πάρος ἔσκεν ἐνὶ γναμπτοῖσι μέλεσσιν.

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 678, 679

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

…………ἀγέλας, τόσα πώεα οἰῶν  
τόσσα συῶν συβόσιςα, τόσ᾽ αἰπόλια πλατέ᾽ αἰγῶν.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These lines occur
"Od." xiv. 100, 101 but with ἀγέλαι instead of ἀγέλας.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 742, τὸν μὲν ἐγὼ προσιόντα
βάλον χαλκήρεϊ δουρί· This line is found "Od." xiii 267 but with
κατιόντα for προσιόντα.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. 777, στῆμεν ἐνὶ προθύροισι
ταψὼν δ᾽ ἀνόρουσεν Ἀχιλλεύς, *cf*. "Od." xvi. 12, ἔστη ἐνὶ προθύροισι
ταφὼν δ᾽ ἀνόρουσε συβώτης.

Here we have only eleven well-marked passages common to both poems, in
spite of the fact that Book <span class="smallcaps">XI</span> is nearly
300 lines longer than Book <span class="smallcaps">X</span>., but I am
precluded from referring to any passages that occur also in any other
Book of the "Iliad." Running my eye over the underlined lines in my copy
of the "Iliad," I do not find much, though I admit that there is some
difference between their frequency in Book <span
class="smallcaps">XI</span>., and in the other

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Books. Furthermore
I own to finding Book xi. perhaps the least interesting and the most
perfunctorily written in all the "Iliad," and can well believe that the
writer of the "Odyssey" borrowed from it less because she was of the
same opinion, but however this may be, the number of common passages
above collected is ample to establish the fact that the writer of the
"Odyssey" had Book <span class="smallcaps">XI</span>. in her mind as
well as Book <span class="smallcaps">X</span>.

I will now go on to examine the passages in "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. which the writer of the "Odyssey" has
wholly or in part adopted. They are:—

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 22-24,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ὣς φάτο τὸν δ᾽ ἄχεος νεφέλη ἐκάλυψε μέλαινα  
ἀμφοτέρῃσι δὲ χερσὶν ἑλὼν κόνιν αἰθαλόεσσαν·  
χεύατο κὰκ κεφαλῆς χαρίεν δ᾽ ᾔσχυνε πρόσωπον.

</div>

These lines are found "Od." xxiv. 315-317 except that as they refer to
an old man, instead of, as in the "Iliad," to a young one, χαρίεν δ᾽
ᾔσχυνε πρόσωπον has become πολιῆς ἀδινὰ στεναχίζων. The first of the
three lines occurs also in "Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVII</span>.
591.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 108, καὶ χόλος ὅσ τ᾽ ἐφέηκε
πολύφρονά περ χαλεπῆναι,

*cf*. "Od." xiv. 464, ἠλεός ὅς τ᾽ ἐφέηκε πολύφρονά περ μάλ᾽ ἀεῖσαι.
"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 250, Πανθοΐδης· ὁ γὰρ οἶος
ὅρα πρόσσω καὶ ὀπίσσω;

*cf*. "Od." xxiv. 452, where however Πανθοΐδης becomes Μαστορίδης.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 344-349,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ἀμφι πυρί στῆσαι τρίποδα μέγαν ὄφρα τάχιστα  
Πάτροκλον λούσειαν ἄπο βρότον αἱματόεντα.  
οἱ δὲ λοετροχόον τρίποδ᾽ ἵστασαν ἐν πυρὶ κηλέῳ,  
ἐν δ᾽ ἄῤ ὕδωρ ἐχέαν, ὑπὸ δὲ ξύλα δαῖον ἑλόντες·  
γάτρην μὲν τρίποδος πῦρ ἄμφεπε, θέρμετο δ᾽ ὕδωρ  
αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ δὴ ζέσσεν ὕδωρ ἐνὶ ἤνοπι χαλκῷ,

</div>

*cf*. "Od." viii. 434-437, ὄφρα τάχιστα becomes ὅττι τάχιστα.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 345 is omitted. In the
following line οἱ becomes αἱ, and in the one after this ἑλόντες becomes
ἑλοῦσαι·

The last line of the Iliadic passage is not given in "Od." viii., but
appears without alteration in "Od." x. 360.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 363, ὅς περ θνητός τ᾽ ἐστὶ
καὶ οὐ τόςα μήδεα οἶδεν. This line occurs "Od." xx. 46.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 385-387,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τίπτε Θέτι τανύπεπλε, ἱκάνεις ἡμέτερον δῶ  
αἰδοίη τε φίλη τε; πάρος γε μὲν οὔ τι θαμίζεις,  
ἀλλ᾽ ἕπεο προτέρω ἵνα τοι πὰρ ξείνια θείω·

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 424-427,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τίπτε Θέτι τανύπεπλε, ἱκάνεις ἡμέτερὸν δῶ  
αἰδοίη τε φίλη τε; πάρος γε μὲν οὔ τι θαμίζεις·  
αὐδα ὅ τι φρονέεις· τελέσαι δέ με θυμὸς ἄνωγεν  
εἰ δύναμαι τελέσαι γε καὶ εἰ τετελεσμένον ἐστίν.

</div>

The "Odyssey" (v. 87-91) has both these passages combined as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Τίπτε μοι, Ἑρμεία χρυσόρραπι, εἰλήλουθας  
αἰδοῖός τε φίλος τε; πάρος γε μὲν οὔ τι θαμίζεις  
αὔδα ὁ τι φρονέεις· τελέσαι δέ με θυμὸς ἄνωγεν  
εἰ δύναμαι τελέσαι γε καὶ εἰ τετελεσμένον ἐστίν.  
ἀλλ᾽ ἕπεο προτέρω, ἵνα τοι πὰρ ξείνια θείω.

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 389, 390

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

……………ἐπὶ θρόνου ἀργυροήλου  
καλοῦ δαιδαλέου· ὑπὸ δὲ θρῆνυς ποσὶν ἦεν·

</div>

These lines will be found "Od." x. 314, 315.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 431, ὅσσ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἐκ πασέων
Κρονίδης Ζεὺς ἄλγἐ ἔδωκεν, *cf*. "Od." iv. 722, 723

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

…………πέρι γάρ μοι Ὀλύμπιος ἄλγἐ ἔδωκεν  
ἐκ πασέων,

</div>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 457,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τούνεκα νῦν τὰ σὰ γοὺναθ᾽ ἱκάνομαι αἴ κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσθα.

</div>

This line occurs "Od." iii. 92 and "Od." iv. 322.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 463, θάρσει, μή τοι ταῦτα
μετὰ φρεσὶ σῇσι μελόντων.

This line occurs "Od." xiii. 362, xvi. 436, and xxiv. 357.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 486-489

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

πληιάδας θ᾽…………  
ἄρκτον θ᾽ ἣν καὶ ἄμαξαν ἐπίκλησιν καλέουσιν,  
ἥ τ᾽ αὐτοῦ στρέφαται καί τ᾽ Ὠρίωνα δοκεύει  
οἴη δ᾽ ἄμμορός ἐστι λοετρῶν Ὠκέανοιο·

</div>

These lines occur "Od." v. 272-275.

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 533, 534,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

στησάμενοι δ᾽ ἐμάχοντο μάχην ποταμοῖο παῤ ὄχθας  
βάλλον δ᾽ ἀλλήλους χαλκήρεσιν ἐγχείῃσιν·

</div>

These lines are found "Od." ix. 54, 55 with παρὰ νηυσὶ θοῇσιν instead of
ποταμοῖο παῤ ὄχθας.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

"Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 604-606,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

τερπόμενοι· μετὰ δέ σφιν ἐμέλπετο θεῖος ἀοιδὸς  
φορμίζων· δοίω δὲ κυβιστητῆρε κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς  
μολπῆς ἐξάρχοντες ἐδίνευον κατὰ μέσον.

</div>

These lines occur "Od." iv. 17-19.

To meet the possible objection that "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. was written later than the "Odyssey,"
and might therefore have borrowed from it, I will quote the context of
line 108 as well as the line itself. The passage runs (<span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 107-110):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ὢς ἔρις ἔκ τε θεῶν ἔκ τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἀπόλοιτο  
καὶ χόλος ὅς τ᾽ ἐφέηκε πολύφρονά περ χαλεπῆναι,  
ὅς τε πολὺ γλυκίων μέλιτος καταλειβόμενοιο  
ἀνδρῶν ἐν στήθεσσιν ἀέξεται ἠύτε καπνός.

</div>

The context of the Odyssean line which I suppose to be derived from this
noble passage is as follows (xiv. 462-465):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

κέκλυθι νῦν Εὔμαιε, καὶ ἄλλοι πάντες ἑταῖροι·  
εὐξάμενός τι ἔπος ἐρέω· οἶνος γὰρ ἀνώγει  
ἠλεός, ὅς τ᾽ ἐφέηκε πολύφρονά περ μάλ᾽ ἀεῖσαι  
καί θ᾽ ἁπαλὸν γελάσι, καί τ᾽ ὀρχήσασθαι ἀνῆκεν,

</div>

Which is the most likely—that the magnificent Iliadic lines were
developed from "Od." xiv. 464, or that this line is an unconscious
adaptation from "Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 108? For
that the two lines are father and son will hardly be disputed.

Which again commends itself best—that the writer of "Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. took the heating of Ulysses’ bath water
to heat water for Patroclus, or that the writer of the "Odyssey" omitted
the line about Patroclus, and used the rest of the passage to heat water
for Ulysses’ bath?

As regards the two salutations to Thetis ("Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 385-387, and 424-427), is it more likely
that the writer of "Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. made two
bites of the Odyssean cherry of v. 87-91, or that the writer of the
"Odyssey," wanting but a single salutation, combined the two Iliadic
ones as in the passage above given?

Lastly, is the list of constellations which Vulcan put on to the shield
of Achilles more likely to have been amplified from "Od." v. 272-275, or
these last-named lines to have been taken with such modification as was
necessary, from "Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>, 486–489?
Whatever may be the date of the "Odyssey," I cannot

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

doubt that "Il." <span class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. must be dated
earlier; and yet there is no Book of the "Iliad" about which our eminent
Homeric scholars are more full of small complaints, or more unanimous in
regarding as an interpolation. If there is one part of the "Iliad"
rather than another in which Homer shows himself unapproachable, it is
in his description of the shield of Achilles.

I will again assure the reader that all the Books of the "Iliad" seem
drawn from with the same freedom as that shown in those which I have now
dealt with in detail, and also that I can find no part of the "Odyssey"
which borrows any less freely from the "Iliad" than the rest of the
poem; here and there difference of subject leads the writer to go three
or four pages without a single Iliadic cento, but this is rare. One or
two, or even sometimes three or four, Iliadic passages in a page is
nearer the average, but of these some will be what may be called common
form.

Their frequency raises no suggestion of plagiarism any more than the
Biblical quotations in *Pilgrim's Progress* would do if the references
were cut out. They are so built into the context as to be structural,
not ornamental; and to preclude the idea of their having been added by
copyists or editors. They seem to be the spontaneous outcome of the
fullness of the writer's knowledge of the "Iliad." It is also evident
that she is not making a *résumé* of other people's works; she is
telling the story *de novo* from the point of view of herself, her home,
her countrymen, and the whole island of Sicily. Other peoples and places
may be tolerated, but they raise no enthusiasm in her mind.

Nevertheless, a certain similarity of style and feeling between the
"Odyssey" and all the poems of the Epic cycle is certain to have
existed, and indeed can be proved to have existed from the fragments of
the lost poems that still remain. In all art, whether literary,
pictorial, musical, or architectural, a certain character will be common
to a certain age and country. Every age has its stock subjects for
artistic treatment; the reason for this is that it is convenient for the
reader, spectator, or listener, to be familiar with the main outlines of
the story. Written literature is freer in this respect than painting or

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

sculpture, for it can explain and prepare the reader better for what is
coming. Literature which, though written, is intended mainly for
recitation before an audience few of whom can read, exists only on
condition of its appealing instantly to the understanding, and will,
therefore, deal only with what the hearer is supposed already to know in
outline. The writer may take any part of the stock national subjects
that he or she likes, and within reasonable limits may treat it
according to his or her fancy, but it must hitch on to the old familiar
story, and hence will arise a certain similarity of style between all
poems of the same class that belong to the same age, language, and
people. This holds just as good for the medieval Italian painters as it
does for the Epic cycle. They offer us a similarity in dissimilarity and
a dissimilarity in similarity.

When we remember, however, that the style of the "Odyssey" must not only
perforce gravitate towards that of all the other then existing epic
poems, but also that the writer's mind is as strongly leavened with the
mind of Homer, let alone the other Cyclic poets, as we have seen it to
be, it is not surprising that the veneer of virility thus given to a
woman's work should have concealed the less patent, but far more
conclusive, evidence that the writer was not of the same sex as the man,
or men, from whom she was borrowing.

At the same time, in spite of the use she makes of Homer, I think she
was angry with him, and perhaps jealous; on which head I will say more
in my next Chapter. Possibly the way he laughs at women and teases them,
not because he dislikes them, but because he enjoys playing with them,
irritates her; she was not disposed to play on such a serious subject.
We have seen how she retorts on him for having made a tripod worth three
times as much as a good serviceable woman of all work. His utter
contempt, again, for the gods, which he is at no pains to conceal, would
be offensive to a writer who never permits herself to go beyond the
occasional mild irreverence of the Vicar's daughter. Therefore, she
treats Homer, as it seems to me, not without a certain hardness; and
this is the only serious fault I have to find with her.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

For example, she takes the concluding lines of Hector's farewell to
Andromache, a passage which one would have thought she would have shrunk
from turning to common uses, and puts it into the mouth of Telemachus
when he is simply telling his mother to take herself off. She does this
in i. 356-359 and again in xxi. 350-353. This is not as it should be.
Nor yet again is her taking the water that was heated to wash the blood
from the body of poor Patroclus ("Il." <span
class="smallcaps">XVIII</span>. 344 &c.) and using it for Ulysses’ bath
("Od." viii. 434-437). Surely the disrespect here is deeper than any
that can be found in Homer towards the gods.

But, whatever the spirit may have been in which the writer of the
"Odyssey" has treated the "Iliad," I cannot doubt that she knew this
poem exceedingly well in the shape in which we have it, and this is the
point which I have thought it worth while to endeavour to substantiate
at such length in the foregoing Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[237:\*](aoto41.htm#fr_87) ἡμεῖς δέ κλέος οἶον
ἀκούομεν, οὐδέ τι ἴδμεν, "Il." ii. 486.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Relation to other Poems of the Trojan Cycle and its
Development by the Authoress](aoto42)
