[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto38) 
[Next](aoto40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

### Chapter XII

### THE DATE OF THE POEM, AND A COMPARISON OF THE STATE OF THE NORTH WESTERN PART OF SICILY AS REVEALED TO US IN THE ODYSSEY, WITH THE ACCOUNT GIVEN BY THUCYDIDES OF THE SAME TERRITORY IN THE EARLIEST KNOWN TIMES.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> view that the "Odyssey" was written
at Trapani will throw unexpected light upon the date of the poem. We can
never date it within a hundred years or so, but I shall attempt to show
that we must place it very little, if at all, later than 1050, and not
earlier than 1150 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>

I see that I may claim Professor Jebb's authority as to some extent, at
any rate, supporting the later of these two dates. He writes:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

With regard to the age of the "Odyssey," we may suppose that the
original "Return" was composed in Greece Proper as early as the Eleventh
Century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and that the first
enlargement had been made before 850 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> <span id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74)

</div>

I have shown why I cannot admit that any part of the "Odyssey" was
written in Greece Proper, and while admitting that the poem has been
obviously enlarged by the addition of Books i.–iv. and line 187 of Book
xiii.–xxiv., with which I will deal fully in a later Chapter—I cannot
think that the enlargement was by another hand than that of the
authoress of the poem in its original form. Nevertheless I am glad to
claim Professor Jebb's support as far as it goes, for dating the
inception of the "Odyssey" as in the eleventh century <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>

I will begin by giving my reasons for thinking that the "Odyssey" must
at any rate be earlier than 734 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>

When Eumæus is telling the story of his childhood to Ulysses (xv. 403,
&c.), he says that he was born in the Syrian

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

island over against Ortygia, and I have rendered "the Syrian island"
"the island of Syra," guided by the analogy of the "Psyrian island"
(iii. 171), which unquestionably means the island of Psyra.

The connection of an island Syra with a land Ortygia, suggests Syracuse,
in spite of the fact that in reality Ortygia was an island, and Syracuse
both on the island and on the adjacent mainland—for as I have already
too often said all Sicilian places in the "Odyssey" are travestied,
however thinly.

The impression that Syracuse <span id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_75) is
being alluded to is deepened by our going on to read that "the turnings
of the sun" are "there"—which I presume may be extended so as to mean
"thereabouts." Now what are "the turnings of the sun"? I looked in
Liddell and Scott, for whose work no one can feel a more cordial
admiration, nor deeper sense of gratitude, and found that the turnings
of the sun are "the solstices, or tropics, *i.e.*, the turning points of
midsummer and midwinter." This may do very well as regards time, but not
as regards place. In reference to the Odyssean passage, I read that "the
turning of the sun denotes a point in the heavens probably to the
Westward."

But we want the sun to turn not at a point in the heavens, but in the
neighbourhood of Syra and Ortygia, and to do so here in a way that he
does not do elsewhere. The simplest way of attaining this end will be to
suppose that the writer of the "Odyssey" was adopting a form of speech
which we often use on a railway journey, when we say that the sun has
turned and is coming in at the other window—meaning that the line has
taken a sharp turn, and that we are going in a new direction. Surely I
am not wrong in thinking that the author meant nothing more recondite
than that near the two places named the land turns sharply round, so
that sailors who follow it will find the sun on the other side of their
ship from what it has hitherto been.

A glance at the map will show that the site which the combination of
Syra and Ortygia has suggested is confirmed

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

by the fact that shortly South of it the coast of Sicily turns abruptly
round, and continues thenceforward in a new direction. Indeed it begins
to turn sharply with the promontory of Plemmyrium itself. Eumæus,
therefore, should be taken as indicating that he was born at the place
which we know as Syracuse, and which was then, so he says, an aggregate
of two small towns, without many inhabitants. It seems to have been a
quite easy-going little place, where every one had enough to eat and
drink, and nobody died except of sheer old age, diseases of all kinds
being unknown. Business must have been carried on in a very leisurely
fashion, for it took the Phœnicians a twelvemonth to freight their
vessel, and the largest ship of those times cannot have been very large.

This is not the description of a busy newly founded settlement, as
Syracuse would be in 734 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> Still less
will it apply to any later Syracusan age. The writer modernises when
dealing with an earlier age as frankly as Shakspeare: I have never
detected a trace in her of any archæological instinct. I believe,
therefore, that she was telling what little she knew of the Syracuse of
her own day, and that that day was one prior to the arrival of the
Corinthian Colony. I think it likely also that she made Eumæus come from
Syracuse because she felt that she rather ought to have done something
at Syracuse during the voyage of Ulysses, but could not well, under the
circumstances, break his journey between Charybdis and Calypso's Island.
She, therefore, took some other way of bringing Syracuse into her story.

It may be urged that we have no other evidence of any considerable
civilisation as having existed at Syracuse before the one founded by the
Corinthians, and as regards written evidence this is true, so far at
least as I know; but we have unwritten evidence of an even more
conclusive kind. The remains of pottery and implements found at, or in
the near neighbourhood of, Syracuse go back in an unbroken line from
post-Roman times to the age of stone, while commerce with the
Peloponnese, at any rate from the Mycenæan age, is shown by the forms
and materials of the objects discovered in countless tombs. I had the
advantage of being shown over the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Museum at Syracuse
by Dr. Orsi, than whom there can be no more cautious and capable guide
on all matters connected with the earliest history of Sicily, and he
repeatedly insisted on the remoteness of the age at which commerce must
have existed between the South East, and indeed all the East, coast of
Sicily, and the Peloponnese. The notion, therefore, too generally held
in the very face of Thucydides himself, that there were no people living
at or near Syracuse till the arrival of the Corinthians must be
abandoned, and I believe we may feel confident that in the story of
Eumæus we have a peep into its condition in pre-Corinthian times.

The two communities of which Eumæus tells us were probably, one, on the
promontory of Plemmyrium, and the other, at a place between three and
four miles distant, now called Cozzo Pantano, on each of which sites Dr.
Orsi has discovered the burying ground of an extensive village or town
(*borgo*) to which he had assigned the date xii.–xi. centuries <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> before his attention had been called to
the existence of a reference to prehistoric Syracuse in the "Odyssey."
Many examples of implements found on these two sites may be seen in the
museum at Syracuse. I did not gather that any other prehistoric burying
grounds had been found at or in close proximity to Syracuse.

Whether the people whose burying grounds have been found at the above
named places were Greeks, who were displaced later by Sicels, as the
Sicels in their turn were displaced by the Corinthians, or whether they
were Sicels of an earlier unrecorded immigration, I must leave Dr. Orsi
and others to determine, but the name of the sea which washes the East
coast of Sicily points to the existence at one time of extensive Ionian
settlements on East Sicilian shores. The name, again, Aci, which is
found in *Aci reale*, *Aci Castello*, and *Aci trezza*, and which among
the common people is now always sounded Iaci, suggests a remote Ionian
origin—for we may assume that there was no Ionian migration later than
734 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> of sufficient importance to give
the name Ionian to Sicilian waters, towns, and islands. The reader will
be reminded in the following Chapter that Ἰακός means Ionian.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

Eumæus was so young when he was carried off that even though Greek was
not his native language, he would have become Grecised in a few years; I
incline to think, however, that the writer of the "Odyssey" would have
said something about his being a Sicel if she had so conceived of him in
her own mind. She seems to think of him as a Greek by birth.

The Sicels, however, also probably spoke Greek. The inhabitants of
Temesa, on the toe of Italy, do not indeed seem to have done so ("Od."
i. 183); but we do not know that they were Sicels. No writing has been
found at Plemmirio nor yet at Cozzo Pantano; we have therefore very
little to go upon.

But postulating that we may accept Thucydides—whose accuracy as regards
Syracusan details proves that even though he had not been at Syracuse
himself, he had at any rate means of informing himself on Sicilian
history—who is evidently taking pains, and whose reputation is surpassed
by that of no other historian—postulating that we may accept his
statement (vi. 2) that the great irruption of Sicels which changed the
name of the country from Sicania to Sicelia took place about 300 years
before <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> 734, I think we may safely
put back the date of the "Odyssey" to a time before <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> 1000.

For the "Odyssey" conveys no impression as though Sicily at large had
been lately subdued and overrun by Sicels. Locally, indeed, the city at
the top of Mt. Eryx had, as we have seen ("Od." vii. 60), been conquered
and overthrown; but I shall bring Thucydides, as well as other evidence,
to show that in this case the victors are more likely to have been
Asiatic Greeks than Sicels. The poem indicates a time of profound
present peace and freedom from apprehension, and on the one occasion in
which the writer speaks of Sicily under its own name, she calls it by
its pre-Sicelian name of Sicania. <span id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76)
The old Sicel woman who waited on Laertes (xxiv. 211 and elsewhere) is
not spoken of as though there were any ill-will on the part of the
writer

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

towards the Sicels, or as though they were a dominant race. Lastly, one
of the suitors (xx. 382) advises Telemachus to ship Theoclymenus and
Ulysses off to the Sicels. Now if the writer had the real Ithaca in her
mind, the Sicels could only have been reached by sea, whether they were
in Italy or Sicily; but I have already shown that she never pictured to
herself any other Ithaca than the one she had created at Trapani; the
fact, therefore, that Theoclymenus and Ulysses were to be put on board
ship before they could reach the Sicels, shows that she imagined these
last as (except for an occasional emigrant) outside the limits of her
own island.

If the foregoing reasoning is admitted, 1050 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> will be about as late as it is safe to
place the date of the "Odyssey"; but a few years later is possible,
though hardly, I think, probable. Unfortunately this date will compel us
to remove the fall of Troy to a time very considerably earlier than the
received date. For a hundred years is, one would think, the shortest
interval that can be allowed between the "Odyssey" and the "Iliad." The
development of myth and of the Epic cycle, of which we find abundant
traces in the "Odyssey," is too considerable to render any shorter
period probable. I therefore conclude that 1150 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> is the latest date to which we should
assign the "Iliad."

The usually received date for the fall of Troy is 1184 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> This is arrived at from a passage in
Thucydides (i. 12) which says that sixty years after the fall of Troy,
the Bœotians were driven from Arne and settled in what was originally
called Cadmeis, but subsequently Bœotia. Twenty years later, he tells
us, the Dorians and the Heraclidæ became masters of the Peloponnese; but
as he does not fix this last date, probably because he could not, so
neither does he fix that of the fall of Troy.

The date commonly accepted for the return of the Heraclidæ and their
conquest of the Peloponnese is 1104, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77) but those who turn to Müller's *History
of the Doric Race*, <span id="fr_78"></span>[†](#fn_78) Vol. I., p. 53,
will see that there is no authority for this date which is worth a
moment's consideration; and with the failure of authority

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

here, we are left absolutely without authority for 1184 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> as the date of the fall of Troy.

Admitting for the moment 1150 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> as the
latest date to which we should assign the "Iliad," the question arises:
How much later than the fall of Troy did Homer write? Mr. Gladstone has
argued very ably in support of the view that he wrote only some forty or
fifty years after the events he is recording, in which case it would
seem that he must date the "Iliad" hardly at all later than the latest
date to which I would assign it, for he does not appear to dispute the
received date for the fall of Troy, though he does not say that he
accepts it. I should only be too glad to find that I can claim Mr.
Glad-stone's support so far, but farther I cannot expect to do so; for
the impression left upon me by the "Iliad" is that Homer was writing of
a time that was to him much what the middle ages are to ourselves.

If he had lived as near the Trojan War as Mr. Gladstone supposes, he
would surely have given us some hint of the manner in which Troy fell,
whereas he shows no signs of knowing more than the bare fact that the
city had fallen. He repeatedly tells us this much, but always more
curtly and drily than we should expect him to do, and his absolute
silence as to the way in which the capture of the city was effected,
goes far to prove either that all record of the modus in quo had
perished—which would point to a very considerable lapse of time—or else
to suggest a fact which, though I have often thought it possible, I
hardly dare to write—I mean that Troy never fell at all, or at any rate
that it did not fall with the close of the Trojan War, and that Homer
knew this perfectly well.

The infinite subtlety of the "Iliad" is almost as unfathomable as the
simplicity of the "Odyssey" has so far proved itself to be, and its
author, writing for a Greek audience whom he obviously despised, and
whom he was fooling to the top of their bent though always sailing far
enough off the wind to avoid disaster, would take very good care to tell
them that—if I may be allowed the anachronism—Napoleon won the battle of
Waterloo, though he very well knew that it was won by Wellington. It is
certain that no even tolerably plausible account of the fall

<span id="img_21600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WALL AT HISSARLIK,
SHOWING CONTRAST BETWEEN WEATHERED AND PROTECTED
COURSES](tn/21600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21600.jpg)  
WALL AT HISSARLIK, SHOWING CONTRAST BETWEEN WEATHERED AND PROTECTED
COURSES  
</span>

<span id="img_21700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE ILIADIC
WALL](tn/21700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21700.jpg)  
THE ILIADIC WALL  
</span>

<span id="img_21701"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A COIN BEARING ON
THE OBVERSE THE LEGEND IAKIN, AND ON THE REVERSE A REPRESENTATION OF THE
BROOCH DESCRIBED BY ULYSSES&lt;br&gt; Enlarged to about double the
actual diameter](tn/21701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21701.jpg)  
A COIN BEARING ON THE OBVERSE THE LEGEND IAKIN, AND ON THE REVERSE A
REPRESENTATION OF THE BROOCH DESCRIBED BY ULYSSES  
Enlarged to about double the actual diameter  
</span>

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

of Troy existed among the Greeks themselves; all plausibility ends with
their burning their tents and sailing away baffled ("Od." viii. 500,
501)—see also the epitome of the "Little Iliad," given in the fragment
of Proclus. The wild story of the wooden horse only emphasises the fact
that nothing more reasonable was known.

But let us suppose that Troy fell, and that Homer's silence was dictated
by the loss of all record as to the manner of its falling. In this case
one would think that two, or even three, hundred years must have passed
between the fall of Troy and the writing of the "Iliad." Let us make it
the same distance of time as that between the Parliamentary Wars and the
present day. This would throw back the Trojan War to about 1400 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and if we accept Homer's statement that
the wall of Troy (*i.e.* that which Dr. Dörpfeld excavated in 1893—for
that this is the Iliadic wall may be taken as certain) was built in the
time of Priam's father Laomedon, we should date the wall roughly as 1450
<span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> I may add, that it seems to me to be
of somewhat earlier date than the co-called Treasury of Atreus at
Mycene, and hence still earlier than that which bears the name of
Clytemnestra.

I see by the latest work on the subject <span
id="fr_79"></span>[\*](#fn_79) that Dr. Dörpfeld dates it as between
1500 and loon <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> I know how perilous it
is to date a wall by the analogy of other walls in distant countries,
which walls are themselves undateable with anything like precision, but
having seen the Iliadic wall as also those of Tiryns and Mycene, as well
as most of the so-called Pelasgic walls that remain in the Latin and
Volscian cities, I should say that the wall of Troy was much later than
those of the megalithic ages, but still not by any means free from the
traditions of megalithic builders. I should date it roughly at not later
than 1300 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> and hardly earlier than
1500 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> <span
id="fr_80"></span>[†](#fn_80)

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

I will, however, date the Iliadic wall as 1400 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> The Trojan war will then be supposed to
have taken place from 1360-1350 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>; the
writing of the "Iliad" will be about 1150; and that of the "Odyssey"
about 1050 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> This is a tight fit, and
I should be glad to throw the Iliadic wall back to the earlier of the
two dates between which Dr. Dörpfeld has placed it, but precision is out
of the question; 1400 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> will be as
near the truth as anything that we are likely to get, and will bring the
archæological evidence as derivable from the wall of Troy, the internal
evidence of the "Iliad" and "Odyssey," the statement of Thucydides that
the last and greatest inroad of the Sicels occurred about 1030 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and our conclusion that the "Odyssey" was
written before that date, into line with one another.

The date 1050 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> will explain the
absence of all allusion in the "Odyssey" to Utica, the land near which,
on certain rare days, can be seen from Mt. Eryx. The Phœnicians are
known in the "Odyssey," disliked and distrusted, but they do not seem to
be feared as they would surely be if so powerful a maritime nation were
already established so near the writer's own abode. She does not seem to
know much about the Phœnicians after all, for in iv. 83 she makes
Menelaus say that he had gone to Cyprus, Phoenicia, and the Egyptians,
and in the next line she adds that he had also been to the Ethiopians
and the Sidonians, as though she was not aware that Sidon was a
Phœnician city.

The absence of all allusion to Olympia when Telemachus was on his return
from Pylos is most naturally explained by supposing that Olympia was not
yet famous. The principal hero at Athens appears to be the earliest
known object of the national cult, I mean Erechtheus (vii. 81); the
later, though still very early, cult of Theseus is not alluded to. There
is no allusion, however vague, to any event known as having happened in
Greek history later than 1100 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and
though the absence of reference to any particular event may be explained
by indifference or forgetfulness, the absence of all reference to any
event whatever suggests, I should say strongly, that none of the events
to one or other of which reference might be expected had as yet
happened.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

While, however, placing 1050 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> as the
latest limit for the "Odyssey" I do not see how we can place it earlier
than 1150 without throwing the date of the Iliadic wall farther back
than we can venture to do, for we can hardly date it earlier than 1500
<span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and 350 years is as short an
interval as we can well allow between the building of that wall and the
writing of the "Odyssey."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let us now compare the history of the N.W. corner of Sicily as revealed
to us in the "Odyssey"—always assuming that the pedigree of Alcinous and
Arēte in Book vii. is in its main facts historic—with the account given
by Thucydides concerning the earliest history of the same district.

In the "Odyssey" we have seen the Sicans (whom I think that I have
sufficiently identified) as originally in possession of Mt. Eryx under a
king whose Odyssean name is Eurymedon. He, it seems, was overthrown, and
the power of his people was broken, by enemies whose name is not given,
about a hundred years before the writing of the "Odyssey," as nearly as
we can gather from the fact of his having been Nausicaa's great great
grandfather.

The writer of the "Odyssey" wrote in a language mainly Ionian, but
containing a considerable Æolian element. It must be inferred,
therefore, that her family and audience—that is to say the
Phæacians—spoke a dialect in which these characteristics are to be
found. The place of all others where such a dialect might be looked for
is Phocæa, a little South of the Troad; for Phocæa was an Ionian city
entirely surrounded on its land sides by Æolian territory. I see from
Professor Jebb's *Introduction to Homer* <span
id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81) that Aristarchus when editing the "Iliad"
and "Odyssey," and settling the text to all intents and purposes as we
now have it, by comparison of the best copies known, made most frequent
use of the civic edition of Marseilles which contained both "Iliad" and
"Odyssey." It will be remembered that Marseilles was a Phocæan colony.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The name Phæacians is not unsuggestive of a thin disguise for Phocæans;
lines iv. 441-443, moreover, will gain greatly in point, if we imagine
that the seals, or Phocæ, with their disgusting smell, are meant for the
writer's countrymen whom she evidently dislikes, and that the words,
"who, indeed, would go to bed with a sea monster if he could help it?"
are her rejoinder to the alleged complaint of the young Phæacians that
she would marry none of them (vi. 276 &c.). Apart, therefore, from any
external evidence, I should suspect the Phæacians to have been Phocæans,
who had settled on this part of the island. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_82) From the fact that the Phæacians in the
time of the "Odyssey" were evidently dominant on Mt. Eryx as well as at
Trapani, I conclude that they must have had, to say the least of it, a
considerable share in the overthrow of Eurymedon and of the Sican power
in that part of the island. If they had allies with them, these allies
seem to have gone on to other sites on which Elymite cities are known to
have existed, for we find no reference in the "Odyssey" to any other
people as sharing Hypereia and Scheria with the Phæacians.

Though the power of the Sicans at Eryx was broken, and the Phæacians
were established at Hypereia, also on the top of Mt. Eryx and less than
a mile from the Sican city, the Sicans were still troublesome
neighbours; there seems, however, to have been a marriage between some
chief man among the Phæacians and Peribœa, youngest daughter of the old
king Eurymedon, and this no doubt would lead to some approach to fusion
between the two peoples. The offspring of this marriage, Nausithous, is
said in the poem to have been by Neptune, from which I infer that the
marriage may have been of a more or less irregular kind, but there can
be no doubt that Nausithous came of a Phæacian father and would speak
the Phæacian dialect, which the Sicans, though in all probability a
Greek-speaking

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

race, cannot be supposed to have done. Nausithous seems to have been a
capable man; finding the continued raids of semi-outlawed Sicans still
harassing, perhaps, also, induced by the fact that the promontory on
which Trapani stands was better suited to a race of mariners than the
lofty and inhospitable top of Mt. Eryx, he moved his people down to the
seaside and founded the city that now bears the name of
Trapani—retaining, however, the site of Hypereia as his own property on
which his pigs and goats would feed, and to which also his family would
resort, as the people of Trapani still do, during the excessive heat of
summer.

The reader will have noted that Eumæus, who we must never forget is
drawn not from Ithaca but from Mt. Eryx, when watching over his pigs by
night thought it necessary to be fully armed (xiv. 526). He seems also
from xvi. 9, to have had neighbours, from which we may infer that the
old Sican city of Eryx was not yet entirely abandoned; nevertheless,
Eumæus would not be there at all unless the fusion between the Sicans
and the Phocæans had been fairly complete. The Sicans appear in the
"Odyssey" under the names of Cyclopes and Læstrygonians, and the Sicels
are not yet come. This is all that we can collect from the "Odyssey."

We will now see what support the sketch given above will derive from
Thucydides (vi. 2). According to him the Læstrygonians and the Cyclopes,
mentioned as the earliest inhabitants of Sicily, are mere poetical
fictions. This, however, does not preclude their having had their
prototype in some real Sicilian people who bore another name; and at any
rate, however fictitious they may be, he locates them in Sicily.

He continues that the oldest historic inhabitants of the island were the
Sicans, who by their own account had been there from time immemorial.
This he denies, for he says they were Iberians, and he says it as though
he had satisfied himself after due inquiry, but since he gives no hint
as to the date of their arrival, he does not impugn their statement that
their settlement in the island dated from a remote time. It is most
likely that he is right about the Sicans having come from Spain; and
indeed at Tarragona, some fifty or sixty miles

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> North of the mouth
of the river Iberus, there are megalithic walls that bear, so far as I
can judge from photographs, a very considerable analogy with those of
Eryx. In Thucydides’ own times there were still Sicans in the Western
part of Sicily.

He then goes on to say that after the fall of Troy, but he does not say
how much after, some of the Trojans who had escaped the Greeks migrated
to Sicily. They settled in the neighbourhood of the Sicans and were all
together called Elymi, their cities being Eryx and Segesta. There were
also settled with them—but whether at the same date, or earlier or
later, and if so, how much, Thucydides does not say—certain Phocians of
the Trojan branch, *i.e.*, Phocæans—Phocæa having been founded by
Phocians from the gulf of Corinth under the leadership of the Athenian
chiefs Philogenes and Damon (*Strab*. xiv. 633; *Pausan*. vii. 3, 10;
*cf*. *Herod*. I. 146). These Phocæans had been carried first by a
tempest to Libya, <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83) and thence to
Sicily.

We need not follow him to the arrival of the Sicels, for I have already,
I hope, satisfied the reader that the "Odyssey" belongs to a
pre-Sicelian age, and I am only dealing with the period which the
"Odyssey" and Thucydides cover in common.

I should perhaps put it beyond doubt that Thucydides means Phocæans and
not Phocians. In the first place it is difficult to understand how
Phocians, who were on the Achæan side ("Il." <span
class="smallcaps">II</span>. 518), should amalgamate with Trojans; and
in the next Thucydides’ words cannot be made to bear the meaning that is
generally put upon them, as though the Phocians in question were on
their way back from Troy to Phocis. His words are Φωκέων τινὲς τῶν ἀπὸ
Τροίας, and this cannot be construed as though he had said Φωκέων τινὲς
τῶν ἀνερχομένων ἐν νόστῳ ἀπὸ Τροίας. If ἀπό is to imply motion from, it
should have a verb or participle involving motion before it; without
this it is a common way of expressing residence in a place. For example,
Ὀρέστης ἤλυθεν…ἀπ᾽ Ἀθηνάων (iii. 307) means Orestes

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

came from Athens, whereas Ὀρέστης ὁ ἀπ᾽ Ἀθηνάων would mean "Orestes the
Athenian, or quasi-Athenian," as Λακεδαιμόνιοι οἱ ἀπὸ Σπάρτης means "the
Lacedæmonians who live at Sparta," Neither of these last two passages
can be made to bear the meaning "Orestes, who was on his way from
Athens," or "the Lacedæmonians, who were on their way from Sparta." The
reader who looks out ἀπὸ in Liddell & Scott will find plenty of
examples. To Thucydides, Phocæans in Asia Minor and Phocians on the gulf
of Corinth would be alike Phocians in virtue of common descent, but to
avoid misapprehension he calls the Phocæans "Phocians of the Trojan
stock," by "Trojan" meaning not very far from Troy. It should be noted
that the Phocians of the gulf of Corinth are called Φωκῆες, not Φωκέες
in "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 517, xv. 516, xvii. 307. I
see that Dobree (*Adversaria in Thucyd*.) is suspicious of the reading
in the passage of Thucydides which we are now considering. He evidently
considers that Φωκέων must mean Phocians from the gulf of Corinth, and
so it would, if it were not qualified by the words τῶν ἀπὸ Τροίας which
negative the possibility of European Phocians being intended.

Thucydides says nothing about any invasion of Sicily by a people called
Elymi. He does not see the Elymi as anything more than the combined
Asiatic and Sican peoples, who came to be called Elymi. If he had
believed in the Elymi as a distinct batch of immigrants he would have
given us a line or two more about them.

It is just possible that the known connection between Phocians and
Phocæans may explain why Ulysses’ maternal grandfather should have been
made to live on Mt. Parnassus, <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84)
which is in Phocis. Ulysses, to the writer of the "Odyssey," was a
naturalised Phæacian, for her native town had become in her eyes both
Scheria and Ithaca. It would not be unnatural, therefore, that she
should wish to connect his ancestry with Phocis, the ancestral seat of
the Phocæans.

Returning to Thucydides, the only point in which he varies the Odyssean
version is that he makes other Trojans migrate

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

to Eryx as well as the Phocæans, whereas the writer of the "Odyssey"
mentions only the Phæacians without saying anything about their having
been of Phocæan descent. She has, however, betrayed herself very
sufficiently. Thucydides again does not tell us that the Phocæans
re-settled themselves at Drepanum, but a man who is giving a mere
outline of events which happened some seven hundred years before he was
writing, can hardly be expected to give so small a detail as this. The
wonder is that the "Odyssey" should bear him out and confirm his
accuracy in so striking a way as it does. We now, therefore, see that
instead of there being any cause for surprise at finding an Ionic-Æolian
poem written near Mt. Eryx, this is the very neighbourhood in which we
might expect to find one.

Finally, let us turn to Virgil. His authority as a historian is
worthless, but we cannot suppose that he would make Æneas apparently
found Drepanum, if he held the presence of a Greek-speaking people at
Drepanùm even before the age of Homer to be so absurd as it appears to
our eminent Homeric scholars. I say "apparently found Drepanum," for it
is not quite easy to fix the site of the city founded by Æneas (*Æn*. v.
755-761), for at the close of *Æn*. III. Anchises dies at Drepanum, as
though this city was already in existence. But whether the city founded
by Æneas was actually Drepanum, or another city hard by it, it is clear
that Virgil places Greek-speaking people at Drepanum, or close to it,
immediately after the fall of Troy. He would hardly do this unless
Drepanum was believed in his time to be a city of very great antiquity,
and founded by Greek-speaking people. That the Trojan language was Greek
will not be disputed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[210:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_74) *Introduction to
Homer*, ed. 1888, pp. 172, 193.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[211:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_75) On its earlier coins
Syracuse not unfrequently appears as Syra.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[214:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_76) The fact that
Σικανίης (xxiv. 307) should not have got corrupted into Σικελίης—which
would scan just as well—during the many centuries that the island was
called Σικελία, suggests a written original, though I need hardly say
that I should not rely on so small a matter if it rested by itself.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[215:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_77) See Prof. Jebb's
*Introduction to Homer*, ed. 1888, Note 1 on p. 43.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[215:†](aoto39.htm#fr_78) Murray, 1830.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[217:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_79) *The Mycenæan Age*,
by Dr. Chrestos Tsountas and Dr. J. Irving Manatt, Macmillan, 1897, p.
369.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[217:†](aoto39.htm#fr_80) The dark line across
my illustration is only due to an accident that happened to my negative.
I believe (but am not quite sure, for my note about it was not written
on the spot) that the bit of wall given in my other illustration has
nothing to do with the Iliadic wall, and is of greatly later date. I
give it to show how much imagination is necessary in judging of any wall
that has been much weathered.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[219:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_81) Ed. 1888, note on p.
91.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[220:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_82) Herodotus tells us
(1. 163) that the Phocæans were the first people to undertake long
voyages, exploring the Tuscan sea, and going as far as Cadiz. He says
that their ships were not the round ones commonly used for commerce, but
long vessels with fifty oarsmen. The reader will recollect that this
feature of Phocæan navigation is found also among the Phæacians, who
sent Ulysses to the place that we are to take as Ithaca, in a vessel
that had fifty oarsmen.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[222:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_83) One cannot help
wondering whether the episode of the Lotus-eaters may not be due to the
existence of tradition among the Phæacians that their ancestors had made
some stay in Libya before reaching Sicily.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[223:\*](aoto39.htm#fr_84) "Od." xix. 410, 432.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Further Evidence in Support of an Early Ionian
Settlement at Trapani](aoto40)
