[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto15) 
[Next](aoto17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XI

#### ULYSSES IN THE HOUSE OF HADES.

"When we were at the water side we got the lamb and the ewe on board and
put out to sea, running all that day before a fair wind which Circe had
sent us, and at nightfall entering the deep waters of the river Oceanus.
Here is the land of the Cimmerians, who dwell in darkness which the
sun's rays never pierce; we therefore made our ship fast to the shore
and came out of her, going along the beach till we reached the place of
which Circe had told us.

"Perimedes and Eurylochus then held the victims, while I <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:23">23</span></span> followed the
instructions of Circe and slaughtered them, letting their blood flow
into a trench which I had dug for it. On this, the ghosts came up in
crowds from Erebus, brides, young bachelors, old men, maids who had been
crossed in love, and warriors with their armour still smirched with
blood. They cried with a strange screaming sound that made me turn pale
with fear, but I would let none of them taste of the blood till Tiresias
should have come and answered my questions.

"The first ghost I saw was that of Elpenor whose body was <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:51">51</span></span> still lying
unburied at Circe's house. Then I said, 'How now, Elpenor? you have got
here sooner by land than I have done by water.' The poor fellow told me
how he had forgotten about the stairs, and begged me to give him all due
rites when I returned to Circe's island—which I promised faithfully that
I would do.

"Then I saw the ghost of my mother Anticlea, but in all <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:81">81</span></span> sadness I would
not let her taste of the blood till Tiresias should have come and
answered my questions.

"Presently Tiresias came with his golden sceptre in his <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:90">90</span></span> hand, bade me let
him taste of the blood, and asked me why I had come.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:97">97</span></span> "I told him
I would learn how I was to get home to Ithaca, and he said I should have
much difficulty: 'Still,' he continued, 'you will reach your home if you
can restrain your men when you come to the Thrinacian island, where you
will find the cattle of the Sun. If you leave these unharmed, after much
trouble you will yet reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, you will lose
your men, and though you may get home after all, it <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:115">115</span></span> will be late,
\[on another man's ship, <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) and you
will find your house full of riotous men who are wasting your substance
and wooing your wife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:118">118</span></span> "'When you
have got back you will indeed kill these men either by treachery or in
fair fight, and you must then take an oar, which you must carry till you
have reached a people who know nothing about the sea and do not mix salt
with their bread. These people have never heard of ships, nor of oars
that are the wings with which ships fly; I will tell you how you may
know them; you will meet a man by the way who will ask you whether it is
a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your shoulder; when you hear
this you must fix your oar in the ground, and offer sacrifice to
Neptune, a ram, a bull, and a boar; then go home again, and offer
hecatombs to the gods that dwell in heaven. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[†](#fn_24) As for your own end, death shall come to
you very gently from the sea, and shall take you when you are <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:137">137</span></span> full of years
and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you.\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:150">150</span></span> "Having
thus said he went back within the house of Hades. Then I let my mother's
ghost draw near and taste of the blood, whereon she knew me, and asked
me what it was that had brought me though still alive into the abode of
death. So I told her, and asked her how she had come by her end. 'Tell
me, also,' I continued, 'about my father, and the son whom I left behind
me. Is my property still safe in their hands, or does another hold it
who thinks that I shall not return? Of <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_11:177">177</span></span> what mind, again, is my wife? Does she
still live with her son and keep watch over his estate, or is she
already married to the best man among the Achæans?'

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

"'Your wife,' answered my mother, 'is still at home, but <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:180">180</span></span> she spends her
life in tears both night and day. Telemachus holds your estate, and sees
much company, for he is a magistrate and all men invite him. Your father
lives a poor hard life in the country and never goes near the town. As
for me, I died of nothing but sheer grief on your account. And now,
return to the upper world as fast as you can, that you may tell all that
you have seen to your wife.'

"Then Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the wives and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:225">225</span></span> daughters of
great kings and heroes of old time, and I made each of them tell me
about herself. There were Tyro, Antiope, Alcmena, Epicaste the mother of
Œdipus, Chloris, Leda, Iphimedea, Phædra, Procris, Ariadne, and hateful
Eriphyle; with all these did I discourse, nor can I tell you with how
many more noble women, for it is now late, and time to go to rest."

Here Ulysses ceased, and from one end of the covered <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:333">333</span></span> cloisters to the
other his listeners sat entranced with the charm of his story.

Then Arēte said, "What think you of this man now, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:336">336</span></span> Phæacians, both
as regards his personal appearance and his abilities? True he is my
guest, but his presence is an honour to you all. Be not niggardly,
therefore, in the presents that you will make him, for heaven has
endowed you all with great abundance." Alcinous also spoke urging
Ulysses to tell still more of his adventures, and to say whether he met
any of the heroes who had fought together with him at Troy. Thus pressed
Ulysses resumed his story.

"When Proserpine," said he, "had dismissed the female <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:385">385</span></span> ghosts, the
ghost of Agamemnon drew near, surrounded by those of the men who had
fallen with him in the house of Ægisthus. He was weeping bitterly, and I
asked him how he met his end; whereon he detailed to me the treachery of
Clytemnestra, which he said threw disgrace upon all women, even on the
good ones. \` Be sure,' he continued, 'that you <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_11:433">433</span></span> never be too
open with your wife; tell her a part only, and keep the rest to
yourself. Not that you need have any fear about Penelope for she is an
admirable woman. You will

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:449">449</span></span> meet your
son, too, who by this time must be a grown roan. Nevertheless, do not
let people know when you are coming home, but steal a march upon them.
And now give me what news you can about my son Orestes.' To which I
answered that I could tell him nothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:465">465</span></span> "While we
were thus holding sad talk with one another, the ghost of Achilles came
up and asked me for news of his father Peleus, and of his son. I said I
could tell him nothing about Peleus, but his son Neoptolemus was with me
in the wooden horse, and though all the others were trembling in every
limb and wiping the tears from their cheeks, Neoptolemus did not even
turn pale, nor shed a single tear. Whereon Achilles strode away over a
meadow full of asphodel, exulting in the prowess of his son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:541">541</span></span> "Other
ghosts then came up and spoke with me but that of Ajax alone held aloof,
for he was still brooding over the armour of Achilles which had been
awarded to me and not to him. I spoke to him but he would not answer;
nevertheless I should have gone on talking to him till he did, had I not
been anxious to see yet other ghosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:568">568</span></span> "I saw
Minos with his golden sceptre passing sentence on the dead; Orion also,
driving before him over a meadow full of asphodel the ghosts of the wild
beasts whom he had slain upon the mountains. I saw Tityus with the
vulture ever digging its beak into his liver, Tantalus also, in a lake
whose waters reached his neck but fled him when he would drink, and
Sisyphus rolling his mighty stone uphill till the sweat ran off him and
the steam rose from him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:601">601</span></span> "Then I
saw mighty Hercules. The ghosts were screaming round him like scared
birds, flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare bow
in his hand and his arrow on the string, glaring round as though ever on
the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous golden
belt marvellously enriched with bears, wild boars, and lions with
gleaming eyes; there were also war, battle, and death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_11:630">630</span></span> "And I
should have seen yet others of the great dead had not the ghosts come
about me in so many thousands that I feared Proserpine might send up the
Gorgon's head. I therefore

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

bade my men make all speed back to their ship; so they hastened on board
and we rowed out on to the waters of Oceanus, where before long we fell
in with a fair wind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[50:\*](aoto16.htm#fr_23) See Chapter xv. for
reasons why I have bracketed lines 115-137.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[50:†](aoto16.htm#fr_24) Ulysses was to appease
Neptune's anger by going as a missionary to preach his name among a
people that did not know him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XII. The Sirens, Scylla and Charybdis, The Cattle of the
Sun](aoto17)
