[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto28) 
[Next](aoto30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XXIV

#### THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES SEES HIS FATHER—IS ATTACKED BY THE FRIENDS OF THE SUITORS—LAERTES KILLS EUPEITHES—PEACE IS MADE BETWEEN HIM AND THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA.

Then Mercury took the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes in
sleep or wakes them just as he pleases, and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

led the ghosts of the suitors to the house of Hades whining and
gibbering as they followed. As bats fly squealing about the hollow of a
great cave when one of them has fallen from the cluster in which they
hang—even so did they whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow
led them down into the dark abode of death. When they had passed the
waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the Sun
and the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel
where dwell the souls and shadows of men that can labour no more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:15">15</span></span> Here they
came upon the ghosts of Achilles, Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, and
that of Agamemnon joined them. As these were conversing, Mercury came up
with the ghosts of the suitors, and Agamemnon's ghost recognised that of
Amphimedon who had been his host when he was in Ithaca; so he asked him
what this sudden arrival of fine young men—all of an age too—might mean,
and Amphimedon told him the whole story from first to last.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:203">203</span></span> Thus did
they converse in the house of Hades deep within the bowels of the earth.
Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the city and soon reached
the farm of Laertes, which he had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here
was his house with a lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who
worked for him ate and slept, while inside the house there was an old
Sicel woman, who looked after him in this his country farm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:214">214</span></span> "Go," said
Ulysses to the others, "to the house, and kill the best pig you have for
dinner; I wish to make trial of my father and see whether he will know
me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:219">219</span></span> So saying
he gave his armour to Eumæus and Philœtius, and turned off into the
vineyard, where he found his father alone, hoeing a vine. He had on a
dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby; his legs were bound round with
thongs of oxhide to keep out the brambles, and he wore sleeves of
leather against the thorns. He had a goatskin cap on his head and was
looking very woebegone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:232">232</span></span> When
Ulysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under
a tall pear tree and began to weep. He

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him all about his
having come home, or whether he should first question him and see what
he would say. On the whole he decided that he would be crafty with him,
so he went up to his father who was bending down and digging about a
plant.

"I see, Sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:244">244</span></span> gardener—what
pains you take with it to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a
fig-tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower-bed, but bears the traces of
your attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say
that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old,
unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that
your master takes such poor care of you; indeed, your face and figure
have nothing of the slave about them, but proclaim you of noble birth. I
should have said you were one of those who should wash well, eat well,
and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do. But tell me, and
tell me true, whose bondsman are you, and in whose garden are you
working? Tell me also about another matter—is this place that I have
come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a
dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was
asking whether an old friend of mine who used to live here was still
alive. My friend said he was the son of Laertes son of Arceisius, and I
made him large presents on his leaving me."

Laertes wept and answered that in this case he would never <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:280">280</span></span> see his presents
back again, though he would have been amply requited if Ulysses had been
alive. "But tell me," he said, "who and whence are you? Where is your
ship? or did you come as passenger on some other man's vessel?"

"I will tell you every thing," answered Ulysses, "quite <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:302">302</span></span> truly. I come
from Alybas, and am son to king Apheides. My name is Eperitus; heaven
drove me off my course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried
here against my will. <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_24:307">307</span></span> As for my ship, it is lying over yonder
off the open country outside the town. It is five years since Ulysses
left me—<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:308">308</span></span>
Poor fellow! we had every hope that we should meet again and exchange
presents"

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:315">315</span></span> Laertes
was overcome with grief, and Ulysses was so much touched that he
revealed himself. When his father asked for proof, he shewed him the
scar on his leg. "Furthermore," he added, "I will point out to you the
trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all about them
as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all, and you told
me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen pear trees,
ten apple trees, and forty fig trees, and you also said you would give
me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each row, and the
vines yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has beaten upon
them." He also told his father that he had killed the suitors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:345">345</span></span> Laertes
was now convinced, but said he feared he should have all the people of
Ithaca coming to attack them. Ulysses answered that he need not trouble
about this, and that they had better go and get their dinner, which
would be ready by the time they got to the house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:361">361</span></span> When they
reached the house the old Sicel woman took Laertes inside, washed him,
and anointed him. Minerva also gave him a more imposing presence and
made him look taller and stronger than before. When he came back,
Ulysses said, "My dear father, some god has been making you much taller
and better looking." To which Laertes answered that if he was as young
and hearty as when he took the stronghold Nericum on the foreland, he
should have been a great help to him on the preceding day, and would
have killed many suitors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:383">383</span></span> Dolius and
his sons, who had been working hard by, now came up, for the old Sicel
woman, who was Dolius's wife, had been to fetch them. When they were
satisfied that Ulysses was really there, they were overjoyed and
embraced him one after the other. "But tell me," said Dolius, "does
Penelope know, or shall we send and tell her?" "Old man," answered
Ulysses, "she knows already. What business is that of yours?" Then they
all took their seats at table.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:412">412</span></span> Meanwhile
the news of the slaughter of the suitors had got noised abroad, and the
people gathered hooting and groaning before the house of Ulysses. They
took their dead, buried every man his own, and put the bodies of those
who came

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the fishermen to take
them every man to his own place. Then they met in assembly and Eupeithes
urged them to pursue Ulysses and the others before they could escape
over to the main land.

Medon, however, and Phemius had now woke up, and came <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:439">439</span></span> to the assembly.
Medon dissuaded the people from doing as Eupeithes advised, inasmuch as
he had seen a god going about killing the suitors, and it would be
dangerous to oppose the will of heaven. Halitherses also spoke in the
same sense, and half the people were persuaded by him. The other half
armed themselves and followed Eupeithes in pursuit of Ulysses.

Minerva then consulted Jove as to the course events should <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:472">472</span></span> take. Jove told
her that she had had everything her own way so far, and might continue
to do as she pleased. He should, however, advise that both sides should
now be reconciled under the continued rule of Ulysses. Minerva approved
of this and darted down to Ithaca.

Laertes and his household had now done dinner, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:489">489</span></span> Eupeithes with
his band of men were seen to be near at hand. Ulysses and the others put
on their armour, and Minerva joined them. "Telemachus," said Ulysses,
"now that you are about to fight in a decisive engagement, see that you
do no discredit to your ancestors, who were eminent all the world over
for their strength and valour."

"You shall see, my dear father," replied Telemachus, "if <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:510">510</span></span> you choose, that
I am in no mind, as you say, to disgrace your family."

"Good heavens," exclaimed Laertes, "what a day I am <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:513">513</span></span> enjoying. My son
and grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour."
Minerva then came up to him, and bade him pray to her. She infused fresh
vigour into him, and when he had prayed to her he aimed his spear at
Eupeithes and killed him. Ulysses and his men fell upon the others,
routed them, and would have killed one and all of them had not Minerva
raised her voice and made every one pause. "Men of Ithaca," she cried,
"cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter without further
bloodshed."

On this they turned pale with fear, dropped their armour, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_24:533">533</span></span>

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and fled every man towards the city. Ulysses was swooping down upon them
like an eagle, but Jove sent a thunderbolt of fire that fell just in
front of Minerva. Whereon she said, "Ulysses, stay this strife, or Jove
will be angry with you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_24:545">545</span></span> Ulysses
obeyed her gladly. Minerva then assumed the voice and form of Mentor,
and presently made a covenant of peace between the two contending
parties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Preponderance of Woman in the Odyssey](aoto30)
