[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto09) 
[Next](aoto11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book V

#### ULYSSES IN THE ISLAND OF CALYPSO—HE LEAVES THE ISLAND ON A RAFT, AND AFTER GREAT SUFFERING REACHES THE LAND OF THE PHÆACIANS.

The gods now held a second council, at which Minerva and Jove both
spoke.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:28">28</span></span> When Jove had
done speaking he sent Mercury to Calypso

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

to tell her that Ulysses was to return home, reaching the land of the
Phæacians in twenty days. The Phæacians would load him with presents and
send him on to Ithaca.

Mercury, therefore, flew over the sea like a cormorant that <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:43">43</span></span> fishes every hole
and corner of the deep. In the course of time he reached Calypso's cave
and told his story. Calypso was very angry, but seeing there was no help
for it promised obedience. As soon as Mercury was gone she went to look
for Ulysses, whom she found weeping as usual and looking out ever sadly
upon the sea; she told him to build himself a raft and sail home upon
it, but Ulysses was deeply suspicious and would not be reassured till
she had sworn a very solemn oath that she meant him no harm, and was
advising him in all good faith.

The pair then returned to Calypso's cave. "I cannot <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:192">192</span></span> understand," she
said, "why you will not stay quietly here with me, instead of all the
time thinking about this wife of yours. I cannot believe that I am any
worse looking than she is. If you only knew how much hardship you will
have to undergo <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_5:206">206</span></span> before you get back, you would stay
where you are and let me make you immortal."

"Do not be angry with me," answered Ulysses, "you are <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:215">215</span></span> infinitely better
looking than Penelope. You are a goddess, and she is but a mortal woman.
There can be no comparison. Nevertheless, come what may, I have a
craving to get back to my own home."

The next four days were spent in making the raft. Calypso <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:228">228</span></span> lent him her axe
and auger and shewed him where the trees grew which would be driest and
whose timber would be the <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_5:240">240</span></span> best seasoned, and Ulysses cut them
down. He made the raft about as broad in the beam as people generally
make a good big ship, and he gave it a rudder—that he might be able to
<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:255">255</span></span> steer it.

Calypso then washed him, gave him clean clothes, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:264">264</span></span> he set out,
steering his ship skilfully by means of the rudder. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_5:270">270</span></span> He steered
towards the Great Bear, which is also called the Wain, keeping it on his
left hand, for so Calypso had advised him.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:278">278</span></span> All went
well with him for seventeen days, and on the eighteenth he caught sight
of the faint outlines of the Phæacian coast lying long and low upon the
horizon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:282">282</span></span> Here,
however, Neptune, who was on his way home from the Ethiopians, caught
sight of him and saw the march that the other gods had stolen upon him
during his absence. He therefore stirred the sea round with his trident,
and raised a frightful hurricane, so that Ulysses could see nothing
more, <span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:294">294</span></span>
everything being dark as night; presently he was washed overboard, but
managed to regain his raft.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:333">333</span></span> He was
giving himself up for lost when Ino, also named Leucothea, took pity on
him and flew on to his raft like a sea gull; she reassured him and gave
him her veil, at the same time telling him to throw it back into the sea
as soon as he reached land, and to turn his face away from the sea as he
did so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:351">351</span></span> The storm
still raged, and the raft went to pieces under its fury, whereon Ulysses
bound Ino's veil under his arms and began to swim. Neptune on seeing
this was satisfied and went away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:382">382</span></span> As soon as
he was gone Minerva calmed all the winds except the North, which blew
strong for two days and two nights, so that Ulysses was carried to the
South again. On the morning of the third day he saw land quite close,
but was nearly dashed to pieces against the rocks on trying to leave the
<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:451">451</span></span> water. At
last he found the mouth of a river, who, in answer to Ulysses's prayer,
stayed his flow, so that Ulysses was able to swim inland and get on
shore.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:456">456</span></span> Nearly dead
with exhaustion and in great doubt what to do, he first threw Ino's veil
into the salt waters of the river, and then took shelter on the rising
ground, inland. Here he covered himself with a thick bed of leaves and
fell fast asleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI. The Meeting Between Ulysses and Nausicaa](aoto11)
