[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto20) 
[Next](aoto22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XVI

#### ULYSSES AND TELEMACHUS BECOME KNOWN TO ONE ANOTHER.

Ulysses and Eumæus prepared their meal at daybreak. When Telemachus was
reaching the hut, Ulysses observed that the dogs did not bark, though he
heard footsteps, and 7 enquired whether the visitor was some
acquaintance of the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

swineherd's. He had hardly done speaking when Telemachus entered, and
was welcomed by Eumæus.

"Is my mother still at the house," said he, "or has she <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:33">33</span></span> left it with
another husband, so that the bed of Ulysses is festooned with cobwebs?"

"She is still there," answered Eumæus, "spending her <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:36">36</span></span> time in tears both
night and day."

Eumæus set refreshments before him and when he had done <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:49">49</span></span> eating he asked
who the stranger might be.

When Telemachus heard that Ulysses was a ship-wrecked <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:68">68</span></span> suppliant he was
much displeased. "I am as yet too young," he said, "to be able to hold
my own in the house; what sufficient support, then, can I give this man?
Still, as he has come to you I will send him clothes and all necessary
food; and let him stay with you; I will not have him go near the
suitors, for harm would be sure to come of it."

Ulysses expressed his surprise and indignation about the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:90">90</span></span> suitors, whereon
Telemachus explained still further, and wound up by telling Eumæus to go
at once and inform Penelope of his return. Eumæus asked if he should
turn a little out of his way and tell Laertes, but Telemachus said he
was not to do so. Penelope would send him word all in due course.

As soon as Eumæus was gone Minerva came to the hut. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:157">157</span></span> Ulysses knew
her, and so did the dogs, for they went whining away to the other end of
the yards, but Telemachus did not see her. She made a sign to Ulysses
that he was to come outside, and when he had done so she told him he was
to reveal himself to his son—whereon she struck him with her wand,
endowed him with a noble presence, and clothed him in goodly raiment.

Then he went back into the hut and told his son who <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:178">178</span></span> he was; but for
a long while Telemachus would not believe. At last, however, when he was
convinced, the pair flung their arms about each other's neck, and wept
like eagles or vultures who had been robbed of their young. Indeed they
would have wept till sundown had it not occurred to Telemachus to ask
his father in what ship he had come to Ithaca, and whose crew it was
that had brought him.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:225">225</span></span> Ulysses
told him about the Phæacians, and how he had hidden the presents they
had given him. "I am now come," he said, "by Minerva's advice, to
consult with you as to how we shall take vengeance on the suitors. I
would therefore learn how many there are of them, and consider whether
we two can kill them, or whether we must get help from outside."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:240">240</span></span> Telemachus
said it was hopeless to think of attacking the suitors without
assistance. There were fifty-two from Dulichium, with six followers,
twenty-four from Same, twenty from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:258">258</span></span> Ulysses
explained that he could rely on help from Jove and from Minerva, and
thought that this would be enough. "They will not be long in joining
us," said he, "when the fight has begun in good earnest. Go, then,
tomorrow to the town, and join the suitors; let the swineherd bring me
later, disguised as a poor miserable beggar. Never mind how much
violence you may see the suitors do me. Look on and say nothing, beyond
asking them in a friendly way to leave me alone. Also, find some pretext
for removing the armour from the walls. Say it is taking harm with the
smoke, and that the sight of armour sometimes sets men fighting, so that
it is better away—but <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_16:295">295</span></span> leave two swords, shields and spears
for you and me to snatch up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:321">321</span></span> As they
were thus conversing, the ship that had brought Telemachus from Pylos
reached the harbour of Ithaca, and the crew took the presents which
Menelaus had given him to the house of Clytius. They sent a man to tell
Penelope that Telemachus was at the farm, and had sent the ship on to
allay her anxiety. This man and the swineherd met at the house of
Ulysses, and the man said, in the presence of the maids, "Madam, your
son is returned from Pylos;" but Eumæus stood by her, and told her all
that her son had bidden him. Then he went back to his pig farm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:342">342</span></span> The
suitors were very angry, and were about sending a ship to fetch those
who had been lying in wait for Telemachus, when Amphinomus, a suitor,
happened to turn round and saw their ship coming into harbour. So he
laughed and said, "We have no need to send, for the men are here." On
this they all

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

went to meet the ship, and Antinous said that as Telemachus had escaped
them in spite of their great vigilance, they must kill him, either at
the farm or as he was coming thence. Otherwise he would expose their
plot, and they would have the people rise against them. "If," he
concluded, "this does not please you, and you would let him live, we
cannot eat up his estate any longer, but must go home, urge our suit
each from his own house, and let the one among us take Penelope who will
give most for her, or whose lot it may happen to be."

Amphinomus, who came from the well-grassed and grain-growing <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:394">394</span></span> island of
Dulichium, then spoke. He was a man of good natural disposition, and his
conversation was more pleasing to Penelope than that of any of the other
suitors; "I will only consent to kill Telemachus," said he, "if the gods
give us their approval. It is a serious thing to kill a man who is of
royal race. If they sanction it, I will be with you; otherwise I am for
letting it alone."

The rest assented, and they went back to the house. But <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:406">406</span></span> Medon told
Penelope of this new plot, so she went attended by her gentlewomen,
stood by one of the bearing-posts that supported the roof of the
cloister, and bitterly rebuked Antinous for his ingratitude in
forgetting how Ulysses in old days had saved the life of his father
Eupeithes.

Eurymachus then made a fair but false speech vowing <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:434">434</span></span> eternal
friendship to Telemachus, and Penelope returned to her own room to mourn
her husband till Minerva closed her eyes in slumber.

In the evening Eumæus got back to his hut just as the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:452">452</span></span> others had
killed a yearling pig and were getting supper ready. Meanwhile Minerva
had again disguised Ulysses as an old beggar.

"What news from the town, Eumæus?" said Telemachus. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:460">460</span></span> "Have the
suitors got back with their ship?"

"I did not ask," answered Eumæus, "for when I had given <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_16:464">464</span></span> my message I
turned straight home; but I met the messenger from your own crew, who
told your mother of your return before I could do so. As I was coming
here, and was on the hill of Mercury above the town, I saw a ship with
many men

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and much armour coming into port; so I suppose it was the suitors, but I
cannot be sure."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_16:476">476</span></span> Telemachus
gave his father a look, but so that the swineherd could not see him.
Then they all got their supper and went to bed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XVII. Ulysses Maltreated by the Suitors](aoto22)
