[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto42) 
[Next](aoto44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

### Chapter XVI

### CONCLUSION.

<span class="smallcaps">Before</span> I quit my subject, I should
perhaps answer a question which the reader has probably long since asked
himself. I mean, how it is conceivable that considerations so obvious as
those urged in the foregoing Chapters should have been overlooked by so
many capable students for so many hundreds of years, if there were any
truth in them. For they lie all of them upon the surface; they are a
mere washing in the Jordan and being clean; they require nothing but
that a person should read the "Odyssey" as he would any other book,
noting the physical characters described in the Scherian and Ithacan
scenes, and looking for them on some West coast of the Mediterranean to
the West of Greece.

The answer is that the considerations which I have urged have been
overlooked because, for very obvious reasons, it never occurred to any
one to look for them. "Do you suppose, then," more than one eminent
scholar has said to me directly or indirectly, "that no one has ever
read the 'Odyssey' except yourself?" I suppose nothing of the kind, and
know that it was only possible for the truth when once lost (as it soon
would be on the establishment of the Phœnicians at Drepanum) to be
rediscovered, when people had become convinced that the "Odyssey" was
not written by the writer of the "Iliad." This idea has not yet been
generally accepted for more than a hundred years, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[\*](#fn_92) if so long, but until it was seized and
held firmly, no one was likely to suspect that the "Odyssey" could have
come from Sicily, much less that it could have been written by a woman,
for there is not one line in the "Iliad" which even hints at the
existence of Sicily, or makes the reader suspect the

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

author to have been a woman, while there are any number of passages
which seem absolutely prohibitive of any other opinion than that the
writer was a man, and a very strong one.

Stolberg in the last century, and Colonel Mure in this, had the key in
the lock when they visited Trapani, each of them with the full
conviction that the Cyclops incident, and the hunting the goats, should
be placed on Mt. Eryx and the island of Favognana—but they did not turn
it. Professor Freeman, Schliemann, and Sir H. Layard, all of them
visited Trapani and its immediate neighbourhood either as students or
excavators, and failed to see that there was as splendid a prize to be
unburied there without pick and shovel, outlay, or trouble of any kind,
as those of Nineveh, Mycene, and Hissarlik—and why? Because they were
still hampered by the long association of the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" as
the work of the same person. Knowing that the "Iliad" could hardly have
been written elsewhere than in the Northern half of the West coast of
Asia Minor, if would never occur to them to look for the "Odyssey" in a
spot so remote as Trapani. They probably held it to be the work of some
prehistoric Herodotus, who would go on from scene to scene without
staying longer than he could help in any one place, instead of feeling
sure, as I believe they should have done, that it was the work of one
who was little likely to have travelled more than a very few miles from
her own home. Moreover, Admiralty charts are things of comparatively
recent date, and I do not think any one would have been likely to have
run the "Odyssey" to ground without their help.

But however this may be, I do not doubt that the habit of ascribing the
"Odyssey" to Homer has been the main reason of the failure to see the
obvious in connection with it. Surely it is time our eminent Iliadic and
Odyssean scholars left off misleading themselves and other people by
including the "Odyssey" in their "Introductions" to the work of "Homer."
It was permissible to do this till within recent years; anything else,
indeed, would have been pedantic, but what would have been pedantic a
hundred years ago, is slovenly and unscholarly now.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

Turning from her commentators to the authoress herself, I am tempted to
wonder whether she would be more pleased or angry could she know that
she had been so long mistaken for a man—and that man Homer. It would
afford her an excellent opportunity for laughing at the dullness of man.
Angry, however, as she would no doubt be, she could hardly at the same
time help being flattered, and would perhaps console herself by
reflecting that poets as great as she was are bound to pay the penalty
of greatness in being misunderstood.

Horace tells us that mediocrity in a poet is forbidden alike by gods,
men, and publishers, but, whether forbidden or no, there are a good many
mediocre poets who are doing fairly well. So far as I can see, indeed,
gods, men, and more particularly publishers, will tolerate nothing in a
poet except mediocrity, and if a true poet by some rare accident slips
in among the others, it is because gods and publishers’ readers did not
find him out until it was too late to stop him. Horace must have known
perfectly well that he was talking nonsense.

And after all it is well that things are as they are; for the mediocre
poet, though he may hang about for many years, does in the end die, or
at any rate become such a mere literary Struldbrug as to give plain
people no trouble, whereas the true poet will possess himself of us, and
live on in us whether we will or no, and unless the numbers of such
people were severely kept in check they would clog the wheels of the
world. Half a dozen first-class poets in prose or verse are as many as
the world can carry in any comfort; twenty Shakespeares, twenty Homers,
twenty Nausicaas would make literature impossible, yet we may be sure
that every country in every century could yield two or three first-class
writers, if genius were to be known at once, and fostered by those who
alone know how to foster it. Genius is an offence; like all other
offences it must needs come, but woe to that man or woman through whom
it comes, for he or she must pass through the Scylla and Charybdis of
being either torn in pieces on the one hand, or so misunderstood on the
other as to make the slipping through with life in virtue of such
misrepresentation more mortifying than death itself.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Do what we may we cannot help it. Dead mind like dead body must, after a
decent interval, be buried out of our sight if living mind is to have
fair play, and it might perhaps not be a bad thing if our great
educational establishments had more of the crematorium and less of the
catacomb about them than they have at present. Our notions of
intellectual sanitation are deplorably imperfect, and unless the living
become more jealous of letting dead mind remain unconsumed in their
system, a fit of intellectual gout must ere long supervene, which, if
not fatal, will still be excruciatingly painful. Since, therefore, there
are such insuperable difficulties in the way of eliminating geniuses
when we have once absorbed them, and since also, do what we may, we can
no more detect the one genius who may be born among a multitude of good
average children, than Herod could detect the King of the Jews among the
babes of Bethlehem, we have no course but to do much as Herod did, and
lay violent hands upon all young people till we have reduced every
single one of them to such mediocrity as may be trusted to take itself
off sooner or later. To this end we have established schools and
schoolmen; nor is it easy to see how we could more effectually foster
that self-sufficiency which does so much towards helping us through the
world, and yet repress any exuberance of originality or independence of
thought which may be prejudicial to its possessor during his own life,
and burdensome to posterity when he is dead and gone.

Obviously wise, however, and necessary as our present system is, we
nevertheless grumble at it. We would have any number of first-class
geniuses in art, literature and music, and yet have plenty of elbow room
for ourselves. Our children too; they cannot show too many signs of
genius, but at the same time we blame them if they do not get on in the
world and make money as genius next to never does. Like the authoress of
the "Odyssey" we are always wanting to have things both ways; we would
have others be forgotten, and yet not be forgotten ourselves; when we
have shuffled off this mortal coil, we would fain shuffle on another
that shall be at once less coil and less mortal, in the good thoughts of
coming generations,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

but if this desire is so universal as to be called natural, it is one
which the best and sanest of us will fight against rather than
encourage; such people will do their work as well and cheerfully as they
can, and make room for others with as little fuss as possible when they
have had their day.

If, however, any man resents the common course of nature and sets
himself to looking upon himself and cursing his fate that he was not
born to be of the number of them that enter into life eternal even in
this world, let him console himself by reflecting that until he is long
dead, there is no certain knowing whether he is in life or no, and also
that though he prove to be an immortal after all, he cannot escape the
treatment which he is the more sure to meet with according as he is the
more immortal—let alone the untold misery which his works will inflict
upon young people.

If ever a great classic could have been deterred from writing by a
knowledge of how posterity would treat her, the writer of the "Odyssey"
should have been so, for never has poem more easy to understand failed
more completely of being understood. If she was as lovely as I should
like to think her, was ever sleeping beauty hidden behind a more
impenetrable hedge of scholasticism? How could it be otherwise? The
"Odyssey," like the "Iliad," has been a school book for nearly 3000
years, and what more cruel revenge could dullness take on genius? What
has the erudition of the last 2500 years done for the "Iliad" and the
"Odyssey" but to emend the letter in small things and to obscure the
spirit in great ones?

There was indeed, as I said in my opening Chapter, a band of scholars a
century or two before the birth of Christ who refused to see the "Iliad"
and "Odyssey" as the work of the same person, but erudition snubbed them
and snuffed them out so effectually that for some 2000 years they were
held to have been finally refuted. Can there be any more scathing satire
on the value of scholastic criticism? It seems as though Minerva had
shed the same darkness over both the poems that she shed over Ulysses,
that they might go in and out among eminent Homeric scholars from
generation to generation, and none should see them.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

The world does indeed know little of its greatest men and women, and
bitterly has it been reproached for its want of penetration, but there
are always two sides, and it should be remembered that its greatest men
and women commonly know very little of the world in its more
conventional aspects. They are continually flying in the face of all
that we expect of greatness, and they never tell us what they are; they
do not even think that they are great; if they do we may be sure that
they are mistaken; how then can we be expected to appreciate people
correctly till we have had plenty of time to think them over?

And when we have thought them over, how little have our canons of
criticism to do with the verdict which we in the end arrive at. Look at
the "Odyssey." Here is a poem in which the hero and heroine have been
already married many years before it opens; from the first page to the
last there is no young couple in love with one another, there is in fact
nothing amatory in the poem, for though the suitors are supposed to be
madly in love with Penelope, they never say or do anything that carries
conviction as to their being so. We accept the fact, as we do the
sagacity of Ulysses, because we are told it, not because we see it. The
interest of the poem ostensibly turns mainly on the revenge taken by a
bald middle-aged gentleman, whose little remaining hair is red, on a
number of young men who have been eating him out of house and home,
while courting his supposed widow.

Moreover, this subject, so initially faulty, is treated with a
carelessness in respect of consistency and plausibility, an ignorance of
commonly known details, and a disregard of ordinary canons which it
would not be easy to surpass, and yet, such is the irony of art that it
is not too much to say that there is only one poem which can be
decisively placed above it. If the "Odyssey" enforces one artistic truth
more than another, it is that living permanent work in literature (and
the same holds good for art and music) can only be done by those who are
either above, or below, conscious reference to any rules or canons
whatsoever—and in spite of Shakespeare, Handel, and Rembrandt, I should
say that on the whole it is

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

more blessed to be below than above. For after all it is not the outward
and visible signs of what we read, see, or hear, in any work, that bring
us to its feet in prostration of gratitude and affection; what really
stirs us is the communion with the still living mind of the man or woman
to whom we owe it, and the conviction that that mind is as we would have
our own to be. All else is mere clothes and grammar.

As regards the mind of the writer of the "Odyssey" there is nothing in
her work which impresses me more profoundly than the undercurrent of
melancholy which I feel throughout it. I do not mean that the writer was
always, or indeed generally, unhappy; she was often, at any rate let us
hope so, supremely happy; nevertheless there is throughout her work a
sense as though the world for all its joyousness was nevertheless out of
joint—an inarticulate indefinable half pathos, half baffled fury, which
even when lost sight of for a time soon re-asserts itself. If the
"Odyssey" was not written without laughter, so neither was it without
tears. Now that I know the writer to have been a woman, I am ashamed of
myself for not having been guided to my conclusion by the exquisitely
subtle sense of weakness as well as of strength that pervades the poem,
rather than by the considerations that actually guided me.

The only approach to argument which I have seen brought forward to show
that the "Odyssey" must have been written by a man, consists in
maintaining that no woman could have written the scene in which Ulysses
kills the suitors. I cannot see this; to me it seems rather that no man
could have brought himself to disregard probability with so little
compunction; moreover a woman can kill a man on paper as well as a man
can, and with the exception of the delightful episode in which Ulysses
spares the lives of Phemius and Medon, the scene, I confess, appears to
me to be the most mechanical and least satisfactory in the whole poem.
The real obstacle to a general belief that the "Odyssey" was written by
a woman is not anything that can be found in the poem, but lies, as I
have already said, in the long prevalence of an opinion that it was
written by the same person as the "Iliad" was. The age and
respectability of this opinion, even though we have at length discarded

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

it, will not allow us to go beyond ascribing the "Odyssey" to another
man—we cannot jump all at once to the view that it was not by a man at
all. A certain invincible scholasticism prevents us from being able to
see what we should see at once if we would only read the poem slowly and
without considering anything that critics have said concerning it.

This, however, is not an easy thing to do. I know very well that I
should never have succeeded in doing it if I had not passed some
five-and-thirty rebellious years during which I never gave the "Odyssey"
so much as a thought. The poem is so august: it is hallowed by the
veneration of so many ages; it is like my frontispiece, so mysterious,
so imperfect, and yet so divinely beyond all perfection; it has been so
long associated with the epic poem which stands supreme—for if the
"Odyssey" be the Monte Rosa of literature, the "Iliad" must, I suppose,
for ever remain as the Mont Blanc; who can lightly vivisect a work of
such ineffable prestige as though it were an overlooked *parvenu* book
picked up for a few pence at a second hand book stall? Lightly, no, but
inexorably, yes, if its natural health and beauty are to be restored by
doing so.

One of our most accomplished living scholars chided with me in this
sense a year or two ago. He said I was ruthless. "I confess," he said,
"I do not give much heed to the details on which you lay so much stress:
I read the poem not to theorise about it, but to revel in its amazing
beauty."

It would shock me to think that I have done anything to impair the sense
of that beauty which I trust I share in even measure with himself, but
surely if the "Odyssey" has charmed us as a man's work, its charm and
wonder are infinitely increased when we see it as a woman's. Still more
must it charm us when we find the writer to be an old friend, and see no
inconsiderable part of her work as a reflection of her own surroundings.

Have we, then, a right in sober seriousness so to find her? I have shown
that in the earliest known ages of Greek literature poetesses abounded,
and gained a high reputation. I have shown that by universal consent the
domestic and female interest in the "Odyssey" predominates greatly over
the male.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have shown that
it was all written in one place, and if so—even were there no further
reasons for thinking so—presumably by one hand: I have shown that the
writer was extremely jealous for the honour of woman, so much so as to
be daunted by no impossibilities when trying to get rid of a story that
she held to be an insult to her sex. These things being so, is it too
much to ask the reader to believe that the poem was not written, as
Bentley held, by a man for women, but for both men and women, by one who
was herself a woman?

And now as I take leave of the reader, I would say that if when I began
this work I was oppressed with a sense of the hopelessness of getting
Homeric scholars to take it seriously and consider it, I am even more
oppressed and dismayed when I turn over its pages and see how certain
they are to displease many whom I would far rather conciliate than
offend. What can it matter to me where the "Odyssey" was written, or
whether it was written by a man or a woman? From the bottom of my heart
I can say truly that I do not care about the way in which these points
are decided, but I do care, and very greatly, about knowing which way
they are decided by sensible people who have considered what I have
urged in this book. I believe I have settled both points sufficiently,
but come what may I know that my case in respect of them is amply strong
enough to justify me in having stated it. And so I leave it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[262:\*](aoto43.htm#fr_92) I see that my
grandfather, Dr. Butler, of Shrewsbury, accepts it in his *Antient
Geography*, published in 1813, but I do not know where he got if from.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](aoto44)
