[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07015)  [Next](cc07017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
14:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And these *are the countries* which
the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar
the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of
the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to
them.

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Haec sunt quae in haereditatem
acceperunt filii Israel in terra Chanaan, quae illis tradiderunt in
haereditatem Eleazar sacerdos, et Josue filius Nun, et capita tribuum
filiorum Israel.

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** By lot *was* their inheritance, as
the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and *for*
the half tribe.

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Per sortem haereditatis eorum, sicut
praeceperat Jehova per manum Mosis, ut daret novem tribubus, et dimidiae
tribui.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For Moses had given the inheritance
of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the
Levites he gave none inheritance among them.

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dederat enim Moses duabustribubus, et
dimidiae tribui citra Jordanem: Levitis autem non dederat haereditatem
in medio eorum.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** For the children of Joseph were two
tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the
Levites in the land, save cities to dwell *in*, with their suburbs for
their cattle and for their substance.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Fuerunt enim filii Joseph duae tribus
Manasse et Ephraim: ideo non dederunt partem Levitis in terra praeter
urbes ad habitandum, et suburbana earum pro armentis et gregibus
ipsorum.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** As the LORD commanded Moses, so the
children of Israel did, and they divided the land.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quemadmodum praeceperat Moses sic
fecerunt filii Israel, et diviserunt terram.

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Then the children of Judah came unto
Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto
him, Thou knowest the thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God
concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Accesserunt autem filii Juda ad
Josuam in Gilgal, dixitque ad eum Caleb filius Jephune Kenisaeus, Tu
nosti verbum quod loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen virum Dei de me, et de
te, in Cades-barnea:

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Forty years old *was* I when Moses
the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land;
and I brought him word again as *it was* in mine heart.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Quadragenarius eram quando misit me
Moses servus Jehovae de Cades-barnea ad explorandam terram, et retuli ei
rem sicuti erat in corde meo.

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Nevertheless my brethren that went
up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the
LORD my God.

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et quum fratres mei qui descenderant
mecum dissolverent cor populi, ego perseveranter sequutus sum Jehovam
Deum meum.

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Moses swear on that day, saying,
Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine
inheritance, and thy children’s for ever, because thou has wholly
followed the LORD my God.

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et juravit Moses illo die, dicendo,
Si non terra quam calcavit pes tuus, tua erit in haereditatem et filiis
tuis in aeternum, quia perseveranter sequutus es Jehovam Deum meum.

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And now, behold, the LORD has kept
me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the LORD
spoke this word unto Moses, while *the children of* Israel wandered in
the wilderness: and now, lo, I *am* this day fourscore and five years
old.

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Nunc autem Jehova concessit mihi
vitam sicuti dixerat. Jam quadraginta quinque anni sunt, ex quo tempore
pronunciavit Jehova hanc rem Mosi, ex quo ambulavit Israel per desertum:
et nunc quidem hodie sum quinque et octoginta annorum.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span>**11.** As yet I *am as* strong this day as
*I was* in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength *was* then, even
so *is* my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et adhuc sum hodie vegetus ut eo
die, quo misit me Moses: quantus erat tunc vigor meus, tantus, hodie est
vigor meus ad praelium, et ad exeundum, et ad ingrediendum:

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Now therefore give me this
mountain, whereof the LORD spoke in that day; for thou heardest in that
day how the Anakims *were* there, and *that* the cities *were* great
*and* fenced: if so be the LORD *will be* with me, then I shall be able
to drive them out, as the LORD said.

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Nunc ergo da mihi montem istum, ut
loquutus est Jehova eo die. Tu enim audivisit eo die quod Anakim sint
ibi, et urbes magnae et munitae: forte Jehova erit mecum, et expellam
eos quemadmodum dixit Jehova.

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And Joshua blessed him, and gave
unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et benedixit ei Josue, deditque
Hebron ipsi Caleb filio Jephune in haereditatem.

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Hebron therefore became the
inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day,
because that he wholly followed the LORD God of Israel.

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Idcirco fuit Hebron ipsuis Caleb
filii Jephune Kenisaei, in haereditatem, usque ad diem hunc, eo quod
perseveranter sequutus est Jehovam Deum Israel.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the name of Hebron before *was*
Kirjatharba; *which Arba was* a great man among the Anakims. And the
land had rest from war.

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Nomen autem Hebron antea fuit
Ciriath-arba, qui Arba homo magnus inter Anakim fuit: et terra quievit a
bello.

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span><span id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span>**1.** *And these are the countries,* etc
He now proceeds to the land of Canaan, from which nine tribes and a half
were to obtain their lots. And he will immediately break off the thread
of the narrative, as we shall see. Yet the transition is seasonably made
from that region whose situation was different, to let the reader know
that the discourse was to be concerning the land of Canaan, which was to
be divided by lot. We have said that Joshua and Eleazar not only divided
what the Israelites had already acquired, but trusting in the promise of
God, confidently included whatever he had promised to his people, just
as if they had been in actual possession of it. We shall see, indeed,
that the division was not all at once made complete, but when the first
lot turned up in favor of Judah, the turns of the others were left in
hope.

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span>Here a difficult question arises. How can
it be said that the distribution of the land was made by Joshua,
Eleazar, and the princes, if lots were cast? For the lot is not
regulated by the opinion or the will or the authority of man. Should any
one answer, that they took charge and prevented any fraud from being
committed, the difficulty is not removed, nay, this evasion will be
refuted from the context. It is to be known, therefore, that they were
not selected simply to divide the land by lot, but also afterwards to
enlarge or restrict the boundaries of the tribes by giving to each its
due proportion. That this business could not be accomplished by a naked
lot is very apparent. For while, according to human ideas, nothing is
more fortuitous than the result of a lot, it was not known whether God
might choose to place the half tribe of Manasseh where the tribe of
Judah obtained its settlement, or whether Zebulun might not occupy the
place of Ephraim. Therefore they were not at liberty at the outset to
proceed farther than to divide the land into ten districts or provinces.
In this way, however, the space belonging to each would remain
indefinite. For had an option been given to each, some would have chosen
to fix themselves in the center, others would have preferred a quiet
locality, while others would have been guided in their choice by the
fertility of the soil, or the climate and beauty of the scenery. But the
lot placed the tribe of Judah, as it were, at the head, while it sent
that of Zebulun away to the seashore, placed the tribe of Benjamin
adjacent to that of Judah, and removed that of Ephraim to a greater
distance. In short, the effect of the lot was that ten divisions fell
out from Egypt towards Syria, and from the north quarter to the
Mediterranean Sea, making some neighbors to the Egyptians, and giving to
others maritime positions, to others hilly districts, to others
intervening valleys.

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>This being understood, the office remaining
for the rulers of the people was to trace out the boundaries on all
sides in accordance with the rules of equity. It remained, therefore,
for them to calculate how many thousand souls there were in every tribe,
and to assign more or less space to each, according to the greatness or
the smallness of their numbers. For in conformity to the divine command,
a due proportion was to be observed, and a larger or narrower district
was to be assigned, according as the census which was taken had
ascertained the numbers to be. (<span id="xvii.i-p36.1"></span>[Nu
26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#000)<span id="xvii.i-p36.1"></span>) To
the judgment of the princes was it in like manner left to shape the
territories, regulating the length and breadth as circumstances might
require. It is necessary also to bear in mind what is said in <span
id="xvii.i-p36.2"></span>[Numbers
26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#000)<span id="xvii.i-p36.2"></span>,
that the ten who are here called heads of families were appointed to
execute this office, not by the suffrages of men, but by the voice of
God. Thus each tribe had its own overseers to prevent either fraud or
violence from being committed. Then it would have been impious to have
any suspicion of those who had been nominated by God. Such is the manner
in which Joshua may be said to have distributed the land, though it was
portioned out by lot.

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span><span id="xvii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span>**4.** *They gave no part unto the
Levites,* etc It is here repeated for the third time with regard to the
Levites, that they were not included in the number, so as to have the
portion of a tribe assigned to them; but it is mentioned for a different
purpose, for it is immediately after added, that the sons of Joseph were
divided into two tribes, and were thus privileged to obtain a double
portion. Thus had Jacob prophesied, (<span id="xvii.i-p38.1"></span>[Ge
49](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#000)<span id="xvii.i-p38.1"></span>) or
rather, like an arbiter appointed by God, he had in this matter
preferred the sons of Joseph to the others. God therefore assumed the
Levites to himself as a peculiar inheritance, and in their stead
substituted one of the two families of Joseph.

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span><span id="xvii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span>**6.** *Then the children of Judah came,*
etc Here the account which had been begun as to the partition of the
land is broken off to make way for the insertion of a narrative, namely,
that Caleb requested Mount Hebron to be given to him as he had been
promised by Moses. This happened a long time before the people had
ceased from making war, and it became necessary to cast lots. It is
stated to be the fifth year since their entrance into the land, and he
does not ask for a locality to be given up to him which was already
subdued and cleared of the enemy, but in the midst of the noise and heat
of warfare, he asks to be permitted to acquire it by routing and slaying
its giants. He only seeks to provide, that when his valor has subdued
the giants, he is not to be defrauded of the reward of his labor. The
method of so providing, is to prevent its being included in the common
lot of a tribe. Accordingly, he does not put forth the claim by himself
alone, but the members of his tribe, the sons of Judah also concur with
him, because the effect of conferring this extraordinary benefit on one
family was so far to make an addition to all. Hence though Caleb alone
speaks, all the tribe whose interest it was that his request should be
granted were present.

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span>I am not clear why the surname of Kenite
was given to Caleb. He is so called also in <span
id="xvii.i-p41.1"></span>[Nu 32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#000)<span
id="xvii.i-p41.1"></span>. I am not unaware of the conjecture of some
expositors, that he was so surnamed from Kenas, because either he
himself or some one of his ancestors dwelt among the Kenites. But I see
no solid foundation for this. What if he gained this title by some
illustrious deed, just as victors sometimes assume a surname from the
nations they have subdued? As the promise had not been inserted into any
public record, and Joshua was the only witness now surviving, he makes
his application to him. And it is probable that when the ten spies made
mention of the names of the Anakim, with the view of terrifying the
people, Caleb, to refute their dishonesty, answered with truth, that
when he beheld them on Mount Hebron, they were so far from being
terrible, that he would attack them at his own hand, provided that on
their expulsion he should succeed to their lands; and that on these
conditions Moses ceded to him a habitation in that locality which he
should have acquired by his own prowess.

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span><span id="xvii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span>**7.** *Forty years old was I*, etc He
seems to talk of his own virtue in rather loftier terms than becomes a
pious and modest man. But let us remember that, seeing the thing was in
itself invidious and liable to many objections, it stood in need of
special commendation as a means of suppressing envy. He therefore
mentions that he had acted in good faith in bringing back an account of
what he had learned concerning the land. For the expression, “As it was
in my heart,” evidently denotes sincerity, the heart being thus opposed
to deceitful words. It is a ridiculous fiction to imagine that he had
said it in his heart, because from fear of being killed by his
companions he had not ventured to mention anything of the kind by the
way. Nothing more is meant than simply this, that he acted honestly
according to the command given him, without gloss or dissimulation. He
enlarges on the merit of his integrity, because though he was opposed by
all his colleagues, with the exception of Joshua, he did not yield to
their malice, nor was dispirited by their iniquitous conspiracy, but
steadfastly pursued his purpose. The words taken in their most literal
sense are, I filled or fulfilled to go after thy God; but the obvious
meaning is, that he was not seduced from a faithful discharge of his
duty by the wicked machination of ten men, however difficult it was to
resist them, because he followed God with inflexible perseverance,
feeling perfectly assured that God was the author of the expedition,
from which those perfidious men were endeavoring to draw off the people.

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span>Let us learn from this passage, first, that
unless the last part corresponds to the first, good beginnings vanish
away; secondly, that constancy is deserving of praise only when we
follow God.

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span><span id="xvii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span>**9.** *And Moses swear on that day,* etc
Here, then, is one fruit of the embassy honestly and faithfully
performed — to gain possession of an inheritance of which the whole
people is deprived. For although long life is justly accounted one of
the mercies of God, the end proposed by it is here added, viz., that
Caleb may obtain the inheritance which is denied to others. This was no
ordinary privilege. He next extols the faithfulness of God in having
prolonged his life, and not only so, but supplied vigor and strength, so
that though he was now above eighty years of age, he was not a whit
feebler than when in the flower of his youth. Others, too, had a green
old age, but they were few in number, and then in their case there was
not added to the even tenor of their days a manly vigor, remaining
wholly unimpaired up to their eighty-fifth year. For he lays claim not
only to the skill and valor of a leader, but also to the physical
strength of a soldier.

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span>He next adds the other offices and actions
of his life. For to go out and in is equivalent in Hebrew to the
observance and execution of all parts of our duty. And this Caleb
confirms by fact, when he demands it as his task to assail and expel the
giants. He is not, however, elated by stolid pride to a confident
assurance of victory, but hopes for a prosperous event from the
assistance of God. There seems, indeed, to be an incongruous expression
of doubt in the word Perhaps, as if he were begirding himself
fortuitously for the fight.  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)
Those expositors who think that he is distrusting himself from a feeling
of modesty and considering his own weakness, say something to the point,
but do not say the whole. They certainly omit what is of principal
import, viz., that this Perhaps refers to the common feelings which men
would entertain on taking a view of the actual state of matters.

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span>The first thing necessary is duly to
consider what his design is. Had he asked the gift of a mountain, which
he could have seized without any great exertion, it would have been more
difficult to obtain it. But now when the difficulty of the task is
plainly set forth, he gains the favor of Joshua and the princes, because
in assenting to his prayer, they grant him nothing but the certainty of
an arduous, doubtful, and perilous contest. Knowing, then, that the
children of Israel trembled and were in terror at the very name of the
giants, he speaks according to their opinion as of a matter attended
with doubt and uncertainty. As regards himself, the words clearly
demonstrate how far he was from viewing that which had been said to him
with a dubious or vacillating mind. I shall drive them out, he says, as
the Lord has declared. Shall we say that when he utters the declaration
of God, he is in doubt whether or not God will do what he promised? It
is quite plain that he only reminded them how dangerous the business
was, in order that he might the more easily obtain their assent.
Although it is not uncommon in Hebrew to employ this term to denote
difficulty merely, without meaning to imply that the mind is agitated by
distrust or disquietude. How very difficult it was to drive out the
giants from that fastness,  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) may
be inferred from the fact that the death of Joshua took place before
Caleb ventured to attack them.

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span><span id="xvii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span>**13.** *And Joshua blessed him*, etc He
prayed thus earnestly to show the delight he felt. For it was expedient
by way of example to extol his valor, by which others might be incited
to surmount all their fears. For it was just as if he had gained an
eminence from which he could look down upon the giants. The blessing of
Caleb, therefore, includes in it praise which may have the effect of an
exhortation to the people. In the end of the chapter it is said, that
the name of Hebron was Ciriath-Arba, (Kirjath-Arba.) Here it is to be
observed, that it is not the mountain itself that is meant, but the
principal city, of which there is frequent mention in Scripture. It is
said to have received the surname from a giant famous for his stature.
And this refutes the imagination of those expositors who insist that it
was so called from having been the burial-place of four patriarchs —
Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="xvii.i-p53"></span>It is plain that Caleb, in making the
request, had not been looking to present ease or private advantage,
since he does not aspire to the place that had been given him till many
years after. Wherefore it was no less the interest of the whole people
than of one private family, that that which as yet depended on the
incomprehensible grace of God, and was treasured up merely in hope,
should be bestowed as a special favor. A grant which could not take
effect without a wonderful manifestation of divine agency could scarcely
be invidious.

<span id="xvii.i-p54"></span>A question, however, arises. Since Hebron
not only became the portion of the Levites, but was one of the cities of
refuge, how could the grant stand good? If we say that Caleb was
contented with other towns, and resigned his right to the Levites, it is
obvious that the difficulty is not solved, because Caleb is distinctly
appointed owner of that city. But if we reflect that the right of
dwelling in the cities was all that was granted to the Levites, there
will be no inconsistency. Meanwhile, no small praise is due to the
moderation of Caleb, who, in a locality made his own by extraordinary
privilege, did not refuse an hospitable reception to the Levites.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc07016.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xvii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span> French, “<span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>Il
est vrai que ce mot *Peut estre,* qui est une marque ordinaire de doute,
semble estre estrange et ne convenir point, comme s’il se preparoit au
combat a l’adventure;” “It is true, indeed, that this word *Perhaps*,
which is an ordinary mark of doubt, seems strange and unsuitable, as if
he were preparing himself for the combat at hap-hazard.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc07016.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xvii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span> Latin, “<span id="xvii.i-p50.1"></span>Ea
munitione.” French, “<span id="xvii.i-p50.2"></span>Cette forteresse si
bien munie;” “That stronghold so well fortified.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc07016.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xvii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p55"></span> According to the explanation here given,
the Levites held Hebron only by a kind of precarious tenure, dependent
on the good will of Caleb, who gave them an hospitable reception, but
might have declined it. It would seem, however, from other passages, and
more particularly from <span id="xvii.i-p55.1"></span>[Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007)<span id="xvii.i-p55.1"></span>,
and <span id="xvii.i-p55.2"></span>[Jos
21:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#009)<span
id="xvii.i-p55.2"></span>, that their right to Hebron was as complete
and absolute as that which they possessed to any of their other cities.
Moreover, as these cities were allocated by lot, or in other words, by
divine arrangement, no injustice was done to Caleb, and it would have
been strangely inconsistent with all that we have previously learned of
his conduct and character, had he on this occasion offered any
remonstrance. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc07017)
