[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07012)  [Next](cc07014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
11:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass, when Jabin king
of Hazor had heard *those things*, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon,
and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quum autem Jabim rex Hasor, misit ad
Jobab regem Madam, et ad regem Simeron, et ad regem Achsaph,

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And to the kings that *were* on the
north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in
the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ad reges quoque qui habitabunt ab
aquilone in montanis, et in planitie ad meridiem Cineroth, et in
planitie in Naphoth-Dor ab occidente.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** *And to* the Canaanite on the east and
on the west, and *to* the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite,
and the Jebusite in the mountains, and *to* the Hivite under Hermon in
the land of Mizpeh.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ad Chananaeum ab oriente et occidente,
et Amorrhaeum, et Hitthaeum, et Pherisaeum, et Jebusaeum in montanis, et
Hivaeum sub Hermon in terra Mispath.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And they went out, they and all their
hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that *is* upon the sea
shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et egressi sunt ipsi, et omnes
exercitus eorum cum ipsis, populus multus tanquam arena quae est juxta
littus maris, prae multitudine, et equi, et currus multi valde.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And when all these kings were met
together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to
fight against Israel.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Congregati sunt omnes reges isti, et
venientes castrametati sunt pariter ad aquas Merom, ut pugnarent cum
Israele.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not
afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver
them up all slain before Israel: thou shall hough their horses, and burn
their chariots with fire.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Josuam, Ne
timeas a facie eorum: cras enim hoc tempore tradam omnes istos occisos
coram Israele, equos eorum subnervabis, et currus eorum combures igni.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** So Joshua came, and all the people of
war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they
fell upon them.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Venit itaque Josue, et cunctus
populus bellator cum eo adversus ipsos ad aquam Merom repente, et
irruerunt in eos.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the LORD delivered them into the
hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and
unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they
smote them, until they left them none remaining.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et tradidit eos Jehova in manum
Israelis, percusseruntque eos, et persequuti sunt usque ad Sidonem
magnam, et usque ad fervores aquarum, et usque ad campum Mispe ad
orientem: ac percusserunt eos donec non reliquerit eis superstitem.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Joshua did unto them as the LORD
bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Fecitque eis Josue quemadmodum
dixerat eis Jehova, equos eorum subnervavit, et currus eorum combussit
igni.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Joshua at that time turned back,
and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor
beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et reversus Josue eodem tempore
cepit Hasor, et regem ejus percussit gladio, aHasor enim antea fuerat
caput omnium istorum regnorum.

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And they smote all the souls that
*were* therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying *them*:
there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Percusserunt quoque omnem animam
quae illic erat, acie gladii perdendo: non remansit ulla anima: et Hasor
combussit igni.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**12.** And all the cities of those kings,
and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge
of the sword, *and* he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of
the LORD commanded.

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Omnes urbes regum istorum, et
universos reges earum cepit Josue, percussitque eos acie gladii,
perdendo eos sicuti praeceperat Moses servus Jehovae.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>**13.** But *as for* the cities that stood
still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only;
*that* did Joshua burn.

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Tantummodo omnes urbes quae manebant
in statu suo non combussit Israel, praeter Hasor solam quam combussit
Josue.

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>**14.** And all the spoil of these cities,
and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves;
but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had
destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et omnia spolia urbium istarum, et
jumenta praedati sunt sibi filii Israel: veruntamen omnes homines
percusserunt acie gladii quousque perderent eos: non reliquerunt ullam
animam.

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>**15.** As the LORD commanded Moses his
servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing
undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi
servo suo: sic praecepit Moses Josue, et Josue sic fecit, ut non
omitteret quidquam ex omnibus quae praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span><span id="xiv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass when Jabin,* etc
In this new league also we have a bright manifestation of the more than
paternal care of God, in warding off dangers from his people, and also
in assisting their weakness by kindness and indulgence. Had Jabin, with
the confederates of whom mention is now made, openly declared himself
the ally of the neighboring kings, a much more formidable war would have
broken out against the Israelites, and greater solicitude and anxiety
must have seized their minds. It would, indeed, have been easy for the
Lord, as well to put all their forces at once to the rout, as to
dissipate all fear and dread of them. He was unwilling, however, to
press beyond measure his own people, who were otherwise feeble, lest the
excessive numbers of the enemy should strike them with terror, and drive
them to despair. He therefore kept the many nations, whose interest it
was to have rushed hastily to arms, in a state of lethargy and
amazement, until the chosen people had been animated by signal
victories, to carry on the wars which still remained. They pillage and
devastate a large territory, and leave it destitute of inhabitants and
stript of resources. None of the neighboring powers, who were afterwards
to act on the offensive, makes the least movement. The Israelites
revisit their wives and children in safety. When they had gathered
courage, and were ready for a new war, suddenly a very large army
appears, composed of different nations, who had hitherto, by remaining
quiet, furnished opportunity for victory. Their coming thus forward at a
later period, was the same as if they had entered into a truce. Thus God
not only fought for his chosen people, but by dividing the enemy,
increased their strength manifold.

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span>How formidable must the onset have been, had
not the Israelites been gradually trained to confidence in battle, and
at the same time experienced the manifest assistance of God? First,
their numbers are compared to the sand of the sea, and then they have
horses and chariots. As the Israelites were altogether destitute of
cavalry, it is strange that they were not terrified at this array.
Therefore they were gradually brought forward till they were able to
bear it. For, in their former battles, he had only exercised them by a
kind of pleasing preludes.  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) It
may be added, that the Lord had, by several victories, ever and anon
borne testimony to his power, that they might not think more lightly of
it than was meet. Had all their enemies been routed at once, they might,
indeed, have magnificently celebrated the praises of God, but they might
also have easily lost the remembrance of them. It was necessary,
therefore, that repeated proofs distinct and apart from each other,
should be held forth to their view, lest they might attribute one
victory to a stroke of fortune.

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span><span id="xiv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span>**6.** *And the Lord said unto, Joshua,* etc
The greater the labor and difficulty of destroying an army, so numerous
and so well equipped, the more necessary was it to inspire them with new
confidence. The Lord, therefore, appears to his servant Joshua, and
promises the same success as he had previously given him on several
occasions. It is to be carefully observed, that as often as he
reiterates his promises men are reminded of their forgetfulness, or
their sloth, or their fickleness. For unless new nourishment is every
now and then given to faith, they forthwith faint and fall away.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) And yet such is our perverse
fastidiousness, that to hear the same thing twice is usually felt to be
irksome. Wherefore let us learn, as often as we are called to engage in
new contests, to recall the remembrance of the divine promises, which
may correct our languor, or rouse us from our sloth. And especially let
us make an application of that which is here said in general, to our
daily practice; as the Lord now intimates, that that which he had
declared concerning all nations would be specially sure and stable on
the present occasion.

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span>We infer from the account of the time
employed, that these kings had marched a considerable distance, in order
to attack Joshua and the people in Gilgal. For immediately after the
divine intimation, mention is made of the expedition used by Joshua.
 <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) He is promised the victory on
the following day. Hence they were not far distant. And the lake of
Merom, where they had pitched their camp, is contiguous to the Jordan,
and much nearer to Gilgal than Gennesaret, from which district some of
the enemy had come.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) It is said
that this lake diminishes or increases according to the freezing of the
snow on the mountains, or to its melting. Moreover, the command given to
Joshua and the people, to cut the legs or thighs of the horses, and to
burn the chariots, was undoubtedly intended to prevent them from
adopting those more studied modes of warfare which were in use among
profane nations. It was indeed necessary that they should serve as
soldiers, and fight strenuously with the enemy, but still they were to
depend only on the Lord, to consider themselves strong only in his
might, and to recline on him alone.

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span>This could scarcely have been the case, if
they had been provided with cavalry, and an array of chariots. For we
know how such showy equipment dazzles the eye, and intoxicates the mind
with overweening confidence. Moreover, a law had been enacted, (<span
id="xiv.i-p43.1"></span>[De 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)<span
id="xiv.i-p43.1"></span>) that their kings were not to provide
themselves with horses and chariots, obviously because they would have
been extremely apt to ascribe to their own military discipline that
which God claimed for himself. Hence the common saying, (<span
id="xiv.i-p43.2"></span>[Ps 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span
id="xiv.i-p43.2"></span>)

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span>“Some trust in chariots and some in
horses,  
but we will remember the name of the Lord our God.”

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span>God wished to deprive them of all stimulants
to audacity, in order that they might live quietly contented with their
own limits, and not unjustly attack their neighbors. And experience
showed, that when a bad ambition had impelled their kings to buy horses,
they engaged in wars not less rashly than unsuccessfully. It was
necessary, therefore, to render the horses useless for war, by cutting
their sinews, and to destroy the chariots, in order that the Israelites
might not become accustomed to the practices of the heathen.

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span><span id="xiv.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span>**8.** *And the Lord delivered them*, etc
The greatness of the overthrow may be inferred from this, that the
slaughter continued as far as Sidon, which was far distant from the lake
of Merom. Sidon is called great, from its celebrity as a commercial
emporium and the great number of its inhabitants. There is no comparison
instituted between it and a minor town of same name. The Hebrew noun
Mozerephoth, which some retain without change as a proper name, we have
preferred to translate “the boiling of the waters,” because it is
probable that there were thermal springs there, which boiled. Moreover,
as the panic which hurried them away into such a scattered flight,
plainly shows that they were driven headlong by the secret terror of the
Lord. So it is certain that the Israelites who dared to follow the
fugitives through so many dangers were carried to a higher pitch of
valor than human by celestial agency.

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span>Praise is bestowed on Joshua as well for his
abstinence as for his prompt obedience. Nor would he have submitted so
willingly to the loss of so many horses and chariots, had not the fear
of God overawed him. For such is our ingenuity in devising pretexts, it
would have been plausible to allege, that though he could not fit them
for military use, still their value was by no means to be despised. But
he thought that he had no right to take anything into consideration but
the pleasure of God. Then, as he had succeeded by his own good conduct,
in making the people willing and obedient, he, as an individual, justly
received the praise of what had been performed generally by all.

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span><span id="xiv.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span>**12.** *And all the cities of those kings,*
etc Having routed the army, they began to plunder and lay waste the
country, and to take and demolish the towns. From its being said that
the cities which remained entire were not burned, it may be inferred
with some probability, that some were taken by force and assault, and so
razed. Hazor, alone, after the siege was over, and the heat of the
struggle had cooled, was destroyed by fire, because it had held forth
the torch which enkindled the war. But in accordance with the
explanation already given, it is repeatedly and more clearly stated in
this passage, that Joshua did not give loose reins to his passion, when
he slew all from the least to the greatest. For there is now a distinct
statement of what had not yet been expressed, namely, that Joshua
faithfully performed his part, by fulfilling everything which the Lord
had enjoined by Moses. It is just as if he had placed his hands at the
disposal of God, when he destroyed those nations according to his
command. And so ought we to hold that, though the whole world should
condemn us, it is sufficient to free us from all blame, that we have the
authority of God.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) Meanwhile, it
becomes us prudently to consider what each man’s vocation requires, lest
any one, by giving license to his zeal, as wishing to imitate Joshua,
may be judged cruel and sanguinary, rather than a strict servant of God.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
11:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**16.** So Joshua took all that land, the
hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the
valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the
same;

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>**16.** Et cepit Josue omnem terram istam
montanam, et omnem australem, omnemque Gosen et planitiem atque
campestria, montem quoque Israel et planitiem ejus.

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span>**17.** *Even* from the mount Halak, that
goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon under mount
Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**17.** A monte Laevi qui assurgit versus
Seir usque ad Baalgad in campo Libani sub monte Hermon: omnes quoque
reges eorum cepit, et percussit eos et interfecit.

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span>**18.** Joshua made war a long time with all
those kings.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**18.** Diebus multis gessit Josue cum
omnibus regibus istis bellum.

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>**19.** There was not a city that made peace
with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon:
all *other* they took in battle.

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>**19.** Non fuit urbs quae pacem fecerit cum
filiis Israel praeter Hivaeos habitatores Gibeon: omnes coeperunt
praelio.

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>**20.** For it was of the LORD to harden
their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he
might destroy them utterly, *and* that they might have no favor, but
that he might destroy them, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>**20.** Quia a Jehova fuit, ut induraretcor
eorum in occursum belli cum Israel: ut deleret eos, nec restaret illis
misericordia: sed ut disperderet eos, sicut praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>**21.** And at that time came Joshua, and
cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from
Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of
Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span>**21.** Venit autem Josue tempore illo, et
excidit Anakim e montanis: ex Hebron, ex Debir, ex Anab, et ex omni
monte Jehuda, et ex omni monte Israel: una cum urbibus eorum delevit eos
Josue.

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>**22.** There was none of the Anakims left
in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in
Ashdod, there remained.

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span>**22.** Non remansit ex Anakim in terra
filiorum Israel: tantum in Gad et in Asdod residui fuerunt.

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>**23.** So Joshua took the whole land,
according to all that the LORD said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for
an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes.
And the land rested from war.

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>**23.** Accepit itaque Josue totam terram
prorsus ut dixerat Jehova Mosi, et tradidit eam in haereditatem Israeli
secundum divisiones eorum per tribus suas: et terra quievit a bello.

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span>**16.** *So Joshua took all that land,* etc
In the uninterrupted series of victories, when the land, of its own
accord, spewed out its old inhabitants, to give free possession to the
Israelites, it was visibly manifest, as is said in the Psalm, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ps 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>)

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span>“They got not the land in possession by
their own sword, neither did their own arm save them; but thy right
hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had
a favor unto them.”

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>The design of enumerating the places and
districts is to let us know that the work which God had begun he
continued to carry on without interruption. But it is a mistake to
suppose: as some do, that by the name Israel a certain mountain is
meant. For it will be plain, from the end of the chapter, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>[Jos
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)<span id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>)
that the term is applied indiscriminately to the mountainous part of
Israel and Judah. There is therefore an enlarge in the enumeration,
because the mountains of the ten tribes are tacitly compared with the
mountains of Judah. Accordingly, an antithesis is to be understood. In
the other mountain (<span id="xiv.ii-p22.2"></span>[Jos
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii-p22.2"></span>)
the surname is ambiguous. Some understand it to mean *division,* as if
it had been cut in two;  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) others
to mean *smooth,* as it was destitute of trees, just as a head is
rendered smooth by baldness. As the point is uncertain, and of little
importance, the reader is at liberty to make his choice.

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span>**18.** *Joshua made war a long time,* etc
Before, he had, in a short time, and, as it were, with the swiftness of
running, seized possession of five kingdoms; in the others the case was
different, not from hesitation, or weariness, or sloth, but because the
Lord exercised his people variously, that he might give a brighter
display of his manifold grace, which usually loses its value in our
eyes, if it is exhibited only in one and the same way. Therefore, as the
divine power had formerly been signally manifested by incredible
facility of accomplishment, when the enemy were routed in an instant, so
a lingering warfare now furnished numerous proofs of heavenly aid.
 <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) Nor did this happen suddenly
and unexpectedly; for God had foretold by Moses that so it would be,
lest, if the land were at once converted into a desert, the wild beasts
might gain the ascendancy. (<span id="xiv.ii-p26.2"></span>[De
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii-p26.2"></span>)
In short, we here perceive, as in a mirror, that whatever the Lord had
promised by Moses was accomplished in reality, and by no dubious event.
But while we recognize the certainty of the promises of God, we ought
also to meditate on the favor confirmed towards his chosen people, in
that he acted as the provident head of a family, not neglecting or
omitting anything which tended to their advantage.

<span id="xiv.ii-p27"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p28"></span>**19.** *There was not a city that made
peace,* etc This sentence appears, at first sight, contradictory to what
is everywhere said in the books of Moses, that the Israelites were not
to enter into any league with those nations, or make any terms of peace
with them, but, on the contrary, to destroy them utterly, and wipe out
their race and name. (<span id="xiv.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ex
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032)<span id="xiv.ii-p28.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.ii-p28.2"></span>[De
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii-p28.2"></span>)
 <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) Seeing the nations were thus
excluded from the means of making any paction, and would in vain have
made any proposals for peace, it seems absurd to ascribe the
destruction, which they had not even the means of deprecating, to their
obstinacy.

<span id="xiv.ii-p30"></span>For, let us suppose that they had sent
ambassadors before them with olive branches in their hands, and had been
intent on pacific measures, Joshua would at once have answered that he
could not lawfully enter into any negotiation, as the Lord had forbidden
it. Wherefore, had they made a hundred attempts to avoid war, they must,
nevertheless, have perished. Why, then, are they blamed for not having
sought peace, as if they had not been driven by necessity to right,
after they saw they had to do with an implacable people? But if it was
not free to them to act otherwise, it is unjust to lay any blame upon
them when they acted under compulsion in opposing the fury of their
enemy.

<span id="xiv.ii-p31"></span>To this objection, I answer, that the
Israelites, though they were forbidden to show them any mercy, were met
in a hostile manner, in order that the war might be just. And it was
wonderfully arranged by the secret providence of God, that, being doomed
to destruction, they should voluntarily offer themselves to it, and by
provoking the Israelites be the cause of their own ruin. The Lord,
therefore, besides ordering that pardon should be denied them, also
incited them to blind fury, that no room might be left for mercy. And it
behooved the people not to be too wise or prying in this matter. For
while the Lord, on the one hand, interdicted them from entering into any
covenant, and, on the other, was unwilling that they should take hostile
measures without being provoked, a too anxious discussion of the
procedure might have greatly unsettled their minds. Hence the only way
of freeing themselves from perplexity was to lay their care on the bosom
of God. And he in his incomprehensible wisdom provided that when the
time for action arrived, his people should not be impeded in their
course by any obstacle. Thus the kings beyond the Jordan, as they had
been the first to take up arms, justly suffered the punishment of their
temerity. For the Israelites did not assail them with hostile arms until
they had been provoked. In the same way, also, the citizens of Jericho,
by having shut their gates, were the first to declare war. The case is
the same with the others, who, by their obstinacy, furnished the
Israelites with a ground for prosecuting the war.

<span id="xiv.ii-p32"></span>It now appears how perfectly consistent the
two things are. The Lord commanded Moses to destroy the nations whom he
had doomed to destruction; and he accordingly opened a way for his own
decree when he hardened the reprobate. In the first place, then, stands
the will of God, which must be regarded as the principal cause. For
seeing their iniquity had reached its height, he determined to destroy
them. This was the origin of the command given to Moses, a command,
however, which would have failed of its effect had not the chosen people
been armed to execute the divine judgment, by the perverseness and
obstinacy of those who were to be destroyed. God hardens them for this
very end, that they may shut themselves out from mercy.  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) Hence that hardness is called his
work, because it secures the accomplishment of his design. Should any
attempt be made to darken so clear a matter by those who imagine that
God only looks down from heaven to see what men will be pleased to do,
and who cannot bear to think that the hearts of men are curbed by his
secret agency, what else do they display than their own presumption?
They only allow God a permissive power, and in this way make his counsel
dependent on the pleasure of men. But what says the Spirit? That the
hardening is from God, who thus precipitates those whom he means to
destroy.

<span id="xiv.ii-p34"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p35"></span>**21.** *And at that time came Joshua,* etc
Of the sons of Anak we have spoken elsewhere. They were a race of
giants, with the account of whose mighty stature the spies so terrified
the people, that they refused to proceed into the land of Canaan.
Therefore, seeing they were objects of so much dread, it was of
importance that they should be put out of the way, and the people made
more alert by their good hopes of success. It would have been
exceedingly injurious  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) to keep
objects which filled them with alarm and anxiety always present before
their minds, inasmuch as fear obscured the glory ascribed to God for
former victories, and overthrew their faith, while they reflected that
the most difficult of all their contests still awaited them. Therefore,
not without cause is it mentioned among the other instances of divine
aid, that by purging the land of such monsters, it was rendered a fit
habitation for the people. The less credible it seemed that they could
be warred against with success, the more illustriously was the divine
power displayed.

<span id="xiv.ii-p37"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p38"></span>**23.** *So Joshua took the whole land*,
 <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) etc Although it was far from
being true that Joshua had actually acquired the whole land, yet he is
truly said to have obtained it as God had declared to Moses, the latter
clause restricting the meaning of the general sentence. For it had been
expressly added that the conquest which God had promised would be made
gradually, lest it should afterwards become necessary to war with the
ferocious wild beasts of the woods, if they pressed forward into a
desert waste. Therefore, we are at liberty to say, that though the Lord
had not yet placed his people in possession of the promised land, yet he
had virtually performed what he had agreed to do, inasmuch as he gave a
commodious habitation, and one which was sufficient for the present
time. And the words used imply that other district, which had not yet
come into their full and actual possession, are included; for it is said
that that which they had acquired was distributed according to families.
And, in short, we afterwards see in the division that the lands were
divided into lots which were not actually subdued by the people till
Joshua was dead, nay, till many ages after.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) The meaning of the words, which is now
plain, is simply this, that while Joshua was still alive, a certain
specimen of the promise was exhibited, making him feel perfectly secure
in dividing the land by lot.  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc07013.htm#fr_109) <span
id="xiv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiv.i-p36.1"></span>Judundis praeludiis.” French “<span
id="xiv.i-p36.2"></span>Escarmouches plaisantes;” “Pleasing skirmishes.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc07013.htm#fr_110) <span
id="xiv.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span> French, “<span id="xiv.i-p39.1"></span>Elle
secoule et evanouist; “It” (faith) “melts and vanishes.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc07013.htm#fr_111) <span
id="xiv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiv.i-p41.1"></span>Oraculo enim subnectitur expeditio Josue.”
French, “<span id="xiv.i-p41.2"></span>Car l’expedition de Josue est
conjointe avec l’avertissement que Dieu luy donne;” “For the expedition
of Joshua is conjoined with the intimation which God gives him.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc07013.htm#fr_112) <span
id="xiv.i-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span> Latin, “<span id="xiv.i-p42.1"></span>Et
lacus Merom, ubi castra locaverant, qui Jordani contiguns est, longe
propius accedit ad Gilgal quam Gennesara ex cujus tractu pars hostium
profecta erat.” French, “<span id="xiv.i-p42.2"></span>Et le lac de
Merom ou ils s’estoyent campez, qui est contigu au Jourdain, approche
beaucoup plus pres de Gilgal que ne fait Genesara, du rivage duquel ume
partie des ennemis s’estoit levee;” “And the lake of Merom, where they
had encamped, which is contiguous to the Jordan, approaches much nearer
to Gilgal than Gennesaret does, on the shores of which a part of the
enemy had been raised.” The geographical details here given, and more
especially those relating to the lake of Merom, are both defective and
inaccurate. The impression left by the Commentary is, that after the
kings, composing this formidable league, had united their forces, they
began to march southwards, and had arrived within a moderate distance of
Gilgal, where they probably expected to come suddenly on Joshua, and
take him by surprise. Meanwhile they encamped by the lake of Merom, and
Joshua having, in consequence of a divine intimation, set out hastily
with his army, gives them the surprise which they expected to have given
him. According to this view, the lake of Merom was comparatively near to
Gilgal, and hence this is distinctly asserted in the Latin and French
quotation which commences this note. The French says plainly, that there
was a shorter distance to Gilgal from the lake of Merom than from that
of Gennesaret. And the Latin, though not free from ambiguity, says,
either the same thing or something still more inaccurate, namely, that
the lake of Merom was nearer to Gilgal than to the lake of Gennesaret.
On the contrary, it is now well known that the lake of Merom, the modern
El Hule, is situated ten miles to the north of the lake of Gennesaret,
and consequently is exactly that number of miles farther from Gilgal
than the lake of Gennesaret is, the distances of the lakes from Gilgal
being respectively, for Merom, about seventy-five, and for Gennesaret
sixty-five miles. Such being the fact, it is obvious that Joshua could
not have been at Gilgal when he was honored with a divine communication,
promising him the victory on the following day. The true state of the
case seems to be, that after Joshua had conquered the central and
southern parts of the country, a number of kings or chiefs, whose
territories extended over the whole of the north of the promised land,
entered into a common league, and appointed the lake of Merom as their
place of rendezvous. Joshua, well informed of the league, and alive to
its formidable nature, did not wait to give the enemy time to mature
their schemes, or remain inert till they were actually within a day’s
march of his camp, but set out with a determination to act on the
offensive, and with this view had advanced far to the north, into the
very heart of the enemy’s country, when any fears which their formidable
array might have produced, either in himself or his army, were
completely removed by the assurance of speedy and signal success. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc07013.htm#fr_113) <span
id="xiv.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span> Latin, “<span id="xiv.i-p51.1"></span>Deum
habere authorem.” French, “<span id="xiv.i-p51.2"></span>Que nous ayons
Dieu pour garant et autheur de ce que nous faisons;” “That we have God
as guarantee and author of what we do.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc07013.htm#fr_114) <span
id="xiv.ii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>Dissectus.” French, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p23.2"></span>Couppee ou fendue;” “Cut, or cleft.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc07013.htm#fr_115) <span
id="xiv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span> According to Josephus, (Antiquit., 5:2,)
the time which Joshua spent in his wars was five years; others make it
seven, and justify their estimate by the following calculation: — In
<span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>[Jos
14:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#007)<span
id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>, Caleb says that he was forty years old when
he was sent from Kadesh-Barnea to spy out the land, and that since then
to the present time (apparently that when the wars had just terminated)
forty-five years had elapsed. Of these forty-five years, thirty-eight
were spent in the desert, and consequently the remaining seven
constitute the whole period which had elapsed from the passage of the
Jordan up to the time when Caleb made his statement. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc07013.htm#fr_116) <span
id="xiv.ii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p29"></span> The Septuagint, as if influenced by
considerations similar to those here mentioned, has evaded the apparent
inconsistency, by rendering the 19th verse (<span
id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>[Jos
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019)<span id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>)
as follows, “And there was not a city which Israel did not take: they
took all in war.” There is a various reading, however, which correspond
almost verbatim with the common rendering. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc07013.htm#fr_117) <span
id="xiv.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p33"></span> French, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p33.1"></span>Dieu les endurcit, afin qu’ils se monstrent
indigne de toute pitie et compassion qu’on eust peu avoir d’eux;” “God
hardens them in order that they may show themselves unworthy of all pity
and compassion which might have been felt for them.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc07013.htm#fr_118) <span
id="xiv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p36"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p36.1"></span>Perquam noxium.” French, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p36.2"></span>Fort dangereuse;” “Very dangerous.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc07013.htm#fr_119) <span
id="xiv.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p39"></span> The Latin text of the 23rd verse, (<span
id="xiv.ii-p39.1"></span>[Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)<span id="xiv.ii-p39.1"></span>),
beginning thus, “<span id="xiv.ii-p39.2"></span>Accepit itaque Josue
totam terram prorsus ut dixerat Jehova Mosi;” “Joshua, therefore
received the whole land entirely, as the Lord had said to Moses,”
removes the apparent inaccuracy, but it is only by a sacrifice of the
literal meaning, which is perfectly rendered by the English version. “So
(And) Joshua took the whole land, *according to all* that the Lord said
unto Moses.” This is certainly superior to the Latin, which endeavors to
obtain by a gloss that which the English equally well obtains by a
literal rendering. In the commentary, the words of the 23rd verse,
(<span id="xiv.ii-p39.3"></span>[Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)<span id="xiv.ii-p39.3"></span>),
as quoted, are, <span id="xiv.ii-p39.4"></span>*Et cepit Josue*. This
makes it not improbable that the <span
id="xiv.ii-p39.5"></span>*Accepit* of the text is only a misprint of
<span id="xiv.ii-p39.6"></span>*Et cepit* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc07013.htm#fr_120) <span
id="xiv.ii-p39.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p40"></span> French, “<span id="xiv.ii-p40.1"></span>Or
en la division nous verrons puis apres, que les regions qui furent
assujetties a l’empire de peuple apres la mort de Josue, voire plusieurs
siecles depuis, furent mises en sort pour voir a qui elles
escherroyent;” “Now, in the division, we shall afterwards see that the
countries which are subjected to the dominion of the people after the
death of Joshua, nay, several ages after, were put into the lot, in
order to see to whom they should fall.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc07013.htm#fr_121) <span
id="xiv.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p41"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p41.1"></span>Exhibitum fuisse certum specimen promissionis
ut secure licuerit terram sorte dividere.” French, “<span
id="xiv.ii-p41.2"></span>La promesse fut tellement ratifice, et si bien
eprouvee par effect, qu’il leur fut loisible de diviser la terre par
sort;” “The promise was so far ratified and proved by fact, that they
were able to leisure to divide the land by lot.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc07014)
