[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07009)  [Next](cc07011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
8:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear
not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and
arise, go up to Ai: see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and
his people, and his city, and his land:

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dixitque Jehova ad Josuam, Netimeas,
nec formides, sume tecum omnem populum bellicosum, et surge, ascende in
Hai. Vide, dedi in manu tua regem Hai, ac populum ejus, urbem ejus, et
terram ejus.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And thou shall do to Ai and her king as
thou did unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the
cattle thereof, shall you take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an
ambush for the city behind it.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Faciesque Hai, et regi ejus,
quemadmodum fecisti Jericho, et regi ejus; tamen spolia ejus, et
animalia ejus praedabimini vobis. Colloca autem insidias urbi a tergo
ejus.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** So Joshua arose, and all the people of
war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty
men of valor, and sent them away by night.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Surrexit itaque Josue, et omnis populus
bellicosus, ut ascenderunt in Hai, et elegit Josue trigintamillia
virorum fortium robore, misitque eos nocte.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And he commanded them, saying, Behold,
you shall lie in wait against the city, *even* behind the city: go not
very far from the city, but be you all ready:

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ac praecepit eis, dicendo, Attendite
vos, Insidiabimini urbi a tergo ejus, nec removeatis vos ab ea procul,
sed estote omnes vos parati.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And I, and all the people that *are*
with me, will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when
they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before
them,

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et ego et omnis populus, qui mecum
est, accedemus ad urbem: quum autem egredientur in occursum nostrum,
sicut prius, fugiemus ante eos:

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6.** (For they will come out after us) till
we have drawn them from the city; for they will say, They flee before
us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Tunc egredientur post nos donec
avellamus eos ab urbe: dicent enim, Fugiunt ante nos, ut prius: et
fugiemus ante eos.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Then you shall rise up from the
ambush, and seize upon the city: for the LORD your God will deliver it
into your hand.

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Vos autem surgetis ex insidiis, et
expelletis habitotores urbis, tradetque eam Jehova Deus vester in manu
vestra.

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And it shall be, when you have taken
the city, *that* you shall set the city on fire: according to the
commandment of the LORD shall you do. See, I have commanded you.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quum ceperitis urbem, succendetis eam
igni, secundum sermonem Jehovae facietis. Videte, praecepi vobis.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Joshua therefore sent them forth: and
they went to lie in ambush, and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west
side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Misitque itaque eos Josue, et
perrexerunt ad insidias, manseruntque inter Bethel et Hai, ab occidente
Hai. Mansit autem Josue nocte illa in medio populi.

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Joshua rose up early in the
morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of
Israel, before the people to Ai.

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Postea surrexit Josue summo mane,
recensuitque populum, atque ascendit ipse et seniores Israel ante
populum versus Hai.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And all the people, *even the people*
of war that *were* with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the
city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now *there was* a valley
between them and Ai.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Omnisque populus bellicosus, qui erat
cum eo ascenderunt et appropinquarunt, veneruntque e regione urbis, et
castrametati sunt ab aquilone Hai. Vallis autem erat inter ipsum et Hai.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he took about five thousand men,
and set them to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of
the city.

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Tulitque praeterea circiter quinque
millia virorum, quos locavit in insidiis inter Bethel et Hai ab
occidente urbi.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And when they had set the people,
*even* all the host that *was* on the north of the city, and their liers
in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst
of the valley.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et propius accessit populus tota
castra quae erant ab aquilone urbi, et insidiae ejus ab occidente ipsi
urbi, perrexitque Josue nocte illa in medium vallis.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And it came to pass, when the king of
Ai saw *it*, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city
went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time
appointed, before the plain; but he wist not that *there were* liers in
ambush against him behind the city.

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Porro quum videret rex Hai,
festinaverunt et mane surrexerunt, atque egressi sunt homines urbis in
occursum Israel ad praelium, ipse et universus populus ejus ad tempus
constitutum ante campestria: nesciebat autem quod insidiae sibi essent a
tergo urbis.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Joshua and all Israel made as if
they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et profligati sunt Josue, et
universus Israel ante eos, et fugerunt per viam deserti.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**16.** And all the people that *were* in Ai
were called together to pursue after them: and they pursued after
Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et congregati sunt totus populus qui
in urbe erat, ut persequeretur eos. Et persequuti sunt Josuam,
abstractique sunt ab urbe.

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And there was not a man left in Ai or
Bethel, that went not out after Israel: and they left the city open, and
pursued after Israel.

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Neque remansit quisquam ex Hai et
Bethel, qui non egressus sit post Israel, et reliquerunt urbem apertam,
et persequuti sunt Israelem.

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the LORD said unto Joshua,
Stretch out the spear that *is* in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give
it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that *he had* in
his hand toward the city.

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Josuam, Eleva
hastam quae est in manu tua contra Hai, quia in manu tua dabo eam. Et
elevavit Josue hastem quae erat in manu sua contra urbem.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>**19.** And the ambush arose quickly out of
their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand: and
they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on
fire.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Tum insidiae surrexerunt repente e
loco suo, et cucurrerunt quum elevasset manum suam, veneruntque ad
urbem, et ceperunt eam, et festinarunt urbem succendere igni.

<span id="xi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And when the men of Ai looked behind
them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to
heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the
people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.

<span id="xi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Vertentes autem sese viri Hai
viderunt, et ecce ascendebat fumus urbis in coelum, neque erant eis
spatia ad fugiendum huc et illuc. Populus autem qui fugerat in desertum
versus est contra persequentes.

<span id="xi.i-p42"></span>**21.** And when Joshua and all Israel saw
that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city
ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.

<span id="xi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Josue itaque et universus Israel ubi
viderunt quod insidiae cepissent urbem, ascendissetque fumus urbis,
reversi sunt, et percusserunt viros Hai.

<span id="xi.i-p44"></span>**22.** And the other issued out of the city
against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side,
and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of
them remain or escape.

<span id="xi.i-p45"></span>**22.** Illi praeterea egressi sunt ex urbe
in occursum eorum, fueruntque Israel in medio, isti hinc, et illi inde,
et percusserunt eos, donec nemo remaneret eis superstes et evasor.

<span id="xi.i-p46"></span>**23.** And the king of Ai they took alive,
and brought him to Joshua.

<span id="xi.i-p47"></span>**23.** Regem quoque Hai ceperunt vivum, et
stiterunt eum coram Josue.

<span id="xi.i-p48"></span>**24.** And it came to pass, when Israel had
made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the
wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on
the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites
returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.

<span id="xi.i-p49"></span>**24.** Quum autem finem fecisset Israel
caedendi omnes habitatores Hai in deserto quo persequuti fuerant eos, et
cecidissent omnes ipsi acie gladii donec consumerentur, reversus est
universus Israel ad Hai, et percusserunt eam acie gladii.

<span id="xi.i-p50"></span>**25.** And *so* it was, *that* all that fell
that day, both of men and women, *were* twelve thousand, *even* all the
men of Ai.

<span id="xi.i-p51"></span>**25.** Fuitque numerus omnium qui ceciderunt
die illa a viro usque ad mulierem circiter duodecim millia, omnes viri
Hai.

<span id="xi.i-p52"></span>**26.** For Joshua drew not his hand back,
wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all
the inhabitants of Ai.

<span id="xi.i-p53"></span>**26.** Porro Josue non reduxit manum suam
quam elevaverat ad laceam, donec interficeret omnes habitatores Hai.

<span id="xi.i-p54"></span>**27.** Only the cattle and the spoil of that
city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of
the LORD which he commanded Joshua.

<span id="xi.i-p55"></span>**27.** Tantum animalia et spolia urbis ejus
sibi praedati sunt filii Israel secundum sermonem Jehovae, quem
praeceperat ipsi Josue.

<span id="xi.i-p56"></span>**28.** And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an
heap for ever, *even* a desolation unto this day.

<span id="xi.i-p57"></span>**28.** Succendit igitur Josue Hai et posuit
eam acervum sempiternum vastitatum usque ad hunc diem.

<span id="xi.i-p58"></span>**29.** And the king of Ai he hanged on a
tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded
that they should take his carcass down from the tree, and cast it at the
entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of
stones, *that remaineth* unto this day.

<span id="xi.i-p59"></span>**29.** Regem vero Hai suspendit in ligno
usque ad tempus vespertinum: cumque occubuisset sol, praecepit Josue, et
deposuerunt cadaver ejus e ligno, et projecerunt illud ad introitum
portae urbis, et statuerunt super illud acervum lapidum grandem usque ad
hunc diem.

<span id="xi.i-p60"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p61"></span><span id="xi.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p62"></span>**1.** *And the Lord said unto Joshua,* etc
It was of great consequence to Joshua, as well as the people, to inspire
new courage, that they might prepare with confidence to assault the city
of Ai, from which they had lately been repulsed with loss and greater
disgrace. God, therefore, to inspire them with intrepidity on this
expedition, promises that he will give them the city. With the same view
he enjoins them to fight by stratagem more than open war, to entice the
enemy out, and to select a secret place for an ambuscade which might
take them by surprise. A few thousands might without any difficulty have
been overthrown by an immense host attacking the city suddenly and
unexpectedly. But as we formerly saw that the hearts of all had melted
away, God consulted for their weakness by laying no greater burden upon
them than they were able to bear, until they had recovered from their
excessive panic, and could execute his commands with alacrity.

<span id="xi.i-p63"></span>It is true, indeed, that he now used their
own exertion, partly that they might not always keep looking for
miracles, and so give themselves up to laziness, and partly that in
different and unequal modes of acting they might nevertheless recognize
that his power is the same. But care must be taken not to omit the
special reason, namely, that not having yet recovered from their terror,
they could scarcely have been induced to engage in an open conflict, had
they not seen stratagem employed as a subsidiary aid. The first place,
however, is due to the promise, Fear not, for I have delivered it into
thy hands: for although it is verbally directed to Joshua, it belongs in
common to the whole people, as it was most necessary that all to a man
should be freed from anxiety and furnished with new confidence. The
order to burn the city like Jericho, appears to be a concession to the
popular feeling, the vengeance thus taken serving to wipe out the
remembrance of their disgrace. At the same time that they may engage in
the expedition more willingly, the spoils are left to them as the reward
of victory.

<span id="xi.i-p64"></span><span id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p65"></span>**13.** *Joshua went that night,* etc It is
not probable that all were called out from the camp, but the army was
composed of those who were more accustomed to war. That it was
sufficiently numerous appears from the fact, that five thousand were
withdrawn from it for ambuscade. At first thirty-five thousand appear to
be enumerated, but it is clear from the context that the number was not
so great. I am rather inclined to conjecture that thirty thousand were
led out for open fight, and that five thousand were specially set apart
for an ambuscade. Joshua hastens to execute the task assigned to him,
commencing his march in the morning, and in this haste we see how
effectual the promise had proved. Had not the mind of all been freed
from fear he never could have found them so prompt to obey.

<span id="xi.i-p66"></span>Apparently, indeed, little prudence is shown
in sending so large a body to proceed by hidden paths to a place
suitable for ambuscade. For with whatever silence and composure they
might proceed, the mere movement of their feet must have caused a
considerable noise. Should any one say that there was nobody to meet
them, as all the inhabitants of the district had deserted the fields and
taken refuge in the city, we will find it mentioned shortly after, that
before the Israelites came near to the city their arrival was known by
the king of Ai; and this could scarcely have been without scouts. But
granting that they met no one in the fields, it was certainly a
difficult matter to pass by, to select a suitable place during night for
an ambuscade, and to take possession of it without giving some
indication of their presence. With regard to the procedure of Joshua,
though he might see that the business could be accomplished by a smaller
force, he seems to have been compelled by the recent trepidation of the
people to be very careful not to engage them in any enterprise of
danger. For had only a few of the army been dispatched they would
perhaps have declined a part by which they were to be particularly
exposed.

<span id="xi.i-p67"></span>The Lord meanwhile displays the greatest
indulgence to his people in delivering up an enemy that was to be so
easily conquered. His wonderful favor especially appears in blinding all
of them, so that they have no suspicion of the ambuscade. I have no
doubt that when it is said they knew not of it, the writer of the
history means to draw attention to the rare and extraordinary kindness
of God in so covering, as it were, with the shadow of his hand, first,
the thirty thousand who accompanied Joshua, and then the five thousand,
that they all escaped the notice of the enemy. When mention is now made
of five thousand, I do not understand it to mean that Joshua furnished a
new ambuscade, as if the number, already excessive, were not sufficient,
but that the writer now merely shows how the thirty-five thousand whom
Joshua had armed were distributed. For to what end would so small a
reinforcement have been given to so great a multitude? Besides, the
place where they are ordered to halt is the same as that which had been
previously pointed out; this could not apply to two separate bodies of
troops.

<span id="xi.i-p68"></span><span id="xi.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p69"></span>**15.** *And Joshua and all Israel made as if
they were beaten,* etc This is another stratagem. By pretending flight
they draw off the enemy to a distance, leaving them no retreat
afterwards into the city, which was in flames before they suspected that
any disaster was to be apprehended in their rear. Hence, while the king
of Ai pursues the Israelites as vanquished, the part of the army which
lay hid towards Bethel had sufficient time to take the city, and make it
too late for the inhabitants to perceive that they were utterly undone.
For after they had been already repulsed, and were everywhere
slaughtered, they were overwhelmed with despair on beholding the flames
of the city, and so completely surrounded that not an individual could
escape.

<span id="xi.i-p70"></span>The question here asked by some, as to
whether it is lawful to overcome an enemy by wiles and stratagem,
originates in gross ignorance. First, it is certain that wars are
carried on not merely by striking blows; for those are considered the
best commanders who accomplish more by art and counsel than by mere
violence; and secondly, the longer any one has served so as to acquire
experience, the better soldier he makes. If war, then, is lawful, it is
beyond all controversy that the usual methods of conquering may be
lawfully employed, provided always that there be no violation of faith
once pledged either by truce or in any other way.

<span id="xi.i-p71"></span><span id="xi.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p72"></span>**17.** *And there was not a man left in Ai,*
etc It will be clear from the context that some were taken in the city
and slain, and therefore we must hold that the sally was not by all
universally, and that the old men and women and many others unfit for
war, did not rush forth into the fields; the meaning simply is, that no
garrison was left to defend the city. The same thing is said of Bethel,
and hence we may easily conjecture that Bethel, as it was a small
unimportant town, belonged to another power. The inhabitants, however,
from being unable to defend their own city, abandoned it, and offered
their whole force to the king of Ai, to whom they were perhaps
tributaries. It is uncertain whether they went to the king of Ai before
the arrival of the Israelites, to unite their forces with his in the
contest, but the probability is, that as they were unable to resist they
had come by agreement into a fortified and more populous city. They
thought that they could not, possibly be safe unless they were preserved
under the shadow of a neighboring city superior to their own.

<span id="xi.i-p73"></span><span id="xi.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p74"></span>**18.** *And the Lord said unto Joshua,* etc
This passage shows, that owing either to the strong fortifications of
the city, or the valor of its inhabitants, or the trepidation of the
Israelites, the victory was difficult, since God promises that he
himself would take it by the lifting up of a spear. Had success been
beyond doubt, the symbol would have been superfluous; their minds must
therefore have been anxious and perplexed, since the Lord, to prevent
them from fainting, raises up a banner of confidence in the hand of
Joshua. It is true, indeed, that shortly after a different motive for
raising the spear is mentioned, when it is said, that in this way a
signal was given to the ambuscade, which accordingly rushed forth. But
if it really was so used as a signal, it will scarcely do to regard the
spear as a manifestation of the victorious power of God dispelling all
doubt. Still, however, as it is not expressly said that the spear was
the cause which brought forth the soldiers who had been placed in
ambuscade, the truth may be that they came forth of their own accord,
either because it was the suitable time, or because the shouting and
noise made them aware that the battle had actually commenced. For it is
scarcely possible to believe that the spear was seen by them, when we
consider the long space which intervened, and more especially that
Joshua was standing in a valley. Moreover, if we hold that the lifting
up of the spear, though intended for a different purpose, had also the
effect of inspiring them with additional courage, there will be no
absurdity in it.

<span id="xi.i-p75"></span>This much ought to be regarded as certain,
*first,* that by this solemn badge they were rendered more certain of
the happy issue of the battle; and *secondly,* that Joshua had no other
intention than to incite his troops according to the command of God. For
it is at last added, that Joshua did not draw back his hand until the
city was taken, the enemy everywhere destroyed, and the war itself
terminated. Hence it appears that he exhibited it in the middle of the
conflict as an ensign of triumph, that the Israelites might have no
doubt of success. For although he ordered them to engage and use their
arms bravely, he at the same time distinctly declared that they had
already conquered.

<span id="xi.i-p76"></span>The course of the battle is rendered somewhat
obscure by the same thing being told twice, but the substance is
sufficiently plain. The children of Israel retreated feigning fear, and
the battle had not actually commenced before the inhabitants of Ai were
precluded from returning and defending their city. After the two armies
had come to close quarters, the ambuscade arose and made such haste that
the flames of the conflagration were rising from the city when the enemy
turned their backs. From this we may infer that the city was in the
possession of the Israelites, but that the chief slaughter took place
when those who were in the city came forth to take part in the battle,
because the inhabitants, hemmed in on all sides, found resistance and
flight equally unavailing. They were thus seized with despair, and,
huddled together in a narrow space, were everywhere cut down.

<span id="xi.i-p77"></span>The statement, that the slaughter did not
take place in the city before those who had feigned flight returned, I
understand to mean, that the whole troops uniting their forces rushed
in, seized the prey, and slew all who might have been left. If any one
objects that the city was burnt while the battle was going on, I answer,
that the fire was indeed applied so as to let both armies know that the
city was in possession of the Israelites, but it was not actually
destroyed by fire. It was not practicable in a moment of time to seize
and carry off the booty, nay, to bring the vessels and a large part of
the property without the walls; and it would have been absurd
voluntarily to destroy spoils which God had granted. We see, then, that
the first fire was not kindled for the purpose of destroying the whole
city, but was merely a partial conflagration giving intimation of its
capture, and that the Israelites entered at the open gates without
bloodshed or a struggle. This is confirmed shortly after, when the
burning is ascribed to Joshua himself, not only because it was burnt
under his command, but because he was careful, after returning from the
battle, to see that it was utterly destroyed; as it is immediately added
that he made it a heap of stones in order that it might be a perpetual
desolation.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="xi.i-p79"></span><span id="xi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p80"></span>**25.** *And so it was that all that fell
that day,* etc The meaning is not that all the slain were inhabitants of
Ai, but that all who dwelt in it were slain, that not one escaped. It
has already been seen that the inhabitants of Bethel were mingled along
with them; and as no mention of that city is afterwards made, it may be
conjectured with some probability that they had abandoned their own
town, which was little fortified, and betaken themselves for greater
safety to one which they hoped could be easily defended. The words,
therefore, simply mean, that all who had come out of the city and all
who were found in it were slain to a man. If any are rather disposed to
think that this number of those whose slaughter took place within the
walls is confined to the aged, the sick, the women and the children, I
will not dispute the matter. Still, if we consider that only a small
town was conjoined with a city of no great extent or population, it is
more probable that the number comprehends those also who fell in battle.

<span id="xi.i-p81"></span><span id="xi.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p82"></span>**26.** *For Joshua drew not his hand back,*
etc As by raising the spear he gave sign and pledge of hope as it were
from heaven, he did not cease to keep the minds of his followers fixed
upon it until they were masters of the city. By thus persevering he
sufficiently proved how far removed he was from ambition; how free from
doing anything in the way of vain ostentation. For it was just as if he
had resigned the office of leader, and transferred the whole praise of
the victory to God. How intrepid a warrior he was is plain from other
passages. He might now, too, have willingly discharged his military
functions, and thus done what was far better fitted to promote his
reputation and glory. But as if his hand had been fastened to the spear,
he exhorts the soldiers to look to God alone, to whom he resigns the
success of the battle. By thus standing aloof he profited more than if
he had in all directions, and by his own hand, struck down heaps of the
enemy: at the same time his remaining at ease was more praiseworthy than
any degree of agility could have been.

<span id="xi.i-p83"></span><span id="xi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p84"></span>**29.** *And the king of Ai he hanged,* etc
Though he seems to have treated the king with great severity in order to
satisfy the hatred of the people, I cannot doubt that he studied
faithfully to execute the divine judgment. Conquerors, indeed, are wont
to spare captive kings, because their rank seems to carry something
venerable along with it, but the condition of kings was different among
those nations in which God wished particularly to show how greatly he
detested the wickedness which he had so long tolerated. For while all
were doomed to destruction, the divine vengeance justly displayed itself
with greater sternness and severity on the leaders, with whom the cause
of destruction originated.

<span id="xi.i-p85"></span>We may add, that the ignominious punishment
inflicted on the king rendered it still less necessary to deal leniently
with the common people, and thus prevented the Israelites from indulging
an unseasonable mercy, which might have made them more sluggish or
careless in executing the work of universal extermination.

<span id="xi.i-p86"></span>God purposely delivered the king alive into
the hand of Joshua, that his punishment might be more marked and thus
better adapted for an example. Had he fallen in the conflict
promiscuously with others, he would have been exempted from this special
mark of infamy; but now even after his death, the divine vengeance
pursues his corpse. Nay, after being hung, he is thrown forth at the
gate of the city where he had sat on his throne in judgment, and a
monument is erected for the purpose of perpetuating his ignominy to
posterity. His burial, however, is mentioned to let us know that nothing
was done through tumultuous impetuosity, as Joshua carefully observed
what Moses had prescribed in the Law, (<span id="xi.i-p86.1"></span>[De
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span id="xi.i-p86.1"></span>)
namely, that those hung on gibbets should be taken down before sunset,
as a spectacle of the kind was held in abomination. And, certainly,
while it is humane to bury the dead under ground, it is inhumanly cruel
to cast them forth to be torn by wild beasts or birds. Therefore, that
the people might not be accustomed to barbarity, God allowed criminals
to be hung, provided they did not hang unburied for more than one day.
And that the people might be more attentive to this duty, which
otherwise might readily have been neglected, Moses declares that every
one who hangs on a tree is accursed; as if he had said, that the earth
is contaminated by that kind of death, if the offensive object be not
immediately taken away.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
8:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**30.** Then Joshua built an altar unto the
LORD God of Israel in mount Ebal,

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**30.** Tunc aedificavit Josue altare Jehovae
Deo Israel in monte Ebal,

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>**31.** As Moses the servant of the LORD
commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the
law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man has lift up
*any* iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the LORD, and
sacrificed peace offerings.

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>**31.** Quemadmodum praeceperat Moses servus
Jehovae filiis Israel: sicut scriptum est in libro legis Mosis, altare
ex lapidibus integris, super quos non levaverant ferrum: et immolaverunt
super illud holocausta Jehovae, et sacrificaverunt hostias
prosperitatum.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>**32.** And he wrote there upon the stones a
copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children
of Israel.

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>**32.** Scripsit quoque ibi in lapidibus
repetitam legem Mosis, quam scripsit coram filiis Israel.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>**33.** And all Israel, and their elders, and
officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side
before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of
the LORD, as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of
them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount
Ebal; as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded before, that they
should bless the people of Israel.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>**33.** Universus autem Israel, et seniores
ejus, et praefecti, et Judices ejus stabant hinc et inde ad arcam coram
sacerdotibus Levitis portantibus arcam foederis Jehovae, tam peregrinus
quam indigena: dimidia pars ejus contra montem Garizin, et dimidia pars
ejus contra montem Ebal: quemadmodum praeceperat Moses servus Jehovae,
ut benediceret populo Israel primum.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>**34.** And afterward he read all the words
of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written
in the book of the law.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>**34.** Et post haec legit omnia verba
legis, benedictionem et maledictionem, secundum id totum quod scriptum
est in libro legis.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>**35.** There was not a word of all that
Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of
Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were
conversant among them.

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>**35.** Non fuit quidquam ex omnibus quae
praeceperat Moses quod non legerit Josue coram universo coetu Israel, et
mulieribus, et parvulis, et peregrinis versantibus in medio ipsorum.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span><span id="xi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span>**30.** *Then Joshua built an altar,* etc
God had been pleased that this should be the first extraordinary
sacrifice offered to him in the land of Canaan, that thus the people
might attest their gratitude, and the land begin to be consecrated in
regular form. It was not possible for the people to do it before freely
and on their own soil, till they had obtained possession of some vacant
region.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) Now, God had at the same
time given them two commands — *first,* that they should erect an altar
on Mount Ebal; and *secondly,* that they should set up two stones
plastered over with lime, on which they should write the Law, in order
that every passer by might be able to see it and read it. We now read
that both were faithfully performed. A third command related to the
recitation of blessings and cursings: this, too, Joshua performed with
no less care.

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span>To begin with the altar, — it is said, that
according to the divine command, it was formed of unhewn stones. For
entire stones on which the masons’ iron has not been employed, are
called rough and unworked.  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) This is
specially said in <span id="xi.ii-p19.2"></span>[De
27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#000)<span id="xi.ii-p19.2"></span>, of
the altar, of which mention is now made. But the same thing had before
been said in general of all others. Some expounders, in searching for
the reason, needlessly have recourse to allegory, and allege that the
hand and industry of men are forbidden, because the moment we introduce
any devices of our own, the worship of God is vitiated. This is indeed
truly and wisely said, but it is out of place, as the divine intention
simply was to prohibit the perpetuity of altars. For we know, that in
order to sacrifice duly, it was enjoined that all should have one common
altar, in order both to cherish mutual agreement, and to obviate all
sources of corruption from the introduction of an adventitious
superstition; in short, in order that religion might remain one and
simple, as a variety of altars would soon have led to discord, thereby
distracting the people and putting sincere piety to flight.

<span id="xi.ii-p20"></span>Then it was not left to the choice of the
people to select a place, but God uniformly in the books of Moses claims
this for himself. He therefore confines the exercises of piety to that
place where he may have put the remembrance of his name. Moreover, as
the divine will was not immediately manifested, nor the place
designated, that worship might not in the mean time cease, it was
permitted to build an altar where the ark should happen to be stationed,
but an altar formed only of a rude pile of stones, or of turf, that it
might be only temporary.

<span id="xi.ii-p21"></span>Let the reader observe that an option was
given to the people to make it of rough stones, that its form might not
attract veneration, or of earth, which would crumble away of its own
accord. In one word, this arrangement tended to give a pre-eminence to
the perpetual altar, after God made choice of Mount Zion for its
locality. Hence it is said in the Psalm, I was glad because our feet
will stand in thy courts, O Jerusalem! (<span
id="xi.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ps. 122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002)<span id="xi.ii-p21.1"></span>) What
other translators render *peace offerings,* I have, not without cause,
rendered by *sacrifices of prosperity,* because they were offered up
either to solicit successful results, or to render thanks; and the
Hebrew term is not unsuitable, as the reader will find more fully
explained in my commentaries on the books of Moses.

<span id="xi.ii-p22"></span><span id="xi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p23"></span>**32.** *And he wrote there upon the
stones,* etc A different rule is applicable to the stones here
mentioned, on which God wished that a memorial of his Law should always
appear, in order that, a kind of barrier might be interposed to protect
the pure religion against the superstitions of Egypt. They were
therefore covered with lime, that they might be more conspicuous, and
the writing upon them more distinct. I willingly subscribe to the
opinion of those who understand by the repeated Law a written form, or
what is commonly called a copy or duplicate. I cannot, however, believe
that the whole volume was traced upon it; for no stones however large
could suffice to contain all the details. I therefore think that by the
term Law only its substance and sanctions  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) are denoted. This made it palpable even
to strangers entering the land what God was worshipped in it, and all
excuse for error was taken away, when the Law was not treasured up in a
book, but made manifest to the eyes of all. In short, though the priests
should have been dumb, the stones themselves spoke clearly.

<span id="xi.ii-p25"></span><span id="xi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p26"></span>**33.** *And all Israel, and their elders,*
etc The third instance of obedience was the placing all the tribes on
Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal to stand in six rows each over against each
other. For they were so arranged that six stood on Mount Ebal, and an
equal number on the opposite Mount Gerizim. The intervening space was
occupied by the Levites with the ark of the covenant, that the Lord
might be surrounded on all sides by his own people. It is said that
Joshua stood that he might first bless the people, as it was the purpose
of God to allure the people to himself by sweetness and winning
condescension. For although Moses, to rebuke the obstinacy of the
people, makes mention of curses only, it is certain that these were in a
manner accidental, because the genuine method was to employ blessings as
a means of gaining over to obedience those who might otherwise have
proved refractory. But when humane invitation proved unavailing, curses
were added as a new resource and remedy.

<span id="xi.ii-p27"></span>God had promised ample rewards to his
servants who should obey the Law. On the other hand, curses were
denounced in order to deter transgressors. Each is now forced to
subscribe his own condemnation, while an amen is responded to every
single sentence. For in this way they not only hear themselves condemned
by the mouth of God, but as if they had been heralds sent by him, they
denounce the punishment which may await themselves. A similar
promulgation was made in the plain of Moab beyond the Jordan, but now
they are bound more solemnly, and acknowledge on what condition they are
to dwell in the land of Canaan. It added no little weight to the whole,
that the children also were admitted as witnesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc07010.htm#fr_75) <span
id="xi.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p78"></span> Ai and its apparently tributary town Bethel,
thus subjected to a fearful destruction, were situated about twelve
miles north from Jerusalem, and seventeen miles west-north-west from
Jericho, and had previously been brought under the notice of the
Israelites in very different circumstances. For they had read in the
interesting narrative of Moses how Abraham had pitched his tent on a
mountain, “having Bethel on the west and Hai (Ai) on the east; and there
he built an alter unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord,”
(<span id="xi.i-p78.1"></span>[Ge
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p78.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.i-p78.2"></span>[Ge
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p78.2"></span>;)
and how Bethel, formerly called Luz, had changed its name, because
Jacob, on awaking out of his wonderful dream, had declared it to be
“none other but the house of God,” and “the gate of heaven.” (<span
id="xi.i-p78.3"></span>[Ge
28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011)<span
id="xi.i-p78.3"></span>.) Notwithstanding of the doom pronounced and
executed upon Ai, it appears to have been rebuilt, was occupied by the
Benjamites after their return from the captivity, (<span
id="xi.i-p78.4"></span>[Ne 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#032)<span
id="xi.i-p78.4"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p78.5"></span>[Ne
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#031)<span id="xi.i-p78.5"></span>;
<span id="xi.i-p78.6"></span>[Ezr
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#028)<span id="xi.i-p78.6"></span>,) is
mentioned by Josephus under the name of Aina, and still exhibits some
indications of its site. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc07010.htm#fr_76) <span
id="xi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span> The 29th verse concludes the account of the
destruction of Ai, and the 30th opens abruptly with the building of an
alter on Mount Ebal. The distance between the two places is not less
than twenty miles, Ai being only twelve and Ebal thirty miles north from
Jerusalem. The journey of so many miles by the whole body of the
Israelites, and through a country which, at least up to the victory of
Ai, was in undisputed possession of the enemy, must have occupied a
considerable time, and have been accomplished with no small labor and
difficulty. How comes it that not one word is said in regard to it, and
that we are led at once from Ai to Ebal just as if the two places,
instead of being widely separated, had been actually contiguous to each
other? Were the incidents of the journey so unimportant as not to
require the slightest notice? Or is the narrative contained in the Book
of Joshua so very succinct that even transactions which might occupy a
large place in a more copious work have been purposely excluded from it?
If both these questions are answered in the negative, and it would seem
that they must be so answered, the only other question is, Has the order
of time been observed? In other words, have we not in the interesting
account now about to be given of one of the most wonderful national
conventions on record, another instance of anticipation of narrative
similar to that which we have already seen in the first chapter?
Assuming this to be the case, the continuation of the narrative is to be
looked for in the ninth chapter, while the account of the transaction on
Mounts Ebal and Gerizim is to be regarded in the light of an episode. It
is very remarkable that the whole episode is omitted by the Septuagint
at this place, and not introduced before giving the account of the
league of the Amorites, contained in the beginning of the ninth chapter.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc07010.htm#fr_77) <span
id="xi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p19"></span> French, “<span id="xi.ii-p19.1"></span>Car
quand il est parle de pierres entrieres sur lesquelles le fur n’avoit
point passe, cela signifie des pierres, telles qu’elles viennent de la
carriere, qui ne sont point polies ni accoustrees par artifice;” “For
when mention is made of entire stones on which no tool had passed, it
means stones as they are when they come from the quarry, without having
been polished or hewn artificially.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc07010.htm#fr_78) <span
id="xi.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p24"></span> French, “<span id="xi.ii-p24.1"></span>Le
sommaire, et les defenses et commandemens;” “The summary, and the
prohibitions and commands.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc07011)
