[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07008)  [Next](cc07010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** But the children of Israel committed a
trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of
Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed
thing: and the anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of
Israel.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Transgressi autem sunt transgressione
filii Israel in anathemate: quia Achan, filius Chermi filii Zabdi, filii
Zerah de tribu Jehudae abstulit de anathemate: et accensa est
excandescentia Jehovae contra filios Israel.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai,
which *is* beside Bethaven, on the east side of Bethel, and spoke unto
them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed
Ai.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Porro misit Josue viros e Jericho contra
Hai, quae erat juxta Bethaven ad orientem Bethel, et loquutus est cum
illis, dicendo, Ascendite et explorate terram. Ascenderunt itaque viri,
et exploraverunt Hai.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** And they returned to Joshua, and said
unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three
thousand men go up and smite Ai; *and* make not all the people to labor
thither; for they *are but* few.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Qui reversi ad Josuam, dixerunt ei, Ne
ascendat totus populus; circiter duo millia virorum aut circiter tria
millia virorum ascendant, et percutient Hai.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68)

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** So there went up thither of the people
about three thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**4.** Ascenderunt ergo illuc e populo fere
fria millia virorum, et fugerunt coram viris Hai.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** And the men of Ai smote of them about
thirty and six men: for they chased them *from* before the gate *even*
unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of
the people melted, and became as water.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**5.** Percusseruntque ex eis circiter
triginta et sex viros, et persequuti sunt eos a porta usque ad Sebarim,
et percusserunt eos in descensu; atque ita liquefactum est cor populi,
fuitque velut aqua.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6.** And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell
to the earth upon his face before the ark of the LORD until the
eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**6.** Porro Josue sicidit vestimenta sua,
prociditque in faciem suam in terram coram arca Jehovae usque ad
vesperam, ipse et seniores Israel, et posuerunt pulverem super caput
suum.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7.** And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord GOD,
wherefore has thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us
into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been
content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**7.** Dixitque Josue, Ah, ah, Dominator
Jehova, ut quid traduxisit populum hunc trans Jordanem, ut traderes nos
in manum Amorrhaei qui perdat nos? Atque utinam libuisset nobis manere
in deserto trans Jordanem!

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8.** O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel
turns their backs before their enemies!

<span id="x.i-p18"></span>**8.** O Domine quid dicam postquam vertit
Israel cervicem coram inimicis suis?

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9.** For the Canaanites and all the
inhabitants of the land shall hear *of it*, and shall environ us round,
and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy
great name?

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**9.** Audientque Channanaeus et omnes incolae
terrae, et vertent se contra nos, disperdentque nomen nostrum e terra:
quid vero facies nomini tuo magno?

<span id="x.i-p21"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p22"></span><span id="x.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**1.** *But the children of Israel committed,*
etc Reference is made to the crime, and indeed the secret crime, of one
individual, whose guilt is transferred to the whole people; and not only
so, but punishment is at the same time executed against several who were
innocent. But it seems very unaccountable that a whole people should be
condemned for a private and hidden crime of which they had no knowledge.
I answer, that it is not new for the sin of one member to be visited on
the whole body. Should we be unable to discover the reason, it ought to
be more than enough for us that transgression is imputed to the children
of Israel, while the guilt is confined to one individual. But as it very
often happens that those who are not wicked foster the sins of their
brethren by conniving at them, a part of the blame is justly laid upon
all those who by disguising become implicated in it as partners. For
this reason Paul, (<span id="x.i-p23.1"></span>[1Co
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)<span id="x.i-p23.1"></span>)
upbraids all the Corinthians with the private enormity of one
individual, and inveighs against their pride in presuming to glory while
such a stigma attached to them. But here it is easy to object that all
were ignorant of the theft, and that therefore there is no room for the
maxim, that he who allows a crime to be committed when he can prevent it
is its perpetrator. I certainly admit it not to be clear why a private
crime is imputed to the whole people, unless it be that they had not
previously been sufficiently careful to punish misdeeds, and that
possibly owing to this, the person actually guilty in the present
instance had sinned with greater boldness. It is well known that weeds
creep in stealthily, grow apace and produce noxious fruits, if not
speedily torn up. The reason, however, why God charges a whole people
with a secret theft is deeper and more abstruse. He wished by an
extraordinary manifestation to remind posterity that they might all be
criminated by the act of an individual, and thus induce them to give
more diligent heed to the prevention of crimes.

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>Nothing, therefore, is better than to keep our
minds in suspense until the books are opened, when the divine judgments
which are now obscured by our darkness will be made perfectly clear. Let
it suffice us that the whole people were infected by a private stain;
for so it has been declared by the Supreme Judge, before whom it becomes
us to stand dumb, as having one day to appear at his tribunal. The stock
from which Achan was descended is narrated for the sake of increasing,
and, as it were, propagating the ignominy; just as if it were said, that
he was the disgrace of his family and all his race. For the writer of
the history goes up as far as the tribe of Judah. By this we are taught
that when any one connected with us behaves himself basely and wickedly,
a stigma is in a manner impressed upon us in his person that we may be
humbled — not that it can be just to insult over all the kindred of a
wicked man, but *first,* that all kindred may be more careful in
applying mutual correction to each other, and *secondly,* that they may
be led to recognize that either their connivance or their own faults are
punished.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>A greater occasion of scandal, fitted to
produce general alarm, was offered by the fact of the crime having been
detected in the tribe of Judah, which was the flower and glory of the
whole nation. It was certainly owing to the admirable counsel of God,
that a pre-eminence which fostered the hope of future dominion resided
in that tribe. But when near the very outset this honor was foully
stained by the act of an individual, the circumstance might have
occasioned no small disturbance to weak minds. The severe punishment,
however, wiped away the scandal which might otherwise have existed; and
hence we gather that when occasion has been given to the wicked to
blaspheme, the Church has no fitter means of removing the opprobrium
than that of visiting offences with exemplary punishment.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span><span id="x.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**2.** *And Joshua sent men from Jericho,* etc
To examine the site of the city and reconnoiter all its approaches was
an act of prudence, that they might not, by hurrying on at random
through unknown places, fall into an ambuscade. But when it would be
necessary shortly after to advance with all the forces, to send forward
a small band with the view of taking the city, seems to betray a want of
military skill. Hence it would not have been strange that two or three
thousand men, on a sudden sally were panic-struck and turned their
backs. And it was certainly expedient for the whole body that twenty or
thirty thousand should have spread in all directions in foraging
parties. We may add, that even the act of slaying, though no resistance
were offered, was of itself sufficient to wear out a small body of
troops. Therefore, when the three thousand or thereabouts were repulsed,
it was only a just recompense for their confidence and sloth. The Holy
Spirit, however, declares that fewness of numbers was not the cause of
the discomfiture, and ought not to bear the blame of it. The true cause
was the secret counsel of God, who meant to show a sign of his anger,
but allowed the number to be small in order that the loss might be less
serious. And it was certainly a rare display of mercy to chastise the
people gently and without any great overthrow, with the view of arousing
them to seek an instant remedy for the evil. Perhaps, too, the
inhabitants of Ai would not have dared to make an attack upon the
Israelites had they advanced against the city in full force. The Lord
therefore opened a way for his judgment, and yet modified it so as only
to detect the hidden crime under which the people might otherwise have
been consumed as by a lingering disease.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>But although there is nothing wonderful in the
defeat of the Israelites, who fought on disadvantageous terms on lower
ground, it was, however, perfectly obvious that they were vanquished by
fear and the failure of their courage before they came to close
quarters; for by turning their backs they gave up the higher ground and
retired to the slope of a valley. The enemy, on the other hand, showed
how thoroughly they despised them by the confidence and boldness with
which they ventured to pursue the fugitives at full speed in the
direction of their camp. In the camp itself, such was the trepidation
that all hearts melted. I admit, indeed, that there was cause for fear
when, after having gained so many victories as it were in sport, they
saw themselves so disgracefully defeated. In unwonted circumstances we
are more easily disturbed. But it was a terror from heaven which
dismayed them more than the death of thirty men and the flight of three
thousand.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span><span id="x.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**6.** *And Joshua rent his clothes,* etc
Although it was easy to throw the blame of the overthrow or disgrace
which had been sustained on others, and it was by no means becoming in a
courageous leader to be so much cast down by the loss of thirty men,
especially when by increasing his force a hundred-fold it would not have
been difficult to drive back the enemy now weary with their exertions,
it was not, however, without cause that Joshua felt the deepest sorrow,
and gave way to feelings bordering on despair. The thought that the
events of war are doubtful — a thought which sustains and reanimates the
defeated — could not be entertained by him, because God had promised
that they would always be victorious. Therefore when the success did not
correspond to his hopes, the only conclusion he could draw was, that
they had fought unsuccessfully merely because they had been deprived of
the promised assistance of God.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>Accordingly, both he and the elders not only
gave themselves up to sorrow and sadness, but engage in solemn mourning,
as used in the most calamitous circumstances, by tearing their garments
and throwing dust on their heads. That mode of expressing grief was used
also by the heathen, but was specially appropriate in the pious
worshippers of God in suppliantly deprecating his wrath. The rending of
the garments and other accompanying acts contained a profession of
repentance, as may also be inferred from the annexed prayer, which,
however, is of a mixed nature, dictated partly by faith and the pure
spirit of piety, and partly by excessive perturbation. In turning
straightway to God and acknowledging that in his hand, by which the
wound was inflicted, the cure was prepared, they are influenced by
faith; but their excessive grief is evidently carried beyond all proper
bounds. Hence the freedom with which they expostulate, and hence the
preposterous wish, Would God we had remained in the desert!  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69)

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>It is not a new thing, however, for pious
minds, when they aspire to seek God with holy zeal, to obscure the light
of faith by the vehemence and impetuosity of their affections. And in
this way all prayers would be vitiated did not the Lord in his boundless
indulgence pardon them, and wiping away all their stains receive them as
if they were pure. And yet while in thus freely expostulating, they cast
their cares upon God, though this blunt simplicity needs pardon, it is
far more acceptable than the feigned modesty of hypocrites, who, while
carefully restraining themselves to prevent any confident expression
from escaping their lips, inwardly swell and almost burst with
contumacy.

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>Joshua oversteps the bounds of moderation when
he challenges God for having brought the people out of the desert; but
he proceeds to much greater intemperance when, in opposition to the
divine promise and decree, he utters the turbulent wish, Would that we
had never come out of the desert! That was to abrogate the divine
covenant altogether. But as his object was to maintain and assert the
divine glory, the vehemence which otherwise might have justly provoked
God was excused.

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>We are hence taught that saints, while they
aim at the right mark, often stumble and fall, and that this sometimes
happens even in their prayers, in which purity of faith and affections
framed to obedience ought to be especially manifested. That Joshua felt
particularly concerned for the divine glory, is apparent from the next
verse, where he undertakes the maintenance of it, which had been in a
manner assigned to him. What shall I say, he asks, when it will be
objected that the people turned their backs? And he justly complains
that he is left without an answer, as God had made him the witness and
herald of his favor, whence there was ground to hope for an
uninterrupted series of victories. Accordingly, after having in the
loftiest terms extolled the divine omnipotence in fulfillment of the
office committed to him, it had now become necessary for him, from the
adverse course of events, to remain ignominiously silent. We thus see
that nothing vexes him more than the disgrace brought upon his calling.
He is not concerned for his own reputation, but fears lest the truth of
God might be endangered in the eyes of the world.  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) In short, as it was only by the order of
God that he had brought the people into the land of Canaan, he now in
adversity calls upon him as author and avenger, just as if he had said,
Since thou has brought me into these straits, and I am in danger of
seeming to be a deceiver, it is for thee to interfere and supply me with
the means of defense.

<span id="x.i-p37"></span><span id="x.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**9.** *For the Canaanites and all the
inhabitants,* etc He mentions another ground of fear. All the
neighboring nations, who, either subdued by calamities or terrified by
miracles, were quiet, will now resume their confidence and make a sudden
attack upon the people. It was indeed probable, that as the divine power
had crushed their spirit and filled them with dismay, they would come
boldly forward to battle as soon as they knew that God had become
hostile to the Israelites. He therefore appeals to God in regard to the
future danger, entreating him to make speedy provision against it, as
the occasion would be seized by the Canaanites, who, though hitherto
benumbed with terror, will now assume the aggressive, and easily succeed
in destroying a panic-struck people.

<span id="x.i-p39"></span>It is manifest, however, from the last clause,
that he is not merely thinking of the safety of the people, but is
concerned above all for the honor of the divine name, that it may remain
inviolable, and not be trampled under foot by the petulance of the
wicked, as it would be if the people were ejected from the inheritance
so often promised. We know the language which God himself employed, as
recorded in the song of Moses, (<span id="x.i-p39.1"></span>[Deut.
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027)<span id="x.i-p39.1"></span>)

<span id="x.i-p40"></span>“I would scatter them into corners, I would
make the remembrance of them cease among men; were it not that I feared
the wrath (pride) of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the Lord has not done all this.”

<span id="x.i-p41"></span>The very thing, then, which God declares that
he was, humanly speaking, afraid of, Joshua wishes now to be timelessly
prevented; otherwise the enemy, elated by the defeat of the people, will
grow insolent and boast of triumphing over God himself.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
7:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**10.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get
thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>**10.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Josuam, Surge. Ut
quid tu ita procidis super faciem tuam?

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span>**11.** Israel has sinned, and they have also
transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for they have even
taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also,
and they have put *it* even among their own stuff.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**11.** Peccavit Israel, atque adeo
transgressi sunt pactum meum quod praecepi illis, atque etiam tulerunt
de anathemate, atque etiam furati sunt, atque etiam mentiti, atque etiam
reposuerunt in vasa sua.

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>**12.** Therefore the children of Israel could
not stand before their enemies, *but* turned *their* backs before their
enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any
more, except you destroy the accursed from among you.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>**12.** Itaque non potuerunt filii Israel
stare coram inimicis suis: cervicem vertent coram inimicis suis:  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) quia sunt in anathema, non perseverabo
esse vobiscum, nisi deleatis anathema e medio vestri.

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>**13.** Up, sanctify the people, and say,
Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for thus says the LORD God of
Israel, *There is* an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel:
thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until you take away the
accursed thing from among you.

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**13.** Surge, sanctifica populum et dicas,
Sanctificate vos in crastinum: sic enim dicit Jehova Deus Israel,
Anathema est in medio tui Israel: non poteris stare coram inimicis tuis,
donec abstuleris anathema e medio vestri.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>**14.** In the morning therefore you shall be
brought according to your tribes: and it shall be, *that* the tribe
which the LORD takes shall come according to the families *thereof*; and
the family which the LORD shall take shall come by households; and the
household which the LORD shall take shall come man by man.

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span>**14.** Accedetis ergo mane per tribus
vestras, et tribus quam deprehendet Jehvoa accedet per domos: et domus
quam deprehendet Jehova accedet per viros.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>**15.** And it shall be, *that* he that is
taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that
he has: because he has transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and
because he has wrought folly in Israel.

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>**15.** Qui autem deprehensus fuerit in
anathemate, comburetur igni, ipse, et omnia quae ejus sunt: quod
transgressus fuerit pactum Jehovae, et quod fecerit nefas in Israel.

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span>**16.** So Joshua rose up early in the
morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was
taken:

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span>**16.** Surrexit igitur Josue mane, et
accedere fecit Israelem per tribus suas, et deprehensa est tribus Juda.

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span>**17.** And he brought the family of Judah;
and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the
Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span>**17.** Tunc applicuit cognationes Juda, et
deprehendit cognationem Zari, applicuit deinde familiam Zari per viros,
et deprehensa est familia Zabdi.

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span>**18.** And he brought his household man by
man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of
the tribe of Judah, was taken.

<span id="x.ii-p20"></span>**18.** Et applicuit domum ejus per viros, et
deprehensus est Achan filius Carmi, filii Zabdi, filii Zera, de tribu
Juda.

<span id="x.ii-p21"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p22"></span><span id="x.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *And the Lord said unto Joshua,* etc
God does not reprimand Joshua absolutely for lying prostrate on the
ground and lamenting the overthrow of the people, since the true method
of obtaining pardon from God was to fall down suppliantly before him;
but for giving himself up to excessive sorrow. The censure, however,
ought to be referred to the future rather than to the past; for he tells
him to put an end to his wailing, just as if he had said, that he had
already lain too long prostrate, and that all sloth must now be
abandoned, as there was need of a different remedy. But he first shows
the cause of the evil, and then prescribes the mode of removing it. He
therefore informs him that the issue of the battle was disastrous,
because he was offended with the wickedness of the people, and had cast
off their defense.

<span id="x.ii-p24"></span>We formerly explained why the punishment of a
private sacrilege is transferred to all; because although they were not
held guilty in their own judgment or that of others, yet the judgment of
God, which involved them in the same condemnation, had hidden reasons
into which, though it may perhaps be lawful to inquire soberly, it is
not lawful to search with prying curiosity. At the same time we have a
rare example of clemency in the fact, that while the condemnation
verbally extends to all, punishment is inflicted only on a single family
actually polluted by the crime. What follows tends to show how enormous
the crime was, and accordingly the particle <span
id="x.ii-p24.1"></span>גם is not repeated without emphasis; as they
might otherwise have extenuated its atrocity. Hence, when it is said
that they have *also* transgressed the covenant, the meaning is, that
they had not sinned slightly. The name of covenant is applied to the
prohibition which, as we saw, had been given; because a mutual
stipulation had been made, assigning the spoils of the whole land to the
Israelites, provided He received the first fruits. Here, then, he does
not allude to the general covenant, but complains that he was defrauded
of what had been specially set apart; and he accordingly adds
immediately after, by way of explanation, that they had taken of the
devoted thing, and that not without sacrilege, inasmuch as they had
stolen that which he claimed as his own. The term *lying* is here used,
as in many other passages, for frustrating a hope entertained, or for
deceiving. The last thing mentioned, though many might at first sight
think it trivial, is set down, not without good cause, as the crowning
act of guilt, namely, that they had deposited the forbidden thing among
their vessels. Persons who are otherwise not wholly wicked are sometimes
tempted by a love of gain; but in the act of hiding the thing, and
laying it up among other goods, a more obstinate perseverance in evil
doing is implied, as the party shows himself to be untouched by any
feelings of compunction. In the last part of the 12th verse, the term
anathema is used in a different sense for execration; because it was on
account of the stolen gold that the children of Israel were cursed, and
almost devoted to destruction.

<span id="x.ii-p25"></span><span id="x.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p26"></span>**13.** *Up, sanctify the people,* etc
Although the word <span id="x.ii-p26.1"></span>קדש has a more extensive
meaning, yet as the subject in question is the expiation of the people,
I have no doubt that it prescribes a formal rite of sanctification.
Those, therefore, who interpret it generally as equivalent to *prepare,*
do not, in my judgment, give it its full force. Nay, as they were now to
be in a manner brought into the divine presence, there was need of
purification that they might not come while unclean. It is also to be
observed in regard to the method of sanctifying, that Joshua intimates
to the people a legal purgation. But though the ceremony might be in
itself of little consequence, it had a powerful tendency to arouse a
rude people. The external offering must have turned their thoughts to
spiritual cleanness, while their abstinence from things otherwise lawful
reminded them of the very high and unblemished purity which was
required. And they are forewarned of what is to take place, in order
that each may be more careful in examining himself. Nay, the Lord
proceeds step by step, as if he meant to give intervals for repentance;
for it is impossible to imagine any other reason for descending from
tribe to family, and coming at length to the single individual.

<span id="x.ii-p27"></span>In all this we see the monstrous stupor of
Achan. Overcome perhaps by shame, he doubles his impudence, and putting
on a bold front, hesitates not to insult his Maker. For why, when he
sees himself discovered, does he not voluntarily come forward and
confess the crime, instead of persisting in his effrontery till he is
dragged forward against his will? But such is the just recompense of
those who allow themselves to be blinded by the devil. Then when first
by the taking of his tribe and next by that of his family, he plainly
perceived that he was urged and held fast by the hand of God, why does
he not then at least spring forward, and by a voluntary surrender
deprecate punishment? It appears, then, that after he had hardened
himself in his wickedness, his mind and all his senses were charmed by
the devil.

<span id="x.ii-p28"></span>Though God does not bring all guilty actions
to light at the very moment, nor always employ the casting of lots for
this purpose, he has taught us by this example that there is nothing so
hidden as not to be revealed in its own time. The form of disclosure
will, indeed, be different; but let every one reflect, for himself, that
things which escape the knowledge of the whole world are not concealed
from God, and that to make them public depends only on his pleasure. For
though a sin may seem as it were to have fallen asleep, it is however
awake before the door, and will beset the miserable man till it overtake
and crush him.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
7:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**19.** And Joshua said unto Achan, My son,
give, I pray thee, glory to the LORD God of Israel, and make confession
unto him; and tell me now what thou has done; hide *it* not from me.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**19.** Tunc dixit Josue ad Achan, Fili mi,
da nunc gloriam Jehovae Deo Israel, et ede ei confessionem, atque indica
mihi quid feceris, ne abscondas a me.

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>**20.** And Achan answered Joshua, and said,
Indeed I have sinned against the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus
have I done:

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**20.** Respondit Achan ad Josuam, et ait,
Vere ego peccavi Jehovae Deo Israel, et sic et sic feci.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>**21.** When I saw among the spoils a goodly
Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of
gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and,
behold, they *are* hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the
silver under it.

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**21.** Vidi inter spolia pallium,
Babylonicum bonum, et ducentos siclos argenteos, et ligulam auream unam,
cujus pondus erat quinquaginta siclorum, quae concupivi et abstuli; et
ecce abscondita sunt in terra, in medio tabernaculi mei, et argentum
subtus.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>**22.** So Joshua sent messengers, and they
ran unto the tent; and, behold, *it was* hid in his tent, and the silver
under it.

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>**22.** Misit itaque Josue nuncios qui
currerunt ad tabernaculum; ecce absconditum erat in tabernaculo ejus et
argentum sub eo.

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>**23.** And they took them out of the midst
of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of
Israel, and laid them out before the LORD.

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>**23.** Acceperuntque ea e medio
tabernaculi, et attulerunt ea ad Josuam et ad omnes filios Israel,
statueruntque coram Jehova.

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>**24.** And Joshua, and all Israel with him,
took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the
wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his
asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they
brought them unto the valley of Achor.

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>**24.** Tollensque igitur Josue Achan filium
Zera, et argentum, et pallium, et ligulam auream, et filios ejus, et
filias ejus, et boves ejus, et asinos ejus, et pecudes ejus, et
tabernaculum ejus, et omnia quae erant ejus, simulque universus Israel
cum eo deduxerunt in vallem Achor.

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span>**25.** And Joshua said, Why has thou
troubled us? the LORD shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned
him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them
with stones.

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span>**25.** Et dixit Josue, Cur turbasti nos?
Turbet te Jehova hodie, et obruerunt eum universus Israel lapidibus
combusseruntque eos igni postquam lapidaverunt eos lapidibus.

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span>**26.** And they raised over him a great
heap of stones unto this day. So the LORD turned from the fierceness of
his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The valley of
Achor, unto this day.

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span>**26.** Et statuerunt super eum acervum
lapidum magnum usque ad hunc diem, et aversus est Jehova ab ira
excandescentiae suae; ideo vocarunt nomen loci illius vallem Achor usque
in hunc diem.

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span><span id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span>**19.** *And Joshua said unto Achan,* etc
Although only by lot, which seems to fall out fortuitously, Achan is
completely caught; yet, as God has declared that he will point out the
guilty party, as if with the finger, Joshua interrogates without having
any doubt, and when the discovery is made, urges Achan to confess it. It
is probable, indeed, that this was the usual form of adjuration, as we
read in John’s Gospel, (<span id="x.iii-p20.1"></span>[Joh
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)<span id="x.iii-p20.1"></span>)
that the scribes and priests used the same words in adjuring the blind
man whose sight our Savior had restored, to answer concerning the
miracle. But there was a special reason why Joshua exhorted Achan to
give God the glory, because by denying or equivocating he might have
impaired the credit of the decision. The matter had already been
determined by lot. Joshua, therefore, simply orders him to subscribe to
the divine sentence, and not aggravate the crime by vain denials.

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span>He calls him son, neither ironically nor
hypocritically, but truly and sincerely declares that he felt like a
father toward him whom he had already doomed to death. By this example,
judges are taught that, while they punish crimes, they ought so to
temper their severity as not to lay aside the feelings of humanity, and,
on the other hand, that they ought to be merciful without being reckless
and remiss; that, in short, they ought to be as parents to those they
condemn, without substituting undue mildness for the sternness of
justice. Many by fawning kindness throw wretched criminals off their
guard, pretending that they mean to pardon them, and then, after a
confession has been extracted, suddenly hand them over to the
executioner, while they were flattering themselves with the hope of
impunity. But Joshua, satisfied with having cited the criminal before
the tribunal of God, does not at all flatter him with a vain hope of
pardon, and is thus more at liberty to pronounce the sentence which God
has dictated.

<span id="x.iii-p22"></span><span id="x.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p23"></span>**20.** *And Achan answered Joshua,* etc As
he was now struck with astonishment, he neither employs subterfuge, nor
palliates the crime, nor endeavors to give any coloring to it, but
rather ingeniously details the whole matter. Thus the sacred name of God
was more effectual in extorting a confession than any tortures could
have been. Nor was the simplicity he thus displayed a sure indication of
repentance; being, as it were, overcome with terror, he openly divulged
what he would willingly have concealed. And it is no new thing for the
wicked, after they have endeavored for some time to escape, and have
even grown hardened in vice, to become voluntary witnesses against
themselves, not properly of their own accord, but because God drags them
against their will, and, in a manner, drives them headlong. The open
answer here given will condemn the hypocrisy of many who obscure the
clear light by their subterfuges. The expression is emphatic — thus and
thus did I; meaning that each part of the transaction was explained
distinctly and in order. Nor does he only acknowledge the deed, but by
renouncing all defense, and throwing aside all pretext, he condemns
himself in regard to its atrocity. I have sinned, he says; this he would
not have said had he not been conscious of sacrilege, and hence it
appears that he did not pretend mistake or want of thought.

<span id="x.iii-p24"></span><span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p25"></span>**22.** *So Joshua sent messengers,* etc
Although it is not singular for messengers to prove their obedience by
running and making haste, yet the haste which is here mentioned, shows
how intent all were to have the work of expiation performed as speedily
as possible, as they had been filled with the greatest anxiety in
consequence of the stern denunciation — I will not be with you until you
are purged of the anathema. They therefore ran swiftly, not merely to
execute the commands of Joshua, but much more to appease the Lord. The
things carried off by stealth, when placed before their eyes, were more
than sufficient to explain the cause of the disgrace and overthrow which
had befallen them.

<span id="x.iii-p26"></span>It had been said that they had turned their
backs on the enemy, because, being polluted with the accursed thing,
they were deprived of the wonted assistance of God; it is now easy to
infer from the sight of the stolen articles, that the Lord had
deservedly become hostile to them. At the same time, they were reminded
how much importance God attached to the delivery of the first-fruits of
the whole land of Canaan in an untainted state, in order that his
liberality might never perish from their memory. They also learned that
while the knowledge of God penetrates to the most hidden recesses, it is
in vain to employ concealment’s for the purpose of eluding his judgment.
 <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)

<span id="x.iii-p28"></span><span id="x.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p29"></span>**24.** *And Joshua, and all Israel with
him,* etc Achan is led without the camp for two reasons; first, that it
might not be tainted and polluted by the execution, (as God always
required that some trace of humanity should remain, even in the
infliction of legitimate punishments,) and secondly, that no defilement
might remain among the people. It was customary to inflict punishment
without the camp, that the people might have a greater abhorrence at the
shedding of blood: but now, a rotten member is cut off from the body,
and the camp is purified from pollution. We see that the example became
memorable, as it gave its name to the spot.

<span id="x.iii-p30"></span>If any one is disturbed and offended by the
severity of the punishment, he must always be brought back to this
point, that though our reason dissent from the judgments of God, we must
check our presumption by the curb of a pious modesty and soberness, and
not disapprove whatever does not please us. It seems harsh, nay,
barbarous and inhuman, that young children, without fault, should be
hurried off to cruel execution, to be stoned and burned. That dumb
animals should be treated in the same manner is not so strange, as they
were created for the sake of men, and thus deservedly follow the fate of
their owners. Everything, therefore, which Achan possessed perished with
him as an accessory, but still it seems a cruel vengeance to stone and
burn children for the crime of their father; and here God publicly
inflicts punishment on children for the sake of their parents, contrary
to what he declares by Ezekiel. But how it is that he destroys no one
who is innocent, and visits the sins of fathers upon children, I briefly
explained when speaking of the common destruction of the city of
Jericho, and the promiscuous slaughter of all ages. The infants and
children who then perished by the sword we bewail as unworthily slain,
as they had no apparent fault; but if we consider how much more deeply
divine knowledge penetrates than human intellect can possibly do, we
will rather acquiesce in his decree, than hurry ourselves to a precipice
by giving way to presumption and extravagant pride. It was certainly not
owing to reckless hatred that the sons of Achan were pitilessly slain.
Not only were they the creatures of God’s hand, but circumcision, the
infallible symbol of adoption, was engraved on their flesh; and yet he
adjudges them to death. What here remains for us, but to acknowledge our
weakness and submit to his incomprehensible counsel? It may be that
death proved to them a medicine; but if they were reprobate, then
condemnation could not be premature.  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)

<span id="x.iii-p32"></span>It may be added, that the life which God has
given he may take away as often as pleases him, not more by disease than
by any other mode. A wild beast seizes an infant and tears it to pieces;
a serpent destroys another by its venomous bite; one falls into the
water, another into the fire, a third is overlain by a nurse, a fourth
is crushed by a falling stone; nay, some are not even permitted to open
their eyes on the light. It is certain that none of all these deaths
happens except by the will of God. But who will presume to call his
procedure in this respect in question? Were any man so insane as to do
so, what would it avail? We must hold, indeed, that none perish by his
command but those whom he had doomed to death. From the enumeration of
Achan’s oxen, asses, and sheep, we gather that he was sufficiently rich,
and that therefore it was not poverty that urged him to the crime. It
must therefore be regarded as a proof of his insatiable cupidity, that
he coveted stolen articles, not for use but for luxury.

<span id="x.iii-p33"></span><span id="x.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p34"></span>**25.** *And Joshua said,* etc The invective
seems excessively harsh; as if it had been his intention to drive the
wretched man to frantic madness, when he ought rather to have exhorted
him to patience. I have no doubt that he spoke thus for the sake of the
people, in order to furnish a useful example to all, and my conclusion,
therefore, is, that he did not wish to overwhelm Achan with despair, but
only to show in his person how grievous a crime it is to disturb the
Church of God. It may be, however, that the haughty Achan complained
that his satisfaction, by which he thought that he had sufficiently
discharged himself, was not accepted,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) and that Joshua inveighed thus bitterly
against him with the view of correcting or breaking his contumacy. The
question seems to imply that he was expostulating, and when he appeals
to God as judge, he seems to be silencing an obstinate man. The throwing
of stones by the whole people was a general sign of detestation, by
which they declared that they had no share in the crime which they thus
avenged, and that they held it in abhorrence. The heap of stones was
intended partly as a memorial to posterity, and partly to prevent any
one from imprudently gathering particles of gold or silver on the spot,
if it had remained unoccupied. For although the Lord had previously
ordered that the gold of Jericho should be offered to him, he would not
allow his sanctuary to be polluted by the proceeds of theft.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc07009.htm#fr_68) <span
id="x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p8"></span> Calvin’s Latin as well as the French version
omit the concluding clause of this verse, “Make not the whole people to
labor thither: for they are few.” The omission, for which no reason is
assigned, is the more remarkable, as there appears to be no doubt as to
the genuineness of the original clause, and its meaning is very exactly
given not only in the Septuagint but other versions, such as Luther’s,
with which Calvin was well acquainted. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc07009.htm#fr_69) <span
id="x.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p32"></span> French, “<span id="x.i-p32.1"></span>O que je
voudrove que nous eussions prins a plaisir de demeurer au dela du
Jordain;” “O how I wish that we had been pleased to remain beyond the
Jordan.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc07009.htm#fr_70) <span
id="x.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p36"></span> French, “<span id="x.i-p36.1"></span>Soit
revoquee en doute, ou moins estimee devant le monde;” “Be called in
question, or less esteemed before the world.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc07009.htm#fr_71) <span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span> The English version puts the verb in the past
tense, and translates “turned their backs;” Calvin’s “<span
id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>vertent cervicem,” “will turn their neck;” making
the expression not a declaration of what had taken place, but a
denunciation of what was still to take place, is truer to the original,
and has also the sanction of the Septuagint, which has <span
id="x.ii-p8.2"></span>αὐχένα ὑποστρέψουσιν. Luther even adds to the
force of the expression by saying, “<span id="x.ii-p8.3"></span>muffen
ihren Feinven ven Ruden fehren;” “must turn the back on their enemies.”
Calvin’s punctuation of the same verse is peculiar. By making a colon at
enemies, he separates the words “<span id="x.ii-p8.4"></span>quia sunt
in anathema,” from the end of the first, and makes it the beginning of
the second clause, which accordingly reads thus: “Because they are in
anathema, (have taken of the accursed thing,) I will not continue to go
with you,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc07009.htm#fr_72) <span
id="x.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p27"></span> French, “<span
id="x.iii-p27.1"></span>C’est folie de chercher couverture et
deguisement pour eschapper son jugement et l’abuser;” “It is folly to
seek cover and disguise in order to escape his judgement and deceive
him.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc07009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="x.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p31"></span> These admirable remarks are well fitted to
satisfy every candid mind, not only as to the nature of this very
remarkable execution, but also as to its expediency and strict justice,
notwithstanding its admitted severity. Several expositors, however,
continue to be dissatisfied, and to bring it more into accordance with
their views, attempt to explain parts of it away by means of a minute
and forced criticism. On finding this process not very successful, they
endeavor to supply its deficiency by extraordinary conjectures. First,
with regard to the criticism, it is said that in the directions which
the Lord gives to Joshua, (<span id="x.iii-p31.1"></span>[Jos
7:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)<span id="x.iii-p31.1"></span>)
he receives no authority to put any person to death, except the one who
should be found to have actually committed the crime. When the words of
the 15th verse, “he and all that he has,” are quoted in opposition to
this view, the answer is, that the expressions does not necessarily mean
more than the man himself, his cattle, and other property, and therefore
*may* not have included his family, properly so called, or the persons
who formed his household. Another criticism, still more extraordinary,
would scarcely be deserving of notice had it not received the
countenance of so distinguished a name as that of Grotius, who insists
that Achan was the only person who actually suffered death, though his
children were taken out to the place of execution and verse, in which it
is said that “All Israel stoned *him* (Achan) with stones, and burned
*them* with fire;” *i.e.,* as he explains, stoned Achan only, and then
burnt his dead body, and his cattle, and other effects designated by
*them.* Such are specimens of the criticism which this transaction has
called forth, and it would almost be an insult to the reader to give a
serious refutation of them. The *conjectures* to which we have referred
are equally extravagant. One of them is given in the Cyclopaedia of
Biblical Literature, under the article Achan, and as the writer appears
both to have invented it, and to plume himself on the invention, it is
but fair to give it in his own words; — “We prefer the supposition that
they (Achan’s family) were included in the doom by one of those sudden
impulses of indiscriminate popular vengeance, to which the Jewish people
were exceedingly prone, and which, in this case, it would not have been
in the power of Joshua to control by any authority which he could, under
such circumstances, exercise.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc07009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="x.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p35"></span> French, “<span
id="x.iii-p35.1"></span>Combien qu’il se peut faire, qu’Achan estant
fier se soit plaint de ce qu’on ne se contentoit pas de la reparation,
et payement qu’il avoit fait, par lequel il pensoit s’estre bien
acquitte, et avoir grand devoir;” “Although it may be that Achan
complained of their not being contented with the reparation and payment
which he had made, and by which he thought that he had acquitted himself
well, and performed a great duty.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc07010)
