[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](foreword) [Next](chap02)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IN TERRITORIAL UTAH CHAPTER I

# GOING WEST IN 1874

I WAS one of the multitude of young men who heeded Horace Greeley's
advice, "Go West, young man, go West!" in the days when he was the
ruling spirit of the New York Tribune. Discredited as a prospective
president by the people at the polls, he yet was accepted by many as a
prophet of agricultural authority on the "Opportunity of the Great
West."  
  
To me, from boyhood, the word "Mississippi" had a winsome charm. I had
read of De Soto and the Jesuit Fathers as the first voyagers on the
great river of the West, of the Lewis and Clark explorations by the pen
of Washington Irving in his Astoria: and to go West, was my one aim as
conditions were ripe for it. The great lakes to the North and the
cane-brakes to the South were not in it with the West as a drawing card
to me. I left the charmed scenery of central New York state in the early
spring of '74 headed for the wonderful Porkopolis of Chicago. That city
was just beginning to rise from the ashes of the terrible fire of '71
when I first set foot in it. Wide areas resembling San Francisco in 1906
were black with the fire's work, and temporary board structures even at
the depots were in common evidence. But there was the tang and the vim
of the West in the faces of its hustling population that foretold the
vigorous growth of after years. Crossing Ohio, I passed through the
famous Western Reserve, supposed to be, in its day, the real West. When
I saw the orderly neatness of farm, road, and townsite, I smiled at the
invitation of an old college chum of the previous year; "When you are in
the West be sure to call on me in the Western Reserve. I live at
Youngstown, Ohio."  
  
The "Father of Waters," as the Indians so fitly call the Mississippi,
was bank-full when I crossed it one Tuesday morning. The prairies of
Illinois and Wisconsin were green with the early spring color that also
clothed the trees along the borders of this great stream. I was not
disappointed, save with the awkwardly built stern-wheel steamers, that
were either wildly swinging down or laboriously puffing up its course.
When I stepped off the cars at Dubuque, Iowa, at last fairly West, I
delighted in the breezy speech and the freedom of the people; men and
women of adaptation to circumstances,-of a width of view like the plains
that they were subduing.  
  
For a year Iowa with its agricultural beauties along the Mississippi
held me prisoner. Then the craving for the far West took hold of me as I
heard the accounts of the returning pioneers of Kansas or Nebraska. The
plague of locusts had driven them back and they had returned for
supplies for another start.  
  
It will be remembered that Uncle Sam was more than generous in his land
gifts at this time. The pre-emption laws allowed pioneers to buy
outright one hundred and sixty acres of the best level land in Iowa and
Minnesota at one dollar and twenty-five cents an acre. Five years' time
was given to pay for this, no other obligation was required beyond the
settler's own interests to live on it and improve it.  
  
I saw, as I travelled west, hundreds of these pre-emptors at work
building small sod or frame houses, and breaking up the heavy grassed
prairies. The cars to western Iowa and Minnesota were crowded every day
with land seekers. The Danes, Norwegians and Swedes were mainly in
evidence; so new to the country that they could not make themselves
understood, but had to talk through their agents when inquiring, or
buying. These people's descendants of this day are the intelligent and
prosperous farmers of the choicest locations in country and town.
Beginning with nothing but their brawn and industry, they are
independent citizens of the best prairie states.  
  
I crossed another great river at Omaha, the Missouri. With the
imagination of youth, I saw the older population of this country of
illimitable plains. The Pawnees, the Sioux, the Omahas, whose gatherings
gave the name to Council Bluffs, upon the Iowa side. I saw also the
black rolling tide of bison racing before the yelling red hunters or
before the redder tongues of prairie fires. While I was denied my hope
of running down a buffalo, I was able to see several of them in their
wild state, as I went farther west. A great and reckless slaughter had
thinned them down but one did not then have to visit a government park
to see a buffalo.  
  
It was a great event in that day for the overland express to leave Omaha
for San Francisco. People made preparation for this pullman ride with
all the gravity of a sea voyage. Baskets of supplies, wraps, rugs, and
dust coats filled the arms of the passengers boarding the cars.  
  
The express averaged sixteen miles an hour, including stops. The
road-bed was of very light caliber and simply spiked down without
fishplates, allowing no forty miles an hour speed. We swayed and
teetered along some parts of the road in a way that reminded me of a
branch line on the Grand Trunk in Canada, where the train dipped and
curtseyed in the cuttings like a sail boat on the lakes. No harm came of
it. We stopped often for fuel and water, and to oil up the small,
wide-funneled engine, or to cool a hot-box in the heavily freighted
baggage car.  
  
The winds of Nebraska are worthy of mention for they are in the business
of blowing, and if the people are much affected by them, they are
certainly in danger of being the biggest boosters of the West. Anyway, I
saw the effect of these constant winds on all faces; the men being as
red as Indians and the women, despite the long poke bonnets they wore,
were almost as brown. Ma-dame Recamier's cream so much advertised then,
should have had a great sale in Nebraska, if the women were at all
solicitous of their complexions. But they were all of stern stuff and
did not mind the Nebraska breezes, whether hot as a blast in summer, or
cold as a blizzard in winter. They were a people that moved as briskly
as their winds, going at top speed in their buggies and on horseback.  
  
I saw women riding astride and they rode like cowboys. There were
villages of marmots or prairie dogs and these little canines shared
their earth-holes with both snakes and owls. Once in a while "Lo," the
Indian, in his native costume was seen on a hill near-by sitting on his
cayuse, stoically viewing the white man's fire wagons as they trailed
past. These natives were also in evidence at every eating station,
either to sell their bead and buffalo ornaments, or to share in the
white man's fire-water.  
  
Those were the days of corn-whiskey, as yellow as gold and as hot as
fire, and which keeled over the drinker at "forty rods." The western men
aboard the cars, filled up with four fingers of this stuff at every
stop. Temperance was not to the fore then and the front streets of
railroad towns were given up to saloons of vigorous titles, and they
were black with men from the cattle ranges around. These bandy-legged
bravos whooped 5 and rode races with the cars and even wasted some
ammunition in celebration of the passing express, that scarcely
out-speeded their ponies.  
  
Those days are gone. The cowboy is now historic. The open range is now
homesteaded or desert-claimed by the nester. The great meat manufactory
has passed from the range, and is now in the hands of the farmer, who
stall-feeds his cattle on the cultivated roots and grains of the
ranches.  
  
With the next morning's sun we saw the faint outline of the Rocky
Mountains. We had been slowly climbing and the elevation was sufficient
to lower the horizon line of this backbone of the continent. I was
interested to see with my own eyes those mountains made famous in my
boyhood days by the stories of that writer for boys, Captain Mayne
Reid.  
  
Though the scenes that he so graphically described were in the great
range farther to the south, and on the Mexican border, yet the name,
Rocky Mountains, satisfied me that I was in the neighborhood of those
old friends Rube and Geary in Scalp-Hunters, or The War Trail. We are
more or less children and beneath the layers of riper years, lie
recumbent the old imaginations of youth. So I sat and deamed again my
boyhood hours and felt young, though sad, since I could never be a boy
again, nor see the boy companions of those book days. Scattered to the
four corners of the globe, some at sea, some at antipodes, some citified
and thus changed; and one old chum gone away to the far country from
which no traveller returns.  
  
What a day that was for the prospector and the cattle man! The
sheep-man, so omnipresent in Australia, was despised and seldom seen in
this great West. The cattle owner hated the sheepman almost as much as
he did the Indian. It was the day of gun rule, for the sheriff and the
constable were persons few and far between. The reprobate was in the
land by voice and deed. All the dare-devils and the scum of the East
drifted this way, and were stranded like river debris, in these little,
hideous shanty railroad towns. Ten years earlier these characters ran
everything to suit themselves. The war was still raging, and Uncle Sam's
hands full, thus giving the rowdy and robber full swing to kill and
steal. Some of these gentry were still about, with faces hardened by
excess and crime, yet the great majority had gone to the greater
majority via the hangman's rope or the hands of the Vigilante Committee
and the yet quicker way of the sawed off shot-gun.  
  
Next came the canyons. I had always thrilled at that word; it seemed to
suggest roaring waters, Mexican riders and red-men yelling. These
canyons were tame, the surveyors had selected the best grades and the
engineers had made a level road for the rails. We went orderly along
these mountain streets, with little noise beyond the tired asthmatic
cough of our over-taxed engines, for we now had two engines to draw us
up these heights. How frail they looked, compared with the immense
monsters of to-day, dun colored and mighty, without brightness or
glitter beyond their headlight! Our engines were gaudy ones, brass
bound, bright-painted, polished to the shining point, showing all their
works to the onlooker; the cylinder and driving-rods working in full
view. We halted at last to change cars; it was Ogden, at the junction of
the Union and Central Pacific Railroads.  
  
We saw here, for the first time, the orange-colored cars, which took all
over-landers to California. I was not booked for the real sea, but was
bound for the Great Salt Lake, or Salt Sea, in Utah Territory. As I
looked around I missed the green earth and the wide expanse of the
plains. I found that I was among rocks of craggy height, overlooking
little narrow valleys, where irrigation was needed to make things grow.
I was m the far West at last though I knew that there was a farther
West, which some day I meant to see A lazy train soon started with the
regulation speed of sixteen miles to the hour and we slowly passed along
the south line of the Salt Lake, a sea so dead and dreary that it
resembled dead sea of that memorable land, ancient Palestine. Then we
came, at last, to the city of the Latter Day Saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: A Far West City](chap02)
