[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap15) [Next](chap17)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVI

# THE TOWN AND CANYON OF AMERICAN FORK

*"So green, so full of goodly prospect and melodious sounds on every
side, that the harp of Orpheus was not more charming."*

*Milton*

THE town of American Fork is a picturesque little place. It is situated
beyond the point of the mountain divide that looks toward Lake Utah. It
fronts this lake, whose sheen in the sunlight resembles "Blue Galilee,"
and is an American Bethsaida. The spurs of the Canyon are near and
looking eastward the lofty knife-like ridge of Mt. Aspinwall is visible
for nearly twenty miles.  
  
I met some strangely interesting people in this little town. I remained
here some time to establish a liberal school, and another in the
adjoining town of Battle Creek. This latter place got its name from a
fight with the Utes in very early days. I rode into American Fork in the
rain of a long-continued storm. My ride was made in a heavy-wheeled farm
wagon and under a flapping low-hung canvas cover. This afforded shelter
from the driving rain, but was a constant weight on one's head and
shoulders, since the bows were so weak and few that the cover sagged
under the weight of the rain and the pressure of the wind. On our way we
stopped for refreshment at a store-hotel. I hyphenate the word for it
was a combination of the two. Some visible groceries and a strong odor
of invisible cheese and kerosene indicated the first business. A round
stove with round backed chairs about it, a huge spittoon, a desk, a
counter with a bar and bottles, suggested the latter occupation. Also
there was a rear room, on the door of which was written in letters of
local talent, this legend, "DININ' RUME." So we had hope of something to
eat in there.  
  
It was here I acted as a member of a volunteer fire department. I sat
drying my garments at the expectoration-anointed stove, listening to the
sounds of frying meat in the rear room. Suddenly something soft, light
and warm fell on my arm. I saw it was a flake of burning soot. An upward
glance, through the stove-pipe hole, revealed a light, and in an instant
more a blaze. The stove-pipe had parted with the heat expansion, and the
under side of the shingle roof was on fire. "FIRE!" I yelled, and sprang
on a chair to get at the opening. The others yelled too, and the host
came running in.  
  
The building was one of those cheap shells of unpainted rough lumber,
which enterprising frontier men liked to build in those days. So utterly
ugly that it was a boon to burn them down. It meant sharp work, if we
were not to lose our supper, and our host his "Hotel." Sharp was the
word. The boss was up a ladder and on the roof with a few movements of
his long legs. Off came the burning shingles. Others of us tore apart
the ceiling boards above the stove, and threw up water from kitchen
buckets, pans and kettles. Five minutes later there was an awful mess
around the stove, a big hole in the roof, a rustling, excited crowd
moving around, but the fire was out. The host felt generous toward the
helping company, and gave us a free supper of fried ham, eggs and
potatoes, with the usual "hotel" coffee. We arrived in the town of
American Fork about dark. We passed a two-story adobe house with dormer
windows in the roof to lighten and enlarge the upper story.  
  
"Who owns that fine large house?" I asked. It was so unlike the usual
adobe house in these Mormon settlements, that I was curious, and put
this question to the teamster.  
  
"Oh! That belongs to one of Brigham's relicts."  
  
"What?"  
  
"Well, one of his widows, 'grass widows' I mean. Mrs. Alien's her name;
ought to have been Mrs. Young, you know."  
  
"Why! I thought Brigham Young married all of the women whom he called
his wives."  
  
"So he did in a way. This one was sealed to him in celestial wedlock. He
is said to have had several dozen married in that way. He had about
nineteen, or twenty, married regular in the Endowment House."  
  
"Did he build homes for all of these celestial wives or widows, what
ever their relation might be?"  
  
"No! Not he, but some pressure was brought to bear in this case, and
Mrs. Alien was a very pretty woman then. She was a favorite of this
great personage."  
  
"Oh! I see. Something after the order of the European Courts in the days
of the French, during the reign of Louis XIV."  
  
The teamster was an intelligent man but he was not up in the history of
Europe. He could doubtless tell all about the small incidents of
American history from the Colonial days down, but across the Atlantic
was too remote to interest him.  
  
Here I met a man from Aberdeen, "Awbur-deen" so he pronounced it; and he
was "that Scotch you could see it a distance." It is not often that the
canny Scot is caught in the meshes of "soopersteeshun," such as catches
the more excitable, and less cautious native of the States. Robert and
William Peters, brothers, were both here. The former had been, and the
latter still was, a Mormon. In fact, William Peters was an official, not
only of the railroad, of which he was the local depot master, but he was
high upon the rungs of the ecclesiastical ladder of this Utah "Kirk."
Robert had left, not only his first love, the old Scotch Kirk of his
boyhood, but his second love, the church of his "beguilement," as he
phrased it.  
  
"I was that looney onct, that I was caught, like a feesh by the gills,
and hooked for fair by them Mormons," he said to me in explanation of
his position.  
  
He was now a liberal and offered to aid me as much as possible to start
a school.  
  
"My brither, Willyum, is still sae saft that he sees not onnything but
this new fangled kirk, but I left the same lang syne." He had the true
Scotch grit, and was able to take his position and take it alone. He led
a lonely life, and made his living by making shoe lasts, and was a
master workman at his trade. He could take your foot measure, and out of
a block of maple wood, cut your last so accurately, that a shoe, built
on it by a good shoemaker, resulted in the comfort of an individual fit.
Moreover, when you put these lasts into your boots, we wore boots high
up the calf of the leg in those days, and the shape "lasted."  
  
This was another comfort, that once discovered by those who could afford
it, resulted in Robert Peters' getting many an order for the lasts, both
for men and for women.  
  
There is nothing like a singular handicraft, dependent upon the
individual skill, to make a man independent as to bread and butter. This
does not mean that Robert ate much of either. For he did not. He was a
singular Scot in several ways. He never married, and would only eat
certain foods of his own cooking.  
  
He made Scotch scones, rather too solid for me, and these, with potatoes
and salt, and cold water, constituted his main food supply. A little
herring and "parritch" three times a week were luxuries.  
  
"Sugar? No I niver ate it. It's just salt with the parritch. Onnything
else would spoil the taste for me."  
  
It was evident that Robert's simple food was not burdensome, and as the
high cost of living was then unknown, he kept well within his slender
means.  
  
I found out that he put his savings into some Scotch charities in
Aberdeen, his old home city, and also that he helped a little in the
efforts to establish schools in Salt Lake City. That is to say he put in
his mite.  
  
"Twa'd be the saving o' the people, if they were taught the Shorter
Catechism and the Lord's Prayer."  
  
This was a reversion to type, by way of prejudice, and a Scotchman is
nothing, if he is not prejudiced in favor of something Scotch-born, like
the Shorter Catechism. At heart, I expect, he was a believer in only a
few of the universal truths of all religions, but he kept up a bold
front about Presbyterianism, just out of opposition to the dominant rule
in Utah.  
  
"I? Do you ask what I am? I am a true blue Presbyterian," he said.  
  
He reminded me of the Wood brothers of Bingham Canyon. They were
teamsters and drove mules, bringing down timbers from the top of the
mountains to the different mining tunnels, much timber being used to
make these tunnels safe. No man not a saint far advanced can drive mules
and not swear. In fact, it is said that mules in tight places will not
move unless a volley of oaths is first launched their way. This I had
from several Army men whom I knew, that had driven mules in the Civil
War.  
  
I am afraid mule-driving is hard on the sanctity of speech. The Wood
brothers were Presbyterians, "away back" where they came from in the
first place. They forgot all about it in camp life, during the six
laboring days of the week while working with their mules; but on Sunday
they braced up. When they put on clean shirts and collars-mark that-they
put on something of their old time "away back" religion, and went to
church, if there was one, and put their quarter in the church
collection.  
  
So a good many at first sight considered them staunch church people, but
hearing them deliver themselves of "mule talk" as they were driving
their teams, they altered these views.  
  
"Saw two of your Presbyterian Elders to-day, the air was bluer than
their Presbyterianism, all about those mules of theirs; the Wood
brothers I mean; better look 'em up, and give them a word of spiritual
advice," said a superintendent of one of the mines who liked to be
considered a humorous man. Yet one of these men, sweaty and covered with
dust and having sworn all day long, showed signs of remorse.  
  
"Say, I know I'm not right, but a man's temper can't keep with mules and
they must be driv' that-a way. I am goin' to get out of this business
some day and live like a Christian ought."  
  
I tell this because it is so with hundreds of men out West. They know
the way that they live is not right and all of them mean to do better
some day. The how to do it, is always beyond them during the present
time. You can see that the exponents of other forms of religious life
and faith, with such followers and hangers on, could not deal in
criticism or denunciation of lapsed Mormons, or for that matter of
standing Mormons, for they were no worse in their actual lives. Robert
Peters used to go to church when the liberal element was strong enough,
as it soon was, to erect a building and open services, on Sunday night.
The lady who played the organ had a little girl, so small that she had
to be held in the lap. Robert Peters became nurse for the time being and
faithfully held and quieted the child. I think the old man really
enjoyed, and was happy in assisting in this way to aid the proprieties
of public worship, after the grave Scotch manner. In leaving the town
for the city, where his business was likely to be better for him, he
left for the little baby girl a book that she might read in riper years.
It was an old Scotch Sunday School book, thought to be adaptable to
young children, and had for a title, *The Valley of Baca* and a
beautiful figure on the cover representing a weep, ing woman bending
over a well. "In the Valley of Baca they maketh it a well," accommodated
from the Book of Psalms.  
  
The irreverent hoodlums, who used to sit in the back seats at meeting,
dubbed Robert "the Presbyterian Nurse," a title he was proud of to the
last day that I knew him. William Peters was a man in conflict with
himself. His past was too strong for his present, and this kept him
uncomfortable. His face and speech showed his ire. He could not accept
some things of his new faith.  
  
"He's peeved about polygamy," said Robert, "he couldn't swallow that,
for Wyllum is a good man at the bottom, and thinks much of his wife,
wedded in Scotland; but I spewed out the whole lot."  
  
I can see his red weather-worn face, his spare body, and can hear his
brogue whenever I call him to mind. A man of individuality and grit;
with a better education, he might have made a mark in the world instead
of being a waste timber thrown up by the sea of life, one of those sad
wrecks left by the tide of religious opinion, which, while it has
floated many to a safe haven, has engulfed a great multitude in
bitterness and isolation.  
  
The canyon of American Fork is worthy of notice. As it has been much
described, I will simply say that its varied, rugged, rock-scenery
rivals, in lesser magnitude, the splendors of the Yosemite Valley in
California. A railroad ran up its winding, rocky sides passing over and
around the purling, foaming mountain stream rushing down to the lake.  
  
A prosperous camp was once the business life of the railroad; but when I
knew it, its commercial glory was gone. It had been smashed by the
extravagances and expenditures of the many promoters, who are the real
curse of all such enterprises. They are after the "wad" held by
innocent, trustful, tenderfoot-investors and stockholders. They get it
and go away, leaving the ruins of a promising camp in their wake. The
railroad was of principal use to haul wood down the canyon, and the
tourists up. Often the depot at American Fork was crowded with
visitors.  
  
Many times I have met distinguished men there, bent on seeing the
beauties of the mountain canyon; bishops, senators, generals, financiers
and the capitalists, came and went.  
  
I could mention some notable names, were I not purposely avoiding
personalities in these pages, and confining myself to descriptions of
real life andd character, such as Utah presented.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Tenderfoot Superintendents](chap17)
