[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap09) [Next](chap11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X

# BEHIND THE CURTAIN

*"Is this a dagger which I see before me, The handle toward my hand?
Come, let me clutch thee"*

*Shakespeare*

AFIELD fence in Utah often occasions a marked contrast in the appearance
of the soil. On one side of it there is green alfalfa, peach and plum
trees as thrifty as the best, due to the little rills of irrigation
water. On the other side of the same fence there is nothing but the silt
and sand of a pure desert, the habitat of sage brush and the
horned-toad.  
  
The two sides of a shield are often quite different; and there are two
sides to Mormonism, as in most religions. I have shown you the fair and
fertile looking side, but in order to be true to the facts, as I saw
them, I must show you the other.  
  
I am not the critic or judge in this matter. The reader can occupy that
position, if he so desires. Otherwise time and the great future must
unite to be it, and will pronounce a true judgment. I am but a recounter
of my own observances and experiences.  
  
First a few words about the Mormon Rurales, Rough Riders or Destroying
Angels. These were the Danites, or Mormon military police, and their
work was for both Church and State.  
  
These strangely gathered people were isolated, enthusiastic, then
intolerant, and afterwards crafty and cruel in the administration of
their public affairs. Many vile things have been said of the Mormons. I
do not join in that abuse. Where so much smoke has arisen there must be
some fire as the cause of it.  
  
We know that the Mormons, as an outgrowth of the persecutions they
endured in the East, and as a defensive measure, organized a militia,
called the Nauvoo Legion. It drilled openly and was perfected as an
engine of war shortly before, and also during, the days of the Civil
strife in the States. Those days saw interests, so paramount to an
insignificant evidence of Mormon disloyalty, that amid the rush of
events and the crash of war, no notice was taken of this Legion, or
steps enforced to put it down.  
  
In the Utah of my experience, this Legion was kept sub-rosa; yet
remained intact as a military arm, of Mormon interests, and could be
used at a moment's call. It had been the great reserve force of the
Territory in the past and was the power behind the throne which enabled
Brigham Young to execute his will in the days of the 5o's. In fact, the
Mormon police or Rurales, popularly known as the "Danites" or the
"Destroying Angels"; using the biblical phraseology so common among
these people, were really the active and executive arm of this
militia.  
  
Thus the Church had something more than moral force to give power to its
mandates. It had a physical force, like any country armed to meet its
foe, or put down rebellion within its own borders.  
  
These were picked men in horsemanship, and the use of weapons. They were
"Angels" of help to their own kind, but "Destroyers" of all opposition.
They had a picked leader in the person of Porter Rockwell, and an able
second in Bill Hick-man, both men of that period, and the products of
the open wild life of the far West.  
  
Porter Rockwell was a romantic person in appearance. Well proportioned,
with dark aquiline features, bright black eyes, and long curling hair,
he was a brunette Custer in his style and charm of leadership.  
  
Probably his most important act was leading his band south in pursuit of
the Missourian overland party of emigrants, the especial objects of
hate; since it was in Missouri that Joseph Smith and his brother had
been slain by the mob.  
  
I had some facts given me by a little man, whose name was Little. He was
indeed insignificant to look at, but a perfect wasp in the sting of his
words when he was willing to talk about these things, "behind the
curtain" as he called them. He had a small farm at a little town called
Benjamin near the borders of Lake Utah; and was well acquainted with
Rockwell and his band. What his former relationship to the Danites was I
never could get him to tell, but he had inside knowledge of many dark
deeds of those early days.  
  
"Old Brigham used to hunt down these apostates with Rockwell's men, like
you'd hunt rabbits in the brush."  
  
"What did he do with them when he caught them?"  
  
"Sent 'em to hell across-lots. That's the way the old prophet talked of
them as knew too much, and had dropped out the Church."  
  
"Well, what does that phrase really mean?"  
  
"Just this. You never saw those men alive again. They were caught
slipping through the canyons, east or west, but they never got clean
away. If any one asked for them it was said that 'the Injuns raised
their hair.' "  
  
"You mean that they were killed and scalped?"  
  
"Yes. But they weren't killed by Injuns, though their scalps might hang
at a Piute's belt."  
  
That was as near as I could get Little to say who killed them. You can
reach your own conclusions.  
  
The Mormons had a crude doctrine, which they derived from the Old
Testament theology. Human blood might be shed when necessary. The red
line is seen running through these Jewish writings. The Mormons called
this doctrine "Blood Atonement," and meant by it, that the shedding of a
man's blood, though it destroyed his body, was the means of saving his
soul from final apostasy. To the Latter Day Saint, who was initiated in
all his religious ritual, it was the unpardonable sin to forsake the
Church of the Latter Days, once you had become a member.  
  
I tried to get Little to give me the names of these men who died,
because they had dropped out of the Church, and also the dates and
places of their deaths. He was mum.  
  
"See, I've had to take a fearful oath to keep silent. I dare not tell.
The Church, here, is a secret order, and has its penalties, which are
carried out."  
  
"Well there is no fear of that now that Brig-ham is dead at last, is
there?"  
  
He only shook his head. This conversation was in October, 1877, two
months after the autocrat of the Mormons had died in Salt Lake City.  
  
I met Bill Hickman when in Bingham Canyon at the mining camp. This was
in 1875. Porter Rockwell was not living then, and Hickman had himself
dropped out of action, although you could not say that he was an
apostate. He was a stout-built, cynical-featured man, with an eye that
glittered and said things; but his lips were silent as to the past. He
was not put out of the way, because, as he himself said, "I know too
much for them to do it."  
  
He was still an active man, although his hair was grey; but his mount of
a horse was like that of a cowboy in the round up days, and you could
see that his home was in the saddle. He dropped to his feet with the
soft touch of a cat, and in his earlier years he must have been a hard
man to handle in a fight.  
  
Both Rockwell and Hickman were at Mountain Meadows in '57, when the
hundred and fifty Mis-sourians, on their way to California, were killed
to the last man and child by the Indians (?).  
  
It would have been a great thing to have gained an account of that
massacre from Hickman, but when asked, he only answered with a shrewd
lift of his eyes.  
  
There was a man whom I knew, an old soldier of Uncle Sam, who was one of
the first of the soldiers who came to the Territory prior to the Civil
War when the Government thought it wise to have a military camp in the
neighborhood of Salt Lake City.  
  
This man fell in love with a daughter of Utah, a buxom young woman, who
beguiled him into joining the Mormon Church in order to marry her. He
was never at heart a very loyal Mormon, and so was in a frame of mind to
give impartial testimony.  
  
John Bennet was of Scotch birth, and could never get away from the
conscience for truth, which he had imbibed from the Old Kirk.  
  
I met him in American Fork, and found he knew a good deal of the past of
the Danites, and was willing to talk.  
  
"Were you here in 1857, when the Missouri party went south?"  
  
"Yes, I saw them go through this town, a tired looking lot."  
  
"How did you treat them?"  
  
"None of us loved a Missourian. They had badly treated us fourteen years
before and we had  
  
not forgotten. These emigrants were hard up and wanted to buy supplies
from us. We wouldn't sell them a thing."  
  
"Didn't *you* do anything for them?"  
  
"Just a little. I had no personal reason to hate 'em, so I gave, to a
tall thin man with a big family, a sack of flour and a ham on the
sly."  
  
"You say on the sly; was there a watch kept over them by the Mormons?"  
  
"Yes, and a close one. The order had gone out to let them feed
themselves, if they could, and not to take their money for any food; so
I had to be cautious. I felt pity for the sick wife of this man, she
looked so worn, and had such hopeless eyes. I fancy she foresaw the fate
awaiting them farther south."  
  
"Did they stop here?"  
  
"Yes, they camped a day, just outside the town, to rest their beasts,
and fill their water casks from the lake three miles away. I talked to
one man, who wanted a drink for his wagon-load of young ones. My house
was not far away. I noticed his hat as he took the bucket I gave him. It
had once been a fine felt hat and white. It was very dirty from use, but
he wore it so it resembled a sugar-cone, with a string band around the
bottom. It looked like those conical hats the Mexican greasers wear,
only theirs are straw made and this one was fine felt."  
  
"Did you ever see him again?" "No, but I saw his hat; I'll tell you
about it. After these people went on, a little rested, with water but no
food from us, all was quiet for a day or two; then a band of the Danites
rode into town, with Bill Hickman at the head of them. I didn't see
Porter Rockwell, for I understood that he had gone ahead, with a select
few, to keep close trail on the emigrants.  
  
"They kept pretty mum. They were all around and rode good horses, and
seemed in a great haste; for they left in a few minutes, in a cloud of
dust."  
  
"Did you see this band again soon?" "Yes, in about ten days I suppose,
they came back a weary looking lot; but this time they had something to
say."  
  
"What was their report?" "That the Missourians were all killed by the
Indians, who had caught them unawares and sick at Mountain Meadows, far
to the south and every man, woman and child had been scalped." "How did
they speak of this massacre?" "Well, they said, it served 'em right.
They got their dues for what they did us years ago! The Indians have
saved us a lot of trouble." "Did the Danites show any signs of being in
the fight?"  
  
"Yes, a few had wounds. They all had more weapons than they needed
apiece. And one man, I am certain, wore that conical white felt hat that
had been on the head of the tall, lean Mis-sourian whose family I
watered at my place. I was curious and got near to him to ask about it,
but he wouldn't talk. Yet I saw a bullet hole in that hat, that showed
that its wearer had been in a fight, before it fell from the head of its
first owner."  
  
The Battle Axes of the Lord, the Piutes were a good disguise for the
Danites, and scape-goats for the blame of this massacre. There is little
doubt, both Utes and Destroyers, were together in the deed. Doubtless
they looked like a band of hostile Indians. In that far-away meadow, the
grass was red with blood, shed to avenge an ancient wrong, done by other
Missourians, and in this was fulfilled, to the letter, the old Jewish
cry of, "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." The avengers of
blood got the blood they sought after fifteen years of vengeful waiting.
The mills of time grind slow, but they grind most surely their grist.  
  
The Piutes of the San Pete and Sevier valleys had the odium of this
massacre in the eyes of the public for many a long day. There were those
who knew enough to be dissatisfied with this stereotyped explanation,
and it took twenty years more for justice to bring the evil doers to its
bar. It was in the spring of 1877 that one saw a satisfied expression on
the face of every Gentile in the Territory. The United States Courts,
after years of examination and preparation of the case, at last had
prosecuted to the full extent of the law the murderers of the emigrants
of '57.  
  
The culprit was no Indian. He was a white man. It might have been
Brigham Young himself, since he was autocrat of both Church and State in
those days. He skillfully evaded the blow, which he saw was inevitable,
and it was allowed to fall upon the local Bishop, John T. Lee. He was
the responsible person, through whom, the authorities carried out their
purposes in that locality. Although promises were made to him that he
should be safe-guarded from government prosecution, he was allowed to
carry all of the responsibility to the last.  
  
Having been found guilty by the government, the higher-ups let him go,
as a sacrifice, and he was "hanged by the neck until dead."  
  
Everywhere that I went I noted the dismay of the Mormon that the
government could ferret out so old a misdeed. No effort of the Church
could offset the chagrin of the people.  
  
I suppose many other deeds, committed in the same high-handed and
fanatical way, were troubling the leaders. They feared that they also
might be brought to the bar of justice, and the guilty ones punished.
There is no question that a good deal of killing took place between 1850
and 1865 that was not due to accident, Indians, personal quarrels of a
frontier population, but was the result of fanaticism.  
  
It went about arresting men and women, who were not staunch of faith,
and was not content with putting them into prison on manufactured
charges, but put them to death in a quiet way.  
  
But it was the spectacular and wholesale killing, together with the
vengeful boastings of the Church, that called so much attention to the
Mountain Meadow's crime and so brought the sword of Justice to smite in
behalf of the law.  
  
As we study human nature and history, we find this strange mingling of
good and evil in religion, the red and white line woven into one strand.
It is hard indeed, as human beings, to be the judges of such people and
their acts. They endeavored to do well and right, but they fell through
the influence of an over-zeal, which swept them away to folly and the
spilling of blood in the name of the Lord.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI: The Creed That Caused the Deed](chap11)
