[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index.md)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap11) [Next](chap13.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XII

# THE PASSING PROPHET

*"Your Fathers, where are they? And the Prophets, do they live
forever?"*

*Bible*

THERE he goes! The fraud 1 The cheat 1" Ole Petersen, of Ephraim
townsite, in the San Pete valley, added some vigorous oaths and gestures
to these words. He was an angry man striding back and forth on the front
porch of the only public hotel in the little town.  
  
I had gone to meet this tow-haired Scandinavian in the month of June,
1877, with the interests of the Liberal work at heart. He was one of a
few, in that section, who was opposed to the backing of the Mormon
Church.  
  
This valley was mainly settled by people from Norway, Sweden, and
Denmark. They had renounced the stately Lutheran Church of their
country, and had welcomed, with enthusiasm, this Latter Day faith. It
fed their fanaticism with promises of forty acres of land, in each man's
name, as a gift of a new, practical religion, now existing in free
America. These people had come over to receive their new start in life.
By their industry they had made homes for themselves in this broad
valley. Everything of their own here, they owed to the church. Why
should they not stick to it? Now what was the matter with Ole Petersen,
that he should revile the head of that church, as he was passing through
this town of Ephraim? He was an apostate of the most violent kind. He
had reacted powerfully against the Church, which had brought him out, as
a boy with his father's household, years before. He had cause for it,
and that cause was concrete in the person of Brigham Young, who was just
then in full view of this incensed son of the North Seas.  
  
He had lost his property, and that loss had caused his apostasy. All
this was due to some fine real estate machinery on the part of Brigham
Young's office. His titles were voided and he was now almost penniless.
He had been too free of speech, for Ole Petersen was a tonguey man, and
the Church had paid him up for his talk, by taking away his estate. This
was done through some such crooked financial trick, as happens nowadays
in California, when an eastern tenderfoot is fleeced by a real estate
broker, whose office is on the curb of the street.  
  
Of course Ole Petersen laid all of his troubles and losses to the
autocrat of Utah's finances, Brig-ham Young. And now this prophet was
passing by. He was taking his last ride from St. George, in southern
Utah, where he had wintered, and was on his return to headquarters in
Salt Lake City.  
  
Brigham had been sick. The strokes of time began to tell on his giant
frame; and to face the winter in the low altitudes of St. George, below
the rim of the basin and near the border of Arizona's canyons, was
deemed the best for him. But a man of affairs must attend to his
affairs. Certain events of late, like the successful prosecution of John
T. Lee for the Mountain Meadows affair, and the odium that the hanging
of this culprit had brought on the Church, made it necessary for the
ailing prophet to get back to his seat in Salt Lake City. So as soon as
his strength would permit, he started on a stage ride of two hundred
miles to the terminus of the railway, some hundred and ten miles south
of the city. It was a ride through an almost hostile territory, since
through this end of the country the dead Bishop had a host of relatives
and friends, who were angry and incensed at the coup the government had
made.  
  
Lee's own family were out with threats to shoot the head of the Church,
and, while Ole Petersen was no relative, he was hot in sympathy with
these threats.  
  
This was Brigham Young's last outing, though he did not know it. He was
not to fall from the shot of some vengeful Mormon, but from the stroke
of disease. Dysentery carried him from the sight of man the following
August.  
  
I had seen him two years before robust, though aged. I caught a glimpse
of him as he was now passing by. He went fully armed and protected like
some European monarch in danger of assault from disaffected subjects.  
  
A cloud of dust announced the coming of the cavalcade. He had left
Manti, the county seat, which like St. George was a temple city. In
these temple cities the rites of polygamy could be given as well as in
Salt Lake City itself. In this manner the means of entering into
polygamy was brought to men's doors and the long ride and expense of a
journey to Salt Lake was avoided.  
  
Brigham had a great many friends in this valley who took pains to
protect him from Lee's two sons, who were out to shoot.  
  
"Here he comes I Here he comes!" Such cries brought me out on the hotel
porch, with Ole Petersen.  
  
I had been talking with him, but found him a restless listener. He was
really listening for the cries to herald the passing prophet. He
fidgeted and fretted. He was short and sharp in his answers, and
impatient in his manner. He ran his hands through his hair, and pulled
his long flaxen beard again and again.  
  
"That d-d cheat is coming through here today. I'd like to take a shot at
him."  
  
"What has he done to you that makes you wish to shoot him?"  
  
I will tell his story in a few words. His parents had died soon after
settling near Ephraim and they had left other property than the ranch
they had received from the Church. His people had means to invest, when
they first came over from Sweden. Being a minor the Church had taken
charge of this property until he should come of age. As soon as he had
grown up, the Church ordered him on a mission to Sweden to make converts
of his fellow countrymen. He knew what this meant, since a Mormon
missionary was sent forth at his own charges and had to make his own way
and provide for his own expenses.  
  
It was a very hardy and wonderful experience that the Mormon missionary
had to face, if sent on a mission. Nothing but the hottest faith and
zeal could meet the need. Now Ole Petersen had cooled off from the faith
of his people. He had seen some things since childhood that he did not
like, and there were many things he could not believe. He had been born
with a brain that wanted to think out things, and not take them for
granted just because they were spoken with authority.  
  
So he refused the mission, and decided to stay and work his property
himself. This did not suit the Church, which had long used his property,
and did not intend to surrender the control of it.  
  
He was disciplined for his disobedience, and it was declared that he had
forfeited his rights, and the Church further claimed that the
investments made by the parents had proven failures, so there was very
little due him.  
  
This little he was given. He was mad all through, and left the Church's
jurisdiction; and was counted an apostate to whom the Church owed
nothing. He interviewed Brigham Young, who had been very rough with him.
He had gone away in a hot-headed rage, and his little home being in this
fanatical town of Ephraim, he had had a fighting time with words and
blows.  
  
Yet he had the old Viking spirit, which kept him on the field. He had
not sold out, and left for other parts, but stood his ground. He was
trying to get a Liberal school into this seat of Mormonism. That was how
I happened to meet him that hot day in June.  
  
If all this had occurred ten years earlier, Ole Petersen would have been
"sent to hell across lots," like many others who had fought the Church
of their early faith.  
  
"Here he comes! Here he comes!"  
  
These repeated cries brought Ole out into the dusty road, as the
trotting cavalcade came up the street.  
  
Thirty Piute warriors in paint, feathers, and blankets, rode first with
their guns across their saddles. These "Battle Axes" of the Lord had
watchful eyes for any movements that looked like action. Ole eyed them
as fiercely as they eyed him, and the others in the crowd.  
  
Next came a four horse covered carriage, with an armed rider on each
side of the vehicle. Within, and yet in view, sunk back in the rear
seat, with a tired air of a sick man, sat the Prophet. I caught a full
view of his grim, grey bearded face, sicklied over by long illness, with
a sallow tint so unlike the rugged hue that I had noticed in the
Tabernacle two years before. He looked annoyed as he leaned slightly
forward, when he caught the sound of Ole Petersen's strident voice. "Oh!
you Cheat! Oh! Church Fraud! You coward to forsake your tools! You are
the man that they should have hung instead of Lee!"  
  
Ole Petersen's arms were in the air, but without weapons; and this
lanky, angry man shook his fist at Brigham, as he rapidly drove past. A
motion with a weapon, and there would have been a hail of bullets about
us.  
  
The last I saw of Brigham Young was the tightening of the mouth until it
was a thin, firm slit within a grey bearded face, that you see in the
characteristic pictures of this Mormon leader. His hands clenched the
seat as the carriage swayed; and I had looked my last at the passing
prophet. He looked the sick man that he was.  
  
"May you die the death! May God strike you down!" This was Ole's parting
shot as the carriage, and its advance riders, swept on. As events
showed, these words were more deadly than any shot that he might have
fired.  
  
Thirty white guards followed close in the rear, garbed like cowboys and
armed. These men grinned at us, and some few of them sneered at the
angry Swede, vociferant in the roadway. Then the dust rose up, and hid
them all from sight.  
  
I never thought that Ole's imprecation would be so soon fulfilled. I
could see death in the eye of this aged despot, and so expected his
passing from the world would not be long delayed. But hardly two months
elapsed when word came south that the President of the Church of the
Latter Day  
  
Saints had left for the bourne from whence no traveler returns.  
  
There are some ancient faiths that proclaim their saneness of life and
creed, through the succeeding ages and changes. But all such become
inert, and if seemingly quick with life, it is but a galvanized vitality
like the movements of a dead toad under the electric spark applied to a
limb.  
  
See how intact China, the oldest of all countries, has remained after
the first discoveries and civilization. It would not change. It would
not learn. So with Buddhism. It was content to meditate and forego
action. It held its ground for ages by the force of some fine, if not
beautiful, ideas, but where it lives to-day it is a quiescent faith, its
force lost to any dominance of the world.  
  
Mormonism has truth elements within its bosom, and because of this, it
will live and thrive; but unless it sloughs off the anachronisms and
superstitions, it will be weighted with a corpse that will hold it to a
body of death which will retard its power. But it has a practical
element welded to its theories, and this may cause it to change with the
times, and keep up with those times as they change.  
  
A heavy step in the entry, and a sharp knock on the door, of the Liberal
Hall, in Mount Pleasant, and I opened to admit Ole Petersen, an excited
and delighted man.  
  
"You've heard the news? That Rascal's gone to his account. My curse came
true!"  
  
There were many who felt like Ole Petersen, but a great mourning was
made throughout the territory, as this modern Prophet passed from among
his people.  
  
I soon got word from superficial observers of the conditions in Utah,
that now the Master Mind was gone and his voice silent, the Church,
which he had built up, would crumble and break. This was the general
idea, just then, but it was a false one.  
  
This singular mixture of the practical and the spiritual, withstood a
change of leaders with about the same ease that a kingdom meets the cry
of, "The King is dead! Long live the King!"  
  
The old order of things went on under a new management. The system was
well fitted to meet greater changes than a death could bring, and even
to face a new condition, and prosper in a new environment, if
necessary.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: The Mixed Multitude](chap13.md)
