[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp28)  [Next](hmvp30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### 10. THE KALKI AVATĀRA.

This incarnation, unlike those already described, has yet to be made. It
is the hope of the Hindus, that he who has so frequently visited the
earth to restore order and happiness will come yet again to inaugurate a
reign of universal goodness, peace, and prosperity. When Vishnu in the
form of Krishna reascended to heaven, the Fourth or Kāli Yuga commenced,
which, as its name implies, is an age of strife and dissension. In the
"Vishnu Purāna" the character of this age is vividly described in words
that seem prophetic. At its termination Vishnu is expected to come
again, bearing the name Kalki, to put an end to wickedness, and
establish a kingdom of righteousness similar to the First or Kritā
Yuga—the age of Truth. These four ages, in the same order and with
similar characteristics, will again and again be experienced until the
final end of all things shall come. The following extract from the
"Vishnu Purāna" <span id="fr_226"></span>[\*](#fn_226)

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

will give an idea of the evils of the present age, which Kalki is to
remove.

In Magadha a sovereign named Viswasphatika will extirpate the Kshattriya
race, elevate fishermen, barbarians, Brāhmans, and other castes to
power; whilst Sudras, outcasts and barbarians will be masters of the
Indus, Darvika, Chandrabhāgā, and Kashmir. "The

<span id="img_24600"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![KALIKI.](tn/24600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24600.jpg)  
KALIKI.  
</span>

kings will be of churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to
falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict death on women, children,
and cows; they will seize the property of subjects, be of limited power,
and will, for the most part, rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be
short, their desires insatiable, and they will display but little piety.
The people of various countries intermingling with them will follow
their example; and the

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

barbarians being powerful in the patronage of princes, whilst purer
tribes are neglected, the people will perish. Wealth and piety will
decrease day by day, until the world shall be wholly depraved. Property
alone will confer rank, wealth will be the only source of devotion,
passion will be the sole bond of union between the sexes, falsehood will
be the only means of success in litigation, and women will be the
objects merely of sensual gratification. Earth will be venerated only
for its mineral treasures (*i.e.* no spot will be peculiarly sacred);
the Brāhmanical thread will constitute a Brāhman; external types will be
the only distinctions of the several orders of life, dishonesty will be
the universal means of subsistence, weakness will be the cause of
dependence, menace and presumption will be the subterfuge for learning,
liberality will be devotion, simple ablution will be purification
(*i.e.* gifts will be made from the impulse of ordinary feeling, not in
connection with religious rites or as an act of devotion, and ablution
will be performed for pleasure or comfort, not religiously with
prescribed ceremonies and prayers). Mutual assent will be marriage, fine
clothes will be dignity, and water afar off will be esteemed a holy
spring. The people, unable to bear the heavy burdens imposed upon them
by their avaricious sovereigns, will take refuge among the valleys, and
be glad to feed upon wild honey, herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, and
leaves; their only covering will be the bark of trees, and they will be
exposed to cold and wind, and sun and rain. No man's life will exceed
three-and-twenty years. Thus in the Kāli Age shall decay flourish, until
the human race approaches annihilation." It is rather strange that the
condition of men, in what appeared to the writer of this Purāna as the
most miserable he could imagine, where their dress was bark and their
food

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

consisted of roots and fruits, was in the earliest ages regarded as the
most desirable. It was thus the old Rishis lived, who are held in the
greatest esteem.

"When the practices taught by the Vedas and the institutes of law shall
nearly have ceased, and the close of the Kāli Age shall be nigh, a
portion of that divine being who exists of his own spiritual nature in
the character of Brahmā, and who is the beginning and the end, and who
comprehends all things, shall descend upon the earth. He will be born in
the family of Vishnuyasas, an eminent Brāhman of Sambhal village, as
Kalki, endowed with the eight superhuman faculties. By his irresistible
might he will destroy all the Mlechchhas (outcasts), thieves, and all
whose minds are devoted to iniquity. He will then re-establish
righteousness upon earth; and the minds of those who live at the end of
the Kāli Age shall be awakened and be made pellucid as crystal. The men
who are changed in virtue of that particular time shall be as the seeds
of human beings, and shall give birth to a race who shall follow the
laws of the Kritā Age, or Age of Purity."

In the descriptions of Kalki, and in pictures, he is represented as a
white man riding upon or bowing down before a white horse, and with a
sword in his hand: he is the purifier of the present degenerate age, and
the restorer of purity and goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[245:\*](hmvp29.htm#fr_226) Page 622.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jagannāth](hmvp30)
