[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp47)  [Next](hmvp49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

#### SUPERHUMAN, THOUGH NOT DIVINE BEINGS.

##### APSARAS AND GANDHARVAS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Apsaras are nymphs, and the
Gandharvas choristers in Indra's heaven. The Apsaras are not as a class
prominently noticed in the Vedas, but Urvasi and a few others are
mentioned by name. In the Institutes of Manu they are said to be the
creations of the Seven Manus, the progenitors of mankind. In the Epic
poems more is said about them—the Rāmāyana attributing their origin to
the churning of the ocean, and with this the Purānic account of their
origin agrees. It is said that when they rose from the waters neither
gods nor asuras would wed them, so they became the common property of
both classes. They are sometimes called "the wives of the gods," and
"daughters of pleasure."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Then from the agitated deep up sprung  
 The legion of Apsarasas, so named  
 That to the watery element they owed  
 Their being. Myriads were they born, and all  
 In vestures heavenly clad, and heavenly gems;  
 Yet more divine their native semblance, rich  
 With all the gifts of grace, of youth and beauty.  
 A train innumerous followed; yet thus fair,  
 Nor god nor demon sought their wedded love;  
 Thus Rāghava! they still remain—their charms  
 The common treasure of the host of heaven."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

"In the Purānas various ganas or classes of them are mentioned; the Vāyu
Purāna enumerates fourteen, the Hari Vansa seven. They are again
divided, as being *daivika*, 'divine,' or *laukika*, 'worldly.' The
former are said to be ten in number, and the latter thirty-four, and
these are the heavenly charmers who fascinated heroes as Urvasi, allured
austere sages from their devotions and penances as Menekā and Rembhā.
The Kāsi Khand says there are forty-five millions of them, but only one
thousand and sixty are the principal. The Apsaras, then, are fairylike
beings, beautiful and voluptuous. They are the wives or mistresses of
the Gandharvas, and are not prudish in the dispensation of their
favours. Their amours upon earth have been numerous, and they are the
rewards in Indra's heaven held out to heroes who fall in battle. They
have the power of changing their forms, and give good luck to whom they
favour." <span id="fr_448"></span>[\*](#fn_448.md)

In the Satapatha Brāhmana is a story, which has been copied into the
Purānas, concerning Purūravas and the Apsaras Urvasi which will give
some idea of the character of these beings. Owing to the imprecation of
Indra and Varuna, Urvasi was compelled to leave heaven. Purūravas, son
of Budha and a daughter of Manu, fell deeply in love with her; and she
agreed, on certain conditions, to live with him. She said, "I have two
rams which must always remain with me, both by day and night; you must
never be seen by me undressed; and I must eat only *ghī*, or clarified
butter." The inhabitants of heaven being anxious for her return, the
Gandharvas came at night and carried off her rams. Purūravas, in order
to rescue them, rushed into her room hurriedly, without being dressed,
trusting to the

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

darkness to hide him. Unfortunately a flash of lightning revealed him to
her gaze, and, the condition of her remaining with him being broken, she
returned to her celestial home. Purūravas was distracted at his loss,
and wandered from place to place searching for her. At length he was
successful in his quest, and obtained a promise that she would meet him
yearly and present him with a son. After five visits, she assured him
that if he offered a sacrifice with the express object of gaining her,
he would succeed. He followed her advice, became a Gandharva, and so
obtained eternal possession of his strange bride.

The Gandharvas, according to the Vishnu Purāna, were sons of Brahmā.
"The Gandharvas were next born, imbibing melody; drinking of the goddess
of speech, they were born, and thence their appellation. (gām dhayantah,
'drinking speech')." <span id="fr_449"></span>[\*](#fn_449.md) In another
place the same Purāna <span id="fr_450"></span>[†](#fn_450.md) makes them
the offspring of Kasyapa and Arishtā, and therefore grandchildren of
Brahmā. The Padma Purāna speaks of them as the children of Vach. They
are said to be sixty millions in number. They defeated the Nāgas, or
snake-gods, seized their jewels, and usurped their kingdom. In their
distress the snakes resorted to Vishnu, who promised to enter into
Purukutsa and destroy them. The Nāgas sent their sister Narmadā (the
river Nerbudda) to ask the help of Purukutsa, who consented to do her
bidding. As a reward the Nāgas gave this power to their sister, that
whoever worshipped her and repeated her name should be safe not only
from the poison of snakes, but other poison too.

It would appear from the earlier books that the

Gandharvas were assistants of Indra, the Storm King,

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

and were rewarded by the later writers with a place in his heaven. And
as the deities were all provided with a wife or wives, the Gandharvas
were not neglected in this respect. The beautiful though frail Apsaras
were allotted to them, and when Indra was in danger of losing his
throne, or the other gods were in a similar plight through the austerity
of the devout, some of the more attractive were commissioned to visit
them and distract their minds.

The name of these heavenly musicians and their loose matrimonial
alliances with the Apsaras has come into common use to designate one of
the five forms of marriage—that where the mutual consent of man and
woman to live together is all that is necessary, without any civil or
religious ceremony.

##### THE RĀKSHASAS.

These formidable beings are frequently referred to, and their actions
described at some length in Hindu legend. Though Brāhmans by birth,
strange to say they are described as cannibals. The goddess Parvati gave
to the whole tribe the power to arrive at maturity the moment they were
born. They are said to be able to assume any form at will; and we read
of them appearing as horses, buffaloes, and tigers. Some of them had a
hundred heads. Amongst the most noted of them was Rāvana, the hereditary
foe of Vishnu, who in several incarnations left his heavenly home to
slay him. The demon reappeared on the earth after remaining some years
in hell; it was therefore necessary for the god in like manner to
revisit the earth to get rid of him. Some of Rāvana's relatives, such as

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kumbhakarna,
Vibhishena, Indrajit, and others, were almost equally notorious.

Kumbhakarna, a brother of Rāvana, as soon as he was born, stretched
forth his arms, and gathered everything he could reach to stay his
hunger. Later on in life, on one occasion he seized five hundred
Apsaras, and at another time he laid violent hands on the wives of a
hundred sages, besides cows and Brāhmans innumerable. Brahmā threatened
to destroy him unless he moderated his demands. Fearing he might come to
an untimely end, he commenced a life of austerity, which was to continue
ten thousand years. But as this proceeded, the gods feared lest, as a
result of such a penance, he should be stronger than ever, and,
especially that he might obtain immortality and be able to swallow up
everything, gods and men included. In their distress they appealed to
Brahmā, who caused his wife Sarasvati to enter the demon's mind, and
delude him so far as to lead him to ask as a boon that he might sleep
for ever. The plan succeeded. But the Rākshasas were not pleased with
the result, and asked Brahmā, to allow him to awake once in six months
for one day only, and then eat as much as he wished. This request was
granted. At one meal he is said to have eaten six thousand cows, ten
thousand sheep, ten thousand goats, four hundred buffaloes, five
thousand deer, and drank four thousand hogsheads of spirits, with other
things in proportion, and then was angry with his brother Rāvana for not
providing him with more! His home in Ceylon is said to have been 20,000
miles long, and his bed occupied the full length; but according to the
Rāmāyana the island itself was only 800 miles in circumference!

What can be represented by these monsters? In

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Manu, <span
id="fr_451"></span>[\*](#fn_451.md) amongst instructions concerning
sacrifice, we read: "As a preservative of the oblation to the
patriarchs, let the housekeeper begin with an offering to the gods; for
the Rākshasas rend in pieces an oblation which has no such
preservative." According to Professor Wilson these beings may be divided
into three classes: "One is of a semi-celestial kind, and is ranked with
the attendants of Kuvera, the god of wealth; another is a sort of
goblin, imp, or ogre, haunting cemeteries, animating dead bodies,
disturbing sacrifices, and ensnaring and devouring human beings; the
third kind approaches more to the Titan, or relentless and powerful
enemy of the gods." Can it be that men, finding it difficult to abstain
from evil and do good, have invented these mighty beings to represent
the forces of evil that are arrayed against them? They are described as
eating cows and also men, when, according to the ordinary belief of the
people, these are the greatest imaginable crimes. May this not be a
vigorous method of teaching that the enemies of God and man will not
stop at anything in order to secure success in their work of
destruction? It may be that the Rākshasas of the Epics were the rude
barbarians of India, who were conquered by the Aryans, and their manners
of life and religious ceremonies caricatured in this strange fashion.
Some of the more intelligent were styled monkeys, possibly the more
savage were styled Rākshasas.

The name Bhuta is given to a similar class of beings who are the common
attendants of Siva; hence. his name of Bhutanātha, the lord of spirits.
The term Pisarch is given to beings similar to, though if possible more
offensive than, the Rākshasas.

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

##### THE JAIN DEITIES.

As there are considerable numbers of Jains, chiefly in the north and
north-west of India, some account should be given of their objects of
worship.

The origin of this sect is obscure, especially as their chronology is so
wild and extravagant. Hindu notions of time are reasonable compared with
those of the Jains.

In some respects, there is much in the tenets of this religion that
closely resembles those of Buddhism. Both reject the divine origin and
authority of the Vedas; though when a Vedic text agrees with his own
belief, a learned Jain will not scruple to employ it to buttress his own
teaching. Both may be regarded as heretical sects of Hinduism. Both
reject the divine institution of caste, and profess to believe in the
social and religious equality of man: though the Jains are not regarded
as outside the pale of Hinduism. For when, as it sometimes happens, a
Jain wishes to worship as an orthodox Hindu, a place is found for him in
the caste system; he is not treated as an outcast. Both acknowledge in a
general way the more common and modern of the Hindu deities; and very
much of the worship of both is very similar to that which prevails
amongst the Hindus. In both systems a number of saints have been raised
to the dignity of deities, and have largely taken the place of the
inferior gods of the Hindu Pantheon. In fact, at one time it was a
commonly received opinion that the Jains were the present-day
representatives of the Buddhists, But fuller and more correct knowledge
has shown that the two religions, though strikingly similar, have
distinct and separate origins. Possibly they originated about the same
time, when there was

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

considerable religious excitement in India; or it may be, that very soon
after Gautama Buddha commenced his work as a teacher, some of his
followers broke away from his leadership, and from that time have formed
a separate and independent stream. At the present time Jains and
Buddhists worship a succession of deified saints in place of the many
gods adored by the Hindus; but in the two systems the names of these
saints are quite different. The main lines of the religions are very
similar, but the differences are sufficiently great to show that they
have run a separate, though to a large extent parallel, course.

The Jain saints belonging to the present age are twenty-four in number;
in a previous age there were twenty-four, and in a succeeding age there
will be a similar number. These twenty-four as represented in the
temples are seated in an attitude of contemplation. In features they
greatly resemble each other, and in order to distinguish them, they are
painted in different colours, and have either their names engraved on
their pedestals, or some distinguishing sign, commonly an animal by
their side. In the stories of their lives there is little of a
distinctive character. But there is this noticeable fact, that in height
of stature and in length of life there has been a steady decline. A
brief account of the first and last two of these saints, now regarded as
divine beings, may be taken as fairly representative of the whole.

1\. Vrishabha, of the kingly race of Ikohwaku, was son of Nābhi and
Marudeva. He is usually painted yellow, and has a bull as his
characteristic mark. His stature was 500 poles in height, and he lived
8,400,000 great years. He was born at Oude. When crowned king he was
2,000,000; he reigned 6,300,000 years, and

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

spent 100,000 in the practice of austerity, by which he became qualified
for sainthood.

23\. Parswanatha was also of the same race as the first. He is
represented as blue in colour, and has a snake to distinguish him.
Possibly this was the real founder of the Jain sect. He was born at
Benares, and commenced his saintly life when he was thirty years of age,
and, continuing his asceticism for seventy years, died when he was just
a hundred years old.

24\. Mahavir is the last and much the best known of all. His common
title is "The Saint." His image is golden in colour, and his symbol a
lion. He resigned his position as a god in order to obtain immortality
as a saint, when there was a little over seventy-five years to run
before the end of the age. His parents were Brāhmans; but as Indra
considered it improper that one whom he recognized as a saint before he
was born, who was to occupy such a position, should be born in a humble
family, he removed the fœtus to the womb of a princess of the royal
race, Trisala, wife of Siddhārta. At twenty-eight he lost his father,
became king and reigned for two years. Then resigning his royal state,
he entered upon a life of austerity, and after forty-two years of
preparation, at the age of seventy-two he became exempt from pain for
ever. In other words he died, and obtained moksha, deliverance from
birth and death, absorption. According to tradition, the death of the
last Jain occurred two thousand four hundred years ago.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[483:\*](hmvp48.htm#fr_448.md) Dowson, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_449"></span>[484:\*](hmvp48.htm#fr_449.md) Page 41.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[484:†](hmvp48.htm#fr_450.md) Page 150.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[487:\*](hmvp48.htm#fr_451.md) Manu, bk. iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](hmvp49.md)
