[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp23)  [Next](hmvp25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### 6. THE PARASURĀMA AVATĀRA.

The incarnation of Parasurāma, or Rāma with axe, was undertaken by
Vishnu for the purpose of exterminating the Kshattriya, or Warrior
caste, <span id="fr_158"></span>[\*](#fn_158) which had tried to assert
its authority over the Brāhmanical. Twenty-one times Rāma is said to
have cleared the earth of these men, but by various means some few were
preserved alive who were able to perpetuate the race.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The story of this
incarnation evidently points to a time when there was a severe and
prolonged struggle for supremacy between the members of these two
classes. Eventually success lay with the Brāhmans. It should be noticed
that the scene of Vishnu's exploits in this Avatāra, and in those which
follow it, was the earth; and not, as in those preceding, the abode of
the gods.

The following legend of the birth of Parasurāma is from the "Vishnu
Purāna." <span id="fr_159"></span>[\*](#fn_159) A prince named Gadhi,
who was himself an incarnation of Indra, had a daughter named Satyavati.
Richika, a descendant of Bhrigu, <span id="fr_160"></span>[†](#fn_160)
demanded her in marriage. The king asked from the decrepit old Brāhman a
thousand fleet white horses, each having one black ear, as a wedding
present. These horses were obtained, by the help of Varuna, and the
Brāhman received the hand of the princess.

In order to effect the birth of a son, Richika prepared a dish of rice,
barley, and pulse, with butter and milk, for his wife to eat, and, at
her request, consecrated a similar mixture for her mother, by partaking
of which she hoped to give birth to a prince of martial prowess, Leaving
both dishes with his wife, after carefully describing which was for
herself and which for her mother, the sage went away into the forest.
When the time for eating the food came, the mother said to Satyavati,
"Daughter! all mothers wish their children to be possessed of excellent
qualities, and would be mortified to see them surpassed by the merits of
their brother. Give me, therefore, the mess your husband has set apart
for you, and you eat that which was intended for me. The son which it is
intended to procure for me, is destined to be the monarch of the whole
world; whilst that which your dish will give you must be a Brāhman,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

alike devoid of affluence, valour, and power." Satyavati consented to
this proposal, and they exchanged messes.

<span id="img_16400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE PARASURĀMA
AVATĀRA.](tn/16400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16400.jpg)  
THE PARASURĀMA AVATĀRA.  
</span>

On Richika's return, perceiving what had happened, he said to his wife,
"Sinful woman! what hast thou

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

done? I see thy body of a fearful appearance. Thou hast eaten of the
consecrated food that was prepared for thy mother; thou hast done wrong.
In that food I had infused the properties of power, and strength, and
heroism; in thine, the qualities suited to a Brāhman—gentleness,
knowledge, and resignation. In consequence of having reversed my plans,
thy son shall follow a warrior's propensities, and use weapons, and
fight, and slay. Thy mother's son shall be born with the inclinations of
a Brāhman, and be addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati, hearing this,
fell at her husband's feet, and asked that she might not have such a son
as he had described; "but if such there must be, let it be my grandson
and not my son." The Muni relented, and said, "So be it." Accordingly in
due time she gave birth to a son named Jamadagni, who married Renukā,
and had by her the destroyer of the Kshattriya race, Parasurāma, who was
a portion of Nārāyana, the spiritual guide of the universe.

This is all we find about Parasurāma's work in the "Vishnu Purāna." The
story of his exploits is told at length twice over in the Mahābhārata,
and is found in the Bhāgavata, Padma, and Agni Purānas. The following
account is from the Mahābhārata. <span id="fr_161"></span>[\*](#fn_161)

Jamadagni, the son of Richika (whose birth was just described), having
married Renukā, "conducted the princess to his hermitage, and she was
contented to partake in his ascetic life. They had four sons, and then a
fifth, who was Jamadagnya (Parasurāma), the last, but not the least, of
the brethren. Once when her sons were absent gathering the fruits on
which they fed, Renukā, who was exact in the discharge of all her
duties, went forth to bathe. On her way to the stream

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

she beheld Chitraratha, the Prince of Mrittikāvati, with a garland of
lotuses on his neck, sporting with his queen in the water, and she felt
envious of their felicity. Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted, but not
purified by the stream, she returned disquieted to the hermitage.
Beholding her fallen from her perfection, and shorn of the lustre of her
sanctity, Jamadagni reproved her, and was exceeding wroth.

"Upon this, her sons came from the wood, and each as he entered was
successively commended by his father to put his mother to death; but,
amazed and influenced by natural affection, neither of them made any
reply; therefore Jamadagni cursed them, and they became idiots. Lastly
Rāma returned to the hermitage, when the mighty and holy Jamadagni said
to him, 'Kill thy mother, who has sinned; and do it without repining.'
Rāma accordingly took up his axe \[this was the Parasu, or axe, which
Siva had given him\] and struck off his mother's head; whereupon the
wrath of Jamadagni was assuaged, and, pleased with his son, said: 'Since
thou hast obeyed my commands, and done what was hard to be performed,
demand from me whatever blessing thou wilt, and thy desires shall be
fulfilled.' Rāma begged these boons: the restoration of his mother to
life, with forgetfulness of having been slain, and purification from all
defilement; the return of his brothers to their natural condition; and
for himself, invincibility in single combat, and length of days. All
these his father bestowed.

"It happened on one occasion that, during the absence of the Rishi's
sons, the mighty monarch Kārttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya
tribe, endowed by the favour of Dattatreya <span
id="fr_162"></span>[\*](#fn_162) with a thousand arms, and a

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

golden chariot that went wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the
hermitage of Jamadagni, where the wife of the sage received him with
proper respect. This Kārttavirya, by reason of his strength, had greatly
oppressed the gods, Rishis, and all creatures. The gods and Rishis
applied to Vishnu, who, with Indra, devised the means of destroying him.
The king, inflated with the pride of valour, made no return for the
hospitality of the Rishi's wife; but carried off with him the calf of
the milch cow of the sacred oblation, and cast down the tall trees of
the hermitage."

In the Rāmāyana is an account of the wonderful cow whose calf this king
stole. When commanded by her owner, on the occasion of the visit of a
king to the hermitage, to supply the varied wants of the great multitude
which accompanied him—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'The cow from whom all plenty flows,  
 Obedient to her saintly lord,  
 Viands to suit each taste outpoured.  
 Honey she gave, and roasted grain,  
 Mead sweet with flowers, and sugar-cane.  
 Each beverage of flavour rare,  
 And food of every sort, were there:  
 Hills of hot rice, and sweetened cakes,  
 And curdled milk, and soup in lakes.  
 Vast beakers flowing to the brim  
 With sugared drink prepared for him;  
 And dainty sweetmeats, deftly made,  
 Before the hermit's guests were laid.'</span>

</div>

"When Rāma returned, his father told him what had happened; and seeing
the cow in distress, he was filled with wrath. Taking up his splendid
bow, he assailed Kārttavirya, and overthrew him in battle. With sharp
arrows Rāma cut off his thousand arms, and he perished. The sons of
Kārttavirya, to avenge their father's death,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

attacked the hermitage of Jamadagni when Rāma was absent, and slew the
pious and unresisting sage, who called repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon
his valiant son. Rāma deeply lamented his father's death, performed the
last obsequies, and lighted the funeral pile. He then made a vow that he
would extirpate the whole Kshattriya race. In fulfilment of which, with
remorseless and fatal rage, he destroyed the sons of Kārttavirya; and,
after them, whatever Kshattriyas he encountered. Thrice seven
times <span id="fr_163"></span>[\*](#fn_163) did he clear the earth of
the Kshattriya caste. After he had cleared the world of Kshattriyas,
their widows came to the Brāhmans, praying for offspring. The religious
Brāhmans, free from any impulse of lust, cohabited with these women,
who, in consequence, brought forth valiant Kshattriya boys and girls."

In another passage in the Mahābhārata it is taught that it was in
consequence of the curse of a sage named Apava, that Rāma was able to
kill Kārttavirya. The king had permitted Agni to devour the hermitage of
this Rishi, who, in revenge, declared that his thousand arms should be
cut off by Parasurāma.

In the Rāmāyana is an interesting legend in which Parasurāma, himself an
incarnation of Vishnu, is described as meeting with Rāma Chandra, the
next avatāra of the same deity, and in which the superiority of Rāma
Chandra is declared. <span id="fr_164"></span>[†](#fn_164) "As King
Dasaratha was returning to his capital with Rāma (Chandra), he was
alarmed by the ill-omened sounds uttered by certain birds. The

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

alarming event indicated was the arrival of Parasurāma. He was fearful
to behold, brilliant as fire, and bore his axe and a bow on his
shoulder. Being received with honour, he proceeded to say to Rāma, the
son of Dasaratha, that he had heard of his prowess in breaking the bow
produced by Janaka, and had brought another which he asked him to bend,
and to fit an arrow on the string; and offered, if he succeeded in doing
so, to engage with him in single combat. Parasurāma went on to say that
the bow Rāma had broken was Siva's; but that the one he now brought was
Vishnu's. The gods, anxious to discover which was the greater, Siva or
Vishnu, and considering this a favourable opportunity for doing so,
sought Brahmā's help. He thereupon excited the passions of the two
Rāmas. A great fight ensued. Siva's bow of dreadful power was relaxed,
and the three-eyed Mahādeva was arrested by a muttering. The gods were
satisfied, and judged Vishnu to be superior. Parasurāma, however, did
not agree to their judgment, so offered Vishnu's bow for his antagonist
to try his strength on. Thus challenged, Rāma snatches the bow, bends
it, and fits an arrow to the string; and then tells his challenger that
as he is a Brāhman he will not slay him, but will either take away his
superhuman capacity of movement, or deprive him of the blessed abodes he
had gained by austerity. Parasurāma entreats that his power of movement
may not be taken away, but consents that his blissful abodes may be
destroyed. 'By bending this bow,' he said, 'I recognize thee to be the
imperishable slayer of Madhu, the great lord.' Rāma shoots the arrow,
and destroys Parasurāma's abodes."

The explanation of this strange legend seems to be the one that is
commonly received by Oriental scholars, that the passages in the Epic
poems which speak of Rāma as

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

an incarnation of Vishnu are interpolations of a later date than the
original poem; and this interview of Parasurāma with Rāma Chandra was
introduced for the purpose of giving a quasi-divine sanction to the
teaching of these interpolations. If Parasurāma, an admitted incarnation
of Vishnu, acknowledged that Rāma was superior to himself, what stronger
proof could be given that Rāma too was divine?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[162:\*](hmvp24.htm#fr_158) There are four
chief castes or jātis of Hindus: the Brāhman, or Priestly; the
Kshattriya, or Warrior; the Vaisya, or Merchant; and the Sudra, or
Servant. These four classes are commonly said to have sprung
respectively from the head, arms, thighs, and feet of the Creator,
though there is good reason for the belief that in the olden time no
such ideas of the divine origin of caste prevailed. The four original
castes have become subdivided into an immense number. This subdivision
has been brought about by inter-marriage with members of other classes.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[163:\*](hmvp24.htm#fr_159) Page 400.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[163:†](hmvp24.htm#fr_160) See part iii. chap.
i.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[165:\*](hmvp24.htm#fr_161) "Vishnu Purāna,"
note p. 401; and Muir, O. S. T., i. 447.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[166:\*](hmvp24.htm#fr_162) A Brāhman saint in
whom a portion of Brahmā, Vishnu, and Siva was incarnate.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[168:\*](hmvp24.htm#fr_163) The reason why
Parasurāma had to perform his work so many times was this:—Some
Kshattriya children were hidden from his rage amongst the other castes,
and in time grew up to be warriors. It was when his work was effectually
accomplished, and there was not a single Kshattriya man left, that their
widows resorted to the Brāhmans, as noticed above.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[168:†](hmvp24.htm#fr_164) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
175.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. The Rāma Chandra Avatāra](hmvp25)
