[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp22)  [Next](hmvp24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### 5. THE VĀMANA OR DWARF AVATĀRA.

The four Avatāras that have already been described are said to have
occurred in the Satya-yuga, or age of Truth, corresponding with the
golden age of classic writers; it was in the Treta-yuga, or second age,
that this incarnation is supposed to have occurred. It is

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

not easy to see how this belief could be formed; for if the story of
Prahlāda be regarded as a true picture of the Satya-yuga, it was not
very far superior to the present, the last and worst of all.

This incarnation was undertaken to recover heaven for the gods. Bali, a
demon, grandson of Prahlāda whose story has just been given, was king
over the three worlds—heaven, earth and sky. In the form of a Brāhman
dwarf, Vishnu appears, and asks, as a gift, all he could cross over in
three steps. This the king grants. Immediately the pigmy becomes a
giant, and with one step strides over heaven, and with the second over
the earth, and thus fulfils his purpose. The "Skanda Purāna" <span
id="fr_155"></span>[\*](#fn_155.md) gives the following legend as the
reason of this incarnation.

In the battle between the gods and asuras for the possession of the
amrita produced at the churning of the ocean, the demons were defeated.
Bali prepared a costly sacrifice in order that he might regain his
power. As he presented his offerings to the sacred fire, he obtained
from it a wondrous car drawn by four white horses, a banner displaying a
lion, and celestial armour and weapons. The sacred rites being finished,
he raised a large army, and in his newly-acquired chariot went and laid
siege to Amravati, the capital of Indra's heaven. The gods in terror
turned to their preceptor for advice. He told them that their enemies
had been rendered invincible by penance. On hearing this, they were
greatly alarmed, and Indra besought the preceptor, Vrihaspati, to tell
them what to do. He advised them to forsake Amravati, assume other
forms, and find a home elsewhere. They obeyed; Indra became a peacock,
Kuvera a lizard, and the other gods, variously

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

disguised, went to the hermitage of Kasyapa, to whom they related their
misfortunes. On hearing their story, the sage desired his wife Aditi to
perform a severe

<span id="img_15700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE VĀMANA
AVATĀRA.](tn/15700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15700.jpg.md)  
THE VĀMANA AVATĀRA.  
</span>

penance, in order to induce Vishnu to become her son, that through him
the gods might be restored to heaven.

As the origin of this incarnation is probably found in the metaphorical
language of the Vedas, it will be

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

well to consider the teaching of the Hindu scriptures as far as possible
in chronological order.

The legend just quoted from the "Skanda Purāna" was written as an answer
to the question why Vishnu had appeared in this strange form. In the
Rig-Veda <span id="fr_156"></span>[\*](#fn_156.md) the germ of the story is
found: "Vishnu strode over this \[universe\]; in three places he planted
his step." This passage is interpreted by the commentators in various
ways. One taught "that the triple manifestation of the god in the form
of fire on earth, of lightning in the atmosphere, and of the solar
slight in the sky, was intended in this hymn." Another understands the
three steps of Vishnu to represent "the different positions of the sun
at his rising, his culmination, and his setting." According to this,
therefore, Vishnu is simply the sun. Frequently in the Rig-Veda the term
"wide-stepping" is applied to him, an evident allusion to his three
steps.

In the "Satapatha Brāhmana," <span id="fr_157"></span>[†](#fn_157.md) the
simple statement of the earlier book respecting Vishnu's strides assumes
a larger form. " The gods and the asuras, who both sprung from
Prajāpati, strove together. Then the gods were worsted; and the asuras
said, 'This world is now certainly ours! Let us divide the earth, and
let us subsist thereon.' The gods heard of it and said, 'The asuras are
dividing the earth: come, we will go to the spot where they are dividing
it!' Placing at their head Vishnu, the sacrifice, they proceeded
\[thither\], and said, 'Put us with yourselves in possession of this
earth; let us have a share of it.' The asuras grudgingly said, 'We will
give you as much as this Vishnu can lie upon.' Now Vishnu was a dwarf.
The gods did not reject this offer. They placed Agni in the East, and
thus they

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

went on toiling and worshipping. By this means they acquired the whole
earth."

The next form of the legend is that of the Rāmāyana. Visvamitra, a sage,
addressing Rāma, tells him the story. "Formerly Bali, the son of
Virochana, after conquering the chief of the gods, enjoyed the empire of
the three worlds, intoxicated with the increase of his power. When Bali
was celebrating a sacrifice, Indra and the other gods addressed Vishnu
in this hermitage \[saying\], 'That mighty Bali is now performing
sacrifice; he who grants the desire of all creatures; the prosperous
lord of the asuras. Whatever suppliants wait upon him, he bestows on
them whatever \[they wish\]. Do thou take the form of a dwarf, and bring
about our highest welfare.' \[Kasyapa now appears, and, after praising
Vishnu, asks a boon, that Vishnu will be born as the son of Aditi and
himself.\] Thus addressed by the gods, Vishnu took the form of a dwarf,
and, approaching the son of Virochana, begged three of his own paces.
Having obtained three paces, Vishnu assumed a miraculous form, and with
three paces took possession of the world. With one step he occupied the
whole earth; with a second, the eternal atmosphere; and with a third,
the sky. Having assigned to the asura Bali an abode in Pātāla (the
infernal region), he gave the empire of the world to Indra."

The notice of this Avatāra in the Mahābhārata is not lengthy. Vishnu is
represented as foretelling it to Nārada. "The great asura Bali shall be
indestructible by all beings, including gods, asuras, and Rākshasas. He
shall oust Indra; and when the three worlds have been taken by Bali, and
Indra put to flight, I shall be born in the form of the twelve Ādityas,
the son of Kasyapa and Diti. I will then restore his kingdom to

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indra, reinstate
the gods in their several positions, and place Bali in Pātāla."

The "Vishnu Purāna" barely notices this event, but it is fully described
in the Bhāgavata. The question is there asked, "Why did Hari, the lord
of creatures, ask, like a poor man, three pieces of land from Bali? And
why, when he had obtained his object, did he bind him? And why was an
innocent being bound by the lord of sacrifice?" The answer given is as
follows:—After Bali had been killed by Indra, he was restored by the
Brāhmans of the race of Bhrigu, who consecrated him for supreme
dominion, and performed a sacrifice to obtain it for him. He then sets
out for Amravati, as before narrated; and Indra is told, when he applies
to his preceptor for advice, that Bali had obtained this power "by
virtue of the Brāhman's sacrifice;" and that, save by Hari, he is
unconquerable. "He now reaps the fruit of Brāhmanical power; through
contempt of these same Brāhmans he shall perish with all his
descendants."

The gods forsake their capital, which is occupied by Bali. Aditi, the
mother of the gods, is distressed as she sees the condition of her
children; and acting upon the advice of her husband, propitiates Vishnu,
who says: "I shall with a portion of myself become thy son, and deliver
thy children. Wait upon thy husband, the sinless Prajāpati, virtuous
female, meditating upon me, who in this form abide within him." Aditi
followed the advice of the god; and Kasyapa knew by meditation that a
portion of Hari had entered into him. In due time the son was born, and
became a dwarfish Brāhmanical student.

As the Bhrigus are performing a sacrifice for Bali on the banks of the
Narmada river, this dwarf visits Bali at Indra's heaven. "Acquainted
with his duty, Bali

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

placed upon his head the auspicious water with which the Brāhman's feet
had been washed, and said, 'Welcome to thee, O Brāhman! What can we do
for thee? Ask of me, student, whatever thou desirest. Son of a Brāhman,
I conclude thou art a suppliant; ask a cow, pure gold, an embellished
house, food and drink, a Brāhman's daughter, flourishing villages,
horses, elephants, and carriages." The dwarf concludes a speech with the
semblance of moderation as follows: "I ask from thee a small portion of
ground, three paces measured step by step. I desire no more from thee. A
wise man incurs no sin, when he asks \[only\] as much as he needs." The
king, though astonished at the smallness of the request, takes a vessel
of water in his hand, and is about to confirm the gift; when his
preceptor, seeing through Vishnu's device, tries to dissuade his pupil.
In a long speech he seeks to show that rather than be left homeless it
would be better for him to break his word. But the king persists in
fulfilling his promise; even though cursed by his preceptor for doing
so. With two steps Vishnu strode over the universe; there was nowhere
for him to take a third.

The gods congratulate Hari; Bali is bound by Garuda and then reproached
by Vishnu for not fulfilling his promise. "Asura, three paces of ground
were given to me by thee; with two paces the entire world has been
traversed; find a place for the third. As thou hast not given what was
promised, it is my pleasure that thou shouldst dwell in the infernal
regions. That man falls downward who, after promising a Brāhman, does
not deliver to him what he had solicited. I have been deluded by thee."
Bali offers his head as a place for Vishnu's foot, saying, "I fear not
the infernal regions so much as a bad name." Bali goes to Pātāla, and is
there

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

visited by his grandfather Prahlāda. First Vishnu's wife and then Brahmā
intercede with him on the demon's behalf, who, in reply, promises that
Bali shall again become Indra; but that in the mean time he must dwell
in Sutala, where "by my will, neither mental nor bodily pains, nor
fatigue, nor weariness, nor discomfiture, nor diseases afflict the
inhabitants." Bali gladly left Pātāla, and went to Sutala, to wait until
the time came when, in accordance with the promise of Vishnu, he should
again rule over gods and men.

Another legend teaches that Vishnu gave Bali the choice of going to
heaven, taking with him five ignorant people, or of going to hell with
five wise. He chose the latter, for there is no pleasure anywhere in the
company of the ignorant; whilst a bad place with good company is
enjoyable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155:\*](hmvp22.htm#fr_154.md) Ward, ii. 7, 8.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156:\*](hmvp23.htm#fr_155.md) Kennedy's "Hindu
Mythology," p. 363.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[158:\*](hmvp23.htm#fr_156.md) Muir, O. S. T., iv.
63-156.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158:†](hmvp23.htm#fr_157.md) Ibid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Parasurāma Avatāra](hmvp24.md)
