[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hmvp04)  [Next](hmvp06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic*, by W.J. Wilkins, \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PART I.

# THE VEDIC DEITIES.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# HINDU MYTHOLOGY.

# THE VEDIC DEITIES.

### CHAPTER I.

#### THE VEDAS.

<span class="smallcaps">Before</span> speaking of the Vedic Deities, it
is necessary that something be said concerning the Vedas themselves, the
source of our information concerning them. The root of the word is
*vid*, "to know;" hence the term *Veda* signifies *knowledge;* and as
these books were not written for centuries after they were originally
composed, it signifies knowledge that was heard, or orally communicated.
The Vedas are not the work of a single person, but, according to popular
belief, were communicated to a number of Rishis or saints, who in their
turn transmitted them to their disciples. The Seer Vyāsa is styled the
arranger, or, as we should now say, the editor, of these works.

The instruction contained in these writings is said to have been
breathed forth by God Himself. Other writers teach that it issued from
Him like smoke from fire. Sometimes the Vedas are said to have sprung
from the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

elements. The accounts of their origin, though differing in form, agree
in teaching that they were the direct gift of God to man; and hence they
are regarded with the greatest veneration. They are the special property
of the Brāhmans. As early as Manu, the nominal author or compiler of a
law book probably not more than two or three centuries later than the
Vedas, though some suppose it to have been no earlier than A.D. 500, it
was regarded as a grave offence for a single word of these divinely
given books to be heard by a man of a lower caste.

The Vedas are four in number; of these the Rig-Veda is the oldest, next
in order was the Yajur-Veda, then the Sama-Veda, and last of all the
Atharva-Veda. Each of these Vedas consists of two main parts: a Sanhita,
or collection of mantras or hymns; and a Brāhmana, containing
ritualistic precept and illustration, which stands in somewhat the same
relation to the Sanhita as the Talmud to the Law. In these are found
instructions to the priests who conduct the worship of the gods
addressed in. the hymns. Attached to each Brāhmana is an Upanishad,
containing secret or mystical doctrine. These are regarded as of lesser
authority than the Mantras and Brāhmanas. For whilst they are spoken of
as *Sruti*, *i.e.* heard, the Upanishads are *Smriti*, learned. Though
based on the older compositions, if there is any discrepancy between
them, the teaching of the later ones is rejected. The Sanhita and
Brāhmana are for the Brāhmans generally; the Upanishads for
philosophical inquirers. Yet, strange to say, whereas the older portions
had, until recent years, been almost entirely neglected, with some parts
of the Upanishads there was considerable acquaintance amongst the
learned pundits of Benares and other places. In many parts

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of India not a man could be found able to read and interpret them. Of
the Sanhitas, the "Rig-Veda Sanhita—containing one thousand and
seventeen hymns—is by far the most important; whilst the
Atharva-Veda-Sanhita, though generally held to be the most recent, is
perhaps the most interesting. Moreover, these are the only two Vedic
hymn-books worthy of being called separate original collections;" <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) the others being almost entirely made up of
extracts from the Rig-Veda. Between the time of the composition of the
Rig-Veda and that of the Atharva, considerable changes in the religious
faith of the people had come about. The childlike trust of the earlier
hymns has disappeared, and the deities now seem more cruel, and there is
greater need of propitiatory offerings. Probably the old religion of the
people whom they had conquered had begun to tell on that of the Aryans.

The Sanhitas of three of the Vedas are said to have some peculiarity.
"If a mantra is metrical, and intended for loud recitation, it is called
*Rich* (from *rich*, praise) whence the name Rig Veda; *i.e.* the Veda
containing such praises. If it is prose (and then it must be muttered
inaudibly), it is called *Yajus* (*yaj*, sacrifice, hence, literally,
the means by which sacrifice is effected); therefore Yajur-Veda
signifies the Veda containing such *yajus*. And if it is metrical, and
intended for chanting, it is called *Sāman* \[equal\]; hence Sāman Veda
means the Veda containing such *Samans*. The author of the Mantra, or as
the Hindus would say, the inspired 'Seer,' who received it from the
Deity, is termed its *Rishi;* and the object with which it is concerned
is its *devata*—a word which generally means a 'deity,' but the meaning
of which, in its reference to mantras, must not

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

always be taken literally, as there are hymns in which not gods nor
deified beings, but, for instance, a sacrificial post, weapons, etc.,
invoked, are considered as the *devata*. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) It should, however, be noticed that the
deifying of a "sacrificial post" or a "weapon" is in perfect harmony
with the general pantheistic notions which prevailed amongst the people
then as now: so that there is nothing unnatural according to their
religious ideas in speaking even of inanimate objects as deities. There
is little doubt that the Brāhmanas are more recent than the Sanhitas.

The Vedas have not come down to the present time without considerable
dispute as to the text. As might have been expected, seeing that this
teaching was given orally, discrepancies arose. One account mentions no
less than twenty-one versions (Sākhās) of the Rig-Veda; another gives
five of the Rig-Veda, forty-two of the Yajur-Veda, mentions twelve out
of a thousand of the Sāman-Veda, and twelve of the Atharva-Veda. And as
each school believed that it possessed the true Veda, it anathematized
those who taught and followed any other. The Rig-Veda Sanhita that has
survived to the present age is that of one school only, the Sākala; the
Yajur-Veda is that of three schools; the Sāma-Veda is that of perhaps
two, and the Atharva-Veda of one only.

"The history of the Yajur-Veda differs in so far from that of the other
Vedas, as it is marked by a dissension between its own schools far more
important than the differences which separated the school of each \[of
the\] other Vedas. It is known by the distinction between a Yajur-Veda
called the Black—and another called the White—Yajur-Veda. Tradition,
especially that of the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Purānas, records a
legend to account for it. Vaisampāyana, it says, a disciple of Vyāsa,
who had received from him the Yajur-Veda, having committed an offence,
desired his disciples to assist him in the performance of some expiatory
act. One of these, however, Yājnavalkya, proposed that he should alone
perform the whole rite; upon which Vaisampāyana, enraged at what he
considered to be the arrogance of his disciple, uttered a curse on him,
the effect of which was that Yājnavalkya disgorged all the Yajus texts
he had learned from Vaisampāyana. The other disciples, having been
meanwhile transformed into partridges (*tittiri*), picked up these
tainted texts and retained them. Hence these texts are called
Taittiriyas. But Yājnavalkya, desirous of obtaining Yajus texts,
devoutly prayed to the Sun, and had granted to him his wish—'to possess
such texts as were not known to his teacher.'" <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md) And thus there are two Yajur-Vedas to this
day; the Black being considered the older of the two.

As to the date of the Vedas, there is nothing certainly known. There is
no doubt that they are amongst the oldest literary productions of the
world. But when they were composed is largely a matter of conjecture.
Colebrooke seems to show from a Vaidick Calendar that they must have
been written before the 14th century B.C. Some assign to them a more
recent, some a more ancient, date. Dr. Haug considers the Vedic age to
have extended from B.C. 2000 to B.C. 1200, though he thinks some of the
oldest hymns may have been composed . B.C. 2400. Max-Müller gives us the
probable date of the Mantra, or hymn portion of the Vedas, from B.C.
1200 to B.C. 800, and the Brāhmanas from B.C. 800 to B.C. 600, and the
rest from B.C. 600 to B.C. 200.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

There is nothing whatever in the books themselves to indicate when they
were *written*. All references in them are to their being given orally,
learned, and then again taught audibly to others. Probably for centuries
after the art of writing was known in India it was not employed for
preserving the sacred books, as in the Mahābhārata those who *write* the
Vedas are threatened with the punishment of hell.( 9 )

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:\*](hmvp05.htm#fr_0.md) "Indian Wisdom," p. 9.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[6:\*](hmvp05.htm#fr_1.md) Goldstücker, art.
"Vedas," Chambers's Cyclopædia.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[7:\*](hmvp05.htm#fr_2.md) Art. "Vedas," Chambers's
Cyclopædia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Vedic Gods Generally](hmvp06.md)
