[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](biob09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE954/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Biography of the Bible*, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES comes from a long line of New England deacons
and members of the clergy. His father was an Episcopal clergyman, his
mother's father a Methodist. Their descendant, however, has devoted
himself to the study of philosophy and literature, having taken his
Ph.D. from Columbia. Dr. Bates has served as professor of both English
literature and philosophy in the Universities of Arizona and of Oregon.
He was literary editor of the Dictionary of American Biography. He has
written half a dozen books, one of them a narrative prose poem entitled
*The Friend of Jesus*.

Finally, he is the editor of *The Bible, Designed to Be Read as Living
Literature*.

(From Back Cover)

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES

ERNEST SUTHERLAND BATES comes from a long line of New England deacons
and members of the clergy. His father was an Episcopal clergyman; his
mother's father was a Methodist. Their descendant, however, has devoted
himself to the study of philosophy and literature, having taken his
Ph.D. from Columbia in 1908. He then served as Professor of English
literature in the University of Arizona until 1915 when he moved to the
University of Oregon to become, first, Professor of English and then
Professor of Philosophy.

In 1926 Dr. Bates joined the staff of the Dictionary of American
Biography as its literary editor and two years later his narrative poem
*The Friend of Jesus* made its appearance both in the United States and
England, bearing in England its original title *The Gospel According to
Judas*. Other books by Dr. Bates include *This Land of Liberty* and *The
Story of Congress*. He was joint author of a life of Mary Baker Eddy and
of *Hearst, Lord of San Simeon*. In 1930 he joined the reviewing staff
of the *Saturday Review of Literature* and in 1933 became one of the
editors of the *Modern Monthly*. In 1936 he edited *The Bible: Designed
to be Read as Living Literature*.

By ancestry, training, and natural inclination Dr. Bates is ideally
equipped to write about the Bible. When he entered college he planned to
become a clergyman but preferred to devote himself to the study of
philosophy which increased, rather than diminished, his life-long
interest in the Bible. He thus brings to his interpretation of the Bible
the learning and wisdom of a varied life.
