[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](biob06)  [Next](biob08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE954/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Biography of the Bible*, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### SIX

### The Higher Criticism

THERE IS no particular mystery about the so-called "Higher Criticism."
It is simply that study of the meaning of the Bible which employs the
same combination of textual and historical criticism that is used today
in the study of all ancient literature.

Originally, the term referred to any criticism concerned primarily with
meaning as contrasted with "lower" or merely textual criticism. Owing to
the fact that the study of the meaning of the Bible proved to be so
peculiarly significant, the term eventually came to be restricted to it
alone, although, of course, textual investigation was always one of the
chief resources of Biblical Higher Criticism.

As usual, the philosophers were the first to come forward with a
rational attitude. Thomas Hobbes in his Leviathan (1651), discussing
Biblical dates and authorship, ventured a number of shrewd conjectures
which lagging scholarship was to verify only after two centuries. He
pointed out many passages

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

in the Pentateuch clearly not of Mosaic authorship; the historical books
were evidently written later than the events they recorded; Psalms and
Proverbs, at least in their final form, were late. Hobbes glimpsed the
fundamental truth that the Bible was a compilation of many books that
were put together and revised by other hands than those of the original
authors.

The Jewish philosopher, Benedict Spinoza (Baruch de Espinoza), went much
further. Looked upon in his precocious youth as the coming glory of the
Amsterdam synagogue, he had early mastered the Talmudic interpretations
of the Bible and from them advanced to the more inspiring study of the
Jewish medieval philosophers, Maimonides, Levi ben Gerson, Hasdai
Crescas, Ibn Ezra, and Moses of Cordova. From them he acquired an
independent habit of thought which soon brought him into collision with
the authorities of the synagogue—for orthodoxy, Jewish or Christian, was
everywhere equally intolerant. At the age of twenty-four, Spinoza was
tried for heresy and excommunicated according to a formula which was a
veritable masterpiece of gruesomeness.

"With the judgment of the angels and the sentence of the saints, we
anathematize, execrate,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

curse, and cast out Baruch de Espinoza, the whole of the sacred
community assenting, in presence of the sacred books with the
six-hundred-and-thirteen precepts written therein, pronouncing against
him the malediction wherewith Elisha cursed the children, and all the
maledictions written in the Book of the Law. Let him be accursed by day,
and accursed by night; let him be accursed in his lying down, and
accursed in his rising up; accursed in going out and accursed in coming
in. May the Lord never more pardon or acknowledge him; may the wrath and
displeasure of the Lord burn henceforth against this man, load him with
all the curses written in the Book of the Law, and blot out his name
from under the sky; may the Lord sever him for evil from all the tribes
of Israel, weight him with all the maledictions of the firmament
contained in the Book of the Law; and may all ye who are obedient to the
Lord your God be saved this day.

"Hereby then are all admonished that none hold converse with him by word
of mouth, none hold communication with him by writing; that no one do
him any service, no one abide under the same roof with him, no one
approach within four cubits length of him, and no one read any document
dictated by him, or written by his hand."

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Thus cut off from the Jewish community, Spinoza withdrew to the
outskirts of Amsterdam where he earned a frugal living as a grinder of
lenses, devoting his leisure to thinking and writing and refusing all
the offers of patronage and financial assistance that became more
frequent as his reputation gradually extended. In the first of his
works, the *Tractatus Theologico-Politicus* (published anonymously in
1670), he outlined in some detail the proper method for the historical
study of the Bible, and, like Hobbes, he pleaded for an interpretation
based upon the Bible itself instead of upon extraneous dogmas. But
knowledge of the Bible itself included in his eyes a knowledge of its
natural environment: ". . . that is, the life, the conduct, and the
studies of the author of each book, who he was, what was the occasion,
and the epoch of his writing, whom did he write for, and in what
language." Further, Spinoza demanded an inquiry "into the fate of each
book: how it was first received, into whose hands it fell, how many
different versions there were of it, by whose advice was it received
into the Bible, and lastly, how all the books now universally accepted
as sacred, were united into a single whole."

Here was a complete outline for the science of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Higher Criticism.
But it came a hundred years too early.

The eighteenth century proved to be critically minded but not
historically minded. Advances in physical science had led to the
conception of a lawful universe difficult to harmonize with the
primitive scientific notions of the early Hebrews. The miracles,
formerly urged as a proof of revelation, now became a stumbling block,
needing defense in their turn. Skeptics such as David Hume pointed out
that if miracles were breaks in the order of nature they needed to be
supported by extraordinarily strong evidence, whereas in reality the
evidence was extraordinarily weak unless one previously admitted the
idea of revelation which the miracles themselves were supposed to prove.
Apologists such as Bishop Butler usually attempted to meet this argument
by denying that miracles were breaks in the order of nature: they were
to be explained either as natural events misinterpreted by the narrators
(this explanation supporting the events at the expense of the narrators)
or as elaborate metaphors for moral or religious truths (this supporting
the narrators at the expense of the events). Both these explanations
explained away, since neither of them upheld the genuineness of the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

miracle as it was actually reported. Thus the literal authority of the
Bible was undermined as much by its defenders as by its critics. Neither
party had the faintest glimpse of the importance of the miraculous,
precisely because it was miraculous, in all primitive thought.

The religious arguments of the eighteenth century turned on the
scientific authority of the Bible rather than on ultimate moral or
religious questions. Most of the critics, such as Bolingbroke, John
Toland, Samuel Reimarus, Voltaire, Volney, Rousseau, and Paine, were
deists, believing in a perfect deity, considered to be the creator of
nature and its beneficent laws. Even when they were atheists, such as
Diderot, Holbach, and the early Shelley, they were devoted to the
Christian doctrine of the brotherhood of man. Looking back upon the
conflict today, one is impressed by the fact that the critics of the
Bible possessed much more of its true spirit than did its orthodox
defenders. The critics were social reformers, fighting as had the Hebrew
Prophets against the injustice of aristocratic and ecclesiastical
domination; the apologists, on the other hand, were primarily concerned
to defend the vested interests of Church and State. Thus, as during the
Reformation, the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

discussion of the Bible was incidental to a larger social revolution,
and the same classes who had once tried to suppress popular knowledge of
the Bible, now, having taken the Bible over and established a private
monopoly in it, consistently opposed any further extension of knowledge
about it. In both instances, the conservative dread of new ideas was
motivated by the fear of social change.

On the main question of the scientific authority of the Bible the
rationalists of the Enlightenment were, of course, victorious. More
logical and more intellectually honest than the eighteenth-century
apologists, the rationalists were on the side of progress. But so far as
specific knowledge of the Bible was concerned, they could do no more
than pave the way for it; they could tell what the Bible was not; they
could not tell what it was.

The situation is illustrated by the most famous of all the
eighteenth-century attacks, *The Age of Reason*, by Thomas Paine,
written during the stormiest period of the French Revolution when the
author was in danger of his life. Paine believed in God, in personal
immortality, and much more than most Christians in human brotherhood.
But when he found errors in the Bible he considered them to be instances
of deliberate falsehood; when

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

he found repetitions, he scented plagiarism; when he found books
ascribed to the wrong authors, he talked of forgery; in a word, he
treated the Bible as if it were a contemporary eighteenth-century
production, and denounced it for what, measured by the customs of his
own time, seemed grave moral evils. As against his antagonists who
reasoned from the same premises but denied the existence of the errors,
repetitions, and wrong ascriptions of authorship, Paine was in the
right, although most of his positive conclusions about the Bible itself
were wide of the mark.

The *Age of Reason*, with its forceful, if occasionally vulgar, use of
irony and wit, was welcomed by the disaffected of Paine's generation,
and it continued to enjoy a kind of *succès de scandale* throughout the
nineteenth century, giving rise in America to agnostic groups who
continued to repeat Paine's arguments long after they were utterly
outmoded. So, in the last quarter of the century, Paine's views, without
Paine's sincerity, were echoed in the meretricious rhetoric of Robert
Ingersoll. Meanwhile, unknown to both the professional agnostics and
their Fundamentalist opponents, there had arisen in Europe a new school
of criticism which made all this noisy disputation meaningless.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

The effect of the eighteenth-century attacks upon the Bible had been to
lead European scholars at last to follow the advice of Hobbes and
Spinoza to try to find out how and when and where and why the Bible
actually was written. A beginning was made as early as 1751 by a French
Roman Catholic physician, Jean Astruc, who proved from the internal
evidence that there were at least two separate documents combined in the
Pentateuch. In the same year Lowth discovered the system of parallelism
in Hebrew poetry and thus began the study of the Bible as literature.
But the real father of Higher Criticism was J. G. Eichhorn whose
monumental *Einleitung* (1780–83) laid a sure foundation for future
scholarship. Eichhorn distinguished between the priestly legislation of
Leviticus and the popular legislation of Deuteronomy, showed that parts
of the Book of Isaiah could not have been written by that Prophet, and
gave a late date to Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, and Daniel. After
Eichhorn the fruitfulness of the historical method in the study of the
Bible could no longer be intelligently questioned.

The next great landmark in Biblical criticism was furnished by the work
of the Dutch scholar De Wette, who in 1806–07 proved the correctness

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of the guess of Thomas Hobbes that Deuteronomy was the lost book of the
law found by Hilkiah in the Temple during the reign of Josiah and
further indicated the key position of Deuteronomy as a product of the
seventh century. For fifty years, critical debate raged over the Mosaic
authorship of the Pentateuch, but in the end the general conclusions of
De Wette were vindicated. Through the labors of Reuss, Graf, Kuenen,
Wellhausen, and many others on the Continent, supplemented by those of
S. R. Driver, T. K. Cheyne, W. Robertson Smith, and others in Great
Britain, the various documents of the Pentateuch were disentangled; the
traditional order of Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Psalms, Prophets, was
replaced by the correct order of Prophets, Deuteronomy, Leviticus,
Psalms; Leviticus and Psalms were proved to have been postexilic
collections; all the books were at least approximately dated; and a
totally new understanding of the entire character of the Old Testament
was gained. Scholarship has no greater triumph to show in any field.

With regard to the New Testament the situation is somewhat different.
There, the critical chapter is still unfinished. At the outset for
several generations the Higher Criticism of the New Testament

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

lagged behind that of the Old Testament until attention was aroused by
the challenging *Leben Jesu* (1835) of David Friedrich Strauss
(translated into English by George Eliot). Strauss denied all historical
value to the Gospels, tracing their origin to popular mythology and
Messianic expectations. Later knowledge concerning oriental religions of
the sacrificed god (Osiris, Attis, Adonis), as set forth, for instance,
in *The Golden Bough* by Sir James Frazer, has served to revive the
"myth theory" of Jesus in recent years. Such able twentieth-century
scholars as Loisy and Bultmann accept as genuine only the sayings of
Jesus and remain skeptical as to all the recorded details of his life.
The extreme myth theory, however, has never gained acceptance among
anything like the majority of critical scholars, chiefly because of the
difficulty, if not impossibility, of reconciling it with the
unquestionable historicity of Paul and the disciples of Jesus whom Paul
mentions.

Another once influential position now somewhat discredited was that of
Ferdinand Christian Baur, founder of the Tübingen School which
flourished at about the middle of the nineteenth century. According to
Baur and his followers, the point of departure for New Testament
criticism should be

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

found in the conflict between the Judaizing tendencies of the original
disciples and the anti-Mosaic teachings of Paul, a conflict finally
harmonized in the Gospels and the Acts, which Baur accordingly dated in
the second century. That there was a conflict, perpetuated by the
Gnostics, is of course evident, but later critics have shown
successfully that Baur greatly overemphasized it, and have restored an
early date for the three Synoptic Gospels. The second-century date of
the Johannine Gospel, on the other hand, is now generally accepted, the
most that is claimed by conservative critics being that it contains
earlier elements, possibly from the hand of John the disciple. That the
Fourth Gospel and the Apocalypse could not possibly have been written by
the same author is all but universally admitted.

Much less ultimately important than the work of Strauss or Baur, both of
whom originated fruitful lines of investigation even though these did
not bear out their own major conclusions, was the enormously popular
*Vie de Jésus* (1863) of Ernest Renan, of which three hundred thousand
copies were sold in France alone. Renan's later works in the long
series, *L’Histoire des origines du Christianisme* (1863–80), and his
*L’Histoire du peuple d’Israël* 

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (1888–94) were
more valuable. Through the charm of his style, if not through the
profundity of his thought, he exercised great influence upon a whole
group of French writers among whom Anatole France, at least, was a world
figure.

At the close of the nineteenth century it seemed unlikely that any fresh
sources of information about the New Testament would ever be
forthcoming. Then, most unexpectedly, excavations in Upper Egypt by
Flinders Petrie, Grenfell, and Hunt brought to light a mass of Greek
papyri which opened up an entirely new line of approach.

The story of these discoveries is a modern romance. Most of the papyri
were found in mummies, having been used as part of their wrappings, but
the most important collection of all was unearthed at Oxyrhynchus in a
rubbish heap long overblown by sand, where Grenfell and Hunt discovered
the contents of a Roman record office. The papyri had been taken to the
rubbish heap to be burned, but the fire had died out leaving many
undamaged, and the sand blowing over them had preserved them for nearly
twenty centuries. To this fortuitous good we owe sixteen quarto volumes
of Greek texts, which have revolutionized our knowledge of the New
Testament. Later findings were equally

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

romantic, one of them consisting in the discovery of a number of
mummified crocodiles, apparently useless to the explorers until an
irritated workman hit one of the sacred reptiles over the head and the
gash revealed that they too were wrapped in papyri covered with precious
writings of the Roman era.

Much publicized in the press was the news that the Oxyrhynchus
discoveries included a page of "Lost Sayings of Jesus," probably from an
Egyptian Gospel. But the importance of the discoveries did not lie in
these probably unauthentic Sayings but in the contents of the record
office, including letters, contracts, wills, documents of marriage and
divorce, and all manner of legal proceedings. These startlingly revealed
the fact that the spoken Greek of the New Testament period was very
close to the Greek of the New Testament itself, which hitherto had been
usually adjudged to be imperfect literary Greek. The full import of this
discovery will be realized when it is said that the style of the New
Testament, instead of being like that of the King James version, is much
more like that of a well-written modern newspaper.

This had indeed already been suspected by a few clairvoyant scholars,
one of whom, Ferrar Fenton,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

had published a translation of *Paul's Epistles in Modern English* as
early as 1883. As soon as their conjectures were verified by the
excavations, a number of scholars were quick to respond with modern
speech translations. First in the field was a Roman Catholic, Francis A.
Spencer, who in 1898 published a translation of the Gospels endorsed by
Cardinal Gibbons. A similar translation was brought out the next year by
F. S. Ballantine. More ambitious was the *Twentieth Century New
Testament* published by a group of twenty scholars, representing various
denominations, in 1899–1900. Then came the valuable *Historical New
Testament* of Professor James Moffatt in 1901 and the *New Testament in
Modern Speech* by Richard Francis Weymouth in 1903. The chief criticism
to be brought against all of these experiments is that in spite of their
titles they were not modern enough; the translators were haunted by
echoes of older versions, which filled their pages with annoying
suggestions of familiar rhythms and phrases entirely out of keeping with
the new style. Of many later attempts in the same vein—there were more
than twenty-five in the first quarter century, chiefly in America—the
most successful was *The New Testament: an American Translation* by
Professor Edgar

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> J. Goodspeed
published in 1923 and republished in 1931 as part of *The Bible: an
American Translation*, in which the Old Testament was translated by a
group of scholars under the editorship of J. M. Powis Smith. In literal
accuracy, this last edition at present holds the foremost place.

At present. But New Testament criticism was never more alive than it is
today, and we have learned to expect surprises. New Testament
scholarship is still creative because its problems have not yet been
fully solved. Many passages in the original Greek still remain so
obscure as to be virtually unintelligible, although this would scarcely
be guessed from the translations, since the translators, when in doubt,
have simply done the best they could without mentioning their
difficulties.

Quite recently, Professor Charles Cutler Torrey of Yale has advanced
what may possibly prove an epoch-making solution of this textual
problem. Having discovered that many of the obscurities can be explained
as Greek mistranslations of Aramaic words or phrases, so that the
passages become perfectly clear when rendered into their presumable
originals, he has followed this clew to its extreme conclusion, namely,
that all four Gospels are compilations of lost Aramaic documents.
Believing that

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

only by translating the Greek into Aramaic and then translating the
Aramaic into English could the true meaning be recovered, he himself
carried through this tremendous undertaking, publishing its results in
*The Four Gospels: a New Translation* (1933). Obviously, this process of
double translation is extremely hazardous, and, unfortunately, its value
can be judged only by competent Aramaic scholars of whom there are
relatively few. Should Professor Torrey's work be accepted in its
entirety, it would bring the original composition of the Gospels close
to the time of Jesus and would lend much added weight to the Fourth
Gospel. Such good fortune rarely awaits any individual work of
scholarship, however, since the achievements of scholarship are directly
due to its collective character wherein the conclusions of one are
checked and modified by those of his successors. But dramatically, at
least, the bold Aramaic theory is a fitting consummation of the long
adventure of the spirit that has gone into the making of our New
Testament.

The problem of Biblical translation does not seem completely solvable.
From the fact that the writers of the New Testament were able to infuse
the spirit of a new and thrilling religion into conversational

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek, it by no
means follows that this spirit can be recaptured by using
twentieth-century conversational English. Modern English is saturated
with scientific connotations equally foreign to the Greek of the New
Testament and to Elizabethan English; it possesses qualities of force
and precision, lacking in the older language, but it is essentially the
speech of prose, whereas the prose of the King James version was itself
half-poetry. Language forever changes and doubtless a time will come
when the King James version will be no longer intelligible. Happily, we
are still far from that period. The rhythm and diction and poetic
quality of the greatest of all translations as yet remains closer to our
hearts than the language of the market which we employ in our daily
lives.

No one should any longer dream of consulting the Authorized Version to
settle any disputed question of literal meaning. For that we will turn
to the modern translations that we already have, or, in due time, to
those others still to come. Each such new rendering will be welcomed,
some of them with appropriate enthusiasm. But for literary appreciation
and enjoyment, and for moral inspiration, we shall still do well to turn
to the matchless King James version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seven. The Bible and the Stream of Life](biob08.md)
