[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31014)  [Next](sbe31016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### YASNA XLV.

#### THE DOCTRINE OF DUALISM. HOMAGE TO AHURA.

This hymn bears fewer traces of a fragmentary condition than others. It
recalls Y. XXX, and, like it, appears to belong to a period, or to an
interval, of political repose and theological activity. It is smoother
and more artificial than is usual, and it goes straight on its way from
beginning to end. A powerful adversary had just been crushed. It was the
du*s*sasti of Y. XXXII, 9. This may well have been the result of the
conflict alluded to in Y. XLIV, 15, 16, and possibly in Y. LI, 9, 10,
also urged on by the fierce Y. XXXI, 18 probably often repeated in lost
hymns.

An assembly is addressed as in Y. XXX, 1, but this time as coming 'from
near and from far.' It may very possibly have been the winning side in a
late struggle. The first verse sounds like a congratulation.

It might be said to be intended to be sung, if not shouted, to a
multitude whose outskirts were by no means within easy reach with the
voice. At all events attention is summoned with three differing
expressions. 'Awake your ears to the sound,' literally 'sound ye,' in a
receptive sense; ('let the sound peal in your ears'), then 'listen'
(sraotâ); and then 'ponder' (mãzd*a*unghôdûm). 'The Antizarathu*s*tra,
the evil teacher par eminence, has been defeated,' he declares, 'and he
will never again destroy the peace of our lives (Y. XXXII, 9, 11). His
evil creed has been silenced, and his tongue can no longer shout out its
periods of persuasion or invective (Y. XXXI, 12) beside our preachers.'

2\. He then reiterates the chief doctrine for which the parties had been
at war, and which they should now see clearly in the light of their
victory. 'The foul evils of society do not lie within the control of the
holy Ahura in such a manner as that he either originates, or tolerates
them.' They are, on the contrary, the product of the personified Anger
of the Daêvas, the Mainyu in its evil sense, the Angra (angry?) Spirit.
Between this being, or personified abstraction, and Ahura, there is a
gulf fixed. (Never do we see any aspersions upon Ahura's name, or a
suspicion of His purity as shown by complicity with cruelty, or the
toleration of evil passions.) It is also to be noted that the defeated
du*s*sasti may have possibly been a Daêva-worshipper chiefly as being a
heretic from this Faith

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

of Ahura, believing Him to be implicated in the creation, or permission
of sin and suffering, or, if the burial or burning of the dead was
forbidden at this time, then possibly a heretic on these questions also.
But yet, as a recreant Mazda-worshipper he may have claimed a rightful
allegiance to the urvâtâ, and the future blessings, as well as temporal
advantages, involved in a correct discipleship; and so he may have used
the name of the sacred tenets of the Religion itself to help on a
nefarious warfare. In fact he may have been a self-styled
Mazda-worshipper, but not of 'Zarathu*s*tra's order,' not owned at all
in any degree by the genuine adherents, and met as a real, if not an
open, Daêva-worshipper.

The ardent prophet therefore declares the utter severance between the
good and the evil, the God and the Demon. It is a popular corollary to
Y. XXX, 3-6. The two spirits came together indeed at first to make life,
and its negation, and they co-operate, if such a term can be applied to
an irreconcilable antagonism out of whose antitheses and friction
sentient existence alone becomes possible. Their union consists in
opposition, for if they blend, they each cease to be what they are. They
are, while upholders of existence, yet separate for ever, and that as to
every attribute and interest.

3\. And the sage goes on to assert that in this he is proclaiming the
first Mãthra of this life which the all-wise Mazda had revealed to him.
And, whether sure of the victorious masses before him, or whether on the
contrary perfectly aware that many a group among them had been more
convinced by the snaitha*is* than by reason, he presses at once upon
them that one terrible doctrine which seems unfortunately too needful
for all successful and sudden propagandism, and he declares that they
who do not act in a manner accordant with what he speaks, and even
thinks, (having formerly announced it), to such delinquents this life
should end in woe.

4\. Proceeding in a happier vein, he then dwells upon the fatherhood of
God. He will declare this world's best being who is Mazda Himself. He is
the father of the Good Mind within His people, when that Good Mind is
active in good works. So our piety, when it is practical, is His
daughter, for no pretended good intention can claim relationship with
Him, nor can any idle sentiment. He needs the 'ready mind' within His
servant, and He is not to be deceived (compare Y. XLIII, 6).

5\. Returning once more to the Mãthra, and this time to hold out rewards
rather than to utter threats, he declares that Happiness and Immortality
would be the portion of those who listened to, and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

pondered his revelation, and that Ahura Himself would likewise approach
them with the rewarding actions of His Good Mind, for Ahura was also in
all good actions on the one hand, just as His Immortal Archangels on the
other had their objective existence likewise in the believer's soul.

6\. Turning from admonition to worship, he announces, not what he terms
the 'first' (verse 3), nor the 'best' (verses 4 and 5), but the
'greatest,' element of all, implying that praise, which he now
expresses, includes both prayer and doctrinal confessions, and he calls
on Ahura both to listen and to teach. 7. It is the 'greatest' element
indeed, for it concerns those spiritual blessings which not only the
offerers who are now living will seek after, but those also who shall
live in future; nay, even the spirits of the just desire them in the
eternal Immortality. And these blessings are, according to a
well-remembered law, woe to the wicked, and that, not only from outward
discipline, but from inward grief. And Ahura had established, so he
adds, the beneficent, but, as regards the wicked, still solemn
regulations by the exercise of His Sovereign Power as the controller of
all (Y. XXIX, 4). 8. Zarathu*s*tra (or his substitute) then professes
his eagerness to serve the Lord with these words which he had called the
'greatest,' and because he had seen Him with his very eyes, which he
explains as meaning that he had known Him through the Righteous Order in
his soul, and therefore he prays and hopes to pronounce these greatest
praises, not in the assembly (Y. LI, 3) alone, but in the 'Home of
sublimity or song' (Y. L, 4).

9\. And he desires all the more fervently to do homage to Ahura, because
He approaches him with the Power of His divine Authority in weal or woe,
blessing both men and herds so long as they multiplied under the
influences of Piety. 10. As the praises were the 'greatest,' so he seeks
to 'magnify' the Lord in the Yasnas of Âramaiti, Ahura being renowned by
His unchanging purpose, for He will bestow the 'eternal two' in His holy
Kingdom, when it shall have been made firm! 11. Yea, he would seek to
magnify Him who contemns the Daêvas and their party as much as they, in
their turn, profess to make little of Him and His religious Kingdom,
contrasted as they were with Ahura's prophet, who honoured Him in the
holy Insight, the Daêna of the Saoshya*n*t. And this Saoshya*n*t is
declared to be the controlling master of every faithful worshipper, and
he, or the faithful venerator of the reviled Ahura, is also as our
friend, brother, nay, like Ahura Himself (verse 4), our very Father in
the Faith.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Translation.

1\. Yea, I will speak forth; hear ye; now listen, ye who from near, and
ye who from afar have come seeking <span id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_576)
(the knowledge). Now ponder <span id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_577) ye
clearly all <span id="fr_579"></span>[3](#fn_578) (that concerns)
him <span id="fr_580"></span>[4](#fn_579). Not for a second time shall
the false teacher slay our life (of the mind, or the body). The wicked
is hemmed in with his faith and his tongue! <span
id="fr_581"></span>[5](#fn_580)

2\. Yea, I will declare the world's two first <span
id="fr_582"></span>[6](#fn_581) spirits, of whom the more bountiful thus
spake to the harmful <span id="fr_583"></span>[7](#fn_582): Neither our
thoughts, nor commands, nor our

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

understandings, nor our beliefs, nor our deeds, nor our consciences, nor
our souls, are at one <span id="fr_584"></span>[1](#fn_583).

3\. Thus I will declare this world's first <span
id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_584) (teaching), that which the all-wise
Mazda Ahura hath told me. And they among you who will not so fulfil and
obey this Mãthra, as I now shall conceive and declare it, to these shall
the end of life (issue) in woe.

4\. Thus I will declare forth this world's best (being). From (the
insight of His) Righteousness Mazda, who hath appointed these
(things) <span id="fr_586"></span>[3](#fn_585), hath known (what He
utters to be true; yea, I will declare) Him the father of the toiling
Good Mind (within us). So is His

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

daughter through good deeds (our) Piety. Not to be deceived is the
all-viewing <span id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_586) Lord.

5\. Yea, thus I will declare that which the most bountiful One told me,
that word which is the best to be heeded by mortals. They who therein
grant me obedient <span id="fr_588"></span>[2](#fn_587) attention, upon
them cometh Weal to bless, and the Immortal being, and in the deeds of
His Good Mind cometh the Lord.

6\. Aye, thus I will declare forth Him who is <span
id="fr_589"></span>[3](#fn_588) of all the greatest, praising through my
Righteousness, I who do aright, those who (dispose of all as well
aright). Let Ahura Mazda hear with His bounteous spirit, in whose homage
(what I asked) was asked <span id="fr_590"></span>[4](#fn_589) with the
Good Mind. Aye, let Him exhort me through His wisdom (which is ever) the
best.

7\. (Yea, I will declare Him) whose blessings the offerers will seek
for, those who are living now, as well as those who have lived
(aforetime), as will they

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

also who are coming <span id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_590) (hereafter.
Yea, even) the soul(s) of the righteous (will desire) them in the
eternal <span id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_591) Immortality. (Those things
they will desire which are blessings to the righteous) but woes to the
wicked. And these hath Ahura Mazda (established) through His kingdom,
He, the creator (of all).

8\. Him in our hymns of homage and of praise would I faithfully serve,
for now with (mine) eye, I see Him clearly, Lord of the good
spirit <span id="fr_593"></span>[3](#fn_592), of word, and action, I
knowing through my Righteousness Him who is Ahura Mazda. And to Him (not
here alone, but) in His home of song <span
id="fr_594"></span>[4](#fn_593), His praise we <span
id="fr_595"></span>[5](#fn_594) shall bear.

9\. Yea, Him with our better Mind we seek to honour, who desiring
(good), shall come to us (to bless) in weal and sorrow <span
id="fr_596"></span>[6](#fn_595). May He, Ahura Mazda, make us <span
id="fr_597"></span>[7](#fn_596) vigorous through Khshathra's royal
power,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

our flocks and men in thrift to further, from the good support and
bearing <span id="fr_598"></span>[1](#fn_597) of His Good Mind, (itself
born in us) by His Righteousness.

10\. Him in the Yasnas of our Piety we seek to praise with homage, who
in His persistent energy <span id="fr_599"></span>[2](#fn_598) was famed
to be (in truth) the Lord Ahura Mazda, for He hath appointed in His
kingdom, through His holy Order and His Good Mind, both Weal and
Immortality, to grant <span id="fr_600"></span>[3](#fn_599) the eternal
mighty pair to this our land (and the creation).

11\. (Him would we magnify and praise) who hath despised the Daêva-gods
and alien men, them who before held Him in their derision. Far different
are (these) from him who gave Him honour. This latter one is through the
Saoshya*n*t's bounteous Faith, who likewise is the Lord of saving
power <span id="fr_601"></span>[4](#fn_600),

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

a friend, brother, or a father to us, Mazda Lord <span
id="fr_602"></span>[1](#fn_601)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_576"></span>[125:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_577) Ish means 'to come
seeking.' The bavîhûnê*d* of the Pahlavi, followed by many, is by no
means incorrect.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[125:2](sbe31015.htm#fr_578) The reading
mãzd*a*unghôdûm was suggested to me by Dr. Aurel Stein previously (as I
believe) to its announcement elsewhere. Before this the indication of
the Pahlavi (which always hesitates to change a MS. regarded at the time
as sacred) had been followed by all with its necessary error.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[125:3](sbe31015.htm#fr_579) The '*e*' in
*k*ithr*e* must represent a nasalised vowel, as in m*e*hmaidî.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[125:4](sbe31015.htm#fr_580) Îm may be merely a
particle.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[125:5](sbe31015.htm#fr_581) I would here
strongly insist upon an alternative rendering in the sense of the
Pahlavi. The rendering above is given on principle. A text should never
be changed, if it is possible to render it as it is. Read, 'the wicked
confessing (varetô, active sense) evil beliefs with his tongue.' The
Pahlavi has zaka*s* sarîtar kâmakŏ va zaka*s* darvandîh pavan hûzvânŏ
hêmnunê*d*. Many, with this view, would at once read varetâ without MSS.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[125:6](sbe31015.htm#fr_582) Observe the
peculiar pouruyê (pourviyê, if not a locative), the two first things,
principles, forces; so in Y. XXX, 3.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[125:7](sbe31015.htm#fr_583) Notice that vahyô
akem*k*â (in Y. XXX, 3) necessarily apply to the mainyû, and not only
because, as nominatives, the words fall to the end of the sentence. Here
we have analogous adjectives applied unmistakably to the two. The
neuters correspond with vahi*s*tem manô and a*k*i*s*tem manô, and are of
capital importance as <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> expressing that
abstract conception which renders the Gâthas so much more impressive as
the earliest documents of their kind.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[126:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_584) The Pahlavi thus
glosses: I do not think what thou thinkest, \[for I think what is pious,
and thou thinkest what is impious\]; nor our teachings, \[for I teach
what is pious, and thou, what is impious\]—nor our religions, for mine
is the Gâthic, and thine that of the sorcerer; nor our souls, \[for he
who takes his stand on my religion, and he who takes his stand on thy
religion, are apart; their souls do not occupy the same position\].
Ner.: na*k*a dînih \[yato me dîni*h* gâthabhavâ te*k*a râkshasî\*\].

<span id="fn_584"></span>[126:2](sbe31015.htm#fr_585) The 'first
teaching' was a prominent idea with the Zarathu*s*trians. Z. is called
in the later Avesta the paoiryô*t*kaêsha (sic). He hardly plays the rôle
of a reformer in the Avesta. He is mentioned after others
chronologically, not as repudiating them. He might better be termed
reviver. Yãm is difficult; perhaps daênãm is to be understood, or y*e*m
(mãthrem) read; see verse 4, angh*e*u*s* ahyâ vahi*s*tem. Neither
pourvîm nor vahi*s*tem are adverbs.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[126:3](sbe31015.htm#fr_586) Some change the
text here to another which corresponds to some of the terms better. It
should, however, first be rendered as it stands; the obscurities may
well be owing to idiosyncrasy it the composer; possibly also to an
affectation of obscurity (or 'dark speech'). How can Mazda be said to
'know Himself?' or how could any but Ahura be spoken of as 'the Father
of Vohu Manah and Âramaiti?' He recognised Himself as having generated
V. M. and Â. He was conscious of the completed relation.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[127:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_587) Hishas looks
irresistibly like a nom. sing., but may it not be a nom. actoris from
the redup. root? Compare hîshasa*t* (although the Pahlavi renders with a
different cast of meaning). What Indian word to compare here is hard to
say. I prefer Bartholomae's earlier view (as to the meaning) with the
Pahlavi harvispŏ nikîrî*d*ar. By dropping the later glosses, the sense
of the Pahlavi comes out as usual, much closer to the Gâtha.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[127:2](sbe31015.htm#fr_588) Observe the vigour
possessed by 'Sraosha.' It designates the angel of Obedience; and at the
same time it is the only word which can here bring out the sense when it
is understood in its actual meaning; so continually with the words Vohu
Manah, Asha, &c.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[127:3](sbe31015.htm#fr_589) Lit. 'Him who I,
doing aright, (praising Him with His immortals) who (all likewise) are
(beneficent).' Or it may be 'that which.'

<span id="fn_589"></span>[127:4](sbe31015.htm#fr_590) So with many who
hold the least to the hints of the Pahlavi. Otherwise I would render
'there is furtherance,' comparing afrashîma*n*tô.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[128:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_591) Bvai*n*ti*k*â
(sic) seems, as elsewhere, to express 'those who are becoming.'

<span id="fn_591"></span>[128:2](sbe31015.htm#fr_592) The Pahlavi
uniformly errs, or is strangely free, with this word. The sense
'continuous' is here admirably adapted.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[128:3](sbe31015.htm#fr_593) This word seems
evidently used almost in a modern sense of 'character,' 'disposition.'
Elsewhere we are in doubt whether to refer it to the Speni*s*ta Mainyu
of Ahura, or to Ahura Himself.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[128:4](sbe31015.htm#fr_594) Paradise; possibly
'home of sublimity.'

<span id="fn_594"></span>[128:5](sbe31015.htm#fr_595) The change from
singular to plural is frequent. Ner. varies from the Pahlavi in the last
verse, improving upon it: Evam tasmai pra*n*âmam antar Garothmâne
nidadâmahe. This was probably an intentional improvement, as the Persian
MS. follows our Pahlavi text. His MS. of the Pahlavi probably read barâ
yehabûnd.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[128:6](sbe31015.htm#fr_596) Or, 'who has
created weal and sorrow for us with good intention, (and as our
discipline);' but this is hardly probable. Ahura did not originate evil.
Sp*enk*â, asp*enk*â are used adverbially (see Y. XXXIV, 7).

<span id="fn_596"></span>[128:7](sbe31015.htm#fr_597) I hardly agree to
reading verez*e*ny*a*u (sic) here in the sense of 'homes.' The meaning
is 'endow us with efficiency' in the pursuit of the objects mentioned in
the context. Or 'the propitiation and <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>
reverential honour' may have been more directly in the composer's mind;
'may He endow our (worship) with efficiency that it may accomplish its
desired result.' See the positions of the words.

The Pahlavi translation also bears witness to the rendering above, with
its erroneous or free varzî*d*âr ayŏ lanman.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[129:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_598) As it is
impossible for those who have studied the subject to believe that the
Pahlavi translator did not know the meaning of amavandîh in Zend, we
must suppose him to have had some form like hazah before him instead of
huzã(thwâ*t*).

<span id="fn_598"></span>[129:2](sbe31015.htm#fr_599) The Pahlavi
translator, rendering this word in the two other places by pavan
astûbîh, had evidently some reason for seeing a form of nãman here. The
natural conclusion is that his MS. read differently in this place. Ner.
renders him appropriately.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[129:3](sbe31015.htm#fr_600) Dãn looks like an
accusative infinitive here (Bartholomae); otherwise the two verbs must
be regarded as having indefinite pronouns understood, 'one assigns,' and
'they grant.'

<span id="fn_600"></span>[129:4](sbe31015.htm#fr_601) I cannot see the
applicability of Agni's title 'house-lord' here; compare dá*m*supatnî as
adj. referring to páti.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[130:1](sbe31015.htm#fr_602) He who despised
the Daêvas, they returning the contempt is probably the same person
expressed by the two hôi in the previous verse. It is therefore Ahura,
but the words which mean friend, brother, father, are grammatically
connected with y*e*—mainyâtâ. the one who reverenced Ahura. The
expression 'father' gives a strong impression that Ahura is referred to,
notwithstanding the vocative. Particularly as we have father in verse 4.
The word 'brother,' however, inclines one to the more closely
grammatical view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XLVI](sbe31016)
