[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31019)  [Next](sbe31021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YASNA XLIX, 12-L.

The most striking circumstance here, after the rhetorical and
moral-religious peculiarities have been observed, is the sixth verse;
and as to the question of Zarathu*s*trian authorship, it is the most
striking in the Gâthas or the Avesta. In that verse we have
Zarathu*s*tra, not named alone, which might easily be harmonised

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

with his personal authorship, nor have we only such expressions as 'to
Zarathu*s*tra and to us' (Y. XXVIII, 7), but we have Zarathu*s*tra named
as 'mahyâ râz*en*g sâhî*t*,' 'may he declare my regulations,' which
could only be said, without figure of speech, by some superior, if not
by the prime mover himself. Were these verses then written by the prime
mover? And was he other than Zarathu*s*tra? If so, the entire mass of
the Gâthas was of course written by him, or else their style and
character may be regarded as of such a character that they could have
been composed by four or five closely connected individuals. But while
verses here and there are doubtless the productions of secondary
persons, the mass of the Gâthas cannot be regarded as the work of
several different composers. They are one man's work, directly or
indirectly. If then the present section, which is especially original in
its tone, was not from Zarathu*s*tra, the man whose heart and soul, and,
we may add, whose power were in Zarathu*s*trianism, was not
Zarathu*s*tra, but some unnamed individual far more important. (See note
on Y. XXVIII, 7.) The prominence of the name of Zarathu*s*tra was in
that case solely owing to the personal activity of Zarathu*s*tra
supported by the social rank of the Spitâmas. Zarathu*s*tra was a
princely disciple, on the hypothesis mentioned, and nothing more. The
real author of Zarathu*s*trianism was, in that case, in no sense
Zarathu*s*tra; compare 'to Zarathu*s*tra and to us:' nor yet Vî*s*tâspa;
compare 'to Vî*s*tâspa and to me:' nor Frashao*s*tra; compare 'to
Frashao*s*tra and to us;' and, we may also say, not *G*âmâspa, for he is
addressed in the vocative. He was mentally and personally the superior
of all of them. In fact he was the power behind both throne and home,
and yet without a name! But, in that case, what becomes of Y. XXIX, 6,
8? Is it probable that the founder of a religion (or of a new departure
in a religion) would describe another as the chosen of God, if he were
not in fact supposed to be thus eminent? Or, if a popular and sincerely
enthusiastic religious composer were about to chant a hymn at a meeting
of the religious masses, would he be likely to name a person to the
animated throngs, whom they themselves did not feel to be the life of
their religious faith? especially, if that person were not prominent
from the arbitrary circumstance that he was the reigning prince? I do
not think that this is at all probable. But if Zarathu*s*tra had, as
described, the leading name, and composed a portion of the hymns with
their lost companions, is it probable that he possessed no decided
prominence in this matter above Vî*s*tâspa, Frashao*s*tra, and
*G*âmâspa? Was there no central poet, who

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

composed the mass of the metrical lore, dominating by his influence
those who added portions here and there, or was there a quaternion of
seers, four Zarathu*s*tras, as one might say? As we have said, the hymns
decide it. One man's soul is in them, as a composer's feelings are in
his compositions, or a master's feelings are in the lines of his
disciples. But if there was one central figure instead of four, and he
is mentioned as Zarathu*s*tra, and as the spokesman in many portions of
the Gâthas, being likewise known by inference to be the composer of
nearly all of them, how can we account for the words, 'let him,
Zarathu*s*tra, teach or proclaim my regulations?' Can the verse be
regarded as put into the mouth of Ahura, as elsewhere? Hardly, for Ahura
is addressed in it. I can therefore only repeat of this verse, as of the
others which present analogous questions in Y. XXVIII (with which this
chapter L stands in the closest connection), that this thoroughly
original piece was composed by Zarathu*s*tra as by far the most
prominent individual in the religious struggle, dominating his party
essentially and positively, and that these verses (6-11) were simply
rhetorically put into the mouth of the monarch from the exigency of the
style of composition. And I conclude that Vî*s*tâspa was supposed to
speak them, because in the presence of Zarathu*s*tra, it is extremely
improbable that any one but the titular head of the State should have
been represented as saying of Zarathu*s*tra, 'mahyâ râz*en*g sâhî*t*.'

1\. The piece from Y. XLIX, 52 to Y. L, 1-5 joins well on with Y. XLIX,
although the tone is brighter. As he begins with questions in Y. XLVIII,
8-11, after the prospective prayers of Y. XLVIII, 1-7, in which he looks
forward to a crisis in the armed struggle, so now after the hostile
chief has got the upper hand, he cries out once more with
interrogatives, uttering the questions, not of curiosity, but of
mournful devotion.

'The storm has broken over us,' so he would seem to say, 'and I have
prayed for grace to know how we may administer (Y. XLIV, 9) the
all-powerful means of help, the Daêna, in which Thy Righteous Order is
set (Y. XLIX, 3). I have cried to Thee for chief and peer (verse 7),
naming Frashao*s*tra, *G*âmâspa, and the Yâhin, and now, while I invoke
you, praying for what in your selection is the best (Y. XXVIII, 11; Y.
XLIV, 10), I would more than ever declare that I have none other help
than Thee and Thy saving Order.' 2. And he asks once more to know how he
who seeks to further the sacred herds, as the emblem of the moral thrift
of the provinces, should proceed in his allotted work. 3. Answering his
own question, he says that it is by advance upon the enemy; he declares

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

that the heroic settler who pushes the holy system to the utmost verge
of the sacred territory or still further, was the man 'to gain the Kine'
for the seeking prophet. 4. But in the midst of struggles, he
anticipates Garô*d*man with its praises. 5. For they were all prepared
for both worship and work, since God had approached to aid His prophet,
encouraging His discouraged spirit. 6. Here Vî*s*tâspa is represented as
intervening; and he addresses Ahura literally, but Zarathu*s*tra really,
exhorting him indirectly to continue on in his work of propagation,
undismayed by present circumstances. 7. And with Zarathu*s*tra, he would
re-engage the other powerful helpers, whom he would yoke on as steeds to
gain God's praise in Heaven by passing over every bridge of trial
safely. 8. Having heard from Zarathu*s*tra his metric words, he will
approach with them to pray, and, as in Y. XXVIII, 2, 3, 'with hands
stretched out' with homage, and with vigour. 9. And he looks to attain
the object of his prayers by religious self-control, and faithful
action. 10. His efforts vie with the heavenly bodies in their praise of
God. 11. Therefore he will persevere, and as a praiser-king (so the
Pahlavi in one place); and he beseeches that Ahura, the life-giver, may
help on the all-engrossing cause.

Translation.

Y. XLIX, 12 <span id="fr_756"></span>[1](#fn_755). What aids of grace
hast Thou for Thine invoking Zarathu*s*tra, (O Ahura Mazda!) to grant
him through Thy Righteous Order? Yea, what (aids of <span
id="fr_757"></span>[2](#fn_756) grace hast thou for me as) through Thy
Good Mind given (within my soul), for me who will (still) pray to Thee
with praises, O Great Creator! beseeching what in accordance with Your
wished-for aim is best?

Y. L, 1. Aye, doth my soul indeed obtain assisting

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

grace, and which of Thy blessings is that gift to me, O Lord? What
saving champion is found to save both flocks and herds? And who for
myself other than Thy Righteous Order, and Thyself, Ahura? Tell me <span
id="fr_758"></span>[1](#fn_757), O (ye) invoked ones! Or what of grace
is there for me save Thy Best Mind (itself)?

2\. (And if Thy guardian is verily to save our wealth) how shall he
(obtain, and by what means shall he) seek after <span
id="fr_759"></span>[2](#fn_758) that joy-creating Kine (who is the
living symbol of our peace <span id="fr_760"></span>[3](#fn_759))? (How
shall that man obtain his wish) who shall desire to see her provided
with pastures for (the welfare of) this land? (That only way is
righteousness.) Do Thou then grant me lands (so would I ask of Thee)
which live in justice in the many <span id="fr_761"></span>[4](#fn_760)
splendours of the sun, and lands which openly <span
id="fr_762"></span>[5](#fn_761) thus live, and which are to be

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

sought and gained by me (as conquests for the cause). Give Thou this
gift!

3\. (Yea, let that joy-creating one) be his possession through the
Righteous Order (which he helps to bring, that living sign) which (the
most valiant citizen) may give to him (at once reward and charge), and
in accordance with Thy Sovereign Authority. (May that heroic settler
grant him this gift) he who may make the (last imperilled) farm to
flourish in the vigour of Thy blest prosperity, the tract which lies the
nearest (to the fields) which our foeman holds as his <span
id="fr_763"></span>[1](#fn_762).

4\. (And therefore both in thankfulness and hope) will I give sacrifice
to You with praises, O Ahura Mazda! together with Thine Order and Thy
Best Mind (in Thy saints), and in accordance with Thy sacred Sovereign
Power, by whose help the wisher (heaven-bound) may stand upon the
(certain) pathway <span id="fr_764"></span>[2](#fn_763), and in Thine
Home-of-song shall I (by means of these my Yasnas offered here) there
hear the praises of Thine offering saints who see Thy face <span
id="fr_765"></span>[3](#fn_764).

5\. And we <span id="fr_766"></span>[4](#fn_765) are in readiness as
well (to fulfil Your praises and declare your words), O Ahura Mazda!
through Your (grace, and) in accordance with Your Holy Order, since Ye
advance with friendliness <span id="fr_767"></span>[5](#fn_766) to cheer
the speaker of Your Mãthra-word with open acts of visible relief, as if
with hand sent forth,

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

whereby that Mãthra-speaker of Your truth may bring us on, and settle
us, in weal and bliss <span id="fr_768"></span>[1](#fn_767).

6\. (Therefore will I incite him to his task the more. Let him indeed
proclaim the righteous way <span id="fr_769"></span>[2](#fn_768)) he who
already lifts his voice in Mãthras, O Ahura Mazda! he,
Zarathu*s*tra <span id="fr_770"></span>[3](#fn_769), the faithful friend
in accordance with the Holy Order, and with self-abasing worship, giver
of understanding for this land, voice-guider (of the way to glory <span
id="fr_771"></span>[4](#fn_770)), let him indeed proclaim and teach my
regulations, and in accordance with Thy Good Mind (as his law).

7\. (And together with that chief speaker of your word I would engage
yet others in the cause). Your well-incited <span
id="fr_772"></span>[5](#fn_771) and swift <span
id="fr_773"></span>[6](#fn_772) (servants), O Ahura! would I yoke <span
id="fr_774"></span>[7](#fn_773) on (as steeds to take their holy course
toward heaven), gaining <span id="fr_775"></span>[7](#fn_773) thereby
(at last) the Bridges <span id="fr_776"></span>[8](#fn_774) where

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Your adoration
(rules and is complete). Yea, I (?) yoke on your mighty ones, and with
Thy Holy Order, and Thy Good Mind. And with these may Ye drive on; aye,
be Ye for my help!

8\. (And as I yoke on Your Mãthra-speakers for their course, then) would
I (myself) approach You in the (highest) deed of worship <span
id="fr_777"></span>[1](#fn_775), and with these sacred metric feet (of
Zarathu*s*tra and his peers <span id="fr_778"></span>[2](#fn_776)),
those which are heard and famed afar, as the metric feet of zealous
worship, and with my hands stretched <span
id="fr_779"></span>[3](#fn_777) out (in supplicating prayer). Yea, You
(would I approach), O Mazda! in union with Your sacred ritual Truth, and
with the homage of a freely-giving helper <span
id="fr_780"></span>[4](#fn_778), and with the good virtue of (Your) Good
Mind (in my soul).

9\. Yea, with these Yasnas of Your sacrifice would I approach You,
praising back to You (in answer to Your mercies), O Ahura! and Thou, O
Righteousness! in (the holy) actions of Your Good Mind, (as he moves
within us), so long indeed as I shall have the power, commanding at my
will o’er this my sacred (privilege) and gift. (And doing as) the wise
man (thus), may I (like him) become a supplicant who gains <span
id="fr_781"></span>[5](#fn_779) his ends.

10\. (Mine every wish and prayer is this), then therefore whatsoever I
shall do, and whatsoever deeds

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (of ritual and
truth I shall yet further do) on account of, (and to make full <span
id="fr_782"></span>[1](#fn_780)) these (prior deeds of worship), yea,
whatsoever (holy works) shine bright <span
id="fr_783"></span>[2](#fn_781) as having worth in (all) men's eyes
through Thy Good Mind (whose character they share; these as) the stars,
suns, and the Aurora which brings on the light <span
id="fr_784"></span>[3](#fn_782) of days, are all, through their
Righteous Order, (the speakers) of Thy <span
id="fr_785"></span>[4](#fn_783) praise, O Thou Great Giver, Lord!

11\. Your praiser then (by eminence) would I be named, and (more), would
be it, so long as by (Thine inspiring) Righteousness I am thus able and
may have the power. And may the maker of the world give help through
(His implanted) Good Mind (in my fellow-servants). And may that (all) be
done <span id="fr_786"></span>[5](#fn_784) (to further us) which through
His veritable grace is most promotive (for the cause)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_755"></span>[170:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_756) This verse is
placed here as obviously more closely related to chapter L than to
chapter XLIX. Lost verses may, however, have intervened between it and
Y. L, 1.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[170:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_757) Another rendering,
regarding ka*t* as a purely interrogative participle, would be, 'Are
they (tôi) helpful to the invoking Zarathu*s*tra?' But ka*t* tôi is a
familiar form; see Y. XXXIV, 12, where it must mean quid tibi.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[171:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_758) I should be far
from denying that azdâ may equal addhâ´, but a strengthening adverb
seems to me of no particular force here. I formerly rested at the simple
explanation az + dâ = dhâ = desire-exciting, much desired one. But the
Pahlavi translator affords an explanation which may surpass that of his
successors. He sees the meaning: 'When I shall call upon You,' (that is,
freely, 'being invoked,') 'cause Thou (sic) me to understand fully.'
This is the remnant of some predecessor's work who rendered 'tell ye
me;' az = ah, otherwise lost in Zend. The plural follows the singular
too often to excite much doubt; azdâ = tell ye; so zdî is from az, as
syôdûm is from as (recall the well-known Indian analogies). See also the
explanation of the Pahlavi at Y. XXXI, 17. If a plural cannot be
admitted, then consider a form extended by d.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[171:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_759) The Pahlavi
translates freely, bavîhûnam.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[171:3](sbe31020.htm#fr_760) The Kine must
represent the people as well as their live-stock. The raids concerned
the owners more than their cattle. In answer to the cry of the Kine,
Zarathu*s*tra was sent to the people.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[171:4](sbe31020.htm#fr_761) I can hardly agree
to the rendering 'among people who see the sun' without a needless
reconstruction of the text. The Pahlavi likewise has pavan khvârîh; for
general meaning, compare Khshathrôi *hven*g daresôi, not as equivalent
however.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[171:5](sbe31020.htm#fr_762) Âskârak stî.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[172:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_763) The Pahlavi
translation, as usual, not literally exact, still furnishes the correct
clue, Zak î nazdistô (1) gêhânŏ min valman î darvand bakhshê*d*
\[aîga*s* zak dên dâri*s*n barâ yansegûnyên\].

<span id="fn_763"></span>[172:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_764) Frô tâi*s*
vîspâi*s* *K*invatô frâ, peretûm.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[172:3](sbe31020.htm#fr_765) Âk*a*u (compare
the Indian âkê); 'who approach, and are therefore evident (âshkârak) to
God, and seeing Him.' Comp. âk*a*u in Y. LI, 13, which has been thought
a loc.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[172:4](sbe31020.htm#fr_766) See n*a*u.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[172:5](sbe31020.htm#fr_767) To vra*g*.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[173:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_768) See the previous
verse, where the wisher stands on the path, seeking to reach Garô*d*man.
It seems therefore probable that *hv*âthrê refers to demânê garô.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[173:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_769) Compare Y. LIII,
2, d*a*unghô erezû*s* pathô.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[173:3](sbe31020.htm#fr_770) As remarked, this
entire piece recalls Y. XXVIII. Here the monarch is represented as
speaking precisely as spokesmen are introduced in any other composition.
We have no reason to suppose the piece to be the composition of some
leading person other than Zarathu*s*tra, because of the words 'let
Zarathu*s*tra speak forth my regulations.' (See page [169](#page_169).)

<span id="fn_770"></span>[173:4](sbe31020.htm#fr_771) Îshô st*a*ungha*t*
â paithî.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[173:5](sbe31020.htm#fr_772) Consider a suffix
ish*t*i.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[173:6](sbe31020.htm#fr_773) Here the Pahlavi
translator gives us both text and translation, aurvatô = arvand.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[173:7](sbe31020.htm#fr_775) Or, 'yoke Thou,
may’st Thou gain.'

<span id="fn_774"></span>[173:8](sbe31020.htm#fr_776) The *K*inva*t*
Bridge, either literally or figuratively. Compare 'the bridge of the
earth' (Y. LI, 12). The crises of effort, or temptation, are meant, as
the *K*inva*t* Bridge was the last crisis before salvation or perdition.
The souls of the good and of the evil were met by their own consciences
on the Bridge, and encouraged or reviled.

'When the soul of the pious passes over that Bridge, the width of <span
id="page_174">p. 174</span> that Bridge becomes about one league' (West,
Mainyô-î Khard,\* p. 134). Possibly the extension of the Bridge for the
pious arose from the plural use here.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[174:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_777) Compare Y. XXVIII,
3.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[174:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_778) See Y. XXVIII, 9.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[174:3](sbe31020.htm#fr_779) See Y. XXVIII, 2.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[174:4](sbe31020.htm#fr_780) See Y. XLVI, 9.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[174:5](sbe31020.htm#fr_781) The Pahlavi
translator accepts a ser se of acquisition here as well as of desire:
Aêtûnŏ zak î valman î avŏ hû-dânâk pavan khvahî*s*nŏ grîftâr hômanânî
\[mozd\]. I accede to its indication, holding that gardh certainly has
such an element in its meaning.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[175:1](sbe31020.htm#fr_782) I can here only
follow the words as they are written; the meaning is clear enough
although rather advanced. Reconstructions on a large scale are seldom of
value.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[175:2](sbe31020.htm#fr_783) Judging from the
context, we may render ar*g*a*t* thus.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[175:3](sbe31020.htm#fr_784) The Pahlavi
translator here renders as if he read ushâ. In Y. XLVI, 3 he translates
ukhshânô. Professor Wilhelm, preferring as above, still recalls the
Homeric usage favouring 'increaser.' The Pahlavi has vakhshînî*d*âr in
Y. XLVI, 3. Here hôsh zak î arûs dên bâm I. Ner. alone understood arûs.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[175:4](sbe31020.htm#fr_785) 'Your.'

<span id="fn_784"></span>[175:5](sbe31020.htm#fr_786) An imperative has
long been recognised in var*s*tãm; or read: 'Let him cause that which is
the most furthering of deeds to grow influential through veritable
grace.' So perhaps better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna LI](sbe31021)
