[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31103)  [Next](sbe31105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

# THE GÂHS.

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

### THE GÂHS.

THE Gâhs are the five divisions of the day. The Hâvani from 6 to 10
A.M., the Rapithwina from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., the Uzayêirina from 3 to 6
P.M., the Aiwisrûthrima from 6 to 12 P.M., the Ushahina from 12 P.M. to
6 A.M. The Gâhs here following are prayers which must be recited at the
Gâhs of the day; hence their name <span
id="fr_1562"></span>[1](#fn_1534).

### I. THE GÂH HÂVAN <span id="fr_1563"></span>[2](#fn_1535).

Unto Ahura Mazda be propitiation. A blessing is Righteousness (called)
the Best—.

1\. I confess myself a Mazda-worshipper, of Zarathu*s*tra's order, a foe
to the Daêvas, devoted to the lore of the Lord, for the holy Hâvani,
regulator of the ritual order, for its sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and praise, and for Sâvanghi and Vîsya, the righteous regulator(s) of
the ritual order, for their homage, sacrifice, propitiation, and praise,
and for those of the Asnya, the day-lords during daylight, and the
Ayara, lords of the days in their length, and for the Mâhya, the
month-lords, and the Yâirya, year-lords, and for those of the especial
seasons.

2\. And to Mithra of the wide pastures, of the thousand ears, of the
myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[3](#fn_1536), be sacrifice, homage, propitiation,
and praise, and to Râman *Hv*âstra.

3, 4. And we sacrifice to Ahura Mazda the holy

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

lord of the ritual Order, and to Zarathu*s*tra, and to the Fravashi of
Zarathu*s*tra, the saint. And we sacrifice to the Bounteous Immortals,
(the guardians) of the saints, and to the good, heroic, and bounteous
Fravashis of the saints (of the living and of the dead), of the bodily,
and of those in heaven. And we sacrifice to the highest of the lords,
the one that most attains its ends; and we sacrifice to the most
strenuous of the Yazads, the most satisfying of the lords of the ritual
order, the one who reaches (what he seeks), the most infallibly of those
who have as yet approached the nearest in the ritual, even to the timely
prayer of the saint who rules in the ritual order. 5. And we sacrifice
to the Hâvani, the holy lord of the ritual order, and to the Universal
Weal, the holy, ruling in the ritual order, and to Deathlessness, the
holy, ruling in the ritual order. And we sacrifice to the question and
lore of the holy lord of the ritual. And we sacrifice to that heroic
mighty Yasna, the Haptanghâiti, the lord of the ritual order. 6. And we
sacrifice to Sâvanghi and Vîsya, the holy lord(s) of the ritual order;
and we sacrifice to the Airy*e*mâ-ishyô <span
id="fr_1565"></span>[1](#fn_1537), the holy lord of the ritual order,
the powerful, victoriously smiting, that which no hate can reach, which
overwhelms all torments, and which passes over all torments with
victory, which is the uppermost, and the middle, and the foremost, for
the effective invocation of that surpassing Mãthra, the five Gâthas.

7, 8. And we sacrifice to Mithra of the wide pastures—, and to Râman
*Hv*âstra, for the worship and exaltation of Vîsya, the chief. And we
sacrifice to

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vîsya, the holy
lord of the ritual order, and to Mithra, and to Râman *Hv*âstra—.

9-11. And we sacrifice to thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son, the holy
lord of the ritual order. And we sacrifice to this Baresman which has
the Zaothra with it, and the girdle with it, and which is spread with
exact sanctity, itself the holy lord. And we sacrifice to the
Apãm-napâ*t*, and to Nairya-sangha, and to that Yazad, the swift curse
of the wise. And we sacrifice to the souls of the dead, \[which are the
Fravashis of the saints\]. And we worship that exalted Lord who is Ahura
Mazda, the highest object of the ritual order, who is the one who has
attained the most to homage in the ritual. And we sacrifice to all the
words which Zarathu*s*tra spake, and to all the deeds well done, and to
those which shall yet be done in days to come. (And) we sacrifice to
that male one of beings whose (gift) in the offering Ahura doth know to
be better, and of female saints, the same. As the Ahû is to be (revered
and) chosen, so (is) the Ratu, one who rules from the Righteous Order, a
creator of mental goodness, and of life's actions done for Mazda, and
the Kingdom (is) to Ahura, which to the poor shall offer a nurturer—.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[379:1](sbe31104.htm#fr_1562) The term Gâh,
itself, may have arisen from the practice of chanting the Gâthas at
different fixed times in the day.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[379:2](sbe31104.htm#fr_1563) To be recited
every day at the time of Hâvani.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[379:3](sbe31104.htm#fr_1564) Having a special
Ya*s*t.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[380:1](sbe31104.htm#fr_1565) The personified
prayer; see Y. LIV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Gâh Rapithvin](sbe31105)
