[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31027)  [Next](sbe31029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

### YASNA VI <span id="fr_951"></span>[1](#fn_945).

#### THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES WITH FULLER EXPRESSION.

1\. We worship the Creator Ahura Mazda with our sacrifice, and the
Bountiful Immortals who rule aright, and who dispose of all aright.

2\. And we worship the Asnya with our sacrifice, and Hâvani, Sâvanghi
and Vîsya, the holy lords of the ritual order, and Mithra of the wide
pastures, of the thousand ears, and myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken
name, and we worship Râman *Hv*âstra.

3\. And we worship Rapithwina with our sacrifice, and Frâda*t*-fshu, and
the Za*n*tuma, and Righteousness the Best, and the Fire, Ahura Mazda's
son, holy lords of the ritual order.

4\. And we worship Uzayêirina, and Frâda*t*-vîra, and Da*hv*yuma\*, the
holy lord of the ritual order, and that kingly Ahura, the radiant
Napâ*t*-apãm, of the fleet horses, and the water holy, and Mazda-made.

5\. And we worship Aiwisrûthrima and Aibigaya in our sacrifice, the holy
lord of the ritual order, and Frâda*t*-vîspãm-hu*g*yâiti and the
Zarathu*s*trôtema, the holy lord of the ritual order, and the good,
heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the saints, and the women who bring forth
many sons, and the Prosperous home-life which endures without reverse
throughout the year, and Force which is well-shaped and stately, and the
Blow which brings the victory, which is Ahura-given, and the Victorious
Ascendency (which it secures).

6\. And we worship Ushahina with our sacrifice, and

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bere*g*ya, and
Nmânya, and Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed and the stately who smites
with victory, and makes the settlements advance, and Rashnu, the most
just, and Ar*s*tâ*t* who makes the settlements advance and causes them
to increase, the holy lords of the ritual order.

7\. And we worship the Mâhya in our sacrifice, the new moon and the
waning moon (the moon within) and the full moon which scatters night,
the holy lord of the ritual order.

8\. And we worship the Yearly festivals in our sacrifice,
Maidhyô-zaremaya, Maidhyô-shema, Paiti*s*hahya, and Ayâthrima, the
furtherer (or breeder), the spender of virile strength, and Maidhyâirya,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and Hamaspathmaêdhaya, and the
Seasons (in which they are).

9\. And we worship with our sacrifice all the lords of the ritual order,
who are the thirty and three who approach the nearest around about us at
Hâvani, who are the lords of Righteousness the Best, and whose
observances were inculcated by Ahura Mazda, and uttered forth by
Zarathu*s*tra.

10\. And we worship Ahura and Mithra with our sacrifice, the lofty, and
imperishable, and holy two, and the stars, moon, and sun, among the
plants of the Baresman, and Mithra, the province-lord of all the
provinces, even Ahura Mazda, the radiant, the glorious, and the good,
valiant, and bountiful Fravashis of the saints.

11\. And we worship thee, the Fire, Ahura Mazda's son, together with all
the fires, and the good waters, the best and Mazda-made, and holy, even
all the waters which are Mazda-made and holy, and all the plants which
Mazda made.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

12\. And we worship the Mãthra Spe*n*ta with our sacrifice, the glorious
and of a truth, the law revealed against the Daêvas, the Zarathu*s*trian
law, and we worship with our sacrifice its long descent, and the good
Mazdayasnian Religion.

13\. And we worship Mount Ushi-darena, the Mazda-made, the glorious
Yazad, shining with holiness, and all the mountains that shine with
holiness, with abundant brilliance, Mazda-made, the holy lords of the
ritual order. And we worship the mighty Kingly glory Mazda-made, the
mighty glory, unconsumed and Mazda-made, and the good Sanctity, the
brilliant, the lofty, the powerful and the stately, delivering (men)
with its inherent power. Yea, we worship the Glory, and the Benefit
which are Mazda-made.

14\. And we worship the pious and good Blessing with our sacrifice, and
the pious man, the saint, and that Yazad, the mighty Curse of wisdom.

15\. And we worship these waters, lands, and plants, these places,
districts, pastures, and abodes with their springs of water, and we
worship this lord of the district with our sacrifice, who is Ahura Mazda
(Himself).

16\. And we worship all the greatest lords, the Day-lords in the day's
duration, and the Day-lords during daylight, and the Month-lords, and
the Year-lords.

17\. And we worship Haurvatâ*t* (who guards the water) and Ameretatâ*t*
(who guards the plants and the wood), and Sraosha (Obedience) the
blessed and the stately, who smites with the blow of victory, and makes
the settlements advance, the holy lord of the ritual order.

18\. And we worship Haoma with our sacrifice

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

and the Haoma-juice. And we worship the sacred Fravashi of Zarathu*s*tra
Spitâma the saint.

And we worship the wood-billets, and the perfume and thee, the Fire,
Ahura Mazda's son, the holy lord of the ritual order.

19\. And we worship the good, heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the saints.

20\. And we worship all the holy Yazads, and all the lords of the ritual
order at the time of Hâvani, and Sâvanghi, and all the greatest lords at
their (proper) time. (The YêNhê hâtãm follows.)

21\. The Ratu. As an Ahû (revered and) to be chosen, the priest speaks
forth to me.

The Zaotar. So let the Ratu from his Righteousness, holy and learned,
speak forth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_945"></span>[219:1](sbe31028.htm#fr_951) This chapter
differs from Y. II only in having yazamaidê instead of the formula ahmya
zaothrê baresmanaê*k*a—âyêsê yê*s*ti. Expressions for the same Zend
words are purposely varied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna VII. Presentation of Offerings by the Priest with the
Object of Propitiation Named](sbe31029)
