[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31013)  [Next](sbe31015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### YASNA XLIV.

#### QUESTIONS ASKED OF AHURA WITH THANKFULNESS AND DEVOTION.

Many verses may here have fallen out, or, on the other hand, the piece
having been made up of homogeneous, but not originally connected
fragments, has been left with some abrupt transitions. These, however,
occasion very little difficulty in exegetical treatment, and are also
not displeasing. The formula, 'This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright'
seems to have been suggested by Y. XXXI, 14. We might therefore look
upon this piece as composed later than Y. XXXI, but not necessarily in a
later generation, or even from another hand. In fact the style is
thoroughly homogeneous in certain places with that of pieces which we
ascribe without a doubt to Zarathu*s*tra, and the signs of struggle
point to the earliest period. It is possible that the words in Y. XXXI,
and the formula here were of common origin, neither having any extended
priority to the other, or the words may be original here, and derived in
Y. XXXI.

Whether Zarathu*s*tra, or another of the narrow circle of religious
leaders, was the composer throughout depends upon the further questions
already more than once broached, as to how far a corresponding
intellectual cultivation was extended at the period in the community,
and as to what is the probability of the existence of more than one man
in the small group, endowed with the peculiar qualities everywhere
manifested in these hymns (see remarks in the Introduction and
elsewhere). It is safest to say that Zarathu*s*tra composed most of the
matter here before us, and that the supplementary fragments were
composed under his dominating, if not immediate, influence.

Verses 1 and 2 seem an introduction, but hardly give added emphasis to
the fact that the following questions were expressions of devotion, and
only in a few instances appeals for knowledge. Verses 3-5 are certainly
questions intended to express veneration while naming particular objects
of devout inquiry. Verse 6 stands somewhat apart. Verses 7-11 enter into
details touching the moral and religious improvement of the people,
12-14 are polemical, 15 and 16 are prophetical, &c.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

1\. More closely; the composer beseeches Ahura to speak to him, and in a
manner characteristic of Himself as in distinction from the falsifying
utterance of the opposing religion, which was so familiarly described as
the religion of 'Falsehood.' He is entreated to reveal, as is His wont,
'the holy truth.' And the first question propounded to Him by the
composer, as comprehensive of all others, is how he may offer homage,
the homage of God Himself or of His bountiful spirit; (see mainyû in
verse 2). And he further asks that Ahura may speak to him, showing him
by what ceremonial he may conciliate him, and by what helps of grace
that spirit, or Ahura Himself, may be inclined to draw near to him in
accordance with his frequent prayer.

2\. Once more he asks how he may serve that Spirit as the foremost one
of Heaven (compare Y. XXXI, 8, and the Parsi vahi*s*t) who seeks for
this addition of praise to praise, for as the supreme claim to our
veneration, He had, as a guardian (Y. XXXI, 13) like Ahura in yet
another place, held off destruction from all believing saints and from
all repentant men (Y. XXXI, 3), and that although as 'the chief of
Heaven,' yet also as a benignant friend.

3\. From these introductory petitions, inserted perhaps before many lost
verses, he proceeds in another tone, although he may still be said to
say what is homogeneous to the foregoing: 'Yea, I ask how I may serve
Him, O Mazda! for He is indeed Thyself, and therefore, to show my
fervent homage, I ask: Who was, not the first establisher alone, but the
first father, of our holy Order as the personified Immortal, and that
not by creation, but by generation, as the parent generates the child?
Who fixed for stars and sun that "way," the undeviating path through
space, long noticed and studied by our fathers, as no random course, or
unknown progress save Thee?'

4\. The laws of gravitation then become the theme of his praise still
expressed in the form of questions, also the atmospheric phenomena,
especially the clouds driven by winds, not like the Maruts beyond the
mountains perhaps, but still terrible as winds can be. But he cannot
leave even the sublime objects of nature without thinking once more of
that spiritual power, the strength of righteous character, which was
justly more impressive, although still more familiar, and which he
designates, as ever, by the 'Good Mind.' Here this great Immortal is
left an immortal thought, and is spoken of as 'created,' not 'born' like
Asha (in verse third). 5. Beyond a doubt, recognising the satisfactions
of energetic life as well as the solaces of slumber, and as forming by
their contrast the necessary

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

change which builds up happiness, he alludes to the supreme arranger as
'well-skilled,' and asks: Who so wisely relieved the day by night? But,
again, he cannot close without reverting to the course of moral duty. 6.
Seized with a doubt which again only heightens the fervour of his
assurance, he asks whether indeed the facts which he proclaims are
really what they seem. Whether piety, although aided by the Good Mind,
implanted through Ahura's grace within us, will indeed at last, or soon,
assign the purified Realm to the servants of Ahura, who were there among
the masses before his eyes (taêibyô), or to Ahura Himself as their
sovereign controller (taibyô?). And, as including all rural riches in
herself, he asks for whom He had made the kine, not now wailing in her
grief (Y. XXIX, 9), but 'delight-affording,' on account of the influence
of Piety and Benevolence embodied in the Kingdom, inferring that God had
made her for these same (the faithful masses). 7. And going yet further
back; he asks who made that paternal and filial Piety itself, together
with the Realm which it should leaven? Answering his own inquiries by an
inference, he adds: I am pressing Thee with fulness in these questions,
O Thou bountiful Spirit (compare mainyu*s*, or mainyû in verse 2), the
maker of all (sun, stars, and holy qualities). 8. Turning now to verbal
revelations, he asks by what means his soul may prosper in moral
goodness, praying that it may indeed thus advance as the expected answer
would declare. 9. He prays that he may know how he may still further
sanctify that Religion which the King of the Holy Realm (compare
angh*e*u*s* vahi*s*tahyâ pourvîm), the one like Ahura (see Khshmâvatô
and thwâvãs, verse 1) would teach, dwelling in the same abode (in which
Ahura is also elsewhere said to dwell) with the holy Order, and the Good
Mind (see Y. XLVI, 16).

10\. Expressing all in a single word, he asks Ahura to reveal to him the
Daêna, the Insight, the substance of that Religion which was 'of all
things best,' and which alone could 'advance the settlements' with the
holy ritual and moral Order as its ally, which would also render all
their moral and. ceremonial actions, and moral principles just by means
of the divine Piety, which was their realisation in practice; and he
closes with the exclamation that the wishes and desires of his soul,
when most embued with wisdom, will seek for God.

11\. Following out the influence of Âramaiti (that personified Piety),
he asks to know by what practical means she may approach, and be
realised as the characteristic of those to whom the holy Insight should
be preached, avowing that God knows how prominent

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

he is in his devotion to the matter, and with what hatred seated 'in his
spirit,' he views the opposing Gods. 12. Then casting a searching glance
over the masses, and perhaps eyeing their several groups, each headed by
its 'chieftainship' (sarden*a*u s*e*nghahyâ), he cries, addressing Ahura
formally, but the people really (so also elsewhere frequently), and
says: 'Who is the righteous believer as regards these my questions asked
of God to express my belief in Him, and who is the sceptic? Which man
does the Angra Mainyu govern; or which is as evil as that chief
himself?' And, recalling the galling fact that some are tolerated who
not only do not assist but oppose his efforts, and perhaps having some
half-convinced sections in full sight, he cries with bitterness: 'Why is
this sinner, that chief who opposes me as Angra Mainyu opposed Ahura
(compare paiti-eretê with âa*t* môi paiti-eretê in Vendîdâd I), why is
he not believed to be what in very truth he is? Why is he still
countenanced?' 13. And then with a fierceness which reminds us of sâzdûm
snaithishâ (Y. XXXI, 18), but which is deeper because proposing a less
material remedy, he asks: 'Why must we abide the sight of these
opposers, representing their Lie-demon as their Goddess? How can I drive
her hence to Hell beneath, not to those who hesitate like these, pausing
before they condemn the evil party, but to those who are already filled
with their disobedience, and who, having no communion at all with us,
receive no light, like these, from the reflected glory of the truth, and
who have moreover neither sought nor shared like these, the counsels of
Thy Good Mind. Yea, how,' he reiterates, 'can I deliver up that Lying
Goddess, in the persons of her adherents, to the Holy Order, in the
persons of the saints, into their hands, to slay her, not with the
snaithi*s* only, but to destroy her as a falsehood by the Mãthras of Thy
doctrine, not barely to withstand these wicked corrupters, as we now do,
enduring the silence of these masses at their deeds (verse 12), their
fear of them, or their connivance with their creeds, but to spread
slaughter among them to their total overthrow?'

15\. He then presses on the coming collision, and prays to know to which
of the hosts (compare ãsay*a*u, Y. XXXI, 2) that claim the urvâtâ, Ahura
will give the prize. 16. And who, he further asks, shall be the champion
who shall lead the victors, the verethrem*g*an (compare sar*g*â, Y.
XXIX, 3) who will thus take up the snaithi*s* and the Mãthra (verse 14),
and so at once contend for 'both the worlds.' And he wishes him rot
alone pointed out, but approached, as Zarathustra was approached (Y.
XLIII), by an obedient will, and moved to his holy work by the inspiring
Good

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind of Ahura, be
that champion Ratu whosoever the Lord might wish. Salvation in the shape
of success in his great attempt should be his portion (Y. XLIII, 1). 17.
Half intimating that he himself may be the coming man, he begs to know
when he can have that conference in which, as in the desired
h*e*mpar*s*ti and dar*s*ti of Y. XXXIII, 6, he may communicate more
closely with Ahura, and through the revelation which might be
vouchsafed, may become a protecting leader to secure the ever-named
'abiding two,' 'Weal' and 'Immortality,' which were the 'better than the
good,' the 'vahi*s*ta' of the saints.

18\. A preliminary wish arising, he asks that he may receive the
honorary gift of mated mares and a camel, as material for sacrifice
before a battle (?), the highest interests of the people even, their
lasting Welfare, demanding that he should receive this help. 19. For the
monarch, or leading chief, who may withhold this justly deserved and
needed help, or honour, he declares by the terms of his following
question, that some instant judgment will be forthcoming, for the
threats of the future condemnation seem for the moment only trite.

20\. As a peroration, he appeals to the reason of the wavering groups,
among the masses who still delay to call evil evil (verse 12), and he
asks whether the Daêvas, as represented by their adherents, had ever
been good rulers, when they had the power. Were not robbery and violence
then the law with them as now? And did not the Kine, as representing the
sacred herds and people, lift up her wailing voice?

(The piece from verse 12 seems to constitute a religious war-song. These
verses seem not to have been originally connected with the calm and
thankful contemplations in verses 1-10, but later united with them.
Verses 12-20 stand in the closest connection with Y. XLVI, which has,
however, preserved more of the elements of sorrow and discouragement
which influenced the leader and his followers at times. See also XLIII,
11.)

Translation.

1\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; when praise is to be
offered, how (shall I complete) the praise of the One like You <span
id="fr_519"></span>[1](#fn_518), O Mazda? Let

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the One like Thee declare it earnestly to the friend who is such as I,
thus through Thy Righteousness (within us) to offer friendly help <span
id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_519) to us, so that the One like Thee <span
id="fr_521"></span>[2](#fn_520) may draw near <span
id="fr_522"></span>[3](#fn_521) us through Thy Good Mind (within the
soul).

2\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright, how, in pleasing Him, may
we serve the supreme one of (Heaven) the better world <span
id="fr_523"></span>[4](#fn_522); yea, how to serve that chief who may
grant us those (blessings of His grace, and) who will seek for (grateful
requitals at our hands); for He, bountiful (as He is) through the
Righteous Order, (will hold off) ruin <span
id="fr_524"></span>[5](#fn_523) from (us) all, guardian (as He is) for
both the worlds, O Spirit <span id="fr_525"></span>[6](#fn_524) Mazda!
and a friend.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

3\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright: Who by generation <span
id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_525) was the first father of the Righteous
Order (within the world)? Who gave the (recurring) sun and stars <span
id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_526) their (undeviating) way? Who established
that whereby the moon waxes, and whereby she wanes <span
id="fr_528"></span>[3](#fn_527), save Thee <span
id="fr_529"></span>[4](#fn_528)? These things, O Great Creator! would I
know <span id="fr_530"></span>[5](#fn_529), and others likewise still.

4\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright, who from beneath hath
sustained the earth and the clouds <span id="fr_531"></span>[6](#fn_530)
above that they do not fall? Who made the waters and the plants? Who to
the wind has yoked on the storm-clouds, the swift and fleetest two <span
id="fr_532"></span>[7](#fn_531)? Who, O Great Creator! is the inspirer
of the good thoughts (within our souls)?

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

5\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; who, as a skilful artisan,
hath made the lights and the darkness <span
id="fr_533"></span>[1](#fn_532)? Who, as thus skilful, hath made sleep
and the zest (of waking hours)? Who (spread) the Auroras, the noontides
and midnight, monitors to discerning (man), duty's true (guides) <span
id="fr_534"></span>[2](#fn_533)?

6\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright these things which I shall
speak forth, if they are truly thus. Doth the Piety (which we cherish)
in reality increase <span id="fr_535"></span>[3](#fn_534) the sacred
orderliness within our actions? To these Thy true saints hath she given
the Realm through the Good Mind. For whom hast Thou made the
Mother-kine, the producer of joy <span id="fr_536"></span>[4](#fn_535)?

7\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; who fashioned Âramaiti
(our piety) the beloved, together with Thy Sovereign Power? Who, through
his guiding wisdom <span id="fr_537"></span>[5](#fn_536), hath made the
son revering the father? (Who made him beloved <span
id="fr_538"></span>[6](#fn_537)?) With (questions

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

such as) these, so abundant <span id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_538), O
Mazda! I press Thee, O bountiful Spirit, (Thou) maker of all!

8\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright, that I may ponder <span
id="fr_540"></span>[2](#fn_539) these which are Thy revelations, O
Mazda! and the words which were asked (of Thee) by Thy Good Mind (within
us), and that whereby we may attain <span
id="fr_541"></span>[3](#fn_540), through Thine Order, to this life's
perfection. Yea, how may my soul with joyfulness <span
id="fr_542"></span>[4](#fn_541) increase in goodness? Let it thus <span
id="fr_543"></span>[5](#fn_542) be <span
id="fr_544"></span>[6](#fn_543).

9\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright, how to myself shall I
hallow <span id="fr_545"></span>[7](#fn_544) the Faith of Thy people,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

which the beneficent kingdom's lord hath taught me, even the admonitions
which He called Thine equal, hath taught me through His lofty (and most
righteous Sovereignty and) Power, as He dwells in like abode <span
id="fr_546"></span>[1](#fn_545) with Thine Order and Thy Good Mind?

10\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright that holy Faith which is
of all things best, and which, going on hand in hand with Thy people,
shall further my lands in Asha, Thine order, and, through the words of
Âramaiti (our piety), shall render actions just. The prayers of mine
understanding will seek <span id="fr_547"></span>[2](#fn_546) for Thee,
O Ahura!

11\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; how to these your
(worshippers) may (that Piety once again and evermore) approach, to them
to whom O Lord, Thy Faith is uttered? Yea, I beseech of Thee to tell me
this, I who am known to Thee as Thy foremost <span
id="fr_548"></span>[3](#fn_547) of (servants); all other (Gods, with
their

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

polluted worshippers), I look upon with (my) spirit's <span
id="fr_549"></span>[1](#fn_548) hate <span
id="fr_550"></span>[2](#fn_549).

12\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; who is the righteous one
in that regard in which <span id="fr_551"></span>[3](#fn_550) I ask Thee
my question? And who is evil? For which is the wicked? Or which is
himself the (foremost) wicked one? And the vile man who stands against
me (in this gain of) Thy blessing, wherefore <span
id="fr_552"></span>[4](#fn_551) is he not held and believed to be the
sinner that he is?

13\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright, how shall I banish this
Demon-of-the-Lie from us hence to those beneath who are filled <span
id="fr_553"></span>[5](#fn_552) with rebellion? The friends of
Righteousness (as it lives in Thy saints) gain no light (from their
teachings), nor have they loved the questions which Thy Good Mind (asks
in the soul <span id="fr_554"></span>[6](#fn_553))!

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

14\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; how shall I deliver that
Demon-of-the-Lie into the two hands of Thine Order <span
id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_554) (as he lives in our hosts) to cast her
down to death through Thy Mãthras of doctrine, and to send mighty
destruction <span id="fr_556"></span>[2](#fn_555) among her evil
believers, to keep those deceitful and harsh oppressors from reaching
their (fell) aims <span id="fr_557"></span>[3](#fn_556)?

15\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright. If through Thy
Righteousness (within our souls) Thou hast the power over this for
my <span id="fr_558"></span>[4](#fn_557) protection, when the two hosts
shall meet in hate (as they strive) for those vows which Thou dost
desire to maintain, how, O Mazda! and to which of both wilt Thou
give <span id="fr_559"></span>[5](#fn_558) the day <span
id="fr_560"></span>[6](#fn_559)?

16\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

who smites with victory <span id="fr_561"></span>[1](#fn_560) in the
protection (of all) who exist, and for the sake of, and by means of Thy
doctrine? Yea, clearly reveal a lord having power <span
id="fr_562"></span>[2](#fn_561) (to save us) for both lives. Then let
(our) Obedience <span id="fr_563"></span>[3](#fn_562) with Thy Good Mind
draw near to that (leader), O Mazda! yea, to him to whomsoever <span
id="fr_564"></span>[4](#fn_563) Thou (shalt) wish that he should come.

17\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; how, O Mazda! shall I
proceed to that (great) conference <span id="fr_565"></span>[5](#fn_564)
with You, to that consummation of Your own, when my spoken wish <span
id="fr_566"></span>[6](#fn_565) shall be (effected) unto me, (the
desire) to be in the chieftainship <span id="fr_567"></span>[7](#fn_566)
(and supported) by (the hope of) Weal and Immortality (those saving
powers of Thy grace), and by that (holy) Mãthra (Thy word of thought)
which fully guides our way through Righteousness (within).

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

18\. (And, having gained Thine audience and Thine Order's sacred
chieftainship), then I ask of Thee, O Ahura! and tell me aright, how
shall I acquire that Thy Righteous Order's prize, ten (costly) mares
male-mated, and with them the camel <span
id="fr_568"></span>[1](#fn_567) (those signs of honour and blessing for
Thy chief. I ask Thee for these gifts for sacrifice). For it was told me
for the sake of our Welfare (in our salvation), and of our Immortality,
in what manner Thou <span id="fr_569"></span>[2](#fn_568) shalt
give <span id="fr_570"></span>[3](#fn_569) to these (Thy conquering
hosts) both of these Thy (gifts <span id="fr_571"></span>[4](#fn_570) of
grace).

19\. This I ask Thee, O Ahura! tell me aright; (in the case of the
recreant, of him) who does not give this (honoured) gift to him who hath
earned it; yea, who does not give it to this (veracious tiller of the
earth, to him who in no respect shows favour to the Demon-of-the-Lie,
even to the) correct speaker <span id="fr_572"></span>[5](#fn_571) (of
Thy sacrificial word), what shall be his sentence at

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the first (now at this time, and because of this false dealing? I ask
it), knowing well his doom at last <span id="fr_573"></span>[1](#fn_572)

20\. (And how as to our deluded foes?) Have Daêva-(worshippers) e’er
reigned as worthy kings? (This verily I ask of Thee, the
Daêva-worshippers) who fight <span id="fr_574"></span>[2](#fn_573) for
these (who act amiss? Have they well reigned) by whom the Karpan and the
Usi*g*(k) gave the (sacred) Kine to Rapine <span
id="fr_575"></span>[3](#fn_574), whence, too, the Kavian in persistent
strength <span id="fr_576"></span>[4](#fn_575) has flourished? (And
these have also never given us tribal wealth nor blessings), nor for the
Kine have they brought waters to the fields for the sake of the
Righteous Order (in our hosts), to further on their growth (and
welfare)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_518"></span>[111:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_519) Some who seldom
cite the Pahlavi follow it here; nîyâyi*s*no zak mûn aêtûno nîyâyi*s*no
î Lekûm \[dînô\]. Otherwise one might <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
read nemê with B.V.S. (variation) in Y. LVIII, 3, and render, 'how shall
I bow myself in your worship?'

<span id="fn_519"></span>[112:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_520) The Pahl.
hamkar*d*âr is likewise followed. The alteration to hâkôrenâ is very
interesting, but, I think, hardly necessary.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[112:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_521) Observe the great
difficulty in referring Khshmâvatô to a human subject. Here we have 'the
homage of the One like You (of Yours(?)' some would say); in Y. XXXIII,
8 we have Yasnem Mazdâ (Ahurâ) Khshmâvatô; in Y. XXXIV, 2 Khshmâvatô
vahmê; in Y. XLIX, 6 Tãm daênãm yâ Khshmâvatô Ahurâ. Khshmâvatô is
sometimes merely a way of saying 'of Thyself,' as mavaitê = to me.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[112:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_522) Observe also the
emphasis on his 'drawing near'; otherwise 'let Your one declare it to my
friend' (?).

<span id="fn_522"></span>[112:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_523) See Roth, Y. XXXI,
8. See, however, also de Harlez's suggestion, perhaps after the hint of
the Pahlavi: 'qu’elle a été l’origine?' Here we have another instance
where an entire verse seems to allude to Ahura in the third person with
an address to Him thrown in, or at the close. In connection with
angh*e*u*s* vahi*s*tahyâ Ahura must be the pourvya, as in Y. XXXI, 8,
where Roth renders vornehmster. The guardian is also Ahura (see Y. XXXI,
13).

<span id="fn_523"></span>[112:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_524) I cannot fully
accept the hint of the Pahlavi here as others do who seldom heed it. I
do not think that 'sin' is so much indicated as 'destruction.'

<span id="fn_524"></span>[112:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_525) Mainyû is
suspiciously expressive as a vocative; perhaps 'by spiritual power'
would be safer.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[113:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_526) 'As a generator
(?).'

<span id="fn_526"></span>[113:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_527) Bartholomae
follows the Pahlavi here as rendered by Ner. putting hv*en*g and
star*e*m (-ãm) in the genitive, which is in itself far better than to
regard dâ*t* as governing two accusatives. One would, however, rather
expect hv*en*g starãm adhvânem dâ*t*.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[113:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_528) All follow the
Pahlavi here, which renders with allowable freedom. Nerefsaitî (= Pahl.
nerefsê*d*; Ner. nimîlati; Persian kâhad) might possibly be explained as
a nasalised form of an Aryan correspondent to arbha, as na*s* = a*s*.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[113:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_529) Possibly from
thine influence (?).

<span id="fn_529"></span>[113:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_530) The infinitive
vîduyê (= vîdvê) lies here in an unusual place, at the end of the
sentence. It is because the word has no stress upon it. The emphasis
rests on the objects which he desires to know about; the entire
connection deals with 'knowing'; it has no prominence.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[113:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_531) This rendering is
not supported by the Pahlavi, which seems to report a rendering from
some text with an a privative, and a form of dar. The 'unsupported'
object might mean the 'air-space.' See the suggestion of Bartholomae
'the earth and the air-space,' comparing the later Sanskrit.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[113:7](sbe31014.htm#fr_532) Or 'for velocity,'
adverbially. Velocity, however, in the abstract as the object yoked-on,
is rather too finely drawn. I should prefer <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> the fleet ones, the lightnings. My rendering follows the
indication of another, as a dual, but not as to full exegesis. One
naturally supposes the yoking together of the winds and dark clouds to
be meant.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[114:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_533) Recall svàr yád
á*s*mann adhipâ´ u ándho.—Rv. VII, 88, 2.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[114:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_534) Ner.: 'Who gave us
the lights with his keen discrimination? And who the darkness? Who, in
his keen discrimination, gave (us our) sleep and waking; \[that is, our
diligence and activity?\] Who is he who gave us the time of hu*s*aina,
and the time of rapithvana \[ \], and the method and calculation of him
who discerns by means of the just rule \[ \]?'

<span id="fn_534"></span>[114:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_535) So also the
Pahlavi indicates by 'stavar.'

<span id="fn_535"></span>[114:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_536) So I prefer; but
the indication of the Pahlavi deserves an alternative 'giver of bounty';
skar = kar.

'G*e*u*s* azy*a*u' was later a common expression for a mature animal,
but possibly vulgarised from its older special use here.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[114:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_537) Root nî (?).

<span id="fn_537"></span>[114:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_538) I thus add as the
Pahlavi translator indicates such an element in uzemem.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[115:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_539) Frakhshnî = in
abundance (Pahl. kabed; Ner. pra*k*uram; Persian MS. bisyar). The
thought refers back to anyâ*k*â vîduyê \[-vê\].

<span id="fn_539"></span>[115:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_540) Haug sagaciously
renders as if m*en*dâidyâi were a miswriting for p*en*dâidyâi, which is
in itself very possible, as an 'm' <span id="img_11500"></span>
![](img/11500.jpg) looks much like an inverted <span
id="img_11501"></span> ![](img/11501.jpg) in MSS. So the Pahlavi records
the irregularity also, from which Haug derived his idea. But Haug
explains the word as an allusion to the five prayer-hours of the day. I
doubt very greatly whether the five prayer-hours existed at the date of
the composition of this passage. Such regulations grew up much later.
The Pahlavi translator indicates elsewhere an accusative (m*en*g = mãm)
with an infinitive 'that I should give forth,' which is in itself far
from impossible. He was aware (!) that m*en*g could also equal man; see
Y. LIII, 5.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[115:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_541) Vaêdyâi is
infinitively used for vôi*z*dyâi.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[115:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_542) I do think that it
is necessary on the whole to postulate two similar words here (although
Geldner's suggestion is most keen and interesting). Urvâkh*s*anguha and
urvâkh*s*ukhti do not favour a comparison with vra*g* here. The Pahlavi
is indifferent: *K*îgûn denman î li rûbânŏ zak î *s*apîr
hû-ravâkh-manîh? So Ner. uttamânanda*h*. Barth. beglückend.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[115:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_543) Kâ-tâ = kéna-téna.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[115:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_544) Or, 'let those
things happen to me;' gam means 'come' more frequently than 'go,' here.
Lit. 'let it thus advance.'

<span id="fn_544"></span>[115:7](sbe31014.htm#fr_545) *K*îgûn denman î
li dînô yô*s*-dâsar î avê*g*ak yô*s*-dâsaryôm? Ner.: Katham ida*m* aham
yat\* dîni*m* pavitratarâm pavitrayâmi; \[kila, dîni*m* katha*m*
pravartamânâ*m* karomi\]? As Zarathu*s*tra is <span id="page_116">p.
116</span> represented as sanctifying the Fire (in Y. IX, 1), so here he
would doubly sanctify the Faith itself. He would 'hallow its name' and
meaning.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[116:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_546)
Pavana*s*-hamdemûnîh-ketrûnê*d* \[pavan hamkhadûkîh\].

<span id="fn_546"></span>[116:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_547) I cannot regard
the caesura in this verse as possessing ordinary importance, the
ma*hv*y*a*u (mahy*a*u) *k*istôi*s* is especially dependent on the
following words. The Pahlavi translator hints at an important solution,
which is, that a pause should be made before us*e*n; 'the wish of mine
understanding wishes, and I wish (am wishing); Khûrsand hômanam = I am
content.' If we can accept a break (a possibility far too little
recognised), the u*se*n as representing a nom. sing. would refer back to
the meaning in ma*hv*y*a*u (mahy*a*u). But reading î*s*tî*s* (as
irregular for î*s*tayô on account of the metre) we might regard us*e*n
as a third pl. Or shall we take it as a quasi-third singular, us*e*n
being usãm (*e*n = the nasal vowel; comp. û*k*ãm as a third sing. imper.
after Barth)? Let 'the wish (î*s*ti*s*) of my enlightened understanding
wish for Thee.'

<span id="fn_547"></span>[116:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_548) Compare 'aêshãm
tôi, Ahura! *e*hmâ pourutemâi*s* dastê.' <span id="page_117">p.
117</span> Auserkoren is a fine but a bold rendering. Election is,
however, included in all divine prescience.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[117:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_549) I have no doubt
whatever, but that mainy*e*u*s* and dvaêshanghâ belong together.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[117:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_550) The Pahlavi
translation is as follows: 'That which I ask of Thee, tell me aright, O
Aûharmazd! when shall the perfect mind come to those persons \[that is,
when does the mind of my disciples become perfect\]? When shall it come
to those who declare this Thy Religion, O Aûharmazd? Grant to me before
these the proclamation of the truth. Against every other spirit which is
malevolent I keep my guard.'

<span id="fn_550"></span>[117:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_551) Yâi*s*
adverbially, or possibly, 'with whom I question.'

<span id="fn_551"></span>[117:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_552) *K*ya*n*gha*t* is,
I think, simply the equivalent for *k*î (?) angha*t* = quî fit, how does
it happen that? 'Stands' free for 'comes.'

<span id="fn_552"></span>[117:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_553) The Pahlavi on the
contrary takes peren*a*unghô in the sense of combating, pavan
anyôkhshî*d*â´rîh patkârênd = '(who) are opposing you through
disobedience.' It is far from certain that he does not indicate some
improvement in text, or rendering.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[117:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_554) Or, 'the counsels
of holy men.'

<span id="fn_554"></span>[118:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_555) Ashâi with
Geldner.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[118:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_556) The Pahlavi
anticipates us in the correct general sense here. It has nas,hôni*s*nŏ.
The Persian MS. renders the Pahlavi, hamâvandî nîst dehand î darwand.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[118:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_557) Anâshê seems
regarded as an infinitive by the Pahlavi translator, anayâtûni*s*no.
'For the destruction of those deceivers' is an obvious alternative to
the rendering above (â nashê?).

<span id="fn_557"></span>[118:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_558) Geldner and Roth
render ma*t* = Sanskrit mad; otherwise 'with complete protection.' Or is
ma*t* ablative for genitive: If thou rulest over me to afford me
protection? The Pahlavi affords no indication.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[118:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_559) The Pahlavi
translator erred widely in his attempt to render the word anao*k*anghâ.
As it is certain that his MSS. differed from ours often, they probably
did so here. The verse alludes beyond a question to some expected battle
in a religious war, and perhaps in a religious civil war. It is the most
positive allusion to the 'strife of the two parties' (V. XXXI, 2) which
has come down to us. It was a struggle concerning the religious vows, or
doctrines; avâi*s* urvâtâi*s* yâ tû Mazdâ dîderegh*z*ô.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[118:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_560) The Pahlavi
renders vananãm by 'good thing,' explaining 'the sovereign power.'

<span id="fn_560"></span>[119:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_561) Verethrem-*g*â
thwâ, following the Pahlavi with Westergaard, Geldner, and Bartholomae.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[119:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_562) Compare Y. XXIX, 2
and Y. XXVIII, 3; or it may mean 'promise to establish' (Barth.).
*K*i*z*dî, however, hardly seems to need an infinitive with it; it may
mean 'appoint.' Compare dá*m*su (patnî) for a better sense than
'house-lord,' also for d*en*g patôi*s*.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[119:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_563) This casts
additional light on the 'one that should come' in Y. XLIII, 7, 9, 11,
13, 15.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[119:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_564) This recalls ahmâi
yahmâi u*s*tâ kahmâi*k*î*t*.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[119:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_565) The comparison
with *g*ar has long circulated among Zendists. Many adopt it. It agrees
admirably with the Pahlavi as to sense: Aîmat, Aûharmazd! damânŏ
kar*d*ârîh î Lekûm, when is Your appointment of the time?

<span id="fn_565"></span>[119:6](sbe31014.htm#fr_566) The Pahlavi va
mûni*k* zak i li gôbi*s*no hômand khvâstar.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[119:7](sbe31014.htm#fr_567) Va sardâr
yehevûni*s*nîh madam Haurvada*d* va Amerôdâ*d*; Ner. Svâmino
bhavishyanti upari Avirdâde Amirdâde; comp. also Y. XLIX, 8
fraê*s*t*a*unghô *a*unghâmâ. Professor Jolly compares bû*z*dyâi with
φύεσθαι (Inf. s. 194). The long since circulated comparison with bhu*g*
seems to me hardly so probable. It may, however, deserve an alternative:
'to enjoy Weal and Immortality'; but accusatives <span id="page_120">p.
120</span> do not fall so naturally to the end of the sentence in Gâthic
or Vedic, without preceding related or qualifying words.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[120:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_568) Those suspected of
no partisanship for the Pahlavi translation follow it here as against
Haug, who translated the words u*s*trem*k*â by et amplius! It means a
camel; so the Pahlavi translator rendered many centuries ago before
Europeans even knew what the Indian úsh*t*ra meant, which simple analogy
Neryosangh first drew. Horses were material for sacrifice among the
Persians according to Herodotus. The reasons for the prayer are not
fully expressed.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[120:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_569) So better than as
a first person aorist subjunctive, if taêibyô is to be read. The
Pahlavi, however, read taibyô, which is not lightly to be passed over.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[120:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_570) The rendering
'take' has long circulated. I do not, however, prefer it here.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[120:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_571) Weal and
Immortality, but hî might refer to the two objects, 'the mares' and the
'camel.'

<span id="fn_571"></span>[120:5](sbe31014.htm#fr_572) The ideal
Zarathu*s*trian; comp. Y. XXXI, 15; XLIX, 9.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[121:1](sbe31014.htm#fr_573) So also the
Pahlavi followed by all. Ka*d*âr valman pavan zak vinâsi*s*nŏ aîtŏ
fratûm; \[aîga*s* pavan-vinâskârîh pâ*d*afrâs fratûm maman\]? Âkâs
hômanam zak mûn valman aîtŏ afdûm \[mamana*s* darvandîh\]? Ner. (with
regard to him) who does not give the reward which has come for the one
fitted for, or deserving of, it \[to *G*arathustra's equal\], (the
reward) which the truthful man; \[that is, the good man\] is giving to
him, what is the first thing which happens through this sin of his?
\[that is, what is his first chastisement in consequence of this
fault?\] (For) I am aware of what his punishment shall be in the end \[
\].

<span id="fn_573"></span>[121:2](sbe31014.htm#fr_574) The Pahlavi
translator either had a text with some form of pâ, or was otherwise
misled. He renders mûn netrûnd, but gives the word the adverse sense of
'hindering' in the gloss. Ner., however, has pratiskhalanti which points
to peshyêi*n*tî, and also tends to show that other MSS. of the Pahlavi
(and among them the one used by Ner.) read differently from our three,
K5, D. J., and the Persian transliteration. Kãm = Ved. kám with dat.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[121:3](sbe31014.htm#fr_575) See Y. XXIX, 1.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[121:4](sbe31014.htm#fr_576) Professor Wilhelm
'vigour' (De Infin. p. 14).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XLV](sbe31015)
