[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31008)  [Next](sbe31010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### YASNA XXXI.

#### THE PROGRESS AND STRUGGLES OF THE CAUSE.

This composition differs from that in XXX as descending from the more
general to the particular, and from the doctrinal to the practical. One
might even trace an immediate connection, urvâtâ occurring in the last
verse of the one and in the first of the other. It is, of course, very
possible that the verses before us are only a remnant of those which
originally constituted the piece, and here and there one may have been
interpolated from other scriptures.

Some writers prefer to assume a loss of the original text or an addition
to it at the smallest change of tone, and to assume also a change of
subject with it. I do not regard it as very useful to lay too much
stress upon these occurrences.

Whether caused by gaps or interpolations, they do not at all affect the
fact that the subject-matter is homogeneous and contemporaneous; and,
probably, like many more modern compositions, the verses gain in
rhetorical effect by being weeded of repetitions.

We might divide as follows 1, 2, an address to the congregation to be
connected with XXX as its concluding words; 3-5, an address to Ahura; 6,
an address to the faithful; 7-17, to Ahura; 18, to the congregation; 19,
to Ahura; 20, 21, to the congregation; 22, an addition.

Treating the section then as containing homogeneous matter which
combines well into a unit, I proceed as follows. The sage chants his
hymn in the presence of the multitude as before.

1\. He declares that while he is reciting things unwillingly heard by
the hostile party, those same truths are valued as the best of existing
things by those who are sincerely devoted to Mazda, their good
disposition quickening their perception.

2\. He then declares that if the truths of the holy Religion are not yet
clearly seen by the instrumentalities provided, he will approach them
still more effectively in accordance with the especial regulation of the
spiritual chieftainship, which Ahura Mazda had prepared in response to
the lament of the soul of the Kine; i.e. of the Iranian herds and people
possibly as representing the entire holy, or clean, creation upon earth.
And he further asserts that this regulation concerns the struggle of the
two parties, and will bring the cause of the Righteous Order to a
successful issue.

3\. Changing his address to Ahura, he proceeds to pray at once

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

for that satisfying decision which would be the natural result of the
regulation just promised, and which could be given by the
instrumentality of the Sacred Fire and holy ritual, affording mental
keenness to the two contending parties. And he declares that this is the
doctrine which should be proclaimed for the conversion of mankind. Here
we observe that the Zarathu*s*trian Mazda-worship was aggressive and
missionary in its spirit, and in a proselyting sense by no means
indifferent to the final destiny of the Gentile world. (The later and
traditional system announced indeed the restoration and so the
conversion of all men, and that not as an object proposed to the efforts
of charity, but as a necessary result (so by inference; see Bundahi*s*
(West), pp. 126, 129). I can find no trace of this in the Gâthas.

Here we have only the effort to convert.)

4\. Addressing all the Bountiful Immortals, and with the striking title
of the Ahuras of Mazda, he prays for the establishment of the 'mighty
kingdom' by means of which he might overcome the personified and
aggressive falsehood of the opposing and persecuting Daêva-worshippers.

5\. In order to enable himself to fulfil his mission, he asks for
prophetic and judicial knowledge as to what ought to be done, or as to
what is about to happen in the immediate future.

6\. He lauds the Mãthra which we may suppose him to recognise as
delivered to him afresh in answer to his prayer for prophetic light, and
he praises co-ordinately with the Word of God that Sovereign Authority
of Ahura, which was to be established in a kingdom where goodness would
increase, and be prosperous, if not predominant.

7\. He takes the heavenly bodies as evidence of the wisdom of Him who
created the Sacred Order personified as the 'Immortal' Asha, and also
the Good Mind, his equal. And he ascribes the support and extension of
their hallowing influence to Ahura, because He never changes.

8\. He reiterates, in expressions which form the basis for another hymn,
his conception of Mazda as the supreme object of devotion, as the father
of the Good Mind personified as His child, as the creator of the
Righteous Order, and as both the controller and the judge of human
actions. Therefore the Good Mind and Righteousness are to be worshipped
as standing in the closest possible relation to him.

9\. He ascribes the 'Immortal' Piety to Him as well. She is His own, and
elsewhere His own daughter. He is declared, as in

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

chapter XXIX, to be the Creator of the Kine, and of Understanding, (His
own intelligence), to guide Him in the disposition of the destiny of the
holy Iranian people. And according to it He makes the path for the Kine,
which as a matter of course has no meaning as applied to bucolics, but
is full of meaning when read in view of the wail of the Kine's Soul in
chapter XXIX, and of the intervention of the Deity in her behalf, for He
actually appointed Zarathu*s*tra to meet her necessities. He adds,
however, that her free choice is not abolished by the construction 'of
this path.' It is elsewhere called the 'religion of the
Saviour-prophets,' and she is free to proceed in it, guided by the first
prophet, the ideal husbandman, or she can follow the profaner nomad.

10\. But he thankfully exclaims that she does not pause in indecision,
nor does she choose perversely. She selects the guardian appointed by
Ahura, the diligent and pious husbandman, elsewhere identified with
Zarathu*s*tra himself. He is rich with the spiritual wealth of the Good
Mind; and she rejects in his favour the idle and free-booting nomad,
excluding him from all share in the sacred religious system.

11\. The composer then delineates the struggle which inevitably follows
this establishment of the needed means of deliverance. When Mazda has
completed the inspiration of doctrines, teaching whither the one endowed
with free volition (like the Kine \[verse 9\]) should direct his choice
in action (12), there upon the spot, as it were, the ignorant
Daêva-worshipper makes himself heard beside God's spokesman. But the
prophet is consoled by the reflection that the pious mind will not
question the evil Spirit, or the good Spirit superficially. It searches
both the Spirits, questioning them, as it were, in their very home.
(Hence it is that Ahura speaks so fully concerning Angra Mainyu,
delineating his opposition to Him in extended detail. See XLV, 2.)

13\. The composer is still more reanimated by the certainty that Ahura
is gazing into the depths of all questions, trivial and profound; which
is to say that he observes most closely the men who are discussing them.
And he declares that he also sees the cruel injustice of the punishments
which the tyrants visit upon the smallest offences, as well as the more
flagrant wickedness of those who persecute his adherents without even a
pretence of justice.

14\. As he recalls the divine forecasting omniscience, he asks Ahura
once more concerning the future which was close at hand with its
portentous events. And he inquires as to the nature of the veritable and
not iniquitous confessions, which were properly due to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

be made by the righteous believer in order to avert the impending
calamities, and secure the upper hand in the struggle for the throne.
And he inquires also as to the proper expiatory prayers which were to be
offered by the believer. He does not however fail to inquire analogously
concerning the wicked, nor to ask how they, as well as the righteous,
shall be situated in the final consummation.

15\. Particularising as to the latter, he asks what shall be the
punishment for those who succeed in installing an evil monarch, one of
the Daêva-party, a prince who cannot exist without the ruthless
persecution of the pious husbandman, who repudiates the Lie-demon
presiding over the counsels and efforts of the opposing religion.

16\. He further asks how and by what actions the wise man may become
like Ahura, or his faithful adherent, the expressions used implying deep
religious feeling.

17\. Striving to arouse the perceptions of his hearers, he inquires as
to which one of the two parties holds to the greater or more important
religion, the disciple of Asha, the personified Righteous Order Ahura's
immediate creature (see above), or the opponent. And he prays that no
blind guide may deceive him, or those who belong to him, 'but that the
enlightened, yea, even Ahura Himself, may speak to him, and become the
indicator and demonstrator of the truth.'

18\. Closing this address to the Deity, he turns to the congregation,
vehemently forbidding them to listen to the doctrines of his opponents,
warning them against the ruin and death which would ensue, and fiercely
appealing to the sword.

19\. Once more addressing Ahura, he prays that they may on the contrary
listen to Him who has power to vindicate the conscientious
Zarathu*s*trian, inculcating veracity upon him, and encouraging him in
its practice; and this by means of the holy sacrifice, or ordeal of the
Fire.

20\. He solemnly warns those who would seduce the righteous of their
ultimate fate, and adds that their sorrows will be self-induced, if they
persevere in their hostility. Their own consciences (as we see from
Ya*s*t XXII) would not only bring on their ruin, but would form a part
of their punishment.

21\. On the other hand, happiness and immortality will be the lot of the
faithful. And these 'eternal two' will be given to them, accompanied by
the fulness of Righteousness, and the exuberant vigour of the Good and
Kindly Mind within them and bestowing its blessings upon them.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

22\. In conclusion he apostrophises the manifest certainty of the truths
which he declares, and, addressing Ahura, animates the faithful not
merely with the hope of the objective recompense, but with the prospect
of being efficient as servants of God.

Translation.

1\. These doctrines (therefore) we are earnestly declaring to You as we
recite them forth from memory, words (till now) unheard <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176) (with faith) by those who by means of
the doctrinal vows <span id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_177) of the harmful
Lie are delivering the settlements of Righteousness to death, but words
which are of the best unto those who are heartily devoted to Ahura <span
id="fr_179"></span>[3](#fn_178).

2\. And if by this means the indubitable truths <span
id="fr_180"></span>[4](#fn_179) are not seen in the soul <span
id="fr_181"></span>[5](#fn_180), then as better (than these words) I
will come to you all (in my person) with

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

that power, and in that way according to which Ahura Mazda knows and
appoints His ruler <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_182), that ruler
over both the two (struggling) bands <span
id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_183), in order that we (in obedience to him),
may live according to Righteousness <span
id="fr_185"></span>[3](#fn_184).

3\. And that keenness, that deciding satisfaction, which Thou hast given
by (Thy) Spirit <span id="fr_186"></span>[4](#fn_185), and (Thy) Fire,
and by Thy Righteousness (itself) to the two battling <span
id="fr_187"></span>[5](#fn_186) (sides), do Thou declare unto us, O
Ahura! that vow which is for the seeing <span
id="fr_188"></span>[6](#fn_187) (as those endowed with mental light).
Yea, do Thou declare this that we may know it, O Mazda! With the tongue
of Thy mouth do Thou speak it (that as I preach its mighty truths <span
id="fr_189"></span>[7](#fn_188)) I may make all the living
believers <span id="fr_190"></span>[8](#fn_189)!

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

4\. And when the Divine Righteousness shall be inclined to my
appeal <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190), and with him all those
(remaining ones who are as) Mazda's <span
id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_191) (own) Ahuras then with the blessedness
(of the reward), with (my) Piety and with Thy Best Mind (active within
me), I will pray <span id="fr_193"></span>[3](#fn_192) for that mighty
Kingdom by whose force <span id="fr_194"></span>[4](#fn_193) we may
smite the Lie-demon <span id="fr_195"></span>[5](#fn_194).

5\. Aye, do Thou tell me that I may discern it, since through (Thy)
Righteous Order the better (lot) is <span
id="fr_196"></span>[6](#fn_195) given; tell me this that I may know it
with (Thy) Good Mind (as it speaks within me), and that I may
ponder <span id="fr_197"></span>[7](#fn_196) that to which these my
truths <span id="fr_198"></span>[8](#fn_197) belong (and

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of which my prophet speaks; yea), tell me those things, O Mazda Ahura!
which may not be, and which may be <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198).

6 <span id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_199). And that verily shall be the
best of all words to Him which the All-(wise one) will <span
id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_200) declare to me in very deed, that word
which is the Mãthra of Welfare and of Immortality (for it proclaims His
beneficent power). And to the Great Creator (shall there be) a Realm
such as that (whose strength I asked for victory <span
id="fr_202"></span>[4](#fn_201)), and which (at the last) shall
flourish <span id="fr_203"></span>[5](#fn_202) in its holiness to His
(glory <span id="fr_204"></span>[6](#fn_203))!

7\. (For He has sovereign control.) He who conceived of these (truths of
the Mãthra) as their first (inspirer), (and as He thought their
existence they

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (all) as (His)
glorious <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_204) (conceptions first)
clothed themselves in the stars <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_205)),
He is through His understanding the Creator <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_206) of the Righteous Order. And thus
likewise He supports His Beneficent Mind (in His saints). And these
(holy creatures) may’st Thou cause to prosper by Thy Spirit (since they
are Thine own), O Ahura Mazda! Thou who art for every hour the
same <span id="fr_208"></span>[4](#fn_207)!

8\. Therefore <span id="fr_209"></span>[5](#fn_208), as the first <span
id="fr_210"></span>[6](#fn_209) did I conceive of Thee, O Ahura Mazda!
as the one to be adored with the mind in the creation, as the Father of
the Good Mind within us, when I beheld Thee <span
id="fr_211"></span>[7](#fn_210) with my (enlightened) eyes as the
veritable maker of our Righteousness, as the Lord of the actions of
life <span id="fr_212"></span>[8](#fn_211)!

9\. Thine, O Ahura! was Piety; yea, Thine, O Creator of the Kine! was
understanding and the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spirit <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_212), when Thou didst order a path for her
(guiding). From the earth's tiller (aided <span
id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_213)) she goeth <span
id="fr_215"></span>[3](#fn_214) (in that allotted way), or from him who
was never tiller. (Thy path hath given her choice <span
id="fr_216"></span>[4](#fn_215).)

10\. (But she did not pause in temptation.) Of the two she chose <span
id="fr_217"></span>[5](#fn_216) the husbandman, the thrifty toiler in
the fields <span id="fr_218"></span>[6](#fn_217), as a holy master
endowed with the Good Mind's wealth <span
id="fr_219"></span>[7](#fn_218). Never, Mazda! shall

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

the thieving <span id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_219) nomad share the good
creed <span id="fr_221"></span>[2](#fn_220). (For the Kine's choice
would bestow it <span id="fr_222"></span>[3](#fn_221)!)

11\. (And this doctrine was the first of rules to regulate our actions.
Yet the opposer speaks beside Thee.) For when first, O Ahura Mazda! Thou
didst create the (holy) settlements, and didst reveal the religious
laws <span id="fr_223"></span>[4](#fn_222); and when Thou gavest (us)
understanding from Thine own mind, and madest our (full) bodily
life <span id="fr_224"></span>[5](#fn_223), and (didst thus determine)
actions (by Thy power), and didst moreover deliver to us (nearer)
injunctions whereby (as by a rule) the wisher may place his
choices <span id="fr_225"></span>[6](#fn_224),

12\. (There strife at once arose, and still is raging.) There (beside
Thy prophet) the truthful or liar, the enlightened or unenlightened,
lifts his voice (to utter

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

his faith), and with devoted mind and heart <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_225). (But without hindrance from this
striving, or pausing with feeble search <span
id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_226), our) Piety steadily <span
id="fr_228"></span>[3](#fn_227) questions the two spirits <span
id="fr_229"></span>[4](#fn_228) (not here on earth) but (there in the
spirit-world) where (they dwell as) in their home <span
id="fr_230"></span>[5](#fn_229).

13\. (Yea, my Piety questions searchingly, for Thou, O Maker! hast Thy
view on all; we cannot question lightly.) What questions are asked which
are open <span id="fr_231"></span>[6](#fn_230) (permitted to our
thoughts), or what questions (are asked) which are furtive <span
id="fr_232"></span>[7](#fn_231) (hiding themselves from the light), or
(what decision soever we may make, and the man) who for the smallest sin
binds on the heaviest penance, on all <span
id="fr_233"></span>[8](#fn_232) with Thy glittering eye(s) as a
righteous guard Thou art gazing <span id="fr_234"></span>[9](#fn_233)!

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

14\. This then I will ask Thee, O Ahura Mazda! (as I seek Thy counsel
once again <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_234)). What events are
coming now, and what events shall come in the future <span
id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_235); and what prayers with
debt-confessions <span id="fr_237"></span>[3](#fn_236) are offered
with <span id="fr_238"></span>[4](#fn_237) the offerings of the holy?
And what (are the awards) for the wicked? And how shall they be in the
(final) state <span id="fr_239"></span>[5](#fn_238) of completion <span
id="fr_240"></span>[6](#fn_239)?

15\. And I would ask Thee this, O Mazda! (concerning the coadjutor of
the wicked): What is the award <span id="fr_241"></span>[7](#fn_240) for
him who prepares the throne <span id="fr_242"></span>[8](#fn_241) for
the evil, for the evil-doer <span id="fr_243"></span>[9](#fn_242), O
Ahura! for him who cannot else reclaim <span
id="fr_244"></span>[10](#fn_243) his life, not else save <span
id="fr_245"></span>[11](#fn_244) with lawless

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

harm to the tiller's herd, to the pious husbandman's flock, who speaks
no word with lying, (who abjures the Lie-demon's faith <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_245))?

16\. Yea, I would ask Thee such a thing as this: How such an one as he
who, with wise action, has striven to promote (Thy holy) Rule <span
id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_246) over house, and region, and province, in
the Righteous Order and in truth, how he may become like Thee <span
id="fr_248"></span>[3](#fn_247), O Great Creator, Living Lord? And when
he may so become, (this also I would ask), and in what actions living he
may so be <span id="fr_249"></span>[4](#fn_248)?

17\. And which of the (religions) is the greater (and the more
prevailing <span id="fr_250"></span>[5](#fn_249) as to these questions
which thus concern the soul?) Is it that which the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

righteous believes, or the wicked <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_250)?
(Let then our questionings cease.) Let the enlightened (alone) speak to
the enlightened. Let not the ignorant (further) deceive us, (high though
he may lift his voice <span id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_251)). Do Thou
thyself, O Ahura Mazda! declare <span id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_252) to
us (the truth) as Thy Good Mind's full revealer.

18\. (And you, ye assembled throngs!) let not a man of you lend a
hearing to Mãthra, or to command of that sinner <span
id="fr_254"></span>[4](#fn_253) (ignorant <span
id="fr_255"></span>[5](#fn_254) as he is), for home, village, region,
and province he would deliver to ruin <span
id="fr_256"></span>[6](#fn_255) and death. But (fly ye to arms without
hearing), and hew ye them all with the halberd <span
id="fr_257"></span>[7](#fn_256)!

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

19\. Let them hear Him who conceived of the Righteous Order for the
worlds, the (all)-wise One, O Ahura! For truthful speech He rules with
absolute sway over words, and ever free of tongue (to guide us in our
way <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257)). By Thy shining flame <span
id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_258) (He doth guide us <span
id="fr_260"></span>[3](#fn_259), Thine altar's flame with its signs of
decision and of grace) sent forth for the good of the strivers <span
id="fr_261"></span>[4](#fn_260).

20\. (But, O ye listening men!) he who renders

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the saint deceived <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_261), for him shall
be later destruction <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_262). Long life
shall be his lot in the darkness; foul shall be his food; his speech
shall be of the lowest <span id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_263). And this,
which is such a life <span id="fr_265"></span>[4](#fn_264) as your own,
O ye vile! your (perverted) conscience through your own deeds will
bring <span id="fr_266"></span>[5](#fn_265) you <span
id="fr_267"></span>[6](#fn_266)!

21\. But Ahura Mazda will give both Universal Weal and Immortality <span
id="fr_268"></span>[7](#fn_267) in the fulness of His Righteous Order,
and from himself <span id="fr_269"></span>[8](#fn_268) as the head <span
id="fr_270"></span>[9](#fn_269) of Dominion (within His saints). And He
will likewise give the Good Mind's vigorous might <span
id="fr_271"></span>[10](#fn_270) to him who in spirit and deeds is His
friend <span id="fr_272"></span>[11](#fn_271), (and with faith fulfils
his vows <span id="fr_273"></span>[12](#fn_272))

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

22\. And to the wise are these things clear as to the one discerning
with his mind (not blinded by the perverter <span
id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_273)). With Thy Good Mind and Thy (holy)
Kingdom he follows the Righteous Order both in his words and his
actions. And to Thee, O Ahura Mazda! such a man shall be the most
helpful and vigorous being <span id="fr_275"></span>[2](#fn_274) (for he
serves with every power <span id="fr_276"></span>[3](#fn_275))!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[40:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_177) Roth, 'wollen wir
Worte künden—ungern gehört von denen, welche nach des Unholds Geboten,'
&c. Hübschmann preferring 'wir sprechen Worte nicht anhörbar für
diejenigen' (Casuslehre, s. 223). A dative of the pronoun is certainly
more natural than the ablative as inst. But on the whole agushtâ seems
better in its ordinary sense, although in so rendering we are obliged to
supply a word.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[40:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_178) Valman*s*ân mûn
pavan âfrîngânîh î Drû*g* zak î Aharâyîh gêhân barâ, maren*k*înên*d*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[40:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_179) The Pahlavi may be
rendered as follows: Both these benedictions, which I (we) recite as
yours \[the Avesta and Zand\], we are teaching by word to him who is no
hearer, \[to the destroyer of sanctity (the heretical persecutor) \[
\]\]. Those who utterly slay the world of righteousness through the
benedictions of the Drû*g* \[ \], even those might be an excellent
thing, if they would cause progress in what belongs to Aûharmazd.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[40:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_180) Read perhaps
advayâo; see the Pahlavi. Otherwise 'the way' advâo as panthâs; but the
participle <span id="fr_182"></span>[\*](#fn_181) does not agree.
Compare for meaning kavím ádvayantam, sákhâ ádvayâs.\*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[40:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_181) The Pahlavi renders
'in the soul' freely by 'believes:' Pavan nikîri*s*nŏ la hêmnunê*d*ŏ
a*s* pavan zak î agûmânîkîh. The general indications are to be observed.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[40:\*](sbe31009.htm#fr_182) Is it a loc.?

<span id="fn_182"></span>[41:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_183) Comp. chap. XXIX,
2, where the Ratu is discussed; here the word might be the abstract.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[41:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_184) Roth 'dieser beiden
Parteien (Yasna XXXI).'

<span id="fn_184"></span>[41:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_185) He repels and
condemns the evil, and he hallows and helps the good.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[41:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_186) Most striking is
the use of mainyu. It is 'the Spirit' = God. It is 'His Spirit.' It is
also used of man's spirit.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[41:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_187) Or, 'from the two
ara*n*i;' but see ãsayâo in verse 2. The Pahlavi translator has avŏ
patkâr*d*ârânŏ shnâkhtârîh; so uniformly. In Y. XLIII, 12, K5 and most
MSS., except K4, and likewise excepting the printed B.V.S., read
ranôibyô which excludes the dual form; also the fire is not mentioned
there. It is however far from impossible that the present Pahlavi
translation may be a growth beyond an earlier one more in accordance
with ara*n*i. The strivers, or fighters, might describe the two
rubbing-sticks (?).

<span id="fn_187"></span>[41:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_188) Aîmar (sic),
vi*g*âr*d*âr. This meaning suits the connection admirably. The word is
otherwise difficult, and this general sense is followed by some who do
not so often cite the Pahlavi translator.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[41:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_189) See verse 1.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[41:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_190) Roth, 'wie ich alle
lebenden bekehren soll.' So also the general indication of the Pahlavi
translator. Pavan hûzvânŏ î Lak—zîvandakân harvist-gûn hêmnund. Observe
that the religious system contemplated universal proselytism.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[42:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_191) The general
indications karîtûntâr and bavîhûnam point to the proper sense.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[42:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_192) Or, with Roth,
'wenn wirklich sich rufen lassen die Ahura-Mazdas.' Otherwise, 'O Mazda
and the Ahuras.' Hübschmann also maintained that Mazd*a*u was here a
plural; (see his Y. XXX, 10.)

<span id="fn_192"></span>[42:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_193) Roth, rendering
ishasâ in accordance with the Pahlavi, 'erbitte ich.'

<span id="fn_193"></span>[42:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_194) Mûn pavan zak î
valman gûrdîh—khûshî*d*ŏ Drû*g*ŏ aê sufficiently indicates the proper
sense. Roth, 'kraft deren wir den Unhold bemeistern mögen.'

<span id="fn_194"></span>[42:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_195) The Pahlavi may he
rendered thus: Since in that dispensation \[in the final body\], I shall
be an invoker of Ashavahi*s*t, and of Aûharmazd also \[ \]; and of her
who is veneration 'Spendarmad' \[ \], I desire \[that best of things
which is the reward\], of Vohûman. Let also that authority which belongs
to my people \[ \] be from the strong one \[ \] by whose fortitude \[ \]
the Drû*g* is overcome \[ \].

<span id="fn_195"></span>[42:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_196) Literally, 'Ye
gave.'

<span id="fn_196"></span>[42:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_197) I am far from sure
that the indication of the Pahlavi is not correct here. According to it,
when properly understood, we have here an accusative with the
infinitive; 'that I should establish.' Its own translation is however
avŏ li yehabûnâi. Me*n* = man or mãm; *en*(g) = ã the nasal vowel. The
Pahl. translator recognises m*en* elsewhere as = mîni*s*nŏ. It was from
no ignorance (!) of the particular word that he wrote 'li' here.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[42:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_198) Or 'my prophet;'
comp. *ri*shi; that is, 'that with which my prophet is concerned.'

<span id="fn_198"></span>[43:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_199) Or, possibly,
'which shall not be, or which shall be.' Is the subjunctive here used to
express obligation? Roth has 'was nicht sein soll oder was sein soll.'
Ner. may be rendered as follows: Tell it to me distinctly \[ \], that
which is the highest gift, and which is given to me through sanctity;
\[that is, because duty and righteousness are fulfilled by me, the best
gift of thy reward (is gained) by this means; but how is it possible to
make it (actually) one's own?\]. Grant me the knowledge through the best
mind; \[that is, declare that intelligence to me which comes through
good conduct\], and by which also safety is (secured) to me \[ \]. And
declare either that which is not, or that which is, O Great Wise One,
the Lord! \[ \].

<span id="fn_199"></span>[43:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_200) An interval of
silence seems here to intervene, or lost verses leave an unexplained
transition. The sage turns again to the people.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[43:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_201) Vao*k*â*t* K4
(Barth.).

<span id="fn_201"></span>[43:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_202) See verse 4.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[43:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_203) The Pahlavi has
Aûharmazd având (sic) khû*d*âyîh *k*and dên valman vakhshê*d* Vohûmanŏ.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[43:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_204) The Parsi-persian
MS. is as follows: Û hast buland, kih ân man âgahîhâ (sic) gû-î
â*s*kârah \[ \] mânsar i tamâm raftanî; \[kû, tamâm pêdâi*s*n pah râh
*i* mânsar bâz ân ‘hwê*s*î *i* Hôrmuzd rasêd\], kih pah Ṣawâb
dârad—bî-marg raftanî aza*s* \[ \]. Hôrmuzd—‘hudâî *k*and andar û
afzayêd Bahman \[Kû*s* pâdi*s*âhî pah tan *i* mard—*k*andî (?) Hôrmuzd
pah tan mihmân\].

<span id="fn_204"></span>[44:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_205) Mûna*s* avŏ
rôshanîh gâmîkhtŏ khvârîh. *Hv*âthrâ and khvârîh can hardly mean
'comfortable' here. 'Ease' is the later sense.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[44:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_206) Rao*ke*bî*s*
certainly means, with illuminating objects, stars or shining lights.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[44:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_207) Hübschmann, 'der
Schöpfer des Asha.'—Casuslehre, s. 190.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[44:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_208) Pavan mînavadîkih
vakhshînê*d* \[ \] mûn kevani*k* ham khû*d*âî.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[44:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_209) Compare the
frequent expression 'spentem a*t* Th\#\#\#vâ meNhî,' in chap. XLIII.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[44:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_210) Roth,
'vornehmsten.'

<span id="fn_210"></span>[44:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_211) When I seized Thee
(took Thee in) with my eye. The Pahlavi: Amatam \[ \] pavan ham*k*ashmîh
avŏ ham vakhdûn*d* hômanih.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[44:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_212) Dên ahvânŏ pavan
kûni*s*nŏ khû*d*âî hômanih.

Ner. may be rendered as follows: Thus thou wert thought at the first by
me, O Great Wise One, the Lord! when thou wert engaged in the production
of Gvahmana \[ \]. In which (production) they apprehend the father of
the Best Mind when they observe him with a full-faced look \[ \]. (And
thou art the father) of that creation which is manifestly righteous;
\[that is, thou makest the purer creation good in conduct\]. Thou art a
King in the world as to action; \[that is, where it is fitting to confer
a benefit, and also where it is fitting to inflict a punishment, in each
of these thou art capable\].

<span id="fn_212"></span>[45:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_213) His spe*n*ta
mainyu; otherwise 'spiritual (understanding),' but mainyu is used
elsewhere (verse 3 and 7) alone, and certainly not as an adjective even
with a substantive understood. The rendering 'spirit' as 'Thy spirit' is
suspiciously significant; but what is the help? We are forced by grammar
so to translate.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[45:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_214) The ablative has
this force as in Ashâ*t* ha*k*â.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[45:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_215) I can hardly accede
to an infinitive here: -tê is a rare infinitive termination in Gâthic.
Also the infinitive seldom falls to the end of the sentence. The Pahlavi
has yâtûnê*d*, a present; but the Pahlavi should never be positively
cited for the forms, as it is free.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[45:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_216) Observe that we are
forced by every dictate of logic and common sense to avoid the
commonplace rendering here. Cattle do not have 'paths' made for them,
nor do they cry aloud for an overseer, or complain at the appointment of
one who does not appear to them promising; nor is it one main effort of
religion 'to content the soul of cattle.' Cattle, as the chief article
of wealth, are taken to signify all civic life. The 'path' is the path
for the people to walk in, securing safety for soul and life and herds.
The adhvan is 'the way' which 'is the religious characteristics and
teachings of the prophets' (XXXIV, 13).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[45:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_217) Observe that this
cow (some would say 'ox') chooses her master, unlike other cattle. But
observe also, what is more interesting, that she seems reconciled to the
guardian appointed by Ahura. In Y. XXIX, 9, she actually 'wept' at the
naming of the pusillanimous Zarathu*s*tra, desiring a kingly potentate.
Now, however, we see that she must have dried her tears, as she is
satisfied with the simple workman whom he represents notwithstanding
high rank.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[45:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_218) In the later Avesta
this first vâstrya f*s*uya*n*t is declared to be Zarathu*s*tra.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[45:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_219) Mûn f*s*uîh pavan
Vohûmanŏ.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[46:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_220) Pahlavi
davãsaha*k*; Ner. pratârayitre.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[46:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_221)
Khûpŏ-hôshmûri*s*nîh. 'Judicial blindness' is everywhere indicated. (The
wicked are kept from the sight of the truth.) Hübschm., Casuslehre, 'der
frohen Botschaft.'

<span id="fn_221"></span>[46:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_222) This seems implied.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[46:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_223) Or, 'madest the
worlds and the souls (?).'

<span id="fn_223"></span>[46:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_224) Geldner admirably
'flesh.' The Pahlavi: tanû-hômandânŏ *g*ân yehabûn*d*. Notice that
'bodily life or flesh' is mentioned after 'understanding.' Compare Y.
XXX, 7, where Âramaiti gives 'a body' after previous creations.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[46:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_225) The Pahlavi has the
following interesting gloss: \[That is, even the actions and teachings
of the pious are given forth by thee; and this was also given in this
wisdom of thy mind\]. And when there is a person in whom there is a
desire for the other world, that desire is granted to him by thee;
\[that is, what is necessary when he is arriving in the other world,
this which is thus required (or desired) by him at that time, is given
by thee—through that which is thy mind and wisdom\]. Although not able
to follow the indications of the Pahlavi fully, I think that there is no
question but that we have an important statement in the last line. It
does not seem to me possible to render less profoundly than 'where the
wisher may place his choices,' his religious preferences and beliefs,
including all moral volition.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[47:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_226) Avŏ zak libbemman.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[47:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_227) See verse 13.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[47:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_228) Pavan ha*g*i*s*nŏ
î: the Persian MS. (Haug XII, b) transliterates khêzi*s*nŏ: Ner. has
mano-utthânena (sic). Or, 'immediately.'

<span id="fn_228"></span>[47:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_229) The evil as well as
the good spirit is questioned. The two spirits of Y. XXX, 3-6 were here
inspiring the conflict.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[47:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_230) The Pahlavi
unvaryingly in the sense of mihânŏ \[-a*s* gâs tamman yehevûnê*d*ŏ\];
Ner. paralokanivâsân. See Y. XXX, 9; XXXIII, 9; XXXIV, 6. A questioning
which was lightly made would indicate a willingness to tamper with
error. The Persian MS. following the Pahlavi has: An*g*a bang *i* buland
ân *i* durû*gh* guftâr \[Ganâ Mînû\] wa ân ham *i* râst guftâr
\[Hôrmuzd\], &c. But Neryosangh is more accurate or literal: Atra
bumbâm\* karoti \[antar *g*agati\], mithyâvaktâ vâ satyavaktâ vâ, &c.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[47:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_231) Pavan zak î
âshkârakŏ.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[47:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_232) Nîhânîk.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[47:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_233) Thou seest even the
questions and decisions of our thoughts as to matters which are simple
or difficult, permitted or occult.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[47:9](sbe31009.htm#fr_234) I have not followed
what may yet possibly be a valuable and correct hint of tradition. I
render Neryosangh: He who asks through what is open \[through
righteousness\], or he who asks through what is secret \[through sin\];
or he (also) who through, or on account of, a little sin which has been
committed, commits the great one to secure a purification; \[that is,
who for the sake of purification necessary on account of a little sin
which has been committed, commits a greater one, in order that the first
may not <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> become known\], upon these two,
each of them, look with thy two eyes. \[Over sins and righteous actions
thou art in one way, everywhere and again, the Lord.\] The concretes
here may give the right indication.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[48:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_235) See verse 5.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[48:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_236) Man madŏ, mûni*k*
yâmtûnê*d*ŏ, 'What has come? And what is coming?'

<span id="fn_236"></span>[48:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_237) Mûn âvâm.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[48:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_238) Ha*k*â in the
Indian sense.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[48:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_239) Angar*d*îkîh, the
judgment; but Ner. vipâkatâ, consummation.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[48:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_240) Neryosangh has as
follows: Tad dvitaya*m* tvatta*h*\* pri*kkh*âmi, Svâmin! yad âgata*m*,
âyâti*k*a, yo\* *rin*am dadate dânebhya*h*\* pu*n*yâtmane \[Hormi*g*dâya
yathâ yu*g*yate dâtu*m*\], ye*k*a, Mahâ*gñ*ânin! durgatimadbhya*h*;
katha*m* teshâ*m* asti vipâkatâ\* eva*m* \[kila, ya*h* tat kurute,
tasmai nidâne prasâdadâna*m* ki*m* bhavati, ya*sk*a tat kurute,
tasmai*k*a ki*m* bhavatî ’ti; me brûhi!\] This seems to me very close,
far more so than we have any right to expect as a general rule from a
Parsi living in India, and only five or six centuries ago, too late for
'tradition,' and too early for close criticism.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[48:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_241) Roth, 'Ich
frage—was die Strafe ist?'

<span id="fn_241"></span>[48:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_242) The head of a party
seems to have been plotting to introduce a hostile sovereign.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[48:9](sbe31009.htm#fr_243) Î dû*s*-kûni*s*nŏ.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[48:10](sbe31009.htm#fr_244) The Pahlavi
translator, nîvîdînê*d*ŏ, (otherwise nivêkînê*d*, which I much suspect
has become confused with nîvîdînê*d*ŏ through a clerical blunder); Ner.
labhate. They both refer vînastî to vid (so Justi) followed by most.
Roth (Yasna XXXI, p. 11), 'der sein Brot nicht findet ohne Gewalthat an
der Heerde.'

<span id="fn_244"></span>[48:11](sbe31009.htm#fr_245) The Pahlavi
translator sees the root han in the sense of <span id="page_49">p.
49</span> acquisition, and not from ignorance of the sense given above.
In another place, he renders vi*g*î*d* min; (see XLVII, 5.)

<span id="fn_245"></span>[49:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_246) Neryosangh may be
rendered as follows: Thus I ask thee: What is for him who seizes upon
destruction, and who provides the sovereignty for the wicked \[ \], and
commits that evil action. O Lord! from which he does not acquire life
even through a bribe\* (so meaning), \[ \] and who is a calamity to the
man who acts for herds and men removing calamities from them \[ \]?

<span id="fn_246"></span>[49:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_247) Roth, 'der die
Herrschaft über Hof Gau and Land um das rechte zu fördern hat.'

<span id="fn_247"></span>[49:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_248) Pahlavi, Lak
hâvand; Neryosangh, tvattulyo; Roth, 'deiner werth.'

<span id="fn_248"></span>[49:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_249) I render the
Sanskrit of Neryosangh thus (it improves on the Pahlavi): I ask (thee)
thus: How \[dost thou bestow\] the sovereignty upon one when he is
beneficently wise? \[ \] (in the body) of him who, through the increase
of sanctity, is no opposer (of prosperity) in provinces or villages;
\[that is, with him who is discharging his duty and performing acts of
sanctity. He is this teacher's teacher, he does not contend\]. Thine
equal, O Great Wise One, the Lord! thus is he verily, who (is such) in
action, \[who is thus Thine equal through activity\].

<span id="fn_249"></span>[49:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_250) Possibly mazyô has
the sense of mazi*s*ta in chap. L, 1. There 'the most prevailing' seems
to be the proper rendering.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[50:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_251) Literally, 'Which
of the two (creeds as) the greater does the righteous (the believing
saint) or the wicked (opponent) believe?'

<span id="fn_251"></span>[50:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_252) See verse 12.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[50:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_253) Or with others 'be
Thou'; but the gloss of the Pahlavi translation contains an explanation
which may well afford the true solution as in so many instances in which
he is both consciously and inadvertently followed. It reads \[aîghmânŏ
barâ khavîtûnînŏ—\]. May we not see an az = ah in the form, or at least
a separate Iranian root, as also in azdâ (L, r), where the Pahlavi
translator gives the same explanation admirably suited to the context.

Neryosangh: Which is it, the pure of soul, or the wicked who teaches as
the great one? \[ \] The intelligent speaks to the intelligent \[ \]. Be
not thou ignorant after this; because (ignorance is) from the deceiver.
Instruct us, O Great Wise One, the Lord! \[ \] Furnish us with a sign
through the Best Mind; \[that is, make me steadfast in good conduct
through the recognition of the dîn\]. Such renderings may suffice to
show that an examination of these ancient translations in our search for
hints is imperative. Yet the practice prevails of omitting a knowledge
of the Pahlavi language, on which not only the oldest translation of the
Avesta, but also the irregular Sanskrit of Neryosangh, closely depends.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[50:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_254) Jolly, 'Keiner von
euch höre auf die Lieder and Gebote des Lügners.' Roth, 'Rath and
Befehle.'

<span id="fn_254"></span>[50:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_255) Compare evîdvâo in
verse 17.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[50:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_256) Dû*s*-rûbi*s*nîh.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[50:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_257) Sazê*d* sanêh,
'prepare the sabre.' It was however a two-handed weapon; see Y. LVI, 12,
(4 Sp.).

The Parsi-persian MS.: Wa ma kas aêdûn az *s*umâ kih û <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> darwand mânsar *s*unawad wa âmû‘hti*s*n (sic);
\[kû az Â*s*môkân (?) Awestâ wa Zand ma *s*unawad\], *k*ih
andar—ma*h*all *s*ahar wa deh dehad bad-rafti*s*n wa marg an i
Â*s*mô*gh*; aêdûn (sic) ô*s*ân Â*s*mô*gh*ân râ sâzad silâ*h*. (Again
very close.)

<span id="fn_257"></span>[51:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_258) So conjecturally.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[51:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_259) Compare chap. XXX,
2. 'Behold ye the flames with the better mind;' possibly, also chap.
XXX, 1, the signs in the lights seen friendly.'

<span id="fn_259"></span>[51:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_260) According to the
grammatical forms the agent here must be a divine being, as y*e* ma*n*ta
ashem ahûbi*s* (see verse 7) is characteristic of the Deity. The
vocative, strange as it may seem, does not necessarily exclude Ahura, as
the subject referred to in y*e*. Several analogous cases occur. The
Deity may here however represent His prophet, as the Daêvas do their
worshippers in the later Avesta. Some writers force the language into a
reference to the human subject for the sake of the greatly to be desired
simplicity.

One places Ahurâ in the instrumental, a case in which the Almighty
seldom appears. The above translation needs no alternative, as the
language would be the same whoever y*e* refers to.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[51:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_261) See note on verse
3, and read as alternative 'from the two ara*n*i.' As an inferior
rendering of tradition I cite Neryosangh here: The matter should be
heard (taking gûshtâ as a third singular in a subjunctive sense); \[that
is, a study should be made of it by him\] who is even (in any degree)
acquainted with the righteous design of Hormi*g*da for both the worlds.
He is independent in the literal truth of his words, in his freedom of
speech, \[and his fear has no existence\]. Thy brilliant fire gives the
explanation to the contenders. \[It makes purity and impurity evident.\]

<span id="fn_261"></span>[52:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_262) I follow the
admirable lead of the Pahlavi here, as the previous verse mentions
veracity. Its indication is pavan frîfi*s*nŏ, freely.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[52:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_263) I differ with
diffidence from the hint of the Pahlavi here (as elsewhere). It has
shîvan = tears, which however is free for 'calamity' and 'sorrow.' Nom.
sing.; see its position.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[52:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_264) Anâk rûbi*s*nîh
yemalelûnê*d*ŏ. This, placed together with such passages as XLVI, 11,
XLIX, 11, and LI, 13, formed the basis for the more complete Ya*s*t
XXII.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[52:4](sbe31009.htm#fr_265) Others prefer
'place,' but see âyû in line b.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[52:5](sbe31009.htm#fr_266) 'Has led on'?

<span id="fn_266"></span>[52:6](sbe31009.htm#fr_267) I cite Ner.: He who
betrays the pure through his fraud, may (deceit) be (also his portion)
at the last; \[that is, let it be so afterwards; it is in his soul\].
Long is his journey, and his arrival is in darkness; and evil food and
increasing lawlessness is his \[ \]. Darkness is your world, O ye
wicked! your in-bred deeds, and your dîn, are leading you on.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[52:7](sbe31009.htm#fr_268) That Ameretatâ*t*
means more than long life is clear from amesha.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[52:8](sbe31009.htm#fr_269) Afa*s* naf*s*man
patîh. The Gâthic would be more literally perhaps 'from His own
Dominion.'

<span id="fn_269"></span>[52:9](sbe31009.htm#fr_270) Sardârîh.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[52:10](sbe31009.htm#fr_271) Vazdvarîh; Ner.
pîvaratvam.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[52:11](sbe31009.htm#fr_272) One naturally
thinks of urvatha (vratha), as having something of the sense of vratyá.
But usage compels also the sense of friendship. Hübschmann, Casuslehre,
s. 259, 'der durch Gesinnung and Thaten sich ihm als freund erweist.'

<span id="fn_272"></span>[52:12](sbe31009.htm#fr_273) Ner.: Mahâ*gñ*âni
dadau Svâmî\* avirdâdât\* an irdâdât sa*m*pûr*n*atva*m* <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> pu*n*yâtmane \[ \] ni*g*a*m* prabhutva*m*
râ*gñ*e\* âdhipatyena \[ \] uttamena pîvaratva*m* manasâ \[-tasmâi
dadate\], yo ni*g*asya adri*s*yamûrte*h* karma*n*â mitra*m*.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[53:1](sbe31009.htm#fr_274) So according to
frequent indications.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[53:2](sbe31009.htm#fr_275) Tanû aîtŏ. Ner.: Sa
te—mitram asti nivedîtatanu*h*.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[53:3](sbe31009.htm#fr_276) See chap. XXXIII,
14. The Pahlavi translator renders freely as follows: Manifest things
(so possibly; otherwise 'manifestly') (are) these to (so a MS. not yet
elsewhere compared) the wise when according to his understanding he
disposes and reflects, \[that is, he who meditates with thought upon
that which his lord and dastur declares to him\]. Good is the King for
whom they would effect righteousness in word and deed, the man whose
body is a bearer of Thee, O Aûharmazd!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XXXII](sbe31010)
