[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31024)  [Next](sbe31026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YASNA III.

#### THE YASNA ADVANCES TO THE NAMING OF THE OBJECTS OF PROPITIATION.

1\. With a Baresman brought to its appointed place accompanied with the
Zaothra at the time of Hâvani, I desire to approach the Myazda-offering
with my praise, as it is consumed, and likewise Ameretatâ*t* <span
id="fr_930"></span>[2](#fn_926) (as the guardian of plants and wood) and
Haurvatâ*t* (who guards the water), with the (fresh) meat <span
id="fr_931"></span>[3](#fn_927), for the propitiation of Ahura Mazda,
and of the Bountiful

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Immortals, and for
the propitiation of Sraosha (who is Obedience) the blessed, who is
endowed with sanctity, and who smites with the blow of victory, and
causes the settlements to advance.

2\. And I desire to approach Haoma and Parahaoma <span
id="fr_932"></span>[1](#fn_928) with my praise for the propitiation of
the Fravashi of Spitâma Zarathu*s*tra, the saint. And I desire to
approach the (sacred) wood with my praise, with the perfume, for the
propitiation of thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son!

3\. And I desire to approach the Haomas with my praise for the
propitiation of the good waters which Mazda created; and I desire to
approach the Haoma-water, and the fresh milk <span
id="fr_933"></span>[2](#fn_929) with my praise, and the plant
Hadhânaêpata, offered with sanctity for the propitiation of the waters
which are Mazda-made.

4\. And I desire to approach this Baresman with the Zaothra with my
praise, with its binding <span id="fr_934"></span>[3](#fn_930) and
spread with sanctity for the propitiation of the Bountiful Immortals.
And I desire with (?) my voice the thoughts well thought, and the words
well spoken, and the deeds well done, and the recital of the Gâthas as
they are heard. And I desire to approach the well-said Mãthras with my
praise, and this (higher) lordship with this sanctity, and this exact
regulation <span id="fr_935"></span>[4](#fn_931) (of the Ratu), and the
reverential prayer for blessings (spoken at the fitting hour); and I
desire to approach them for the contentment and propitiation

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

or the holy Yazads, heavenly and earthly, and for the contentment of
each man's soul.

5\. And I desire to approach the Asnya with my praise, the lords of the
ritual order, and the Hâvani and Sâvanghi and Vîsya, the holy lords of
the ritual order. And I desire to approach with the Ya*s*t <span
id="fr_936"></span>[1](#fn_932) of Mithra of the wide pastures, of the
thousand ears, of the myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name, and
with him Raman *Hv*âstra.

6\. And I desire to approach Rapithwina with my praise, the holy lord of
the ritual order, and Frâda*t*-fshu and Za*n*tuma, and Righteousness the
Best, and Ahura Mazda's Fire.

7\. And I desire to approach Uzayêirina, and Frâda*t*-vîra and
Da*hv*yuma\* with my praise, with that lofty Ahura Napâ*t*-apãm, and the
waters Mazda-made,

8\. And Aiwisrûthrima, and Aibigaya, and Frâda*t*-vîspãm-hu*g*aiti, and
Zarathu*s*trôtema with the Ya*s*t of the Fravashis of the saints <span
id="fr_937"></span>[2](#fn_933), and of the women who have many sons,
and the year long unchanged prosperity, and of Might, the well-shaped
and stately, smiting victoriously, Ahura-made and of the Victorious
Ascendency (which it secures).

9\. And I desire to approach Ushahina, Bere*g*ya, and Nmânya with the
Ya*s*t of Sraosha (Obedience) the sacred, the holy, who smites with the
blow of victory, and makes the settlements advance, and with that of
Rashnu, the most just, and Ar*s*tâ*t*

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

who furthers the settlements, and causes them to increase.

10\. And I desire to approach the monthly festivals, the lords of the
ritual order, and the new moon and the waning moon, and the full moon
which scatters night,

11\. And the yearly festivals, Maidhyô-zaremaya, Maidhyô-shema,
Paiti*s*hahya, and Ayâthrima the breeder who spends the strength of
males, and Maidhyâirya, and Hamaspathmaêdhaya, and the seasons, lords of
the ritual order, (12) and all those lords who are the three and thirty,
who approach the nearest at the time of Hâvani, who are the Lords of
Asha called Vahishta (and whose services were) inculcated by Mazda, and
pronounced by Zarathu*s*tra, as the feasts of Righteousness, the Best.

13\. And I desire to approach Ahura and Mithra, the lofty and
imperishable two, the holy, and with the Ya*s*t of those stars which are
the creatures of Spe*n*ta Mainyu, and with the Ya*s*t of the star
Ti*s*trya, the radiant, the glorious, and with that of the moon which
contains the seed of cattle, and with that of the resplendent sun, the
eye of Ahura Mazda, and of Mithra, province-lord of the provinces, and
with that of Ahura Mazda (as He rules this day) the radiant, the
glorious, and with that of the Fravashis of the saints, (who rule this
month),

14\. And with thy Ya*s*t, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! with all the
fires, and to the good waters with the Ya*s*t of all the waters which
are Mazda-made, and with that of all the plants which Mazda made.

15\. And I desire to approach with the Ya*s*t of the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mãthra Spe*n*ta,
the holy, the effective, the law composed against the Daêvas, the
Zarathu*s*trian, and with that of the long descent of the Religion which
Mazda gave.

16\. And I desire to approach with the Ya*s*t of Mount Ushi-darena,
Mazda-made, and of all, glorious with sanctity, and abundant in
brilliance, and with that of the Kingly Glory, Mazda-made; yea, with
that of the unconsumed glory which Mazda made, and with that of Ashi
Vanguhi, and *K*i*s*ti Vanguhi, and with that of the good Ereth*e*, and
the good Rasãstâ*t*, and the good Glory, and of the Benefit which Mazda
gave.

17\. And I desire to approach with the Ya*s*t of the good and pious
Blessing of the pious man and of the saint, and with that of the awful
and swift Curse of the wise, the Yazad-curse, (18) and to these places,
regions, pastures, and abodes, with their water-springs, and with that
of the waters, and the lands, and the plants, and with that of this
earth and yon heaven, and with that of the holy wind and of the stars,
moon, and sun, and with that of the stars without beginning,
self-determined and self-moved, and with that of all the holy creatures
which are those of Spe*n*ta Mainyu, male and female, regulators of the
ritual order, (19) and with that of the lofty lord who is Righteousness
(himself, the essence of the ritual), and with that of the days in their
duration, and of the days during daylight, and with that of the monthly
festivals, and the yearly festivals, and with those of the several
seasons which are lords of the ritual at the time of Hâvani.

20\. And I desire to approach the meat-offering with a Ya*s*t, and
Haurvatâ*t* (who guards the water), and Ameretatâ*t* (who guards the
plants and wood), with

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the Ya*s*t of the sacred flesh for the propitiation of Sraosha
(Obedience) the blessed and the mighty, whose body is the Mãthra, of him
of the daring spear, the lordly, the Yazad of the spoken name.

21\. And I desire to approach both Haoma and the Haoma-juice with a
Ya*s*t for the propitiation of the Fravashi of Zarathu*s*tra Spitâma,
the saint, the Yazad of the spoken name. And I desire to approach the
wood-billets with a Ya*s*t, with the perfume for the propitiation of
thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! the Yazad of the spoken name.

22\. And I desire to approach with a Ya*s*t for the mighty Fravashis of
the saints, the overwhelming, the Fravashis of those who held to the
ancient lore, and of those of the next of kin.

23\. And I desire to approach toward all the lords of the ritual order
with a Ya*s*t, toward all the good Yazads, heavenly and earthly, who are
(set) for worship and for praise because of Asha Vahi*s*ta (of
Righteousness the Best).

24\. I will confess myself a Mazdayasnian, of Zarathu*s*tra's order, a
foe to the Daêvas, devoted to the lore of the Lord for Hâvani, the holy
lord of the ritual order, for sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and for
praise, and for Sâvanghi and Vîsya, the holy lord(s) of the ritual
order, and for the sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and praise of the
day-lords of the days in their duration, and of the days during
daylight, and for the month-regulators, and the year-regulators, and for
those of the (several) seasons, for their sacrifice, and homage, their
propitiation, and their praise.

(The Zaotar speaks <span id="fr_938"></span>[1](#fn_934)): As the Ahû to
be

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (revered and)
chosen, let the priest speak <span id="fr_939"></span>[1](#fn_935) forth
to me.

(The Ratu responds): As the Ahû to be (revered and) chosen, let him who
is the Zaotar speak <span id="fr_940"></span>[1](#fn_935) forth to me.

(The Zaotar again): So let the Ratu from his Righteousness, holy and
learned, speak forth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_925"></span>[207:1](sbe31024.htm#fr_929) See note on Y. I,
16.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[207:2](sbe31025.htm#fr_930) Spiegel has
observed with truth that Ameretatâ*t* and Haurvatâ*t* may represent
severally all the fruits and the liquids offered.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[207:3](sbe31025.htm#fr_931) The modern Parsis,
Haug following, render 'butter'; but Spiegel is inclined to discredit
this later tradition, holding that 'flesh' was originally intended; but
on its becoming disused in India, milk was substituted, hence the error.

Gau*s* hudh*a*u, in its primary sense, meant of course 'the Kine of
blessed endowment.' (Repetitions are again curtailed.)

<span id="fn_928"></span>[208:1](sbe31025.htm#fr_932) The Haoma-juice.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[208:2](sbe31025.htm#fr_933) So better than
'fresh meat.' Fluids are the chief objects of attention here.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[208:3](sbe31025.htm#fr_934) With its girdle.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[208:4](sbe31025.htm#fr_935) Anghuyãm—rathwãm
stand related as ahû and ratu; so also the Pahlavi ahûŏîh and ra*d*îh,
and Ner. svâmitâ*mk*a gurutâ*mk*a.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[209:1](sbe31025.htm#fr_936) Ye*s*tî seems used
of an especial Ya*s*t here, and subsequently, as genitives intrude among
datives, the form possibly taking the place of the words 'for the
propitiation of'; here Ya*s*t X may be referred to.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[209:2](sbe31025.htm#fr_937) Ya*s*t XIII.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[212:1](sbe31025.htm#fr_938) So at least the
rubric. One would think that the sentence was intended to be dictated to
the Ratu to be repeated; that is, if the <span id="page_213">p.
213</span> rubric is correct. The sentence as uttered by the priest
seems difficult.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[213:1](sbe31025.htm#fr_940) Present, or infin.
for imperative (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna IV. The Offering Takes Place](sbe31026)
