[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31012)  [Next](sbe31014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### THE GÂTHA(Â) U*S*TAVAITI(Î).

This Gâtha, consisting of Yasna XLIII-XLVI, is named from the word which
begins it, like the three last collections. The fact that the word
u*s*tâ possesses special significance may have influenced the minds of
the Parsis of a later age, inducing them to associate this first chapter
with happy anticipations, but it was of course not owing to any such
circumstance that the name was given to the Gâtha. The Gâtha, like its
fellows, has its existence as a unit from the nature of its metre.

It has lines generally of eleven syllables, arranged in stanzas of five.
It seemed convenient to chant all the hymns of one particular metre
together. This hymn, from some unknown reason, or from pure accident,
having stood first in the collection in this metre, the Gâtha was named
from its first word.

The question naturally arises at this place whether this Gâtha, in its
parts or as a whole, is older than the Ahunavaiti and the others. For
supplementary statements on this subject, see the Introduction, page
xxvii, also elsewhere. It is sufficient to recall here that the
procedure of the Ahunavaiti, and the sequence of the other Gâthas in the
MSS. of the Yasna, have little importance in determining the question of
relative age. If originally grouped in the order of their age, they
might easily become transposed for the purpose of liturgical recitation.
(See the inserted Haptanghâiti, and Y. LII.) As to the metres present,
they afford no indications as to relative age. The metre of the
U*s*tavaiti, approaching as it does the Trish*t*up, may be as old as, or
older than, that of the Ahunavaiti. The oldest *Ri*shis sang in
Trish*t*up. The sole remaining test of the relative age of pieces, is
their contents. Do those of the Ahunavaiti show a priority to those in
the U*s*tavaiti as regards the particular circumstances of which they
treat? So far as I am able to

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

judge, no part of the Ahunavaiti is older than Y. XLVI. There we have
the man before us at a period in his life before he had attained to his
supreme position. He not only laments the unfavourable prospects of his
cause, but he is full of vehement animosity, urging on his adherents to
the overthrow of some powerful opposing leader, and anticipating an
armed struggle so formidable that its partisans are elsewhere alluded to
(in Y. XLIV) as 'hosts.' We see him also exhorting the various chiefs of
his party as they are evidently standing before him in some large
assembly, possibly as the army on the eve of an important encounter.

He refers intimately to the monarch, to his own family, the Spitâmas,
and to the Hvôgvas, as represented by Frashao*s*tra. He offers the
rewards of Ahura, as he pronounces His threats and condemnations. Every
feature bears the strongest evidence of originality. But have we not the
same in the Gâthas Ahunavaiti, Spe*n*tâ-mainyu, and the others? Beyond a
question. Those passages which express grief, fear, and passionate
resentment, we should naturally refer to Zarathu*s*tra personally, and
to the earlier portion of his career; and we can make no distinction
between such passages when they occur in the Ahunavaiti, U*s*tavaiti, or
elsewhere. As to chapter XXIX with its logical commencement, as
expressing the sufferings to be remedied in the entire effort, together
with the call of Zarathu*s*tra in immediate connection, and chapter XXX
with its theosophical statements, we should say that they were composed
later, during a period of success and reflection. But this would be a
mere surmise. The time of the sage need not necessarily have been
consumed in struggles even during the early years of his career.

Chapter LIII seems to belong to a period of mature age, but not
necessarily to a period of advanced age. It celebrates the marriage of
Zarathu*s*tra's daughter, but maidens were married early. With the
exception of Y. LIII, I would say that the occurrence of a piece in this
or that Gâtha has little, if anything, to do with determining the
question of its relative age.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### YASNA XLIII.

#### SALVATION IS ANNOUNCED AS UNIVERSAL FOR BELIEVERS. REFLECTIONS OF ZARATHU*S*TRA UPON THE SUBLIMITY AND BOUNTIFULNESS OF AHURA.

As, in every instance, it is probable that verses have fallen out here
and there in this important piece, and some may have been inserted, not
necessarily from another composer, but from other compositions. After
certain limits, however, marked signs of at least external connection
are present. After the first three verses, which are quite apart, then
from the fourth and fifth on, every alternate verse has the formula
Spe*n*tem a*t* thwâ Mazdâ meNhî Ahurâ. It would indeed present no
difficulty for a successor to add these words to stanzas otherwise also
imitated, but whether from the leading sage or not, whether from him in
one strain, or from him as collected from different fragments, the
course of thought does not so fail in logical sequence as that it is
either impossible, or displeasing, as a whole in a poetical composition.

Verses 1-3 are admirable as preliminary. Verses 4-6, with their lofty
descriptions of power and benevolence in the Deity, prepare the way
well, with their allusions to the final judgment, for the closer
reflections in verses 7-15 upon the prophet's call, uttered at the
instigation of Sraosha (his obedient will). Verse 16 is a closing
strophe looking much like an addition from another hand, not at all
because Zarathu*s*tra is mentioned in the third person, but from its
general cast. It possesses, however, very great interest from these
circumstances. If a later addition, it enables us to see how the
principal features of the system were viewed at a period not identical
with the earliest, but closely following it.

1\. If we can accept the deeply interesting suggestion of the Pahlavi
translator, which is, 'Salvation to him to whom there is salvation for
every man,' we need then suppose no necessary loss of verses. Otherwise
we are obliged to consider the loss of some laudatory verse, or verses,
containing such matter as perhaps Y. XXXIV, 14, 'This princely priest
has devoted all to Thee, therefore, salvation to him, whosoever he may
be.' Whatever may be the actual truth, the main stress of the thoughts
is clear and appropriate. Using the word vas*e*-khshayãs in a good
sense,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the composer beseeches Ahura to grant those two 'mighty and eternal
ones,' which logically form the complement to each other, universal
wholeness, welfare of soul and body, without which beatitude was
inconceivable, and then the unlimited duration of that condition; for it
is quite impossible that 'long life' alone was here meant by a term, the
equivalent of which soon after designated the Bountiful Immortals. We
have here again ample data for affirming the richness and depth of the
religious conceptions.

The 'powerful and continuous two' are sought together with splendour as
rewards, not for the gratification of any selfish sentiment, but in
order to maintain Asha, the religious Order, on which the sacred polity,
and the tribal, as well as the national wealth depended, but more than
any general blessings, the individual sanctity of life. 2. And this is
signalised as the highest good; and to this a prayer is added for the
'mâya,' which recalls the supernatural wisdom of the Indian Hercules,
about which much phantastic and highly coloured myth is grouped; but
here, with the ever-recurring contrast, the mâya is the mysterious
wisdom of the Divine Benevolence, colourless and abstract indeed, but
yet possessing how great religious depth!

3\. The highest blessing, in another and more than once repeated phrase,
is again besought, as 'the better than the good,' even the attainment of
the one who guides to the 'straight paths,' which are the 'way, even the
conceptions and revelations of the Saviours' (Y. XXXIV, 13; LIII, 2), in
which the believer prospers, and Ahura dwells, as he dwells in his
kingdom, and his 'chosen home' itself (Y. XLVI, 16). Whether 'this man
who shows the paths' of 'the bodily and mental world' is the same as he
who prays for the âyaptâ ahv*a*u astvatas*k*â hya*tk*â mananghô (the
boons of the two worlds) in Y. XXVIII, 3, here referred to in the third
person, there speaking in the first, and whether he is Zarathu*s*tra
himself; are questions. It is only necessary to say that, if any relief
is gained by the supposition, then beyond a doubt Zarathu*s*tra may have
been the composer of both pieces or fragments, here, as in Y. XXVIII, 7,
referring to himself as in the third person, there, in Y. XXVIII, also
further representing another who prays, referring by name to him as in
the third.

But was Zarathu*s*tra the only sacred singer, or was he the centre of a
group only, of which he was the life? (Compare Yathrâ v*e* afsmâinî (?)
s*e*nghânî—*G*âmâspâ Hvôgvâ; Y. XLVI, 17; see also the Introduction.)

4\. Proceeding as if the first three verses were absent from his

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

mind (as indeed they may have been only later brought together with what
now follows), the composer begins his ascriptions of praise. He will
regard Ahura as all-bountiful and mighty, since He has carefully
nurtured, as with His very hand, the aids of grace which He will bestow,
as gifts of forbearance on those now wicked, in the hope of penitence,
and in the merciful threat of punishment, and to the devout disciple,
whose piety is never ceremonial only. And these means of grace, although
abounding in the inculcation of moral sanctity in thought, and word, and
deed (see Vendîdâd VIII, 100 (Sp. 283) <span
id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_454), where 'thought' clearly refers to
intention in the strongest sense of the term), are yet profane, aside
from the flame of that holy Fire which rallied the masses to a national
worship, and which was strong for the holy order, as well as by means of
it. For these reasons he adores their giver, but for still another. It
was because the might of the Good Mind of Ahura approached him within
them, and gave him strength for all that was before him. 5. Like the
Semitic prophet, he poetically conceives himself as having beheld Ahura,
as the chief of the two spirits, and as sovereign over all other powers
when the world was born. And he regards Him as having also then
established rewards and punishments by his holiness, so separate in its
dualistic distinction from all complicity with evil either by infliction
or permission. And these rewards and punishments were to have their
issue not in time alone, but in 'the last turning of the creation' in
its course.

6\. And for Ahura's coming in this last changing he fervently beseeches,
as well as for the appearance of the Sacred Kingdom, established aid
guarded by the divine Benevolence. And this consummation, he implies,
will take place when the settlements shall be furthered in the Righteous
Order, and by means of it, the end of progress having been attained; for
then the piety of men's souls will itself be their instructor,
delivering the regulations which shall silence the controversy of the
two sides (Y. XXXI, 3). And these regulations are as the wisdom of
Ahura's understanding (Y. XXVIII, 2), so penetrating that all thoughts
lie bare to it (Y. XXXI, 13).

7\. He now declares the principles on which he accepted the divine call.
Sraosha (verse 12), he says, drew near to question him. As he is called
by Ahura, Obedience, the same who constitutes the way to Ahura (or finds
His throne (Y. XXVIII, 6)), now draws near

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

him, (I say Sraosha (i.e. Obedience), for if he is not so described as
drawing near in this verse, he assuredly is so described in a verse
nearly following (the twelfth)). Beyond a question, the fine
subjectivity here expressed was intended. As the seer cried: O
Righteousness! when shall I see thee (in myself and within my people),
so now he means that his obedient spirit listens to the call of God. 8.
And as his personified conscience questions him as to his origin, and
the principles on which he would proceed, it represents the obedient
people, as well as the obedient sage (for the sense of Sraosha, while
originally applied to the personal will, is not restricted to it).
'Loyalty' questions him, that 'loyalty' may report his answers. He
therefore responds, speaking in his name as Zarathu*s*tra (or else one
thoroughly in unison with him, here speaks in his name). And this is his
statement as to the indications which shall determine his personality.
His course will be without a compromise. The unbelieving opposers, as he
declares, shall meet no favour at his hands, but detestation, while to
the devout disciple he will be as powerful an aid. And this because his
mind and thought are (as if blinded to the present) fixed upon the ideal
Kingdom, while for the present he never ceases to toil on, making
preparations for the Frashakar*d*, and constructing hymn after hymn to
set up the needed machinery of lore.

9\. Again, his conscience and obedient will, as the angel of the Deity,
questions him; and this time offers him that chief of wished for objects
to him, religious knowledge. He mentions the holy Fire, with its proper
offering, as the theme of his first inquiry.

10\. And he beseeches Ahura to answer and to favour him, since he
invokes such a complete endowment, going hand in hand with true Piety,
and with no selfish interest in his prayer. He then, with a depth which
I confess seems suspicious, asks of Mazda to put his petitions for him,
recalling Y. XXVIII, 11, where he beseeches Ahura to fill up his desire
with what not he, the speaker, but with what He, Ahura, knows to he the
Good Mind's gifts. Or, with a conjectural improvement (?) of the text,
he asks of Ahura to question him that he may be questioned indeed,
saying as it were, 'search me, and know me.' But the other reading being
retained as having superior point, and needing no conjectured text, we
may see his further thought: 'Ask Thou our questions for us, and then we
shall never fail; then we shall be no desireless (anaêsha) men, spurned
by the wailing kine as flinching champions (Y. XXIX, 9), but we shall be
indeed Thy rulers, "speaking our mighty wish."

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Like the
isha-khshathra, whom she sought (Y. XXIX, 9), our wish shall work our
will; it will accord with the will of God.'

11\. He is, however, not blind to all that lies before him in accepting
this call. He worships the bounty and majesty of Ahura while he is
impressing his soul with the import of this conference, and that
notwithstanding, and none the less, because His will, when obeyed in
actions, will bring on earthly sufferings.

12\. But notwithstanding all that may be in store for him, he hopes to
make those doctrines treasures (Y. XXXIV, 7), that is, a spiritual
wealth (compare also Ahura's î*s*ti). One only qualification would he
add: 'Wait only before Thou givest the word that I should go forth with
Thy new truths (which bring such suffering to him who first pronounces
them), wait till my obedient will, listening fully to all which Thou
shalt say, shall come to me, and then shall that obedient reverence in
me and my beloved, help on our effort, that we may spread abroad the
tidings of Thy promised recompense to win the living to Thee (Y. XXXI,
3).' 13. 'And that I may know and make known (so he continues) the true
aims and objects of desire to those to whom I am at Thy word to go,
grant me for this long life within Thy Realm, although that life be full
of bitterness (verse 11; and Y. XXXII, 10, 11; XLVI, 1), for those who
propagate Thy cause.' 14. 'Yea, as a friend, both wise and powerful,
gives to a friend, send to me not only Sraosha, an obedient listening
will, but raf(e)nô frâkhshnenem, abundant grace. Then, and then only,
shall I be flanked with a proper ally. Then with Thy Sovereign Power,
like my Obedient will, as an angel sent forth from Thee, and inspired by
Thy righteous Order in law and ritual in thought, and word, and deed,
then I will go out to arouse and head the chiefs, gathering into
spiritual hosts the many believing priests who even now would bear in
mind and celebrate Thy mysteries.'

15\. And as he began with fearless severity, so he would end without a
compromise. 'My patient suffering (so he implies as he proceeds (Y.
XLVI, 1)) reveals its lesson to me. My mind is long-enduring, but that
patience, although it may seem to some the cowardice of a pusillanimous
protector (Y. XXIX, 9), yet it is not such in truth, for it declares
within me, and forces me to say: Let no man please the wicked; this is
our only prospect of success.'

16\. And casting back his thoughts he (or another in his name) sums all
up well: 'Thus doth Zarathustra choose the spirit, that spirit which
animates the faithful in their chiefs (Y. XXXIII, 9),

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and by his side every true believer utters his sympathising prayer: Let
the Order of life and of the ritual become incarnate in our tribes, and
strong because it has the valiant power of faithful men to obey and to
defend it. And let Piety prevail till it covers our land blest with the
favours of the sacred sun, and as she lives in the lives of true
adherents, may she in sympathy with the Good Mind, thus grant rewards
for all our deeds!'

Translation.

1\. Salvation to this man <span id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_455),
salvation to him whosoever (he may be <span
id="fr_457"></span>[2](#fn_456))! Let the absolutely ruling Great
Creator grant (us, He) the living Lord, the two eternal powers. Yea,
verily <span id="fr_458"></span>[3](#fn_457), I ask it of Thee (O Ahura)
for the maintaining <span id="fr_459"></span>[4](#fn_458) Righteousness.
And may’st Thou also give it to me, (O inspiring) Piety! splendour <span
id="fr_460"></span>[5](#fn_459) (as it is), holy blessings, the Good
Mind's life <span id="fr_461"></span>[6](#fn_460).

2\. Yea, to this one <span id="fr_462"></span>[7](#fn_461) may the man
endowed with

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

glory <span id="fr_463"></span>[1](#fn_462) give that best of all
things, the (spiritual) glory. And do Thou likewise (Thyself)
reveal <span id="fr_464"></span>[2](#fn_463) Thine own <span
id="fr_465"></span>[3](#fn_464) (gifts) through Thy most bountiful
spirit, O Mazda! (And do Thou teach us) Thy wonderful thoughts of
wisdom <span id="fr_466"></span>[4](#fn_465), those of Thy Good Mind,
which Thou hast revealed (to us) by Thy Righteousness (within us) with
the happy increase of (our joy <span id="fr_467"></span>[5](#fn_466)),
and on a long life's every day <span id="fr_468"></span>[6](#fn_467).

3\. And may that (holy man) approach toward that which is the better
than the good <span id="fr_469"></span>[7](#fn_468), he who will show to
us the straight paths of (spiritual) profit, (the blessings) of this
corporeal life, and of that the mental <span
id="fr_470"></span>[8](#fn_469), in those veritably real (eternal <span
id="fr_471"></span>[9](#fn_470)) worlds, where dwells Ahura; (that holy
man) an offerer of Thine <span id="fr_472"></span>[10](#fn_471), O
Mazda! a faithful citizen <span id="fr_473"></span>[11](#fn_472), and
bountiful of (mind).

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

4\. Yea, I will <span id="fr_474"></span>[1](#fn_473) regard Thee as
mighty and likewise bountiful, O Ahura Mazda! when (I behold) those aids
of grace (approach me), aids which Thou dost guard and nurture <span
id="fr_475"></span>[2](#fn_474) as (Thy) just awards to the wicked (to
hold him far from us), as well as to the righteous (for our help), Thy
Fire's flame therewith so strong through the Holy Order <span
id="fr_476"></span>[3](#fn_475), and when to me the Good Mind's power
comes  <span id="fr_477"></span>[4](#fn_476)+ <span
id="fr_478"></span>[5](#fn_477)

5\. (For) so I conceived of Thee as bountiful, O Great Giver, Mazda!
when I beheld Thee as supreme <span id="fr_479"></span>[6](#fn_478) in
the generation of life, when, as rewarding <span
id="fr_480"></span>[7](#fn_479) deeds and words, Thou didst establish
evil for the evil, and happy blessings for the good, by Thy (great)
virtue <span id="fr_481"></span>[8](#fn_480) (to be adjudged to each) in
the creation's final change.

6\. In which (last) changing Thou shalt come, and with Thy bounteous
spirit, and Thy sovereign power,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O Ahura Mazda! by
deeds of whom the settlements are furthered through the Righteous Order.
And saving regulations <span id="fr_482"></span>[1](#fn_481) likewise
unto these shall Âramaiti utter, (she, our Piety within us), yea, (laws)
of Thine understanding which no man may deceive <span
id="fr_483"></span>[2](#fn_482).

7\. Yea, I conceived of Thee as bountiful, O Great Giver Mazda! when he
(Thy messenger, Obedience) drew near me, and asked me thus: Who <span
id="fr_484"></span>[3](#fn_483) art thou? And whose is thine allegiance?
And how to-day shall I show the signs that give the light on this (our)
question, (signs) as to the lands (from whence thou camest) and in
thyself?

8\. Then to him I, Zarathu*s*tra, as my first answer, said: To the
wicked (would that I could be) in very truth a strong <span
id="fr_485"></span>[4](#fn_484) tormentor and avenger, but to the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

righteous may I be a mighty help and joy <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_485), since to preparations <span
id="fr_487"></span>[2](#fn_486) for Thy Kingdom, and in desire (for its
approach), I would devote myself so long as to Thee, O Mazda! I may
praise, and weave my song.

9\. Yea, I conceived of Thee as bountiful, O Ahura Mazda! when (Thine
herald) with Thy Good Mind near approached me, and asked me thus: For
what dost thou desire that thou may’st gain, and that thou may’st know
it? Then for Thy Fire an offering of praise and holiness (I desired. And
on that offering for myself) <span id="fr_488"></span>[3](#fn_487) as
long as I have the power, will I meditate <span
id="fr_489"></span>[4](#fn_488), (and for its holy power among Thy
people will I plan <span id="fr_490"></span>[5](#fn_489)).

10\. And may’st Thou likewise grant <span
id="fr_491"></span>[6](#fn_490) me (Thy) Righteousness (within me),
since I earnestly invoke that perfect readiness (of mind), joining in my
prayer with Âramaiti (our Piety toward Thee. Yea, pray Thou Thyself
within me through these holy powers). Ask Thou (Thyself) our questions,
those which shall be asked by us <span id="fr_492"></span>[7](#fn_491)
of Thee; for a question asked by

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thee (as its
inspirer), is as the question of the mighty, whene’er Thy (?) ruler
speaks his potent wish.

II\. Yea, I conceived of Thee as bountiful, O Ahura Mazda! when (Thy
messenger) with Thy Good Mind near approached me, and with your words
I <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_492) first impressed (my soul). Woes
then 'midst men Thy heart-devoted one <span
id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_493) declared <span
id="fr_495"></span>[3](#fn_494) (to be) my (portion); but that will I
do <span id="fr_496"></span>[4](#fn_495) which Thou did’st <span
id="fr_497"></span>[5](#fn_496) say was best.

12\. And since Thou, coming thus, Thy legal Righteousness in
fulness <span id="fr_498"></span>[6](#fn_497) spakest, then declare not
to me words as yet unheard (with faith or knowledge; command me not) to
go forth (with these upon my task) before Thy Sraosha <span
id="fr_499"></span>[7](#fn_498) (Obedience) comes to me, to go on hand
in hand with me with holy recompense and mighty splendour <span
id="fr_500"></span>[8](#fn_499), whereby to

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

give the contending <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_500) throngs(?), as
a blessing <span id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_501), (Your) spiritual gifts
(of certainty and peace).

13\. Thus I conceived of Thee as bounteous, O Ahura Mazda! when with Thy
Good Mind (Sraosha, Obedience) approached me. (And I would therefore
pray thus of Thee, that bounteous one.) In order that I may make known
to men the true and sacred aims of their desires (in the rite or daily
toil), grant Ye me long life <span id="fr_503"></span>[3](#fn_502) for
this, (that blessing <span id="fr_504"></span>[4](#fn_503)) which none
with daring may extort <span id="fr_505"></span>[5](#fn_504) from You,
even this (gift) of that desired <span id="fr_506"></span>[6](#fn_505)
place which has been declared to be within Thy Realm.

14\. Yea, as the man enlightened <span id="fr_507"></span>[7](#fn_506)
(in Thy law), and who has possessions, gives to his friend, (so give Ye)
me, O Great Creator <span id="fr_508"></span>[8](#fn_507)! Thy rejoicing
and

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

abounding grace, when through Thy sovereign Power, and from (the motives
of Thy cause of) Righteous Order, I stand forth <span
id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_508) to go out to <span
id="fr_510"></span>[2](#fn_509), or to arouse, the chiefs <span
id="fr_511"></span>[3](#fn_510) of Thy (pure) proclamation, with all
those (others) who recite Thy well-remembered <span
id="fr_512"></span>[4](#fn_511) Mãthra word.

15\. Yea, I conceived of Thee as bounteous, O Ahura Mazda! when with the
Good Mind's grace Thy Sraosha (Obedience) approached me, (and said): Let
the quiet and long-enduring better mind with understanding teach (thee);
let not a foremost <span id="fr_513"></span>[5](#fn_512) man

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

conciliate the wicked (as sycophant desiring aid), for with that (quiet
mind of faith), Thy saints have brought full many a sinner unto Thee (as
convert, and in penitence <span id="fr_514"></span>[1](#fn_513)).

16\. Thus, O Ahura Mazda! this Zarathu*s*tra loves <span
id="fr_515"></span>[2](#fn_514) the Spirit <span
id="fr_516"></span>[3](#fn_515), and every man most bounteous
prays <span id="fr_517"></span>[4](#fn_516) (beside him): Be
Righteousness life-strong, and clothed with body. In that (holy) Realm
which shines (with splendour) as the sun, let Piety be present; and may
she through the indwelling of Thy Good Mind give us blessings in reward
for deeds <span id="fr_518"></span>[5](#fn_517)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_454"></span>[95:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_455) Anaêshem manô,
anaêshem va*k*ô, anaêshem *s*kyaothnem prove that the thought, word, and
deed referred to were not limited to a ritual meaning.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[98:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_456) Ahmâi as = to us,
does not seem to be good grammar here, as it necessitates a forced
separation between it and yahmâikahmâi*k*î*t*. Cp. ahmâi
yahmâi-kahmâi*k*î*t* in Y. XLIV, 16.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[98:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_457) I turn from the
fine rendering of the Pahlavi with the greatest reluctance: Nadû*k*
valman mûn zak î valman nadûkîh ka*d*ârzâî \[aîgh ka*d*ârzâî an*s*utâ
min nadûkîh î valman nadûkîh\], happy is he whose benefit is for every
one; \[that is, for every man there is happiness from his benefit\];
Ner. follows.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[98:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_458) There is a question
whether the particle ga*t* (gha*t*?) may not have originated from gâ*t*.
Barth. here follows the Pahlavi, reading gatôi (?) = pavan yâmtûni*s*nŏ.
Lak may have been added, as often, to serve as an alternative rendering.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[98:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_459) Or 'I will,' so
Prof. Jolly (infinitive for imper.).

<span id="fn_459"></span>[98:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_460) So also the Pahl.
rayê-hômand, not as a rendering merely, but as a philological analagon.
Otherwise 'riches.'

<span id="fn_460"></span>[98:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_461) Gaêm recalls
sraê*s*ta gaya *g*(i)vai*n*ti.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[98:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_462) As ahmâi would more
naturally mean 'to this one' in the previous verse, it is desirable to
render it in the same way here.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[99:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_463) It is to the last
degree improbable that *hv*âthrôyâ (*hv*âthravâ; 'y' miswritten for 'v')
indicates a condition of ease and comfort here. The 'easy man' is the
farthest possible from the thoughts of the composer. The 'best of all
things' makes a word kindred to *h*v*en*g (*hv*an) appropriate here.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[99:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_464) *K*î*k*î (?), if an
imperative (?), may mean guard over; but the Pahlavi translator gives us
the better view; he has lak pê*d*âkînŏ; Ner. tvam prakâ*s*aya. Geldner's
*k*î*k*îthwâ is important.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[99:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_465) Thwâ = thy
properties.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[99:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_466) The Pahl. has
merely pa*d*mânŏ.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[99:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_467) This shade of
meaning is expressed by the Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[99:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_468) Ayâr*e*, acc. pl.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[99:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_469) This expression
seems to equal the summum bonum; so also 'worse than the evil' is the
ultimate of woe.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[99:8](sbe31013.htm#fr_470) Cp. Y. XXVIII, 3.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[99:9](sbe31013.htm#fr_471) Does haithy*en*g
mean 'eternal,' with every passage in which it occurs considered?

<span id="fn_471"></span>[99:10](sbe31013.htm#fr_472) Thwâva*n*t may,
however, like mava*n*t, simply express the personal pronoun here. The
position of aredrô, &c. is awkward if thwâva*n*t = thy: 'Where dwells
Ahura, Thyself, O Mazda! beneficent, wise, and bountiful.' But aredra is
almost a special term for a zealous partisan.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[99:11](sbe31013.htm#fr_473) The Pahl. has
khûp-dânâkîh, indicating a meaning which would <span id="page_100">p.
100</span> better apply to Ahura than the one given, which cannot be
applied to Him.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[100:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_474) Subjunctive (see
Prof. Jolly, V.S. p. 28).

<span id="fn_474"></span>[100:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_475) 'By Thy hand.'

<span id="fn_475"></span>[100:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_476) The holy Fire of
the altar.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[100:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_477) *G*ima*t* may be
regarded as an improper subjunctive here.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[100:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_478) The Pahlavi: 'and
that too which renders justice to the wicked and also to the righteous.
And this Thy Fire is burning, since by it the strength of him who lives
in Righteousness is (maintained) when that violence which approaches
with a good intention comes to me.'

<span id="fn_478"></span>[100:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_479) See Y. XXXI, 8,
where the word is also rendered as = vornehmster.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[100:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_480) Literally, 'When
Thou didst render deeds provided with rewards.' We are forced to put the
action in the past on account of zãthôi, but the influences originally
set in motion were to have their issue in the end of the world.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[100:8](sbe31013.htm#fr_481) I render hunarâ
literally, and bring its Pahlavi translation to the same sense as
necessarily. Otherwise hûmar would generally mean 'skill.' Ner. has tava
gu*n*eshu. The Pahlavi would here be recognised by all reasonable
scholars as striking in its closeness.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[101:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_482) The word ratû*s*
reminds one of the work of the Ratu for the afflicted kine. In the last
changing, which shall complete the Frashakar*d*, he, or his
representatives, will appear as the last Saoshya*n*t, introducing
'millennial' blessedness.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[101:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_483) I render the
Pahlavi here as in evidence: 'Through Thee, O (?) bountiful Spirit! the
changing comes \[(later (?) gloss) from wickedness to goodness\]. And it
comes likewise through Aûharmazd's supremacy within a good mind, through
whose action the progress of Aharâyîh's settlements is furthered, those
which the master is instructing with a perfect mind \[ \], and in which
this Thy wisdom shall in no wise be deceived thereby.'

<span id="fn_483"></span>[101:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_484) As the kine
thought little of her deliverer (see Y. XXIX, 9), so Sraosha, the
obedient host, is here represented as inquiring as to the antecedents of
the newly-appointed prophet. But he asks more properly concerning the
settlements from which he comes than the lands. Gaêtha is not
da*hv*(h)yu. An origin external to that of other chieftains is not at
all necessarily indicated by the question.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[101:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_485) The Pahlavi sees a
denominative in isôyâ (isôvâ; y for v); it is denom. in the
Altiranisches Verbum. It differs, however, as to root. I offer an
alternative in its sense. An open tormentor; \[that is, I openly torment
the wicked\] even as much as I desire, do I torment (them) \[(later (?)
gloss) Ganrâk mînavad\].

<span id="fn_485"></span>[102:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_486) We must be
cautious in accepting the statement that the Pahlavi translations
attempt to be literal. Here is one which is free and far from erroneous:
Aêtûnŏ avŏ aharûbŏ min valman î aô*g*-hômand aîtŏ; \[aîgha*s*,
râmînam\].

<span id="fn_486"></span>[102:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_487) The Pahlavi here
shows only the correct root.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[102:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_488) Mâ = smâ?

<span id="fn_488"></span>[102:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_489) 'So long as I can,
will I be of this mind,' seems hardly expressed here. Observe the nearly
parallel construction in verse 8.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[102:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_490) The Pahlavi,
Sanskrit, and Persian translations would here be regarded once more as
extremely close even by opponents, if reasonable in their estimates.
Manayâî seems to me hardly an infinitive, as it is comparatively seldom
that an infinitive falls to the end of a sentence either in Gâthic or
Vedic. I prefer the indication of the Pahlavi with Justi and Bartholomae
(in the Altiranisches Verbum).

<span id="fn_490"></span>[102:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_491) Read perhaps
daidhî*s* (later shortened to suit the metre).

<span id="fn_491"></span>[102:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_492) Or, 'ask us that
we may be questioned by Thee.'

<span id="fn_492"></span>[103:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_493) The Pahlavi
translation bears evidence to a less subtle, and therefore more probable
sense here, but at the same time to a rarer grammatical form. It renders
dîdaiNhê as a third person, indicating an instance of a third person in
ê, and not in the perfect. It also recognises a reduplicated form by its
pavan nikêzi*s*nŏ nikêzê*d*ŏ.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[103:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_494) The Pahlavi
translator with a curious error, or still more curious freedom, has
rûbâk-dahi*s*nîh here and elsewhere. Possibly the Gâthic text before the
last compiler differed from ours.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[103:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_495) I still prefer
Professor Bartholomae's earlier rendering, after the Pahlavi, as more in
harmony with mraotâ and mrao*s*.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[103:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_496) Professor Jolly
has the important rendering 'das will ich thun;' the infinitive in a
future or imperative sense.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[103:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_497) 'Ye said.'

<span id="fn_497"></span>[103:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_498) The Pahlavi
unvaryingly kabed.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[103:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_499) Here we probably
have the missing subject in the other verses.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[103:8](sbe31013.htm#fr_500) Reading mãzâ rayâ.
(Rayâ cannot well mean 'riches' here.) The Pahlavi also indicates the
division by its free or erroneous mas ratû (ra*d*). Sraosha, an obedient
will personified, guides the soul as in the later Parsism. Cp. the
Ar*d*â Vîrâf.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[104:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_501) Here we have the
important reading rânôibyô as against the dual of K4, &c. (see Geldner).
No mention of the fire occurs; and as the form does not agree with
ara*n*i, we may well doubt that comparison in view of ãsay*a*u in Y.
XXXI, 2, and the unvarying and uniform patkar*d*ârânŏ of the Pahlavi.
The rendering 'with the sticks' is, however, admirably adapted, and must
be considered as an emphatic alternative.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[104:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_502) The Pahlavi
supports the reading vî for v*e*; it has barâ. Ashî might also mean
merely 'holy,' as adjective.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[104:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_503) In Y. XXVIII, 7,
he asks for it that he may crush the malice of the foe.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[104:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_504) Justi admirably
suggested yânem understood.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[104:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_505) The Pahlavi
divides dâr*s*taitê, and, as I hold, mistakes the root as was
inevitable. The ancient scribe feared to restore the severed fragments,
which appeared, as so often, in the MSS. before him. I would read
dar*s*aitê with Spiegel's c(?) (so Bartholomae, later, however,
recurring to a division, with Geldner after the Pahlavi, for the sake of
bringing out an infinitive).

<span id="fn_505"></span>[104:6](sbe31013.htm#fr_506) Vairy*a*u
contracted from vairyay*a*u by a corrupting improvement to regulate the
metre.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[104:7](sbe31013.htm#fr_507) So the Pahlavi
indicates, Bartholomae following as against the rendering 'possessing.'

<span id="fn_507"></span>[104:8](sbe31013.htm#fr_508) With regard to
Mazd*a*u and medhâ, I should perhaps long <span id="page_105">p.
105</span>since have stated that I object to the comparison, not only
because medhâ´ is a feminine, and, as Grassmann has supposed, possibly
represented by the Zend madh, Greek math, but because 'wisdom' is an
abstract (while su-medhâ´s, as a compound, does not apply so directly).
I hold, however, that mazdâ, the fem. noun in Y. XL, 1 = medhâ´. It is
also not impossible that this word may be represented (with differing
shades of meaning) by both madh and mazdãm (fem.) in Zend.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[105:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_509) Read, perhaps,
frâkh*s*tâ; or frâ*s*tâ, 'with Thine advancing kingdom I (am) to go
forth to'; (frâ + as, participle.)

<span id="fn_509"></span>[105:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_510) Prof. Jolly has
the important rendering, 'Ich will mich erheben;' the infinitive in a a
future or imperative sense.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[105:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_511) Chieftainships.
Compare (not with exactness, however) *s*árdhâ*m*si.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[105:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_512) The idea of
reciting from memory seems to be included in mar*en*tê.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[105:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_513) The rendering
pourû*s* (?) as=pl. of pûrús is attractive, but dregvatô hardly needs,
and seldom has, a substantive. The wicked = wicked men; and, on the
other hand, nâ constantly claims an accompanying word; (nâ ismanô; nâ
vaêdemnô; hvô nâ-erethwô; nâ spe*n*tô, y*e*-nâ, k*e* vâ-nâ, &c.) Also it
is improbable that the words nâ and pourû*s*, as = pûrávas, should come
together; 'let not a man men evil ingratiate (?).' Compare for sense
here purviâs in one or more of its applications. Possibly the meaning
is, 'let not a man be foremost in conciliating the wicked.' The Pahlavi
likewise has kabed (freely). Ner. has: Mâ nara*h*\* pra*k*ura*m*
durgatinâm bhûyât\* yathâ katha*mk*it satkartâ. An important rendering
is that of Professor <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> Jolly, V.S. s.
47, 'möchte es wenige Verehrer des Lügners geben.' Cp. Y. XLVI, 1, where
the composer speaks of the chefs as on their side, 'not contenting' him.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[106:1](sbe31013.htm#fr_514) Or, with the
Pahl.: Mûn aêtûnŏ lak harvisp-gûnŏ aharûbânŏ pavan anâk yakhsenund, for
they consider all Thy saints as wicked. The rendering above is less
natural as conveying the idea of a conversion (comp., however, yâ
*g*(i)va*n*tô vîsp*en*g vaurayâ), but it renders the grammatical forms
more simply. It is bad policy to force a text to express what we happen
to believe to be a more natural idea. Using the hint of the Pahlavi here
in an understanding manner, we might then render 'for they hold all
sinners as holy.'

<span id="fn_514"></span>[106:2](sbe31013.htm#fr_515) I had long since
compared vere*n*tê with v*rin*îte (-devâ´nâm ávas); and am now sustained
by Bartholomae's view.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[106:3](sbe31013.htm#fr_516) Possibly the
Speni*s*ta mainyu of Ahura. (See also Y. XLIV, 2.)

<span id="fn_516"></span>[106:4](sbe31013.htm#fr_517) The Pahlavi, on
the contrary, bears evidence to the meaning 'comes,' which I cannot
accept as 'tradition' in view of the following precatives.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[106:5](sbe31013.htm#fr_518) Ner.: 'The kingdom
becomes established (in a manner completely manifest) in sun-publicity
through mental perfection \[ \]; and upon the workers of righteousness
the Good Mind bestows it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna XLIV](sbe31014)
