[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe31023)  [Next](sbe31025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185731/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part III (SBE31)*, L.H. Mills, tr. \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YASNA II.

#### THE SACRIFICE CONTINUES.

1\. I desire to approach <span id="fr_923"></span>[1](#fn_920) the
Zaothras <span id="fr_924"></span>[2](#fn_921) with my worship. I desire
to approach the Baresman with my worship. I desire to approach the
Zaothra conjointly with the Baresman in my worship, and the Baresman
conjointly with the Zaothra. Yea, I desire to approach this Zaothra
(here),and with this (present) Baresman, and I desire to approach this
Baresman conjoined with this Zaothra with my praise <span
id="fr_925"></span>[3](#fn_922); and I desire to approach this Baresman
with praise provided with its Zaothra with its girdle, and spread with
sanctity.

2\. And in this Zaothra <span id="fr_926"></span>[3](#fn_922) and the
Baresman I desire to approach Ahura Mazda with my praise, the holy

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

lord of the ritual order, and the Bountiful Immortals, (all) those who
rule aright, and who dispose of all aright, these also I desire to
approach and with my praise.

3\. And in this Zaothra. with this Baresman I desire to approach the
Asnya with my praise. I desire to approach the Hâvani with my praise,
the holy lord of the ritual order, and Sâvanghi and Vîsya, the holy
lords of the ritual order. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I
desire to approach Mithra with my praise, of the wide pastures, of the
thousand ears, and of the myriad eyes, the Yazad of the spoken name, and
Râman *Hv*âstra with him, the holy lord of the ritual order.

4\. And in this Zaothra and with the Baresman I desire to approach
Rapithwina with my praise, the holy lord of the ritual order; and
Frâda*t*fshu and Za*n*tuma, the holy lords of the ritual order; and in
this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach toward
Righteousness the Best with my praise, and with him the Fire, Ahura
Mazda's son.

5\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach
Uzayêirina with my praise, and Frâda*t*-vîra and Da*hv*yuma <span
id="fr_927"></span>[1](#fn_923), the holy lords of the ritual order; and
with them that lofty lord, the kingly and brilliant Apãm-napâ*t* <span
id="fr_928"></span>[2](#fn_924), of the fleet horses, and likewise the
water Mazda-made and holy,

6\. And Aiwisrûthrima, (and) Aibigaya, the holy lord(s) of the ritual
order, and Frâda*t*-vîspãm-hu*g*âiti, and Zarathu*s*trôtema, the holy
lord, and the good, heroic, and bountiful Fravashis of the saints, and
the women who have many sons, and a peaceful and prosperous home-life
that continues without reverse throughout the year, and Force
well-shaped and

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

stately, and the Victorious-blow Ahura-given, and the Victorious
Ascendency (which it secures), and (7) Ushahina, the holy lord of the
ritual order, Bere*g*ya and Nmânya, the holy lords of the ritual order,
and Sraosha, Obedience, the blessed and the stately, who smites with the
blow of victory, furthering the settlements, the holy lord of the ritual
order, and Rashnu, the most just, and Ar*s*tâ*t*, who furthers the
settlements, and causes them to increase.

8\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the
Mâhya, the monthly festivals with my praise, the new moon and the waning
moon (the moon within), the holy lords of the ritual order, and the full
moon which scatters night, (9) and the Yearly festivals,
Maidhyô-zaremaya, the holy lord of the ritual order, and Maidhyô-shema,
and Paiti*s*hahya, and Ayâthrima, the promoter, who spends the strength
of males, and Maidhyâirya and Hamaspathmaêdhaya, and the seasons, the
holy lords of the ritual order.

10\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach all the
lords of the ritual order with my praise, the three and thirty who come
the nearest round about our Hâvanis, who are those lords (and seasons)
of Righteousness the Best, which were inculcated by Mazda, and spoken
forth by Zarathu*s*tra.

11\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach Ahura
and Mithra with my praise, the lofty, eternal, and the holy two; and I
desire to approach the stars, moon, and sun with the Baresman plants,
and with my praise, and with them Mithra the governor of all the
provinces, and Ahura Mazda the radiant and glorious, and the good,
heroic, bountiful Fravashis of the saints, (12) and thee, the Fire,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ahura Mazda's son,
the holy lord of the ritual order, with all the fires! And I desire to
approach the good waters in this Zaothra with this Baresman with my
praise, all best waters, Mazda-made and holy, and all the plants which
are Mazda-made and holy.

13\. And I desire to approach the bounteous Mãthra in this Zaothra with
this Baresman, and with my praise, the most glorious as it is, and with
it the law instituted against the Daêvas; yea, I desire to approach the
Zarathu*s*trian law with my praise, and (with it) its long descent, and
the good Mazdayasnian Religion (as complete).

14\. And I desire to approach Mount Ushi-darena in this Zaothra, with
this Baresman with my praise, Mazda-made, and glorious with sanctity,
the Yazad-(mount). And I desire to approach all the mountains with my
praise, glorious with sanctity as they are, and with abundant glory,
Mazda-made, and holy lords of the ritual order; and I desire to approach
the mighty kingly Glory Mazda-made and unconsumed; yea, (even) the
mighty unconsumed Glory Mazda-made. And I desire to approach Ashi
Vanguhi (the good blessedness) in my praise, the brilliant, lofty,
powerful, and stately, saving by inherent power. Yea, I desire to
approach the Glory Mazda-made with my praise; and I desire to approach
the Benefit conferred by Mazda.

15\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the
Blessing, pious and good, and the pious and holy man who utters it, and
the mighty and redoubted Curse of the wise, the Yazad.

16\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach these
waters with my praise, and these lands and plants, and these places,
districts,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

and pastures, and these dwellings with their springs of water <span
id="fr_929"></span>[1](sbe31025.htm#fn_925), and this land-ruler, who is
Ahura Mazda.

17\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach all the
greatest lords with my praise, the day-lords, and the month-lords, those
of the years, and of the seasons, and the good, heroic, bountiful
Fravashis of the saints.

18\. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach all the
holy Yazads with my praise; yea, even all the lords of the ritual order,
Hâvani at his time, and Sâvanghi at his time, and all the greatest lords
of the ritual at their proper times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_920"></span>[203:1](sbe31024.htm#fr_923) Referring yâs to
its more original sense. Or read, 'I desire the approach of' the various
objects of worship, which may be correct, as we understand the genius of
each several object to be invoked. Aside from this, a desire 'to
approach' seems quite necessary to fill out the sense here. Many of the
objects referred to were already present, although some, like 'the
mountains,' needed to be spiritually approached, or indeed invoked.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[203:2](sbe31024.htm#fr_924) Zaothra seems to
me hardly a vocative here. If declined as other nouns, it would seem to
be exceptionally a masculine; compare ahmya zaothrê below. I should feel
constrained to regard it here as a masc. plural accusative (comp.
haoma).

<span id="fn_922"></span>[203:3](sbe31024.htm#fr_926) If zaothrê is not
a loc. masc. it may be used with the loc. masc. pronoun irregularly. It
would then equal Zaothraya. The letter <span id="img_20300"></span>
![](img/20300.jpg) is often simply the Pahlavi <span
id="img_20301"></span> ![](img/20301.jpg) a little lengthened and
equivalent to ya (aya). <span id="img_20300"></span> ![](img/20300.jpg)
does not merely stand for ya (aya), but it is sometimes the correct
writing for those letters. (Useless repetitions are curtailed.)

<span id="fn_923"></span>[204:1](sbe31024.htm#fr_927) *hv* = h before y.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[204:2](sbe31024.htm#fr_928) Sometimes
Napâ*t*-apãm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yasna III. The Yasna Advances to the Naming of the Objects of
Propitiation](sbe31025)
