[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup09)  [Next](tup11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

THE FIRST step of a Truth student in handling the psychic forces of
consciousness is the same as that in handling any other, and that is to
realize that God is the one and only power; to declare with Byron:
"There is no god but God!--to prayer--lo! God is great!"

The name psyche, which figures in Greek mythology, means breath, life.
Psyche is represented as one of the three daughters of a king. These
three "daughters" are spirit, soul, and body. Psyche is the soul in its
many earthly experiences, in its failures and its successes.

God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and His law is for the
use of all alike. Man interprets His law and operates in accord with it
to the best of his ability in his endeavor to grow and prove his mastery
over the many events that take place in his life.

If man would become expert in handling scientifically the psychical
forces, he should first get a thorough understanding of just what these
forces are, and above all he should know that like other forces they are
subservient to God's law. The psychic

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

or soul realm includes the sum total of consciousness, all that the
individual has experienced.

In analyzing the soul realm we have first the animal soul. The animal
soul comprises all sensations and all thoughts that we entertain with
reference to animal life. Through man's thought the animal soul forms
the animal man.

The second element in the soul realm, the human soul, is one step higher
than the animal, and comprises all the thoughts and emotions we
entertain on the human plane of consciousness: thoughts of family, of
friends, of business associates, or personal possessions.

The third and highest element of soul is the spiritual. This phase of
the soul is the depository of all thoughts and aspirations we have ever
had about God and things spiritual. Here also we find a consciousness
that relates us to God and forms the connecting link between the human
and the divine. When through prayers, meditations, and good works man
has built spiritual qualities into his soul to the point of dominance
over the animal and human natures, he is ready for the regeneration with
Jesus Christ.

It is true that through the animal and human departments of the soul we
are in sympathy with all nature, which includes the earth, the sun, the
moon, and the stars, and as these are all ensouled, their reactions
affect us when there is no higher power in evidence. But there is a
higher power in us every one: Spirit. In Genesis it is stated that
spiritual

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

man, the image-and-likeness man, was given dominion over all creation.
As Shakespeare aptly says,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The fault is not in our stars,  
But in ourselves, that we are underlings."  
</span>

</div>

In our ongoing we endeavor always to bear in mind that God is the one
and only power. We must know and realize that the great intelligence of
God works in every conceivable way to lead us into the light, thus
aiding us in avoiding error conditions. The indwelling Christ will
"neither slumber nor sleep"; with the Holy Spirit it is teaching us the
great truth that we are "Gods in the making" and that as such we have
dominion over every thought and condition.

When Jesus was born in the manger in Bethlehem the star appeared in the
east and pointed the way for the Wise Men to the spot where the young
child lay. A mighty soul had been incarnated and had come to do a mighty
work on the earth. So great was the occasion that the whole heavenly
universe sang with joy. This to the individual means that a speck of
light shone in the east, the within, revealing to the illumined soul
what was taking place. The star is a symbol of potentiality; it
represents expanding possibilities. The saving I AM had at last made its
spiritual power manifest in the earth. But was the star seen by those
who were not spiritually illumined? No. They had eyes but saw not. Only
the illumined, the awakened, could perceive

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the star of Bethlehem. So the spiritual I AM is often doing a great work
in a man, and the man knows it not. This scripture also reveals the way
in which Spirit often uses the so-called psychic to do its bidding, to
reveal its power.

Today men are breaking into the psychic realm as never before and, not
being consciously unified with Spirit, are becoming entangled in their
own mentality, in addition to the psychic vibrations of the whole race.
Often this leads to very unpleasant experiences.

In fact all people are being quickened, and in the absence of an
understanding of Truth erratic states of mind are formed that cause
fantastic notions about many things. Persons in this condition often
become supersensitive and imagine that they are being criticized, that
others are talking about them, and a thousand and one other things. Very
often this condition is the result of trying to communicate with the
dead through mediums and spiritualistic seances.

There is a realm in which the souls that have left the body are
functioning feebly. Spiritualists call it "spirit land" or "the home of
the soul." The early Christians taught that those who had passed away
were asleep. This is not true of all persons, but those who have lived a
long, strenuous life and are weary want rest and fall asleep. Paul said,
"Because you have not discerned the Lord's body you have fallen asleep."
Others who have lost their body early in life are ready for immediate
action

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

in reincarnation and do not find sleep necessary.

Eventually all souls reincarnate on the earth as babes and in due time
take up their problems where they left off at death. But before they do
reincarnate they sometimes try to communicate with their loved ones here
on earth. This is never satisfactory and leads nowhere. Persons who sit
in seances are taking a great risk. Instead of really getting in touch
with their loved ones they are apt to make contact with psychic forces
of a low order that tend to weaken their faith in God.

Paul said, "Our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against
the principalities, against the powers, against the world-rulers of this
darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly
places."

When a person is established in the Christ power and dominion, he finds
that Spirit often uses the mental realm to reveal to him some message
that is of vital importance to him. Such messages are imparted through
dreams and visions. When the soul is still, as in sleep, the Spirit of
truth throws the message on the screen of the mind in the form of
thought pictures. One only has to read the symbols in order to receive
the message. If the message is constructive, it is well to praise God
and give thanks. If it is of a destructive nature, take the message into
the silence and place it before God. Hold the thought for light until
you have the realization that the illumination of Spirit permeates and
penetrates the whole condition. Spiritual light transforms,
reconstructs,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

and makes beautiful. Joseph, the son of Jacob, was an expert at
interpreting dreams and visions. However many of the patriarchs of old
were well versed in the art of deciphering the visions of the night.

Again the psychic realm is the realm in which primitive man (Adam and
Eve) first functioned. Instead of listening to the Lord they listened to
the serpent (the sense man) and learned to indulge in sensation until it
depleted divine substance. Disintegration of the body followed. This is
physical death. For this cause the human family lost their original
estate in the ethereal or heavenly kingdom and descended into earthly
fleshly consciousness.

We are now, through Christ, listening to Jehovah God, through whom we
are learning the law of life, and we are being restored to the
understanding that all the factors that enter into life are here all the
time and are ours to use. Through Christ man has dominion. Through
Christ it is possible for us to make the perfect union between soul and
body, and enter into the consciousness of Almightiness, thus being
restored to the paradise of God from which we originally came forth.

We should not think of the psychic realm as evil or be afraid of it.
Through Christ we possess mastery and dominion over all realms. Through
our own Christ dominion we develop spiritual powers to handle the
psychic realm to great advantage. And that this is a realm in which
tremendous forces are present is being discovered by the investigations
of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

physical science. Jesus often referred to the "kingdom of the heavens"
or the kingdom of God, which He said was very nigh unto us and even
within us. This kingdom is above the psychic, awaiting our appropriation
of it through prayer. Jesus told His followers that after His ascension
they were to go into the upper room in Jerusalem (a high, peaceful state
of consciousness), where the Holy Spirit would come upon them with
power. Science says the ether possesses dynamic power beyond anything we
can imagine. Sir Oliver Lodge is quoted as saying that there is energy
enough in one cubic inch of ether to run a forty-horsepower engine for
forty millions of years. This is beyond all human conception; but many
of the stories that science is telling us about the power of the ether
are fully equal to this, and if they were in the Bible skeptics would
point to them as examples of the credulity of the Christians.

Jesus says that all power should be given to us, which carries with it
the idea of unlimited capacity.

For mastery and dominion over all conditions affirm:

I AM THAT I AM.

Through Jesus Christ I am the master of every realm of consciousness in
my being.

Through Jesus Christ I enter into a full and complete understanding of
how to handle all states of consciousness to the glory of God.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

I am illumined with the light of Spirit, and I bring "every thought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ."

I commit all my works unto Jehovah, and my purposes are established.

Every plane of consciousness in me is transformed by the renewing of the
mind.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spiritual Unfoldment Makes Man Master](tup11)
