[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup18)  [Next](tup20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I see myself as God sees me, strong, robust,
healthy.  
The Spirit of industry, energy, and honesty now stirs me to  
action, and I am truly prosperous.  
</span>

</div>

THERE IS AN idea quite prevalent in the public mind that we teach a
system of thought and word juggling; that anyone anywhere can have any
and every thing by merely repeating over and over certain magic words.
It is true that words have magic in them and very often the result of
the mental imagery evoked by them is so startling as to suggest Aladdin
and his lamp. However a comprehension of the whole philosophy reveals a
well-balanced set of principles upon which it rests. By being determined
one can project an isolated idea and gets results without conforming to
the accepted laws of human relationships. No one can use the dynamic
power of thought and word in unbalanced ways without suffering
undesirable reactions. To avoid this we keep before our mind's eye the
dominant existence of a divine order and law to which

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

we must conform if we are to attain enduring success. Jesus taught that
He was the executive of a spiritual principle that was the source, the
wisdom, and the power of everything He did. He urged His followers to
look to the same inner power. "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you."

We who are striving to acquire an understanding of the divine law and to
apply it in our life as Jesus did in His should set up the same intimate
relation with the Father that He did. "For the Father loveth the Son,
and showeth him all things that he himself doeth." We are all the
offspring of God and come into sonship when we acquaint ourselves with
His mind.

In the beginning of our existence as free, thinking entities we had a
certain consciousness of the Father-Mind, but continued thinking of
ourselves as independent of this Mind has formed a gulf of apartness. We
are prodigals in the far country of sense life. Those of us who are
beginning to see how poor and bare this material life is have turned our
faces to the Father's house and are mentally journeying home. It is not
a question of geographical locality but of mental recognition. "The
kingdom of God is within you," said Jesus. Seeking God within changes
our whole mental viewpoint. We find ourselves right in the presence of
creative Mind, and seeking to co-operate with this Mind, we receive
spiritual inspiration and are guided in even the most minute details of
life.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

In the early stages of our spiritual awakening we realize our dependence
upon God for all that we are, and our attitude is that of the humble,
obedient child. Then gradually there arises within us the consciousness
of sonship, the consciousness that God is the parent Mind and that we
inherit all the ideas constituting this mind. If we inherit these
creative ideas it logically follows that we are to use them. This is
where, as Jesus explained, the son becomes the co-operator with the
Father in creation. "For as the Father hath life in himself, even so
gave he to the Son also to have life in himself: and he gave him
authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man." The claim
that Jesus was the exclusive and only Son of God is here refuted:
"because he is a son of man." By divine right man is the executive power
of God-Mind, and he will never fulfill the law of his being before he
enters into the realization of his dominion and authority in the realms
of mind and matter.

Thus we see that we are warranted in affirming our unity with God and
expecting the attributes of the perfect man to appear. "Judge not
according to appearance." Right in the face of adverse appearances enter
into God-Mind and see yourself as He sees you, strong, robust, healthy.
Jesus said, "Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all that
are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth." All those
who believe in the inevitable conquest of death are already in mental
tombs, but when they realize that Jesus walked out of the tomb

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

and said, "Follow me," they are lifted into the heavens of eternal life.
Do not be afraid to go all the way with Jesus.

When the prodigal son returned, the father ran to meet him, ordered the
best robe to be put upon him, shoes on his feet, a ring on his hands;
and he provided a feast, with merriment. Here is parabled the prosperity
that ensues when man returns to the consciousness of God as his
resource. In the world of affairs, industry, energy, and honesty are
expected of those who would succeed. These qualities have a divine
source and can be quickened and intensely energized by attaching them to
the dynamic mind of God. "Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall
be established unto thee."

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spiritual Soul Therapy](tup20)
