[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup16)  [Next](tup18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I praise and give thanks that I am strong in the
Lord and  
in the power of His might.  
I praise and give thanks for the plenty, visible and  
invisible, that I feel and see everywhere.  
</span>

</div>

TO BE "strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might" means that we
are seeking strength and power from sources other than the physical.
Food and exercises are the usual sources of bodily vigor. We are not
discussing mental vigor, which is gained by combining diet, discipline,
and idealism.

A study of Truth reveals that words based upon the authority of Spirit
develop dynamic force. The difference between the force of a word based
in physical things and one based in spiritual things is the difference
between the effect one gets from contact with a wire carrying a light
and a wire carrying a heavy voltage.

The time will come when scientific metaphysics will measure
mathematically the currents of energy

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

emanating from a brain charged with material ideas and one charged with
spiritual ideas. At present the science of mind is quite primitive. We
are, like Franklin, flying a few kites and making cursory excursions
into a field of energy the control of which will eventually change our
whole world.

We have found however that very definite changes occur in our mind and
body when we practice concentration in the silence. This means that when
we want to gain spiritual power we get still mentally and physically and
turn our attention within. On our first entering this "silence" we close
our eyes and ears, and with our concentrated attention fixed on an
imaginary point within, we repeat silently any set of words that carry a
spiritual idea. With practice we can make the inner connection without
closing the eyes.

In His directions for effective prayer Jesus told His disciples to go
into the secret place and close the door, there to pray to the Father in
secret, and the response would appear outwardly. Jesus sometimes prayed
all night. He taught persistence in prayer. We find that contact with
the supermind--which Jesus named the Father--is sometimes quickly made
in concentrated prayer; then again our mind is slow to see the inner
light. The relation of our mind to creative Mind may be compared to the
relation of a radio receiving set to a broadcasting station. As we must
tune our radio set so that it will pick up waves from the proper
station, so we have to acquire the ability to attune our mind to Divine

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Mind, so we may learn by spiritual understanding the true ideas that
exist eternally in Divine Mind.

Every word has a quality that sympathetically relates it to an idea
innate in the mind of man, and when the word is released it radiates an
energy that contracts or expands the body cells and through them
external nature. For example, words of praise, gratitude, or
thanksgiving expand, set free, and in every way radiate energy. Words of
failure or impotence congest energy and cause the cells to crowd
together, making nerves trembly and bones brittle.

When the thoughts are lifted up to the contemplation of our
all-pervading and all-powerful Spirit Father and our voices ring out in
words of praise and thanksgiving, the withered hands and shackled feet
are freed, the walls of negation are shattered, and we step forth into a
new consciousness of life.

To those in the clutches of adverse words it seems a travesty to praise
and give thanks to the God of strength and power, but thousands of those
who have endured poverty and sickness for years find that their prison
doors open when they praise and give thanks, like Paul and Silas, as
related in the 16th chapter of Acts. They were praying and singing hymns
to God when suddenly there was a great earthquake, all the prisoners'
chains were loosened, and Paul and Silas stepped forth free men.

So you will find that you can be freed from all the prison cells of
mind's blind thinking by lifting up your voice and heart in songs of
praise and thanksgiving to the God of freedom, light, and life.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Face to Face with God](tup18)
