[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tup21)  [Next](tup23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Teach Us to Pray*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1941\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I am no longer like Lot's wife, preserving evil in
mind and  
body by remembering it. I relax and willingly let go of all  
effete substance, that the new, pure radiance of God may be  
made manifest in me.  
My mind no longer clings to the complexity of mortal  
finances. I am open to the splendor of the kingdom of God  
within, and a flood of plenty follows.  
</span>

</div>

ONE OF the axiomatic truths of metaphysics is that "thoughts are
things." That the mind of man marshals its faculties and literally makes
into living entities the ideas that it entertains is also a foregone
conclusion.

The word "things" expresses poorly the active and very vital character
of the thoughts to which the mind gives life, substance, and
intelligence.

We see so many inanimate "things" around us in the material world, and
we compare our creative thoughts with them and thereby get a very
inferior

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

conception of the marvelous ability of our mind in its creative
capacity.

Shakespeare says, "The poet's pen . . . gives to airy nothing a local
habitation and a name." At the same time the poet's mind forms in the
ether a replica of his idea, and that replica takes up its habitation in
his thought atmosphere and henceforth injects into it a tincture of the
sentiments that the poets originally had.

This ability of the Adamic man to "name" or give character, form, and
shape to ideas is symbolically described in the 2d chapter of Genesis,
where Jehovah God brought before Adam the elemental ideas or "beasts" of
the Garden of Eden (called by metaphysicians the "ether"). "And
whatsoever the man called every living creature, that was the name
thereof."

We often refer in Unity literature to the discoveries by modern science
of the ether and its stupendous properties as confirming in scientific
terms what Jesus taught in symbols concerning the properties of the
ether, which He named the kingdom of the heavens. The Garden of Eden is
a symbolic description of that elemental realm which modern science has
named the ether. Science says that this ether fills all space, is not
molecular, and possesses an amount of energy beyond comparison with
anything material; that all the complex phenomena of nature may be
reduced to different kinds of waves of energy in the ether. Professor
James Jeans says, "We live in a universe of waves, and

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

nothing but waves." He also says that it may be that our mind lays hold
of the atoms of our body and so forms the world about us.

Here we see how very near to the teaching of religion scientific minds
are approaching. They are virtually proclaiming the one life as the
source of everything. Their next great proclamation will be that one
directive intelligence is an essential cause of the harmonious universe.

Every experienced metaphysician knows that man's mind molds from an
omnipresent element whatever takes form, shape, and intelligence and
becomes part of his thought world. That science in a measure confirms
this is a source of gratification and a stabilizer of faith. Knowing
that our world is composed of what we have idealized should make us more
watchful of the activities of our mind. Are we still harboring thought
forms that are impeding our soul's progress? Are we preserving our evil
thoughts by thinking about them with fear in our mind? Or it may be that
we yearn for the pleasures of the past and like Lot's wife look back,
thereby subjecting ourselves to the things of the past or with the salt
of the mind preserving them. There are always better things just ahead
for those who build in mind the living thought entities that go before
and open the way.

Man lives in two worlds, the world of cause and the world of effect. The
world of effect is at present in a complex tangle. Panaceas without
number are offered. There is but one panacea and that is the
installation of an economic system in which human greed will be
eliminated. To institute such a system will require men and women who
have overcome greed in themselves.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

If you would help the world, and incidentally yourself, to better
economic conditions, begin to deny your selfishness and greed and
affirm,

"I am open to the splendor of the kingdom of God within, and a flood of
plenty follows."

The Supermind

I join with all the hosts of heaven in declaring that only the good is
true, and that good health everywhere is made manifest.

The rich substance of the kingdom of God is pouring its plenty
perpetually into my mind and affairs, and I am in all ways prospered.

THAT MAN in his spiritual nature is leagued with supermind realms is
taught freely in the Scriptures and can be proved to the satisfaction of
anyone who will submit to the required mental discipline. That these
supermind forces are not always used to bring about good is no argument
against their existence. Anyone who develops spiritually in any way
breaks into realms of thought energy superior to the intellectual and
can incite to action subtle causes that mystify the average on-looker.
For this reason every Christian metaphysician should acquaintance with
these facts about the supermind, which occupies so great a place in
Truth demonstrations.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

The question is often asked if the Indian medicine man or the African
witch doctor uses the same force that the Christian healer does. The
answer is yes. There is but one primal life in which we all exist and
which we use as we will. The way in which we project this force
determines whether we are Christian or pagan. If our thought is to
destroy, we are pagan. If our thought is for peace, we are Christian.
This law is operative not only in the nations but in every individual.
As we are taught in our Bible, God originally guided man to think good
only; but man was tempted and chose to be free and think for himself.
This freedom threw the whole race into a mental vortex of "good" and
"evil," hate and love, war and peace. Christ is the Prince of Peace and
Satan is the devil of destruction.

These good and evil states of consciousness form the heavens and the
hells of the race, and we go in mind to heaven or hell every time we
mentally project the thoughts that "chord" with that particular state.
Only a supermastermind can overcome this law of mental affinity and set
up in our earthly discordant thought atmosphere a consciousness of peace
and love. Jesus was able to do this, and when we think of Him, the
Christ in us "tunes in" to the Christ in Him and we are saved from the
destructive forces that tear soul and body asunder.

The mental harmony of Jesus not only radiates throughout the earth but
reaches into the heavens, where it taps the glory of the Son of God.
When we pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ or

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

decree His presence and power in our spiritual work, we effect a reunion
with His supermind and its tremendous ramifications in heaven and earth,
and our own meager spiritual ability is augmented a thousandfold. Jesus
understood and used this law of thought affinity when He claimed that
the works He did were not His but the Father's within Him. It was in
this consciousness that He proclaimed, "All authority hath been given
unto me in heaven and on earth." He also affirmed a like spiritual unity
for His disciples and for all those who proclaim Him as their spiritual
leader. His last promise was "And these signs shall accompany them that
believe: in my name shall they cast out demons; they shall speak with
new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly
thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick,
and they shall recover." This is found in the 16th chapter of Mark,
where it is also written, "And they went forth, and preached everywhere,
the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs that
followed."

Peter and John developed marvelous healing power when they spoke the
magic words to the lame man at the gate Beautiful: "In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, walk." "And immediately his feet and his ankle-bones
received strength. And leaping up, he stood, and began to walk."

For two thousand years those who have had faith in Jesus and proclaimed
their faith in His name have had proof that He is present as a dynamic

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

life-giving force. Men and women with no previous healing power have
suddenly become healers of marvelous ability. They do not claim to
understand how the healing is done. They know only that through the
exercise of faith and their word the spiritual quality in them is fused
into unity with the power of Christ and the work is marvelously
accomplished.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cheerfulness Heals](tup23)
