[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod14)  [Next](ebod16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE III.

Vignette: Scene of the weighing of the Heart of the Dead. Ani and his
wife enter the Hall of Double Law or Truth, wherein the heart,
emblematical of the conscience, is to be weighed in the balance against
the feather, emblematical of law. Above, twelve gods, each holding a
sceptre are seated upon thrones before a table of offerings of fruit,
flowers, etc. Their names are: Harmachis, "the great god within his
boat"; Tmu; Shu; Tefnut, "lady of heaven"; Seb; Nut, "lady of Heaven"
Isis; Nephthys; Horus, "the great god"; Hathor, "lady of Amenta"; and
Sa. Upon the beam of the scales sits the dog-headed ape which was
associated

\[1. A name of the underworld.

2\. Or *Sexet-Anru*, a division of the *Sexet-hetepu* (see Plate XXXV.),
the Elysian fields wherein the souls of the blessed were supposed to
reap and sow.

3\. In British Museum papyrus No. 9901 the goddess Maat is seated on the
centre of the beam of the balance. The double Maat goddesses are at
times represented standing beside the balance to watch the result of the
weighing, and at the same time Maat is also placed in the scale to be
weighed against the heart of the deceased (Fig. x) (see Naville,
*Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 136, Pa.). {footnote page 256} In the papyrus
of Qenna the head of Anubis is on the beam, and the ape, wearing disk
and crescent, is seated upon a pylon-shaped pedestal beside the balance
(Fig. 2). Another vignette shows Horus holding Maat in his band,
weighing the heart in the presence of the Maat goddesses, and Anubis,
holding the deceased by the hand, presents the heart to Osiris while
Isis and Nephthys in the form of apes sit near (Fig. 3).

<img src="256.jpg" width="400" height="142" />

\]

{p. 256}

with Thoth,\[1\] the scribe of the gods. The god Anubis, jackal-headed,
tests the tongue of the balance, the suspending bracket of which is in
the form of the feather The inscription above the head of Anubis
reads:--"He who is in the tomb saith, pray thee, O weigher of
righteousness, to guide (?) the balance that it may be stablished.'" On
the left of the balance, facing Anubis, stands Ani's "Luck" or
"Destiny," *Shai* and above is the object called *mesxen* which has been
described\[2\] as "a cubit with human head," and which is supposed to be
connected with the place of birth. Behind these stand the goddesses
Meskhenet and Renenet: Meskhenet\[3\]

\[1. In the papyrus of Sutimes (Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 43)
the ape is called *neb xemennu ut a maa*, "Lord of Khemennu, just
weigher"; and in British Museum papyrus No. 9900, "Thoth, lord of the
scales."

2\. Birch, in Bunsen's Egypt's Place, vol. v., p. 259. In the papyrus of
Anhai (British Museum, No. 10,472) there is a *meskhen* on each side of
the upright of the balance: one is called Shai and the other Renen.

3\. Four goddesses bore the name of Meskhen, and they were supposed to
assist the resurrection of Osiris; they were associated with Tefnut,
Nut, Isis, and Nephthys (see Lepsius, *Denkmäler*, iv., Bl. 59a; and
Mariette, *Dendérah*, iv., pl. 74 *a*). Each wore upon her head the
object \#\#\#, which is said by some to represent the blossoms of palm
trees (Lanzone, *Dizionario*, p. 329). Examples of this as an amulet, in
hard stone, in the British Museum, are Nos. 8158, 8159, 8161, 20,618,
and, in porcelain, No. 15,963.\]

{p. 257}

presiding over the birth-chamber, and Renenet\[1\] probably
superintending the rearing of children. Behind the *meskhen* is the soul
of Ani in the form of a human-headed bird standing on a pylon. On the
right of the balance, behind Anubis, stands Thoth,\[2\] the scribe of
the gods, with his reed-pen and palette\[3\] containing black and red
ink, with which to record the result of the trial. Behind Thoth stands
the female monster Amam\[4\], the "Devourer," or Am-mit, the eater of
the Dead."

\[1. The name of this goddess is probably connected with the word
*renen*, "to suckle." M. Pierret identifies her with the goddess of that
name who presided over harvests, and is described as the "lady of the
offerings of all the gods" (*Panthéon*, p. 61), having a snake's head,
which in some instances is surmounted by the disk, horns and feathers of
the goddess Hathor (see Lanzone, *Dizionario*, tav. 188, No. 2).

2 Thoth was the personification of intelligence. He was self-created and
self-existent, and was the "heart of Ra." He invented writing, letters,
the arts and sciences, and he was skilled in astronomy and mathematics.
Among his many titles are "lord of Law," "maker of Law," and "begetter
of Law." He justified Osiris against his enemies, and he wrote the story
of the fight between Horus, the son of Osiris, and Set. As "lord of Law"
he presides over the trial of the heart of the dead, and, as being the
justifier of the god Osiris against his enemies, he is represented in
funereal scenes as the justifier also of the dead before Osiris (see
Lanzone, *Dizionario*, p. 1264 ff., and tav. cccciv., No. i; Pierret,
Panthéon, pp. 10-14; and Brugsch, *Religion und Mythologie*, p. 439
ff.). Brugsch connects the name Tehuti (Thoth) with the old Egyptian
word *tehu*, "ibis," and he believes that it means the "being who is
like an ibis." The word *tex* also means "to measure," "to compute," "to
weigh"; and as this god is called "the counter of the heavens and the
stars, and of all that therein is," the connexion of the name Thoth with
*tex* is evident. Bronze and *faïence* figures of the god represent him
with the head of an ibis, and holding an *utchat* in his hands (see Nos.
481, 490a, and 11,385 in the British Museum). The *utchat*, or eye of
the sun, has reference to the belief that Thoth brought back each
morning the light of the sun which had been removed during the night.

3\. The palettes of the Egyptian scribe were rectangular, and were made
of wood, stone, basalt, ivory (see Nos. 5512a, 5513, 5525a, and 12,779,
etc., in the British Museum). They measure from 10 to 17 inches in
length, and from 2 to 3 inches in width. They usually contain two round
cavities to hold red and black ink, and a groove to hold the reed-pens.
The inscriptions on them, which usually have reference to Thoth, are
cut, or written in ink, or inlaid in colour; the name of the owner of
the palette is generally added. The colours with which the Egyptians
wrote were made of vegetable substances, coloured earths, and
preparations of copper.

4 She is also called "Devourer of Amenta" (i.e., the underworld), and
Shai (see Lanzone, *Dizionario*, p. 129). In the British Museum papyrus
No. 9901 she is described as *hat en emsuh; pehu-s em tebt her-ab-set em
ma* "the fore-part of a crocodile; her hind-quarters are those of a
hippopotamus; her middle part \[is that\] of a lion."

{footnote p. 258} The Devourer usually stands near the balance instead
of behind Thoth; but there is one papyrus quoted by Naville,
(Todtenbuch, Bd. I., Bl. 136) in which she is shown crouching beside the
lake of fire in the infernal regions.

<img src="258.jpg" width="256" height="196" />

\]

{p. 258}

Text: \[Chapter XXXB.\] Osiris, the scribe Ani, saith:\[1\] "My heart my
mother, my heart my mother, my heart my coming into being! May there be
nothing to resist me at \[my\] judgment; may there be no opposition to
me from the *Tchatcha*;\[2\] may there be no parting of thee from me in
the presence of him who keepeth the scales! Thou art my *ka* within my
body \[which\] knitteth\[3\] and strengtheneth my limbs. Mayest thou
come forth to the place of happiness to which\[4\] I am advancing. "May
the *Shenit*\[5\] not cause my name to stink, and may no lies be spoken
against me in the presence of the god!\[6\] Good is it for thee to
hear."\[7\] . . . . . . .

Thoth, the righteous judge of the great company of the gods who are in
the presence of the god Osiris, saith: "Hear ye this judgment. The heart
of Osiris hath in very truth been weighed, and his soul hath stood as a
witness for him; it hath been found true by trial in the Great Balance.
There hath not been found any wickedness in him; he hath not wasted the
offerings in the temples; he hath not done harm by his deeds; and he
uttered no evil reports while he was upon earth."

The great company of the gods reply to Thoth dwelling in Khemennu: "That
which cometh forth from thy mouth hath been ordained. Osiris, the scribe

\[1. Ani's speech forms the text of Chapter XXXB. as numbered by M.
Naville (*Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 43).

2\. The four gods of the cardinal points, Mestha, Hapi, Tuamautef, and
Qebhsennuf (see Naville, *Todtenbuch Einleitung*, p. 164).

Some copies read, "Thou art my *ka* within my body, the god Khnemu
(*i.e.*, "Moulder"), who uniteth (or formeth) and strengtheneth my
limbs." Khnemu was called "builder of men, maker of the gods, the father
from the beginning; creator of things which are," etc.

4 British Museum papyrus No. 9901 has "place of happiness to which thou
goest with me."

5 A class of divine beings.

6 *I.e.*, "the great god, lord of Amenta."

7\. This sentence appears to be unfinished; see the Egyptian text, p.
12.\]

{p. 259}

Ani, triumphant, is holy and righteous. He hath not sinned, neither hath
he done evil against us. Let it not be given to the devourer Amemet to
prevail over him. Meat-offerings and entrance into the presence of the
god Osiris shall be granted unto him, together with a homestead for ever
in Sekhet-hetepu, as unto the followers of Horus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate IV.](ebod16)
