[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ebod05)  [Next](ebod07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE EGYPTIANS' IDEAS OF GOD.

The word neter and its meaning.

To the great and supreme power which made the earth, the heavens, the
sea, the sky, men and women, animals, birds, and creeping things, all
that is and all that shall be, the Egyptians gave the name *neter*. This
word survives in the Coptic \#\#\#, but both in the ancient language and
in its younger relative the exact meaning of the word is lost. M.
Pierret,\[2\] following de Rougé, connects it with the word \#\#\# and
says that it means "renovation" (*renouvellement*), but Brugsch\[3\]
renders it by "göttlich," "heilig," "divin," "sacré," and by three
Arabic words which mean "divine," "sacred *or* set apart," and "holy"
respectively. By a quotation from the stele of Canopus he shows that in
Ptolemaic times it meant "holy" or "sacred" when applied to the animals
of the gods. Mr. Renouf\[4\] says that "the notion expressed by *nutar*
as a noun, and *nutra* as an adjective or verb, must be sought in the
Coptic \#\#\#, which in the translation of the Bible corresponds to the
Greek words {Greek *du'namis*, *i?sxu's*, *i?sxuro's*, *i?sxupo'w*}
'power,' 'force,' 'strong,' 'fortify,' 'protect,'"\[5\] and he goes on
to show that the word *neter* means "strong" or "mighty." M. Maspero,
however, thinks that the Coptic *nomti* has nothing in common with
meter, the Egyptian word for God, and that the passages quoted by Mr.
Renouf in support of his theory can be otherwise explained.\[6\] His own
opinion is that the signification "strong," if it ever existed, is a
derived and not an original meaning, and he believes that the word is

\[1. Several examples of the different ways in which the word is spelt
are given by Maspero, *Notes sur différent point de Grammaire* (in
*Mélanges d'Archéologie*, t. ii., Paris, 1873, p. 140).

2\. Pierret, *Essai sur la Mythologie Égyptienne*, Paris, 1879, p. 8.

3\. *Wörterbuch*, p. 825.

4\. *Hibbert Lectures*, p. 95.

5\. A number of examples are given in Tatham, *Lexicon*, Oxford, 1835,
pp. 310 806.

6 *La Mythologie Égyptienne*, t. ii., p. 215.\]

{p. lxxxiii}

so old that its first sense is unknown to us. The fact that the Coptic
translators of the Bible used the word *nouti* to express the name of
the Supreme Being shows that no other word conveyed to their minds their
conception of Him, and supports M. Maspero's views on this point.
Another definition of the word given by Brugsch makes it to mean "the
active power which produces and creates things in regular recurrence;
which bestows new life upon them, and gives back to them their youthful
vigour,"\[1\] and he adds that the innate conception of the word
completely covers the original meaning of the Greek {Greek *fu'sis*} and
the Latin *natura*.

Neteru, the gods.

But side by side with *neter*, whatever it may mean, we have mentioned
in texts of all ages a number of beings called *neteru* which
Egyptologists universally translate by the word "gods." Among these must
be included the great cosmic powers and the beings who, although held to
be supernatural, were yet finite and mortal, and were endowed by the
Egyptians with love, hatred, and passions of every sort and kind. The
difference between the conceptions of *neter* the one supreme God and
the *neteru* is best shown by an appeal to Egyptian texts.

In the pyramid of Unas it is said to the deceased,

un-k ar kes neter

Thou existest at the side of God.\[3\]

In the pyramid of Teta it is said of the deceased,

ut'a-f met neter as set'em-nef metu

He weigheth words, and, behold, God hearkeneth unto the words.\[3\]

nas en Teta neter

God hath called Teta\[4\] (in his name, etc.).

\[1. Die thätige Kraft, welche in periodischer Wiederkehr die Dinge
erzeugt und erschafft, ihnen neues Leben verleiht und die Jugendfrische
zurückgiebt." *Religion und Mythologie*, p. 93.

2\. Maspero, *Recueil de Travaux*, t. iii., p. 202 (l. 209).

3\. *Ibid.*, t. v., 27 (ll. 231, 232).

4\. *Ibid.*, p. 26 (l. 223).\]

{p. lxxxiv}

Views held in the first six dynasties.

In the pyramid of Pepi I. an address to the deceased king says,

sesep-nek aru neter aaa-k am xer neteru

Thou hast received the form of God, thou hast become great therewith
before the gods.\[1\]

ta en mut-k Nut un-nek em neter en xeft-k em ren-k en nefer

Hath placed thy mother Nut thee to be as God to thine enemy in thy name
of God.\[2\]

tua Pepi pen neter

Adoreth this Pepi God.\[3\]

Pepi pu ar neter sa neter

Pepi this is then God, the son of God.\[4\]

All these extracts are from texts of the Vth and VIth dynasties. It may
be urged that we might as well translate *neter* by "a god" or "the
god," but other evidence of the conception of *neter* at that early date
is afforded by the following passages from the Prisse papyrus,\[5\]
which, although belonging at the earliest to he XIth dynasty, contains
copies of the Precepts of Kaqemna, written in the reign of Seneferu, a
king of the IVth dynasty, and the Precepts of Ptah-hetep, written during
the reign of Assa, a king of the Vth dynasty.\[6\]

\[1. *Recueil de Travaux*, t. v., p. 160 (l. 19).

2\. *Ibid.*, p. 162 (l. 33).

3\. *Ibid.*, p. 191 (l. 185).

4\. *Ibid.*, t. viii., p. 89 (l. 574).

5\. See *Fac-simile d'un papyrus Égyptien en caractères hiératiques*,
trouvé à Thèbes, donné à la Bibliothèque royale de Paris et publié par
E. Prisse d'Avennes, Paris, 1847, fol. The last translation of the
complete work is by Virey, *Études sur le Papyrus Prisse*, Paris, 1887.

6\. M. Amélineau thinks (*La Morale Égyptienne*, p. xi.) that the Prisse
papyrus was copied about the period of the XVIIth dynasty and that the
works in it only date from the XIIth dynasty; but many Egyptologists
assign the composition of the work to the age of Assa. See Wiedemann,
*Aegyptische Geschichte*, p. 201; Petrie, *History of Egypt*, p. 81.\]

{p. lxxxv}

Views held in the first six dynasties.

1\.

an rex-entu xepert arit neter

Not known are the things which will do God.\[1\]

2\.

am-k ari her em reth xesef neter

Thou shalt not cause terror in men and women, \[for\] is opposed God
\[thereto\].\[2\]

3\.

au am ta xer sexer neter

The eating of bread is according to the plan of God.\[3\]

4\.

ar seka-nek ter em sexet ta set neter

If thou art a farmer, labour (?) in the field which hath given God \[to
thee\].\[4\]

5\.

ar un-nek em sa aqer ari-k sa en smam neter

If thou wouldst be like a wise man, make thou \[thy\] son to be pleasing
unto God.\[5\]

6\.

sehetep aqu-k em xepert nek xepert en

Satisfy those who depend on thee, so far as it may be done by thee; it
should be done by

hesesu neter

those favoured of God.\[6\]

\[1. Plate ii., l. 2.

2\. Plate iv., line 8.

3\. Plate vii., l. 2.

4 Plate vii., l. 5.

5\. Plate vii., l. 11.

6\. Plate xi., l. 1.\]

{p. lxxxvi}

Views held in the first six dynasties.

7\. If, having been of no account, thou hast become great, and if,
having been poor, thou hast become rich, when thou art governor of the
city be not hard-hearted on account of thy advancement, because

xeper-nek mer septu neter

thou hast become the guardian of the provisions of God.\[1\]

8\.

mertu neter pu setem an setem en mesetu neter

What is loved of God is obedience; disobedience hateth God.\[2\]

9\.

mak sa nefer en tata neter

Verily a good son is of the gifts of God.\[3\]

Passing from the Prisse papyrus, our next source of information is the
famous papyrus\[4\] containing the "Maxims of Ani," which are well known
through the labours of de Rougé,\[5\] Maspero,\[6\] Chabas\[7\] and
Amélineau.\[8\] We should speak of them, however, more correctly as the
Maxims of Khonsu-hetep.\[9\] The papyrus

\[1. Plate xiii., l. 8.

2\. Plate xvi., l. 7.

3\. Plate xix., l. 6.

4\. It was found in a box laid upon the floor of the tomb of a Christian
monk at Dêr el-Medinet, The text was given by Mariette in *Papyrus
Égyptiens du Musée de Boulaq, publiés en fac-simile sous les auspices de
S.A. Ismaïl-Pacha, Khédive d'Égypte*.

5\. In the Moniteur, 15 Août, 1861; and in *Comptes Rendus des séances
de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres*, Paris, 1871, pp.
340-50.

6\. In the *Journal de Paris*, 15 Mars, 1871; and in the *Academy*, Aug.
1, No. 29, p. 386, 1871.

7\. *L'Égyptologie*, Série I., tt. i., ii., Chalons-sur-Saône and Paris,
40., 1876-78. This work contains the hieratic text divided into sections
for analysis, and accompanied by a hieroglyphic transcript, commentary,
etc.

8\. *La Morale Égyptienne quinze siècles avant notre ère--Étude sur le
Papyrus de Boulaq*, No. 4, Paris, 1892. This work contains a more
accurate hieroglyphic transcript of the hieratic text, full translation,
*etc*.

9\. Maspero, *Lectures Historiques*, p. 16; Amélineau, *op. cit.*, p.
ix.\]

{p. lxxxvii}

Views held in the XVIIIth dynasty.

was probably copied about the XXIInd dynasty; but the work itself may
date from the XVIIIth. The following are examples of the use of
*neter*:--

1\.

Pa neter er seaaaua ren-f

The God is for magnifying his name.\[1\]

2\.

xennu en neter betu-tuf pu sehebu senemehu-nek

The house of God what it hates is much speaking. Pray thou

em ab mert au metet-f nebt amennu ari-f

with a loving heart the petitions of which all are in secret. He will do

xeru-tuk setemu-f a t'et-tuk sesep utennu tu-k

thy business, he will hear that which thou sayest and will accept thine
offerings.\[2\]

3\.

au tau neter-kua unnu

Giveth thy God existence.\[3\]

4\.

Pa neter aput pa maa

The God will judge the right.\[4\]

5\.

utennu neter-ku sau-tu er na betau-tuf

In offering to thy God guard thou against the things which He
abominateth.

\[1. Amélineau, *La Morale*, p. 13.

2\. *Ibid.*, p. 36.

3 *Ibid.*, p. 103.

4 *Ibid.*, p. 138.\]

{p. lxxxviii}

Views held in the XVIIIth dynasty.

a ennu maat-k er paif sexeru qentet emtuk

O behold with thine eye His plans. Devote thyself

senenti-tu ent ren-f su tat baiu heh en aaru

to adore His name. It is He who giveth souls to millions of forms,

se-aaaua pa enti seaaaua-f ar neter ta pen

and He magnifieth whosoever magnifieth him. Now the God of this earth

en pa Suu her xut du nai-f matui

is the sun who is the ruler of the horizon, \[and\] his similitudes are

her tep ta tata-tha neter sentra em kai-set emment

upon earth is given incense with their food offerings to these
daily.\[1\]

6\.

faau-s aaui-set en pa neter emtuf setemu

If she (*i.e.*, thy mother) raiseth her hands to God, he will hear

sebehu-set

her prayers\[2\] \[and rebuke thee\].

7\.

amma su en pa neter sauu-k su emment en

Give thyself to God, keep thou thyself daily for

pa neter au tuauu ma qeti pa haru

God; and let to-morrow be as to-day.\[3\]

\[1. *Amélineau, La Morale*, p. 141.

2\. *Ibid.*, p. 149.

3 *Ibid.*, p. 172.\]

{p. lxxxix}

God and the gods.

The passages from the pyramid of Pepi show at once the difference
between *neter* as God, and the "gods" *neteru*; the other passages,
which might be multiplied almost indefinitely, prove that the Being
spoken of is God. The *neteru* or "gods" whom Unas hunted, and snared,
and killed, and roasted, and ate, are beings who could die; to them were
attributed bodies, souls, *ka's*, spiritual bodies, *etc*. In a
remarkable passage from the CLIVth Chapter of the Book of the Dead
(Naville, *Todtenbuch*, Bd. I., Bl. 179, l. 3) the deceased king
Thothmes III. prays:--

seset-kua emxet-k Tem huau ma ennu ari-k

Preserve me behind thee, O Tmu, from decay such as that which thou
workest

er meter neb netert nebt er aut neb er t'etfet neb

for god every, and goddess every, for animals all, for reptiles all

sebuit-f per ba-f emxet mit-f ha-f

for each passeth away when hath gone forth his soul after his death, he
perisheth

emxet sebi-f

after he hath passed away.

The gods mortal.

Of these mortal gods some curious legends have come down to us; from
which the following may be selected as illustrating their inferior
position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Ra And Isis.](ebod07)
