[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce02)  [Next](jce04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A JOURNEY INTO THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH

### CHAPTER I.

#### THE PROFESSOR AND HIS FAMILY

On the 24th of May, 1863, my uncle, Professor Liedenbrock, rushed into
his little house, No. 19 Königstrasse, one of the oldest streets in the
oldest portion of the city of Hamburg.

Martha must have concluded that she was very much behindhand, for the
dinner had only just been put into the oven.

"Well, now," said I to myself, "if that most impatient of men is hungry,
what a disturbance he will make!"

"M. Liedenbrock so soon!" cried poor Martha in great alarm, half opening
the dining-room door.

"Yes, Martha; but very likely the dinner is not half cooked, for it is
not two yet. Saint Michael's clock has only just struck half-past one."

"Then why has the master come home so soon?"

"Perhaps he will tell us that himself."

"Here he is, Monsieur Axel; I will run and hide myself while you argue
with him."

And Martha retreated in safety into her own dominions.

I was left alone. But how was it possible for a man of my undecided turn
of mind to argue successfully with so irascible a person as the
Professor? With this persuasion I was hurrying away to my own little
retreat upstairs, when the street door creaked upon its hinges; heavy
feet made the whole flight of stairs to shake; and the master of the
house, passing rapidly through the dining-room, threw himself in haste
into his own sanctum.

But on his rapid way he had found time to fling his hazel stick into a
corner, his rough broadbrim upon the table, and these few emphatic words
at his nephew:

"Axel, follow me!"

I had scarcely had time to move when the Professor was again shouting
after me:

"What! not come yet?"

And I rushed into my redoubtable master's study.

Otto Liedenbrock had no mischief in him, I willingly allow that; but
unless he very considerably changes as he grows older, at the end he
will be a most original character.

He was professor at the Johannæum, and was delivering a series of
lectures on mineralogy, in the course of every one of which he broke
into a passion once or twice at least. Not at all that he was
over-anxious about the improvement of his class, or about the degree of
attention with which they listened to him, or the success which might
eventually crown his labours. Such little matters of detail never
troubled him much. His teaching was as the German philosophy calls it,
'subjective'; it was to benefit himself, not others. He was a learned
egotist. He was a well of science, and the pulleys worked uneasily when
you wanted to draw anything out of it. In a word, he was a learned
miser.

Germany has not a few professors of this sort.

To his misfortune, my uncle was not gifted with a sufficiently rapid
utterance; not, to be sure, when he was talking at home, but certainly
in his public delivery; this is a want much to be deplored in a speaker.
The fact is, that during the course of his lectures at the Johannæum,
the Professor often came to a complete standstill; he fought with wilful
words that refused to pass his struggling lips, such words as resist and
distend the cheeks, and at last break out into the unasked-for shape of
a round and most unscientific oath: then his fury would gradually abate.

Now in mineralogy there are many half-Greek and half-Latin terms, very
hard to articulate, and which would be most trying to a poet's measures.
I don't wish to say a word against so respectable a science, far be that
from me. True, in the august presence of rhombohedral crystals,
retinasphaltic resins, gehlenites, Fassaites, molybdenites, tungstates
of manganese, and titanite of zirconium, why, the most facile of tongues
may make a slip now and then.

It therefore happened that this venial fault of my uncle's came to be
pretty well understood in time, and an unfair advantage was taken of it;
the students laid wait for him in dangerous places, and when he began to
stumble, loud was the laughter, which is not in good taste, not even in
Germans. And if there was always a full audience to honour the
Liedenbrock courses, I should be sorry to conjecture how many came to
make merry at my uncle's expense.

Nevertheless my good uncle was a man of deep learning—a fact I am most
anxious to assert and reassert. Sometimes he might irretrievably injure
a specimen by his too great ardour in handling it; but still he united
the genius of a true geologist with the keen eye of the mineralogist.
Armed with his hammer, his steel pointer, his magnetic needles, his
blowpipe, and his bottle of nitric acid, he was a powerful man of
science. He would refer any mineral to its proper place among the six
hundred  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) elementary substances now
enumerated, by its fracture, its appearance, its hardness, its
fusibility, its sonorousness, its smell, and its taste.

The name of Liedenbrock was honourably mentioned in colleges and learned
societies. Humphry Davy,  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) Humboldt,
Captain Sir John Franklin, General Sabine, never failed to call upon him
on their way through Hamburg. Becquerel, Ebelman, Brewster, Dumas,
Milne-Edwards, Saint-Claire-Deville frequently consulted him upon the
most difficult problems in chemistry, a science which was indebted to
him for considerable discoveries, for in 1853 there had appeared at
Leipzig an imposing folio by Otto Liedenbrock, entitled, "A Treatise
upon Transcendental Chemistry," with plates; a work, however, which
failed to cover its expenses.

To all these titles to honour let me add that my uncle was the curator
of the museum of mineralogy formed by M. Struve, the Russian ambassador;
a most valuable collection, the fame of which is European.

Such was the gentleman who addressed me in that impetuous manner. Fancy
a tall, spare man, of an iron constitution, and with a fair complexion
which took off a good ten years from the fifty he must own to. His
restless eyes were in incessant motion behind his full-sized spectacles.
His long, thin nose was like a knife blade. Boys have been heard to
remark that that organ was magnetised and attracted iron filings. But
this was merely a mischievous report; it had no attraction except for
snuff, which it seemed to draw to itself in great quantities.

When I have added, to complete my portrait, that my uncle walked by
mathematical strides of a yard and a half, and that in walking he kept
his fists firmly closed, a sure sign of an irritable temperament, I
think I shall have said enough to disenchant any one who should by
mistake have coveted much of his company.

He lived in his own little house in Königstrasse, a structure half brick
and half wood, with a gable cut into steps; it looked upon one of those
winding canals which intersect each other in the middle of the ancient
quarter of Hamburg, and which the great fire of 1842 had fortunately
spared.

It is true that the old house stood slightly off the perpendicular, and
bulged out a little towards the street; its roof sloped a little to one
side, like the cap over the left ear of a Tugendbund student; its lines
wanted accuracy; but after all, it stood firm, thanks to an old elm
which buttressed it in front, and which often in spring sent its young
sprays through the window panes.

My uncle was tolerably well off for a German professor. The house was
his own, and everything in it. The living contents were his god-daughter
Gräuben, a young Virlandaise of seventeen, Martha, and myself. As his
nephew and an orphan, I became his laboratory assistant.

I freely confess that I was exceedingly fond of geology and all its
kindred sciences; the blood of a mineralogist was in my veins, and in
the midst of my specimens I was always happy.

In a word, a man might live happily enough in the little old house in
the Königstrasse, in spite of the restless impatience of its master, for
although he was a little too excitable—he was very fond of me. But the
man had no notion how to wait; nature herself was too slow for him. In
April, after a had planted in the terra-cotta pots outside his window
seedling plants of mignonette and convolvulus, he would go and give them
a little pull by their leaves to make them grow faster. In dealing with
such a strange individual there was nothing for it but prompt obedience.
I therefore rushed after him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](jce03.htm#fr_0) Sixty-three. (Tr..md)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](jce03.htm#fr_1.md) As Sir Humphry Davy died in
1829, the translator must be pardoned for pointing out here an
anachronism, unless we are to assume that the learned Professor's
celebrity dawned in his earliest years. (Tr.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. A Mystery to be Solved at Any Price](jce04.md)
