[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce08)  [Next](jce10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

#### A WOMAN'S COURAGE

Thus ended this memorable seance. That conversation threw me into a
fever. I came out of my uncle's study as if I had been stunned, and as
if there was not air enough in all the streets of Hamburg to put me
right again. I therefore made for the banks of the Elbe, where the
steamer lands her passengers, which forms the communication between the
city and the Hamburg railway.

Was I convinced of the truth of what I had heard? Had I not bent under
the iron rule of the Professor Liedenbrock? Was I to believe him in
earnest in his intention to penetrate to the centre of this massive
globe? Had I been listening to the mad speculations of a lunatic, or to
the scientific conclusions of a lofty genius? Where did truth stop?
Where did error begin?

I was all adrift amongst a thousand contradictory hypotheses, but I
could not lay hold of one.

Yet I remembered that I had been convinced, although now my enthusiasm
was beginning to cool down; but I felt a desire to start at once, and
not to lose time and courage by calm reflection. I had at that moment
quite courage enough to strap my knapsack to my shoulders and start.

But I must confess that in another hour this unnatural excitement
abated, my nerves became unstrung, and from the depths of the abysses of
this earth I ascended to its surface again.

"It is quite absurd!" I cried, "there is no sense about it. No sensible
young man should for a moment entertain such a proposal. The whole thing
is non-existent. I have had a bad night, I have been dreaming of
horrors."

But I had followed the banks of the Elbe and passed the town. After
passing the port too, I had reached the Altona road. I was led by a
presentiment, soon to be realised; for shortly I espied my little
Gräuben bravely returning with her light step to Hamburg.

"Gräuben!" I cried from afar off.

The young girl stopped, rather frightened perhaps to hear her name
called after her on the high road. Ten yards more, and I had joined her.

"Axel!" she cried surprised. "What! have you come to meet me? Is this
why you are here, sir?"

But when she had looked upon me, Gräuben could not fail to see the
uneasiness and distress of my mind.

"What is the matter?" she said, holding out her hand.

"What is the matter, Gräuben?" I cried.

In a couple of minutes my pretty Virlandaise was fully informed of the
position of affairs. For a time she was silent. Did her heart palpitate
as mine did? I don't know about that, but I know that her hand did not
tremble in mine. We went on a hundred yards without speaking.

At last she said, "Axel!"

"My dear Gräuben."

"That will be a splendid journey!"

I gave a bound at these words.

"Yes, Axel, a journey worthy of the nephew of a savant; it is a good
thing for a man to be distinguished by some great enterprise."

"What, Gräuben, won't you dissuade me from such an undertaking?"

"No, my dear Axel, and I would willingly go with you, but that a poor
girl would only be in your way."

"Is that quite true?"

"It is true."

Ah! women and young girls, how incomprehensible are your feminine
hearts! When you are not the timidest, you are the bravest of creatures.
Reason has nothing to do with your actions. What! did this child
encourage me in such an expedition! Would she not be afraid to join it
herself? And she was driving me to it, one whom she loved!

I was disconcerted, and, if I must tell the whole truth, I was ashamed.

"Gräuben, we will see whether you will say the same thing tomorrow."

"To-morrow, dear Axel, I will say what I say to-day."

Gräuben and I, hand in hand, but in silence, pursued our way. The
emotions of that day were breaking my heart.

After all, I thought, the kalends of July are a long way off, and
between this and then many things may take place which will cure my
uncle of his desire to travel underground.

It was night when we arrived at the house in Königstrasse. I expected to
find all quiet there, my uncle in bed as was his custom, and Martha
giving her last touches with the feather brush.

But I had not taken into account the Professor's impatience. I found him
shouting- and working himself up amidst a crowd of porters and
messengers who were all depositing various loads in the passage. Our old
servant was at her wits' end.

"Come, Axel, come, you miserable wretch," my uncle cried from as far off
as he could see me. "Your boxes are not packed, and my papers are not
arranged; where's the key of my carpet bag? and what have you done with
my gaiters?"

I stood thunderstruck. My voice failed. Scarcely could my lips utter the
words:

"Are we really going?"

"Of course, you unhappy boy! Could I have dreamed that yon would have
gone out for a walk instead of hurrying your preparations forward?"

"Are we to go?" I asked again, with sinking hopes.

"Yes; the day after to-morrow, early."

I could hear no more. I fled for refuge into my own little room.

All hope was now at an end. My uncle had been all the morning making
purchases of a part of the tools and apparatus required for this
desperate undertaking. The passage was encumbered with rope ladders,
knotted cords, torches, flasks, grappling irons, alpenstocks, pickaxes,
iron shod sticks, enough to load ten men.

I spent an awful night. Next morning I was called early. I had quite
decided I would not open the door. But how was I to resist the sweet
voice which was always music to my ears, saying, "My dear Axel?"

I came out of my room. I thought my pale countenance and my red and
sleepless eyes would work upon Gräuben's sympathies and change her mind.

"Ah! my dear Axel," she said. "I see you are better. A night's rest has
done you good."

"Done me good!" I exclaimed.

I rushed to the glass. Well, in fact I did look better than I had
expected. I could hardly believe my own eyes.

"Axel," she said, "I have had a long talk with my guardian. He is a bold
philosopher, a man of immense courage, and you must remember that his
blood flows in your veins. He has confided to me his plans, his hopes,
and why and how he hopes to attain his object. He will no doubt succeed.
My dear Axel, it is a grand thing to devote yourself to science! What
honour will fall upon Herr Liedenbrock, and so be reflected upon his
companion! When you return, Axel, you will be a man, his equal, free to
speak and to act independently, and free to --"

The dear girl only finished this sentence by blushing. Her words revived
me. Yet I refused to believe we should start. I drew Gräuben into the
Professor's study.

"Uncle, is it true that we are to go?"

"Why do you doubt?"

"Well, I don't doubt," I said, not to vex him; "but, I ask, what need is
there to hurry?"

"Time, time, flying with irreparable rapidity."

"But it is only the 16th May, and until the end of June --"

"What, you monument of ignorance! do you think you can get to Iceland in
a couple of days? If you had not deserted me like a fool I should have
taken you to the Copenhagen office, to Liffender & Co., and you would
have learned then that there is only one trip every month from
Copenhagen to Rejkiavik, on the 22nd."

"Well?"

"Well, if we waited for the 22nd June we should be too late to see the
shadow of Scartaris touch the crater of Sneffels. Therefore we must get
to Copenhagen as fast as we can to secure our passage. Go and pack up."

There was no reply to this. I went up to my room. Gräuben followed me.
She undertook to pack up all things necessary for my voyage. She was no
more moved than if I had been starting for a little trip to Lübeck or
Heligoland. Her little hands moved without haste. She talked quietly.
She supplied me with sensible reasons for our expedition. She delighted
me, and yet I was angry with her. Now and then I felt I ought to break
out into a passion, but she took no notice and went on her way as
methodically as ever.

Finally the last strap was buckled; I came downstairs. All that day the
philosophical instrument makers and the electricians kept coming and
going. Martha was distracted.

"Is master mad?" she asked.

I nodded my head.

"And is he going to take you with him?"

I nodded again.

"Where to?"

I pointed with my finger downward.

"Down into the cellar?" cried the old servant.

"No," I said. "Lower down than that."

Night came. But I knew nothing about the lapse of time.

"To-morrow morning at six precisely," my uncle decreed "we start."

At ten o'clock I fell upon my bed, a dead lump of inert matter. All
through the night terror had hold of me. I spent it dreaming of abysses.
I was a prey to delirium. I felt myself grasped by the Professor's
sinewy hand, dragged along, hurled down, shattered into little bits. I
dropped down unfathomable precipices with the accelerating velocity of
bodies falling through space. My life had become an endless fall. I
awoke at five with shattered nerves, trembling and weary. I came
downstairs. My uncle was at table, devouring his breakfast. I stared at
him with horror and disgust. But dear Gräuben was there; so I said
nothing, and could eat nothing.

At half-past five there was a rattle of wheels outside. A large carriage
was there to take us to the Altona railway station. It was soon piled up
with my uncle's multifarious preparations.

"Where's your box?" he cried.

"It is ready," I replied, with faltering voice.

"Then make haste down, or we shall lose the train."

It was now manifestly impossible to maintain the struggle against
destiny. I went up again to my room, and rolling my portmanteaus
downstairs I darted after him.

At that moment my uncle was solemnly investing Gräuben with the reins of
government. My pretty Virlandaise was as calm and collected as was her
wont. She kissed her guardian; but could not restrain a tear in touching
my cheek with her gentle lips.

"Gräuben!" I murmured.

"Go, my dear Axel, go! I am now your betrothed; and when you come back I
will be your wife."

I pressed her in my arms and took my place in the carriage. Martha and
the young girl, standing at the door, waved their last farewell. Then
the horses, roused by the driver's whistling, darted off at a gallop on
the road to Altona.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Serious Preparations For Vertical Descent](jce10.md)
