[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce07)  [Next](jce09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

#### EXCITING DISCUSSIONS ABOUT AN UNPARALLELED ENTERPRISE

At these words a cold shiver ran through me. Yet I controlled myself; I
even resolved to put a good face upon it. Scientific arguments alone
could have any weight with Professor Liedenbrock. Now there were good
ones against the practicability of such a journey. Penetrate to the
centre of the earth! What nonsense! But I kept my dialectic battery in
reserve for a suitable opportunity, and I interested myself in the
prospect of my dinner, which was not yet forthcoming.

It is no use to tell of the rage and imprecations of my uncle before the
empty table. Explanations were given, Martha was set at liberty, ran off
to the market, and did her part so well that in an hour afterwards my
hunger was appeased, and I was able to return to the contemplation of
the gravity of the situation.

During all dinner time my uncle was almost merry; he indulged in some of
those learned jokes which never do anybody any harm. Dessert over, he
beckoned me into his study.

I obeyed; he sat at one end of his table, I at the other.

"Axel," said he very mildly; "you are a very ingenious young man, you
have done me a splendid service, at a moment when, wearied out with the
struggle, I was going to abandon the contest. Where should I have lost
myself? None can tell. Never, my lad, shall I forget it; and you shall
have your share in the glory to which your discovery will lead."

"Oh, come!" thought I, "he is in a good way. Now is the time for
discussing that same glory."

"Before all things," my uncle resumed, "I enjoin you to preserve the
most inviolable secrecy: you understand? There are not a few in the
scientific world who envy my success, and many would be ready to
undertake this enterprise, to whom our return should be the first news
of it."

"Do you really think there are many people bold enough?" said I.

"Certainly; who would hesitate to acquire such renown? If that document
were divulged, a whole army of geologists would be ready to rush into
the footsteps of Arne Saknussemm."

"I don't feel so very sure of that, uncle," I replied; "for we have no
proof of the authenticity of this document."

"What! not of the book, inside which we have discovered it?"

"Granted. I admit that Saknussemm may have written these lines. But does
it follow that he has really accomplished such a journey? And may it not
be that this old parchment is intended to mislead?"

I almost regretted having uttered this last word, which dropped from me
in an unguarded moment. The Professor bent his shaggy brows, and I
feared I had seriously compromised my own safety. Happily no great harm
came of it. A smile flitted across the lip of my severe companion, and
he answered:

"That is what we shall see."

"Ah!" said I, rather put out. "But do let me exhaust all the possible
objections against this document."

"Speak, my boy, don't be afraid. You are quite at liberty to express
your opinions. You are no longer my nephew only, but my colleague. Pray
go on."

"Well, in the first place, I wish to ask what are this Jokul, this
Sneffels, and this Scartaris, names which I have never heard before?"

"Nothing easier. I received not long ago a map from my friend, Augustus
Petermann, at Liepzig. Nothing could be more apropos. Take down the
third atlas in the second shelf in the large bookcase, series Z, plate
4."

I rose, and with the help of such precise instructions could not fail to
find the required atlas. My uncle opened it and said:

"Here is one of the best maps of Iceland, that of Handersen, and I
believe this will solve the worst of our difficulties."

I bent over the map.

"You see this volcanic island," said the Professor; "observe that all
the volcanoes are called jokuls, a word which means glacier in
Icelandic, and under the high latitude of Iceland nearly all the active
volcanoes discharge through beds of ice. Hence this term of jokul is
applied to all the eruptive mountains in Iceland."

"Very good," said I; "but what of Sneffels?"

I was hoping that this question would be unanswerable; but I was
mistaken. My uncle replied:

"Follow my finger along the west coast of Iceland. Do you see Rejkiavik,
the capital? You do. Well; ascend the innumerable fiords that indent
those sea-beaten shores, and stop at the sixty-fifth degree of latitude.
What do you see there?"

"I see a peninsula looking like a thigh bone with the knee bone at the
end of it."

"A very fair comparison, my lad. Now do you see anything upon that knee
bone?"

"Yes; a mountain rising out of the sea."

"Right. That is Snæfell."

"That Snæfell?"

"It is. It is a mountain five thousand feet high, one of the most
remarkable in the world, if its crater leads down to the centre of the
earth."

"But that is impossible," I said shrugging my shoulders, and disgusted
at such a ridiculous supposition.

"Impossible?" said the Professor severely; "and why, pray?"

"Because this crater is evidently filled with lava and burning rocks,
and therefore—"

"But suppose it is an extinct volcano?"

"Extinct?"

"Yes; the number of active volcanoes on the surface of the globe is at
the present time only about three hundred. But there is a very much
larger number of extinct ones. Now, Snæfell is one of these. Since
historic times there has been but one eruption of this mountain, that of
1219; from that time it has quieted down more and. more, and now it is
no longer reckoned among active volcanoes."

To such positive statements I could make no reply. I therefore took
refuge in other dark passages of the document.

"What is the meaning of this word Scartaris, and what have the kalends
of July to do with it?"

My uncle took a few minutes to consider. For one short moment I felt a
ray of hope, speedily to be extinguished. For he soon answered thus:

"What is darkness to you is light to me. This proves the ingenious care
with which Saknussemm guarded and defined his discovery. Sneffels, or
Snæfell, has several craters. It was therefore necessary to point out
which of these leads to the centre of the globe. What did the Icelandic
sage do? He observed that at the approach of the kalends of July, that
is to say in the last days of June, one of the peaks, called Scartaris,
flung its shadow down the mouth of that particular crater, and he
committed that fact to his document. Could there possibly have been a
more exact guide? As soon as we have arrived at the summit of Snæfell we
shall have no hesitation as to the proper road to take."

Decidedly, my uncle had answered every one of my objections. I saw that
his position on the old parchment was impregnable. I therefore ceased to
press him upon that part of the subject, and as above all things he must
be convinced, I passed on to scientific objections, which in my opinion
were far more serious.

"Well, then," I said, "I am forced to admit that Saknussemm's sentence
is clear, and leaves no room for doubt. I will even allow that the
document bears every mark and evidence of authenticity. That learned
philosopher did get to the bottom of Sneffels, he has seen the shadow of
Scartaris touch the edge of the crater before the kalends of July; he
may even have heard the legendary stories told in his day about that
crater reaching to the centre of the world; but as for reaching it
himself, as for performing the journey, and returning, if he ever went,
I say no—he never, never did that."

"Now for your reason?" said my uncle ironically.

"All the theories of science demonstrate such a feat to be
impracticable."

"The theories say that, do they?" replied the Professor in the tone of a
meek disciple. "Oh! unpleasant theories! How the theories will hinder.
us, won't they?"

I saw that he was only laughing at me; but I went on all the same.

"Yes; it is perfectly well known that the internal temperature rises one
degree for every 70 feet in depth; now, admitting this proportion to be
constant, and the radius of the earth being fifteen hundred leagues,
there must be a temperature of 360,032 degrees at the centre of the
earth. Therefore, all the substances that compose the body of this earth
must exist there in a state of incandescent gas; for the metals that
most resist the action of heat, gold, and platinum, and the hardest
rocks, can never be either solid or liquid under such a temperature. I
have therefore good reason for asking if it is possible to penetrate
through such a medium."

"So, Axel, it is the heat that troubles you?"

"Of course it is. Were we to reach a depth of thirty miles we should
have arrived at the limit of the terrestrial crust, for there the
temperature will be more than 2372 degrees."

"Are you afraid of being put into a state of fusion?"

"I will leave you to decide that question," I answered rather sullenly.
"This is my decision," replied Professor Liedenbrock, putting on one of
his grandest airs. "Neither you nor anybody else knows with any
certainty what is going on in the interior of this globe, since not the
twelve thousandth part of its radius is known; science is eminently
perfectible; and every new theory is soon routed by a newer. Was it not
always believed until Fourier that the temperature of the interplanetary
spaces decreased perpetually? and is it not known at the present time
that the greatest cold of the ethereal regions is never lower than 40
degrees below zero Fahr.? Why should it not be the same with the
internal heat? Why should it not, at a certain depth, attain an
impassable limit, instead of rising to such a point as to fuse the most
infusible metals?"

As my uncle was now taking his stand upon hypotheses, of course, there
was nothing to be said.

"Well, I will tell you that true savants, amongst them Poisson, have
demonstrated that if a heat of 360,000 degrees  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) existed in the interior of the globe, the
fiery gases arising from the fused matter would acquire an elastic force
which the crust of the earth would be unable to resist, and that it
would explode like the plates of a bursting boiler."

"That is Poisson's opinion, my uncle, nothing more."

"Granted. But it is likewise the creed adopted by other distinguished
geologists, that the interior of the globe is neither gas nor water, nor
any of the heaviest minerals known, for in none of these cases would the
earth weigh what it does."

"Oh, with figures you may prove anything!"

"But is it the same with facts! Is it not known that the number of
volcanoes has diminished since the first days of creation? and if there
is central heat may we not thence conclude that it is in process of
diminution?"

"My good uncle, if you will enter into the legion of speculation, I can
discuss the matter no longer."

"But I have to tell you that the highest names have come to the support
of my views. Do you remember a visit paid to me by the celebrated
chemist, Humphry Davy, in 1825?"

"Not at all, for I was not born until nineteen years afterwards."

"Well, Humphry Davy did call upon me on his way through Hamburg. We were
long engaged in discussing, amongst other problems, the hypothesis of
the liquid structure of the terrestrial nucleus. We were agreed that it
could not be in a liquid state, for a reason which science has never
been able to confute."

"What is that reason?" I said, rather astonished.

"Because this liquid mass would be subject, like the ocean, to the lunar
attraction, and therefore twice every day there would be internal tides,
which, upheaving the terrestrial crust, would cause periodical
earthquakes!"

"Yet it is evident that the surface of the globe has been subject to the
action of fire," I replied, "and it is quite reasonable to suppose that
the external crust cooled down first, whilst the heat took refuge down
to the centre."

"Quite a mistake," my uncle answered. "The earth has been heated by
combustion on its surface, that is all. Its surface was composed of a
great number of metals, such as potassium and sodium, which have the
peculiar property of igniting at the mere contact with air and water;
these metals kindled when the atmospheric vapours fell in rain upon the
soil; and by and by, when the waters penetrated into the fissures of the
crust of the earth, they broke out into fresh combustion with explosions
and eruptions. Such was the cause of the numerous volcanoes at the
origin of the earth."

"Upon my word, this is a very clever hypothesis," I exclaimed, in spite
rather of myself.

"And which Humphry Davy demonstrated to me by a simple experiment. He
formed a small ball of the metals which I have named, and which was a
very fair representation of our globe; whenever he caused a fine dew of
rain to fall upon its surface, it heaved up into little monticules, it
became oxydized and formed miniature mountains; a crater broke open at
one of its summits; the eruption took place, and communicated to the
whole of the ball such a heat that it could not be held in the hand."

In truth, I was beginning to be shaken by the Professor's arguments,
besides which he gave additional weight to them by his usual ardour and
fervent enthusiasm.

"You see, Axel," he added, "the condition of the terrestrial nucleus has
given rise to various hypotheses among geologists; there is no proof at
all for this internal heat; my opinion is that there is no such thing,
it cannot be; besides we shall see for ourselves, and, like Arne
Saknussemm, we shall know exactly what to hold as truth concerning this
grand question."

"Very well, we shall see," I replied, feeling myself carried off by his
contagious enthusiasm. "Yes, we shall see; that is, if it is possible to
see anything there."

"And why not? May we not depend upon electric phenomena to give us
light? May we not even expect light from the atmosphere, the pressure of
which may render it luminous as we approach the centre?"

"Yes, yes," said I; "that is possible, too."

"It is certain," exclaimed my uncle in a tone of triumph. "But silence,
do you hear me? silence upon the whole subject; and let no one get
before us in this design of discovering the centre of the earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](jce08.htm#fr_3) The degrees of temperature
are given by Jules Verne according to the centigrade system, for which
we will in each case substitute the Fahrenheit measurement. (Tr.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. A Woman's Courage](jce09)
