[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce16)  [Next](jce18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV.

#### SNÆFELL AT LAST

Snæfell is 5,000 feet high. Its double cone forms the limit of a
trachytic belt which stands out distinctly in the mountain system of the
island. From our starting point we could see the two peaks boldly
projected against the dark grey sky; I could see an enormous cap of snow
coming low down upon the giant's brow.

We walked in single file, headed by the hunter, who ascended by narrow
tracks, where two could not have gone abreast. There was therefore no
room for conversation.

After we had passed the basaltic wall of the fiord of Stapi we passed
over a vegetable fibrous peat bog, left from the ancient vegetation of
this peninsula. The vast quantity of this unworked fuel would be
sufficient to warm the whole population of Iceland for a century; this
vast turbary measured in certain ravines had in many places a depth of
seventy feet, and presented layers of carbonized remains of vegetation
alternating with thinner layers of tufaceous pumice.

As a true nephew of the Professor Liedenbrock, and in spite of my dismal
prospects, I could not help observing with interest the mineralogical
curiosities which lay about me as in a vast museum, and I constructed
for myself a complete geological account of Iceland.

This most curious island has evidently been projected from the bottom of
the sea at a comparatively recent date. Possibly, it may still be
subject to gradual elevation. If this is the case, its origin may well
be attributed to subterranean fires. Therefore, in this case, the theory
of Sir Humphry Davy, Saknussemm's document, and my uncle's theories
would all go off in smoke. This hypothesis led me to examine with more
attention the appearance of the surface, and I soon arrived at a
conclusion as to the nature of the forces which presided at its birth.

Iceland, which is entirely devoid of alluvial soil, is wholly composed
of volcanic tufa, that is to say, an agglomeration of porous rocks and
stones. Before the volcanoes broke out it consisted of trap rocks slowly
upraised to the level of the sea by the action of central forces. The
internal fires had not yet forced their way through.

But at a later period a wide chasm formed diagonally from south-west to
north-east, through which was gradually forced out the trachyte which
was to form a mountain chain. No violence accompanied this change; the
matter thrown out was in vast quantities, and the liquid material oozing
out from the abysses of the earth slowly spread in extensive plains or
in hillocky masses. To this period belong the felspar, syenites, and
porphyries.

But with the help of this outflow the thickness of the crust of the
island increased materially, and therefore also its powers of
resistance. It may easily be conceived what vast quantities of elastic
gases, what masses of molten matter accumulated beneath its solid
surface whilst no exit was practicable after the cooling of the
trachytic crust. Therefore a time would come when the elastic and
explosive forces of the imprisoned gases would upheave this ponderous
cover and drive out for themselves openings through tall chimneys. Hence
then the volcano would distend and lift up the crust, and then burst
through a crater suddenly formed at the summit or thinnest part of the
volcano.

To the eruption succeeded other volcanic phenomena. Through the outlets
now made first escaped the ejected basalt of which the plain we had just
left presented such marvellous specimens. We were moving over grey rocks
of dense and massive formation, which in cooling had formed into
hexagonal prisms. Everywhere around us we saw truncated cones, formerly
so many fiery mouths.

After the exhaustion of the basalt, the volcano, the power of which grew
by the extinction of the lesser craters, supplied an egress to lava,
ashes, and scoriae, of which I could see lengthened screes streaming
down the sides of the mountain like flowing hair.

Such was the succession of phenomena which produced Iceland, all arising
from the action of internal fire; and to suppose that the mass within
did not still exist in a state of liquid incandescence was absurd; and
nothing could surpass the absurdity of fancying that it was possible to
reach the earth's centre.

So I felt a little comforted as we advanced to the assault of Snæfell.

The way was growing more and more arduous, the ascent steeper and
steeper; the loose fragments of rock trembled beneath us, and the utmost
care was needed to avoid dangerous falls.

Hans went on as quietly as if he were on level ground; sometimes he
disappeared altogether behind the huge blocks, then a shrill whistle
would direct us on our way to him. Sometimes he would halt, pick up a
few bits of stone, build them up into a recognisable form, and thus made
landmarks to guide us in our way back. A very wise precaution in itself,
but, as things turned out, quite useless.

Three hours' fatiguing march had only brought us to the base of the
mountain. There Hans bid us come to a halt, and a hasty breakfast was
served out. My uncle swallowed two mouthfuls at a time to get on faster.
But, whether he liked it or not, this was a rest as well as a breakfast
hour and he had to wait till it pleased our guide to move on, which came
to pass in an hour. The three Icelanders, just as taciturn as their
comrade the hunted, never spoke, and ate their breakfasts in silence.

We were now beginning to scale the steep sides of Snæfell. Its snowy
summit, by an optical illusion not unfrequent in mountains, seemed close
to us, and yet how many weary hours it took to reach it! The stones,
adhering by no soil or fibrous roots of vegetation, rolled away from
under our feet, and rushed down the precipice below with the swiftness
of an avalanche.

At some places the flanks of the mountain formed an angle with the
horizon of at least 36 degrees; it was impossible to climb them, and
these stony cliffs had to be tacked round, not without great difficulty.
Then we helped each other with our sticks.

I must admit that my uncle kept as close to me as he could; he never
lost sight of me, and in many straits his arm furnished me with a
powerful support. He himself seemed to possess an instinct for
equilibrium, for he never stumbled. The Icelanders, though burdened with
our loads, climbed with the agility of mountaineers.

To judge by the distant appearance of the summit of Snæfell, it would
have seemed too steep to ascend on our side. Fortunately, after an hour
of fatigue and athletic exercises, in the midst of the vast surface of
snow presented by the hollow between the two peaks, a kind of staircase
appeared unexpectedly which greatly facilitated our ascent. It was
formed by one of those torrents of stones flung up by the eruptions,
called 'sting' by the Icelanders. If this torrent had not been arrested
in its fall by the formation of the sides of the mountain, it would have
gone on to the sea and formed more islands.

Such as it was, it did us good service. The steepness increased, but
these stone steps allowed us to rise with facility, and even with such
rapidity that, having rested for a moment while my companions continued
their ascent, I perceived them already reduced by distance to
microscopic dimensions.

At seven we had ascended the two thousand steps of this grand staircase,
and we had attained a bulge in the mountain, a kind of bed on which
rested the cone proper of the crater.

Three thousand two hundred feet below us stretched the sea. We had
passed the limit of perpetual snow, which, on account of the moisture of
the climate, is at a greater elevation in Iceland than the high latitude
would give reason to suppose. The cold was excessively keen. The wind
was blowing violently. I was exhausted. The Professor saw that my limbs
were refusing to perform their office, and in spite of his impatience he
decided on stopping. He therefore spoke to the hunter, who shook his
head, saying:

"*Ofvanför*."

"It seems we must go higher," said my uncle.

Then he asked Hans for his reason.

"*Mistour*," replied the guide.

"*Ja Mistour*," said one of the Icelanders in a tone of alarm.

"What does that word mean?" I asked uneasily.

"Look!" said my uncle.

I looked down upon the plain. An immense column of pulverized pumice,
sand and dust was rising with a whirling circular motion like a
waterspout; the wind was lashing it on to that side of Snæfell where we
were holding on; this dense veil, hung across the sun, threw a deep
shadow over the mountain. If that huge revolving pillar sloped down, it
would involve us in its whirling eddies. This phenomenon, which is not
unfrequent when the wind blows from the glaciers, is called in Icelandic
'mistour.'

"*Hastigt! hastigt!*" cried our guide.

Without knowing Danish I understood at once that we must follow Hans at
the top of our speed. He began to circle round the cone of the crater,
but in a diagonal direction so as to facilitate our progress. Presently
the dust storm fell upon the mountain, which quivered under the shock;
the loose stones, caught with the irresistible blasts of wind, flew
about in a perfect hail as in an eruption. Happily we were on the
opposite side, and sheltered from all harm. But for the precaution of
our guide, our mangled bodies, torn and pounded into fragments, would
have been carried afar like the ruins hurled along by some unknown
meteor.

Yet Hans did not think it prudent to spend the night upon the sides of
the cone. We continued our zigzag climb. The fifteen hundred remaining
feet took us five hours to clear; the circuitous route, the diagonal and
the counter marches, must have measured at least three leagues. I could
stand it no longer. I was yielding to the effects of hunger and cold.
The rarefied air scarcely gave play to the action of my lungs.

At last, at eleven in the sunlight night, the summit of Snæfell was
reached, and before going in for shelter into the crater I had time to
observe the midnight sun, at his lowest point, gilding with his pale
rays the island that slept at my feet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Boldly Down the Crater](jce18.md)
