[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce11)  [Next](jce13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

#### INTERESTING CONVERSATIONS WITH ICELANDIC SAVANTS

Dinner was ready. Professor Liedenbrock devoured his portion
voraciously, for his compulsory fast on board had converted his stomach
into a vast unfathomable gulf. There was nothing remarkable in the meal
itself; but the hospitality of our host, more Danish than Icelandic,
reminded me of the heroes of old. It was evident that we were more at
home than he was himself.

The conversation was carried on in the vernacular tongue, which my uncle
mixed with German and M. Fridrikssen with Latin for my benefit. It
turned upon scientific questions as befits philosophers; but Professor
Liedenbrock was excessively reserved, and at every sentence spoke to me
with his eyes, enjoining the most absolute silence upon our plans.

In the first place M. Fridrikssen wanted to know what success my uncle
had had at the library.

"Your library! why there is nothing but a few tattered books upon almost
deserted shelves."

"Indeed!" replied M. Fridrikssen, "why we possess eight thousand
volumes, many of them valuable and scarce, works in the old Scandinavian
language, and we have all the novelties that Copenhagen sends us every
year."

"Where do you keep your eight thousand volumes? For my part—"

"Oh, M. Liedenbrock, they are all over the country. In this icy region
we are fond of study. There is not a farmer nor a fisherman that cannot
read and does not read. Our principle is, that books, instead of growing
mouldy behind an iron grating, should be worn out under the eyes of many
readers. Therefore, these volumes are passed from one to another, read
over and over, referred to again and again; and it often happens that
they find their way back to their shelves only after an absence of a
year or two."

"And in the meantime," said my uncle rather spitefully, "strangers --"

"Well, what would you have? Foreigners have their libraries at home, and
the first essential for labouring people is that they should be
educated. I repeat to you the love of reading runs in Icelandic blood.
In 1816 we founded a prosperous literary society; learned strangers
think themselves honoured in becoming members of it. It publishes books
which educate our fellow-countrymen, and do the country great service.
If you will consent to be a corresponding member, Herr Liedenbrock, you
will be giving us great pleasure."

My uncle, who had already joined about a hundred learned societies,
accepted with a grace which evidently touched M. Fridrikssen.

"Now," said he, "will you be kind enough to tell me what books you hoped
to find in our library and I may perhaps enable you to consult them?"

My uncle's eyes and mine met. He hesitated. This direct question went to
the root of the matter. But after a moment's reflection he decided on
speaking.

"Monsieur Fridrikssen, I wished to know if amongst your ancient books
you possessed any of the works of Arne Saknussemm?"

"Arne Saknussemm!" replied the Rejkiavik professor. "You mean that
learned sixteenth century savant, a naturalist, a chemist, and a
traveller?"

"Just so!"

"One of the glories of Icelandic literature and science?"

"That's the man."

"An illustrious man anywhere!"

"Quite so."

"And whose courage was equal to his genius!"

"I see that you know him well."

My uncle was bathed in delight at hearing his hero thus described. He
feasted his eyes upon M. Fridrikssen's face.

"Well," he cried, "where are his works?"

"His works, we have them not."

"What—not in Iceland?"

"They are neither in Iceland nor anywhere else."

"Why is that?"

"Because Arne Saknussemm was persecuted for heresy, and in 1573 his
books were burned by the hands of the common hangman."

"Very good! Excellent!" cried my uncle, to the great scandal of the
professor of natural history.

"What!" he cried.

"Yes, yes; now it is all clear, now it is all unravelled; and I see why
Saknussemm, put into the Index Expurgatorius, and compelled to hide the
discoveries made by his genius, was obliged to bury in an
incomprehensible cryptogram the secret—"

"What secret?" asked M. Fridrikssen, starting.

"Oh, just a secret which—" my uncle stammered.

"Have you some private document in your possession?" asked our host.

"No; I was only supposing a case."

"Oh, very well," answered M. Fridrikssen, who was kind enough not to
pursue the subject when he had noticed the embarrassment of his friend.
"I hope you will not leave our island until you have seen some of its
mineralogical wealth."

"Certainly," replied my uncle; "but I am rather late; or have not others
been here before me?"

"Yes, Herr Liedenbrock; the labours of MM. Olafsen and Povelsen, pursued
by order of the king, the researches of Troïl the scientific mission of
MM. Gaimard and Robert on the French corvette *La Recherche*,  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) and lately the observations of scientific
men who came in the *Reine Hortense*, have added materially to our
knowledge of Iceland. But I assure you there is plenty left."

"Do you think so?" said my uncle, pretending to look very modest, and
trying to hide the curiosity was flashing out of his eyes.

"Oh, yes; how many mountains, glaciers, and volcanoes there are to
study, which are as yet but imperfectly known! Then, without going any
further, that mountain in the horizon. That is Snæfell."

"Ah!" said my uncle, as coolly as he was able, "is that Snæfell?"

"Yes; one of the most curious volcanoes, and the crater of which has
scarcely ever been visited."

"Is it extinct?"

"Oh, yes; more than five hundred years."

"Well," replied my uncle, who was frantically locking his legs together
to keep himself from jumping up in the air, "that is where I mean to
begin my geological studies, there on that Seffel—Fessel—what do you
call it?"

"Snæfell," replied the excellent M. Fridrikssen.

This part of the conversation was in Latin; I had understood every word
of it, and I could hardly conceal my amusement at seeing my uncle trying
to keep down the excitement and satisfaction which were brimming over in
every limb and every feature. He tried hard to put on an innocent little
expression of simplicity; but it looked like a diabolical grin.

"Yes," said he, "your words decide me. We will try to scale that
Snæfell; perhaps even we may pursue our studies in its crater!"

"I am very sorry," said M. Fridrikssen, "that my engagements will not
allow me to absent myself, or I would have accompanied you myself with
both pleasure and profit."

"Oh, no, no!" replied my uncle with great animation, "we would not
disturb any one for the world, M. Fridrikssen. Still, I thank you with
all my heart: the company of such a talented man would have been very
serviceable, but the duties of your profession—"

I am glad to think that our host, in the innocence of his Icelandic
soul, was blind to the transparent artifices of my uncle.

"I very much approve of your beginning with that volcano, M.
Liedenbrock. You will gather a harvest of interesting observations. But,
tell me, how do you expect to get to the peninsula of Snæfell?"

"By sea, crossing the bay. That's the most direct way."

"No doubt; but it is impossible."

"Why? "

"Because we don't possess a single boat at Rejkiavik."

"You don't mean to say so?"

"You will have to go by land, following the shore. It will be longer,
but more interesting."

"Very well, then; and now I shall have to see about a guide."

"I have one to offer you."

"A safe, intelligent man."

"Yes; an inhabitant of that peninsula He is an eiderdown hunter, and
very clever. He speaks Danish perfectly."

"When can I see him?"

"To-morrow, if you like."

"Why not to-day?"

"Because he won't be here till to-morrow."

"To-morrow, then," added my uncle with a sigh.

This momentous conversation ended in a few minutes with warm
acknowledgments paid by the German to the Icelandic Professor. At this
dinner my uncle had just elicited important facts, amongst others, the
history of Saknussemm, the reason of the mysterious document, that his
host would not accompany him in his expedition, and that the very next
day a guide would be waiting upon him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](jce12.htm#fr_4) *Recherche* was sent out in
1835 by Admiral Duperré to learn the fate of the lost expedition of M.
de Blosseville in the *Lilloise* which has never been heard of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. A Guide Found to the Centre of the Earth](jce13)
