[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce28)  [Next](jce30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVII.

#### LOST IN THE BOWELS OF THE EARTH

To describe my despair would be impossible. No words could tell it. I
was buried alive, with the prospect before me of dying of hunger and
thirst.

Mechanically I swept the ground with my hands. How dry and hard the rock
seemed to me!

But how had I left the course of the stream? For it was a terrible fact
that it no longer ran at my side. Then I understood the reason of that
fearful, silence, when for the last time I listened to hear if any sound
from my companions could reach my ears. At the moment when I left the
right road I had not noticed the absence of the stream. It is evident
that at that moment a deviation had presented itself before me, whilst
the Hansbach, following the caprice of another incline, had gone with my
companions away into unknown depths.

How was I to return? There was not a trace of their footsteps or of my
own, for the foot left no mark upon the granite floor. I racked my brain
for a solution of this impracticable problem. One word described my
position. Lost!

Lost at an immeasurable depth! Thirty leagues of rock seemed to weigh
upon my shoulders with a dreadful pressure. I felt crushed.

I tried to carry back my ideas to things on the surface of the earth. I
could scarcely succeed. Hamburg, the house in the Königstrasse, my poor
Gräuben, all that busy world underneath which I was wandering about, was
passing in rapid confusion before my terrified memory. I could revive
with vivid reality all the incidents of our voyage, Iceland, M.
Fridrikssen, Snæfell. I said to myself that if, in such a position as I
was now in, I was fool enough to cling to one glimpse of hope, it would
be madness, and that the best thing I could do was to despair.

What human power could restore me to the light of the sun by rending
asunder the huge arches of rock which united over my head, buttressing
each other with impregnable strength? Who could place my feet on the
right path, and bring me back to my company?

"Oh, my uncle!" burst from my lips in the tone of despair.

It was my only word of reproach, for I knew how much he must be
suffering in seeking me, wherever he might be.

When I saw myself thus far removed from all earthly help I had recourse
to heavenly succour. The remembrance of my childhood, the recollection
of my mother, whom I had only known in my tender early years, came back
to me, and I knelt in prayer imploring for the Divine help of which I
was so little worthy.

This return of trust in God's providence allayed the turbulence of my
fears, and I was enabled to concentrate upon my situation all the force
of my intelligence.

I had three days' provisions with me and my flask was full. But I could
not remain alone for long. Should I go up or down?

Up, of course; up continually.

I must thus arrive at the point where I had left the stream, that fatal
turn in the road. With the stream at my feet, I might hope to regain the
summit of Snæfell.

Why had I not thought of that sooner? Here was evidently a chance of
safety. The most pressing duty was to find out again the course of the
Hansbach. I rose, and leaning upon my iron-pointed stick I ascended the
gallery. The slope was rather steep. I walked on without hope but
without indecision, like a man who has made up his mind.

For half an hour I met with no obstacle. I tried to recognise my way by
the form of the tunnel, by the projections of certain rocks, by the
disposition of the fractures. But no particular sign appeared, and I
soon saw that this gallery could not bring me back to the turning point.
It came to an abrupt end. I struck against an impenetrable wall, and
fell down upon the rock.

Unspeakable despair then seized upon me. I lay overwhelmed, aghast! My
last hope was shattered against this granite wall.

Lost in this labyrinth, whose windings crossed each other in all
directions, it was no use to think of flight any longer. Here I must die
the most dreadful of deaths. And, strange to say, the thought came
across me that when some day my petrified remains should be found thirty
leagues below the surface in the bowels of the earth, the discovery
might lead to grave scientific discussions.

I tried to speak aloud, but hoarse sounds alone passed my dry lips. I
panted for breath.

In the midst of my agony a new terror laid hold of me. In falling my
lamp had got wrong. I could not set it right, and its light was paling
and would soon disappear altogether.

I gazed painfully upon the luminous current growing weaker and weaker in
the wire coil. A dim procession of moving shadows seemed slowly
unfolding down the darkening walls. I scarcely dared to shut my eyes for
one moment, for fear of losing the least glimmer of this precious light.
Every instant it seemed about to vanish and the dense blackness to come
rolling in palpably upon me.

One last trembling glimmer shot feebly up. I watched it in trembling and
anxiety; I drank it in as if I could preserve it, concentrating upon it
the full power of my eyes, as upon the very last sensation of light
which they were ever to experience, and the next moment I lay in the
heavy gloom of deep, thick, unfathomable darkness.

A terrible cry of anguish burst from me. Upon earth, in the midst of the
darkest night, light never abdicates its functions altogether. It is
still subtle and diffusive, but whatever little there may be, the eye
still catches that little. Here there was not an atom; the total
darkness made me totally blind.

Then I began to lose my head. I arose with my arms stretched out before
me, attempting painfully to feel my way. I began to run wildly, hurrying
through the inextricable maze, still descending, still running through
the substance of the earth's thick crust, a struggling denizen of
geological 'faults,' crying, shouting, yelling, soon bruised by contact
with the jagged rock, falling and rising again bleeding, trying to drink
the blood which covered my face, and even waiting for some rock to
shatter my skull against.

I shall never know whither my mad career took me. After the lapse of
some hours, no doubt exhausted, I fell like a lifeless lump at the foot
of the wall, and lost all consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. The Rescue in the Whispering Gallery](jce30)
