[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce25)  [Next](jce27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXIV.

#### WELL SAID, OLD MOLE! CANST THOU WORK I’ THE GROUND SO FAST?

By the next day we had forgotten all our sufferings. At first, I was
wondering that I was no longer thirsty, and I was for asking for the
reason. The answer came in the murmuring of the stream at my feet.

We breakfasted, and drank of this excellent chalybeate water. I felt
wonderfully stronger, and quite decided upon pushing on. Why should not
so firmly convinced a man as my uncle, furnished with so industrious a
guide as Hans, and accompanied by so determined a nephew as myself, go
on to final success? Such were the magnificent plans which struggled for
mastery within me. If it had been proposed to me to return to the summit
of Snæfell, I should have indignantly declined.

Most fortunately, all we had to do was to descend.

"Let us start!" I cried, awakening by my shouts the echoes of the
vaulted hollows of the earth.

On Thursday, at 8 a.m., we started afresh. The granite tunnel winding
from side to side, earned us past unexpected turns, and

seemed almost to form a labyrinth; but, on the whole, its direction
seemed to be south-easterly. My uncle never ceased to consult his
compass, to keep account of the ground gone over.

The gallery dipped down a very little way from the horizontal, scarcely
more than two inches in a fathom, and the stream ran gently murmuring at
our feet. I compared it to a friendly genius guiding us underground, and
caressed with my hand the soft naiad, whose comforting voice accompanied
our steps. With my reviving spirits these mythological notions seemed to
come unbidden.

As for my uncle, he was beginning to storm against the horizontal road.
He loved nothing better than a vertical path; but this way seemed
indefinitely prolonged, and instead of sliding along the hypothenuse as
we were now doing, he would willingly have dropped down the terrestrial
radius. But there was no help for it, and as long as we were approaching
the centre at all we felt that we must not complain.

From time to time, a steeper path appeared; our naiad then began to
tumble before us with a hoarser murmur, and we went down with her to a
greater depth.

On the whole, that day and the next we made considerable way
horizontally, very little vertically.

On Friday evening, the 10th of July, according to our calculations, we
were thirty leagues south-east of Rejkiavik, and at a depth of two
leagues and a half.

At our feet there now opened a frightful abyss. My uncle, however, was
not to be daunted, and he clapped his hands at the steepness of the
descent.

"This will take us a long way," he cried, "and without much difficulty;
for the projections in the rock form quite a staircase."

The ropes were so fastened by Hans as to guard against accident, and the
descent commenced. I can hardly call it perilous, for I was beginning to
be familiar with this kind of exercise.

This well, or abyss, was a narrow cleft in the mass of the granite,
called by geologists a 'fault,' and caused by the unequal cooling of the
globe of the earth. If it had at one time been a passage for eruptive
matter thrown out by Snæfell, I still could not understand why no trace
was left of its passage. We kept going down a kind of winding staircase,
which seemed almost to have been made by the hand of man.

Every quarter of an hour we were obliged to halt, to take a little
necessary repose and restore the action of our limbs. We then sat down
upon a fragment of rock, and we talked as we ate and drank from the
stream.

Of course, down this fault the Hansbach fell in a cascade, and lost some
of its volume; but there was enough and to spare to slake our thirst.
Besides, when the incline became more gentle, it would of course resume
its peaceable course. At this moment it reminded me of my worthy uncle,
in his frequent fits of impatience and anger, while below it ran with
the calmness of the Icelandic hunter.

On the 6th and 7th of July we kept following the spiral curves of this
singular well, penetrating in actual distance no more than two leagues;
but being carried to a depth of five leagues below the level of the sea.
But on the 8th, about noon, the fault took, towards the south-east, a
much gentler slope, one of about forty-five degrees.

Then the road became monotonously easy. It could not be otherwise, for
there was no landscape to vary the stages of our journey.

On Wednesday, the 15th, we were seven leagues underground, and had
travelled fifty leagues away from Snæfell. Although we were tired, our
health was perfect, and the medicine chest had not yet had occasion to
be opened.

My uncle noted every hour the indications of the compass, the
chronometer, the aneroid, and the thermometer the very same which he has
published in his scientific report of our journey. It was therefore not
difficult to know exactly our whereabouts. When he told me that we had
gone fifty leagues horizontally, I could not repress an exclamation of
astonishment, at the thought that we had now long left Iceland behind
us.

"What is the matter?" he cried.

"I was reflecting that if your calculations are correct we are no longer
under Iceland."

"Do you think so?"

"I am not mistaken," I said, and examining the map, I added, "We have
passed Cape Portland, and those fifty leagues bring us under the wide
expanse of ocean."

"Under the sea," my uncle repeated, rubbing his hands with delight.

"Can it be?" I said. "Is the ocean spread above our heads?"

"Of course, Axel. What can be more natural? At Newcastle are there not
coal mines extending far under the sea?"

It was all very well for the Professor to call this so simple, but I
could not feel quite easy at the thought that the boundless ocean was
rolling over my head. And yet it really mattered very little whether it
was the plains and mountains that covered our heads, or the Atlantic
waves, as long as we were arched over by solid granite. And, besides, I
was getting used to this idea; for the tunnel, now running straight, now
winding as capriciously in its inclines as in its turnings, but
constantly preserving its south-easterly direction, and always running
deeper, was gradually carrying us to very great depths indeed.

Four days later, Saturday, the 18th of July, in the evening, we arrived
at a kind of vast grotto; and here my uncle paid Hans his weekly wages,
and it was settled that the next day, Sunday, should be a day of rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. De Profundis](jce27)
