[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce33)  [Next](jce35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXII.

#### WONDERS OF THE DEEP

On the 13th of August we awoke early. We were now to begin to adopt a
mode of travelling both more expeditious and less fatiguing than
hitherto.

A mast was made of two poles spliced together, a yard was made of a
third, a blanket borrowed from our coverings made a tolerable sail.
There was no want of cordage for the rigging, and everything was well
and firmly made.

The provisions, the baggage, the instruments, the guns, and a good
quantity of fresh water from the rocks around, all found their proper
places on board; and at six the Professor gave the signal to embark.
Hans had fitted up a rudder to steer his vessel. He took the tiller, and
unmoored; the sail was set, and we were soon afloat. At the moment of
leaving the harbour, my uncle, who was tenaciously fond of naming his
new discoveries, wanted to give it a name, and proposed mine amongst
others.

"But I have a better to propose," I said: "Grauben. Let it be called
Port Gräuben; it will look very well upon the map."

"Port Gräuben let it be then."

And so the cherished remembrance of my Virlandaise became associated
with our adventurous expedition.

The wind was from the north-west. We went with it at a high rate of
speed. The dense atmosphere acted with great force and impelled us
swiftly on.

In an hour my uncle had been able to estimate our progress. At this
rate, he said, we shall make thirty leagues in twenty-four hours, and we
shall soon come in sight of the opposite shore.

I made no answer, but went and sat forward. The northern shore was
already beginning to dip under the horizon. The eastern and western
strands spread wide as if to bid us farewell. Before our eyes lay far
and wide a vast sea; shadows of great clouds swept heavily over its
silver-grey surface; the glistening bluish rays of electric light, here
and there reflected by the dancing drops of spray, shot out little
sheaves of light from the track we left in our rear. Soon we entirely
lost sight of land; no object was left for the eye to judge by, and but
for the frothy track of the raft, I might have thought we were standing
still.

About twelve, immense shoals of seaweeds came in sight. I was aware of
the great powers of vegetation that characterise these plants, which
grow at a depth of twelve thousand feet, reproduce themselves under a
pressure of four hundred atmospheres, and sometimes form barriers strong
enough to impede the course of a ship. But never, I think, were such
seaweeds as those which we saw floating in immense waving lines upon the
sea of Liedenbrock.

Our raft skirted the whole length of the fuci, three or four thousand
feet long, undulating like vast serpents beyond the reach of sight; I
found some amusement in tracing these endless waves, always thinking I
should come to the end of them, and for hours my patience was vying with
my surprise.

What natural force could have produced such plants, and what must have
been the appearance of the earth in the first ages of its formation,
when, under the action of heat and moisture, the vegetable kingdom alone
was developing on its surface?

Evening came, and, as on the previous day, I perceived no change in the
luminous condition of the air. It was a constant condition, the
permanency of which might be relied upon.

After supper I laid myself down at the foot of the mast, and fell asleep
in the midst of fantastic reveries.

Hans, keeping fast by the helm, let the raft run on, which, after all,
needed no steering, the wind blowing directly aft.

Since our departure from Port Gräuben, Professor Liedenbrock had
entrusted the log to my care; I was to register every observation, make
entries of interesting phenomena, the direction of the wind, the rate of
sailing, the way we made—in a word, every particular of our singular
voyage.

I shall therefore reproduce here these daily notes, written, so to
speak, as the course of events directed, in order to furnish an exact
narrative of our passage.

*Friday, August 14*.—Wind steady, N.W. The raft makes rapid way in a
direct line. Coast thirty leagues to leeward. Nothing in sight before
us. Intensity of light the same. Weather fine; that is to say, that the
clouds are flying high, are light, and bathed in a white atmosphere
resembling silver in a state of fusion. Therm. 89° Fahr.

At noon Hans prepared a hook at the end of a line. He baited it with a
small piece of meat and flung it into the sea. For two hours nothing was
caught. Are these waters, then, bare of inhabitants? No, there's a pull
at the line. Hans draws it in and brings out a struggling fish.

"A sturgeon," I cried; "a small sturgeon."

The Professor eyes the creature attentively, and his opinion differs
from mine.

The head of this fish was flat, but rounded in front, and the anterior
part of its body was plated with bony, angular scales; it had no teeth,
its pectoral fins were large, and of tail there was none. The animal
belonged to the same order as the sturgeon, but differed from that fish
in many essential particulars. After a short examination my uncle
pronounced his opinion.

"This fish belongs to an extinct family, of which only fossil traces are
found in the devonian formations."

"What!" I cried. "Have we taken alive an inhabitant of the seas of
primitive ages?"

"Yes; and you will observe that these fossil fishes have no identity
with any living species. To have in one's possession a living specimen
is a happy event for a naturalist."

"But to what family does it belong?"

"It is of the order of ganoids, of the family of the cephalaspidae; and
a species of pterichthys. But this one displays a peculiarity confined
to all fishes that inhabit subterranean waters. It is blind, and not
only blind, but actually has no eyes at all."

I looked: nothing could be more certain. But supposing it might be a
solitary case, we baited afresh, and threw out our line. Surely this
ocean is well peopled with fish, for in another couple of hours we took
a large quantity of pterichthydes, as well as of others belonging to the
extinct family of the dipterides, but of which my uncle could not tell
the species; none had organs of sight. This unhoped-for catch recruited
our stock of provisions.

Thus it is evident that this sea contains none but species known to us
in their fossil state, in which fishes as well as reptiles are the less
perfectly and completely organised the farther back their date of
creation.

Perhaps we may yet meet with some of those saurians which science has
reconstructed out of a bit of bone or cartilage. I took up the telescope
and scanned the whole horizon, and found it everywhere a desert sea. We
are far away removed from the shores.

I gaze upward in the air. Why should not some of the strange birds
restored by the immortal Cuvier again flap their 'sail-broad vans' in
this dense and heavy atmosphere? There are sufficient fish for their
support. I survey the whole space that stretches overhead; it is as
desert as the shore was.

Still my imagination carried me away amongst the wonderful speculations
of palaeontology. Though awake I fell into a dream. I thought I could
see floating on the surface of the waters enormous chelonia, preadamite
tortoises, resembling floating islands. Over the dimly lighted strand
there trod the huge mammals of the first ages of the world, the
leptotherium (slender beast), found in the caverns of Brazil; the
merycotherium (ruminating beast), found in the 'drift' of iceclad
Siberia. Farther on, the pachydermatous lophiodon (crested toothed), a
gigantic tapir, hides behind the rocks to dispute its prey with the
anoplotherium (unarmed beast), a strange creature, which seemed a
compound of horse, rhinoceros, camel, and hippopotamus. The colossal
mastodon (nipple-toothed) twists and untwists his trunk, and brays and
pounds with his huge tusks the fragments of rock that cover the shore;
whilst the megatherium (huge beast), buttressed upon his enormous hinder
paws, grubs in the soil, awaking the sonorous echoes of the granite
rocks with his tremendous roarings. Higher up, the protopitheca—the
first monkey that appeared on the globe—is climbing up the steep
ascents. Higher yet, the pterodactyle (wing-fingered) darts in irregular
zigzags to and fro in the heavy air. In the uppermost regions of the air
immense birds, more powerful than the cassowary, and larger than the
ostrich, spread their vast breadth of wings and strike with their heads
the granite vault that bounds the sky.

All this fossil world rises to life again in my vivid imagination. I
return to the scriptural periods or ages of the world, conventionally
called 'days,' long before the appearance of man, when the unfinished
world was as yet unfitted for his support. Then mydream backed even
farther still into the ages before the creation of living beings. The
mammals disappear, then the birds vanish, then the reptiles of the
secondary period, and finally the fish, the crustaceans, molluscs, and
articulated beings. Then the zoophytes of the transition period also
return to nothing. I am the only living thing in the world: all life is
concentrated in my beating heart alone. There are no more seasons;
climates are no more; the heat of the globe continually increases and
neutralises that of the sun. Vegetation becomes accelerated. I glide
like a shade amongst arborescent ferns, treading with unsteady feet the
coloured marls and the particoloured clays; I lean for support against
the trunks of immense conifers; I lie in the shade of sphenophylla
(wedge-leaved), asterophylla (star-leaved), and lycopods, a hundred feet
high.

Ages seem no more than days! I am passed, against my will, in retrograde
order, through the long series of terrestrial changes. Plants disappear;
granite rocks soften; intense heat converts solid bodies into thick
fluids; the waters again cover the face of the earth; they boil, they
rise in whirling eddies of steam; white and ghastly mists wrap round the
shifting forms of the earth, which by imperceptible degrees dissolves
into a gaseous mass, glowing fiery red and white, as large and as
shining as the sun.

And I myself am floating with wild caprice in the midst of this nebulous
mass of fourteen hundred thousand times the volume of the earth into
which it will one day be condensed, and carried forward amongst the
planetary bodies. My body is no longer firm and terrestrial; it is
resolved into its constituent atoms, subtilised, volatilised. Sublimed
into imponderable vapour, I mingle and am lost in the endless foods of
those vast globular volumes of vaporous mists, which roll upon their
flaming orbits through infinite space.

But is it not a dream? Whither is it carrying me? My feverish hand has
vainly attempted to describe upon paper its strange and wonderful
details. I have forgotten everything that surrounds me. The Professor,
the guide, the raft—are all gone out of my ken. An illusion has laid
hold upon me.

"What is the matter?" my uncle breaks in.

My staring eyes are fixed vacantly upon him.

"Take care, Axel, or you will fall overboard."

At that moment I felt the sinewy hand of Hans seizing me vigorously. But
for him, carried away by my dream, I should have thrown myself into the
sea.

"Is he mad?" cried the Professor.

"What is it all about?" at last I cried, returning to myself.

"Do you feel ill?" my uncle asked.

"No; but I have had a strange hallucination; it is over now. Is all
going on right?"

"Yes, it is a fair wind and a fine sea; we are sailing rapidly along,
and if I am not out in my reckoning, we shall soon land."

At these words I rose and gazed round upon the horizon, still everywhere
bounded by clouds alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. A Battle of Monsters](jce35)
