[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce44)  [Next](jce46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIII.

#### SHOT OUT OF A VOLCANO AT LAST!

Yes: our compass was no longer a guide; the needle flew from pole to
pole with a kind of frenzied impulse; it ran round the dial, and spun
hither and thither as if it were giddy or intoxicated.

I knew quite well that according to the best received theories the
mineral covering of the globe is never at absolute rest; the changes
brought about by the chemical decomposition of its component parts, the
agitation caused by great liquid torrents, and the magnetic currents,
are continually tending to disturb it -even when living beings upon its
surface may fancy that all is quiet below. A phenomenon of this kind
would not have greatly alarmed me, or at any rate it would not have
given rise to dreadful apprehensions.

But other facts, other circumstances, of a peculiar nature, came to
reveal to me by degrees the true state of the case. There came incessant
and continuous explosions. I could only compare them to the loud rattle
of along train of chariots driven at full speed over the stones, or a
roar of unintermitting thunder.

Then the disordered compass, thrown out of gear by the electric
currents, confirmed me in a growing conviction. The mineral crust of the
globe threatened to burst up, the granite foundations to come together
with a crash, the fissure through which we were helplessly driven would
be filled up, the void would be full of crushed fragments of rock, and
we poor wretched mortals were to be buried and annihilated in this
dreadful consummation.

"My uncle," I cried, "we are lost now, utterly lost!"

"What are you in a fright about now?" was the calm rejoinder. "What is
the matter with you?"

"The matter? Look at those quaking walls! look at those shivering rocks.
Don't you feel the burning heat? Don't you see how the water boils and
bubbles? Are you blind to the dense vapours and steam growing thicker
and denser every minute? See this agitated compass needle. It is an
earthquake that is threatening us."

My undaunted uncle calmly shook his head.

"Do you think," said he, "an earthquake is coming?"

"I do."

"Well, I think you are mistaken."

"What! don't you recognise the symptoms?"

"Of an earthquake? no! I am looking out for something better."

"What can you mean? Explain?"

"It is an eruption, Axel."

"An eruption! Do you mean to affirm that we are running up the shaft of
a volcano?"

"I believe we are," said the indomitable Professor with an air of
perfect self-possession; "and it is the best thing that could possibly
happen to us under our circumstances."

The best thing! Was my uncle stark mad? What did the man mean? and what
was the use of saying facetious things at a time like this?

"What!" I shouted. "Are we being taken up in an eruption? Our fate has
flung us here among burning lavas, molten rocks, boiling waters, and all
kinds of volcanic matter; we are going to be pitched out, expelled,
tossed up, vomited, spit out high into the air, along with fragments of
rock, showers of ashes and scoria, in the midst of a towering rush of
smoke and flames; and it is the best thing that could happen to us!"

"Yes," replied the Professor, eyeing me over his spectacles, "I don't
see any other way of reaching the surface of the earth."

I pass rapidly over the thousand ideas which passed through my mind. My
uncle was right, undoubtedly right; and never had he seemed to me more
daring and more confirmed in his notions than at this moment when he was
calmly contemplating the chances of being shot out of a volcano!

In the meantime up we went; the night passed away in continual ascent;
the din and uproar around us became more and more intensified; I was
stifled and stunned; I thought my last hour was approaching; and yet
imagination is such a strong thing that even in this supreme hour I was
occupied with strange and almost childish speculations. But I was the
victim, not the master, of my own thoughts.

It was very evident that we were being hurried upward upon the crest of
a wave of eruption; beneath our raft were boiling waters, and under
these the more sluggish lava was working its way up in a heated mass,
together with shoals of fragments of rock which, when they arrived at
the crater, would be dispersed in all directions high and low. We were
imprisoned in the shaft or chimney of some volcano. There was no room to
doubt of that.

But this time, instead of Snæfell, an extinct volcano, we were inside
one in full activity. I wondered, therefore, where could this mountain
be, and in what part of the world we were to be shot out.

I made no doubt but that it would be in some northern region. Before its
disorders set in, the needle had never deviated from that direction.
From Cape Saknussemm we had been carried due north for hundreds of
leagues. Were we under Iceland again? Were we destined to be thrown up
out of Hecla, or by which of the seven other fiery craters in that
island? Within a radius of five hundred leagues to the west I remembered
under this parallel of latitude only the imperfectly known volcanoes of
the north-east coast of America. To the east there was only one in the
80th degree of north latitude, the Esk in Jan Mayen Island, not far from
Spitzbergen! Certainly there was no lack of craters, and there were some
capacious enough to throw out a whole army! But I wanted to know which
of them was to serve us for an exit from the inner world.

Towards morning the ascending movement became accelerated. If the heat
increased, instead of diminishing, as we approached nearer to the
surface of the globe, this effect was due to local causes alone, and
those volcanic. The manner of our locomotion left no doubt in my mind.
An enormous force, a force of hundreds of atmospheres, generated by the
extreme pressure of confined vapours, was driving us irresistibly
forward. But to what numberless dangers it exposed us!

Soon lurid lights began to penetrate the vertical gallery which widened
as we went up. Right and left I could see deep channels, like huge
tunnels, out of which escaped dense volumes of smoke; tongues of fire
lapped the walls, which crackled and sputtered under the intense heat.

"See, see, my uncle!" I cried.

"Well, those are only sulphureous flames and vapours, which one must
expect to see in an eruption. They are quite natural."

"But suppose they should wrap us round."

"But they won't wrap us round."

"But we shall be stifled."

"We shall, not be stifled at all. The gallery is widening, and if it
becomes necessary, we shall abandon the raft, and creep into a crevice."

"But the water—the rising water?"

"There is no more water, Axel; only a lava paste, which is bearing us up
on its surface to the top of the crater."

The liquid column had indeed disappeared, to give place to dense and
still boiling eruptive matter of all kinds. The temperature was becoming
unbearable. A thermometer exposed to this atmosphere would have marked
150°. The perspiration streamed from my body. But for the rapidity of
our ascent we should have been suffocated.

But the Professor gave up his idea of abandoning the raft, and it was
well he did. However roughly joined together, those planks afforded us a
firmer support than we could have found anywhere else.

About eight in the morning a new incident occurred. The upward movement
ceased. The raft lay motionless.

"What is this?" I asked, shaken by this sudden stoppage as if by a
shock.

"It is a halt," replied my uncle.

"Is the eruption checked?" I asked.

"I hope not."

I rose, and tried to look around me. Perhaps the raft itself, stopped in
its course by a projection, was staying the volcanic torrent. If this
were the case we should have to release it as soon as possible.

But it was not so. The blast of ashes, scorix, and rubbish had ceased to
rise.

"Has the eruption stopped?" I cried.

"Ah!" said my uncle between his clenched teeth, "you are afraid. But
don't alarm yourself—this lull cannot last long. It has lasted now five
minutes, and in a short time we shall resume our journey to the mouth of
the crater."

As he spoke, the Professor continued to consult his chronometer, and he
was again right in his prognostications. The raft was soon hurried and
driven forward with a rapid but irregular movement, which lasted about
ten minutes, and then stopped again.

"Very good," said my uncle; "in ten minutes more we shall be off again,
for our present business lies with an intermittent volcano. It gives us
time now and then to take breath."

This was perfectly true. When the ten minutes were over we started off
again with renewed and increased speed. We were obliged to lay fast hold
of the planks of the raft, not to be thrown off. Then again the paroxysm
was over.

I have since reflected upon this singular phenomenon without being able
to explain it. At any rate it was clear that we were not in the main
shaft of the volcano, but in a lateral gallery where there were felt
recurrent tunes of reaction.

How often this operation was repeated I cannot say. All I know is, that
at each fresh impulse we were hurled forward with a greatly increased
force, and we seemed as if we were mere projectiles. During the short
halts we were stifled with the heat; whilst we were being projected
forward the hot air almost stopped my breath. I thought for a moment how
delightful it would be to find myself carried suddenly into the arctic
regions, with a cold 30° below the freezing point. My overheated brain
conjured up visions of white plains of cool snow, where I might roll and
allay my feverish heat. Little by little my brain, weakened by so many
constantly repeated shocks, seemed to be giving way altogether. But for
the strong arm of Hans I should more than once have had my head broken
against the granite roof of our burning dungeon.

I have therefore no exact recollection of what took place during the
following hours. I have a confused impression left of continuous
explosions, loud detonations, a general shaking of the rocks all around
us, and of a spinning movement with which our raft was once whirled
helplessly round. It rocked upon the lava torrent, amidst a dense fall
of ashes. Snorting flames darted their fiery tongues at us. There were
wild, fierce puffs of stormy wind from below, resembling the blasts of
vast iron furnaces blowing all at one time; and I caught a glimpse of
the figure of Hans lighted up by the fire; and all the feeling I had
left was just what I imagine must be the feeling of an unhappy criminal
doomed to be blown away alive from the mouth of a cannon, just before
the trigger is pulled, and the flying limbs and rags of flesh and skin
fill the quivering air and spatter the blood-stained ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV. Sunny Lands in the Blue Mediterranean](jce46.md)
