[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jce39)  [Next](jce41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P884Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Journey to the Center of the Earth*, by Jules Verne, \[1877\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVIII.

#### THE PROFESSOR IN HIS CHAIR AGAIN

To understand this apostrophe of my uncle's, made to absent French
savants, it will be necessary to allude to an event of high importance
in a palæontological point of view, which had occurred a little while
before our departure.

On the 28th of March, 1863, some excavators working under the direction
of M. Boucher de Perthes, in the stone quarries of Moulin Quignon, near
Abbeville, in the department of Somme, found a human jawbone fourteen
feet beneath the surface. It was the first fossil of this nature that
had ever been brought to light. Not far distant were found stone
hatchets and flint arrow-heads stained and encased by lapse of time with
a uniform coat of rust.

The noise of this discovery was very great, not in France alone, but in
England and in Germany. Several savants of the French Institute, and
amongst them MM. Milne-Edwards and de Quatrefages, saw at once the
importance of this discovery, proved to demonstration the genuineness of
the bone in question, and became the most ardent defendants in what the
English called this 'trial of a jawbone.' To the geologists of the
United Kingdom, who believed in the certainty of the fact—Messrs.
Falconer, Busk, Carpenter, and others—scientific Germans were soon
joined, and amongst them the forwardest, the most fiery, and the most
enthusiastic, was my uncle Liedenbrock.

Therefore the genuineness of a fossil human relic of the quaternary
period seemed to be incontestably proved and admitted.

It is true that this theory met with a most obstinate opponent in M.
Elie de Beaumont. This high authority maintained that the soil of Moulin
Quignon was not diluvial at all, but was of much more recent formation;
and, agreeing in that with Cuvier, he refused to admit that the human
species could be contemporary with the animals of the quaternary period.
My uncle Liedenbrock, along with the great body of the geologists, had
maintained his ground, disputed, and argued, until M. Elie de Beaumont
stood almost alone in his opinion.

We knew all these details, but we were not aware that since our
departure the question had advanced to farther stages. Other similar
maxillaries, though belonging to individuals of various types and
different nations, were found in the loose grey soil of certain grottoes
in France, Switzerland, and Belgium, as well as weapons, tools, earthen
utensils, bones of children and adults. The existence therefore of man
in the quaternary period seemed to become daily more certain.

Nor was this all. Fresh discoveries of remains in the pleiocene
formation had emboldened other geologists to refer back the human
species to a higher antiquity still. It is true that these remains were
not human bones, but objects bearing the traces of his handiwork, such
as fossil leg-bones of animals, sculptured and carved evidently by the
hand of man.

Thus, at one bound, the record of the existence of man receded far back
into the history of the ages past; he was a predecessor of the mastodon;
he was a contemporary of the southern elephant; he lived a hundred
thousand years ago, when, according to geologists, the pleiocene
formation was in progress.

Such then was the state of palæontological science, and what we knew of
it was sufficient to explain our behaviour in the presence of this
stupendous Golgotha. Any one may now understand the frenzied excitement
of my uncle, when, twenty yards farther on, he found himself face to
face with a primitive man!

It was a perfectly recognisable human body. Had some particular soil,
like that of the cemetery St. Michel, at Bordeaux, preserved it thus for
so many ages? It might be so. But this dried corpse, with its
parchment-like skin drawn tightly over the bony frame, the limbs still
preserving their shape, sound teeth, abundant hair, and finger and toe
nails of frightful length, this desiccated mummy startled us by
appearing just as it had lived countless ages ago. I stood mute before
this apparition of remote antiquity. My uncle, usually so garrulous, was
struck dumb likewise. We raised the body. We stood it up against a rock.
It seemed to stare at us out of its empty orbits. We sounded with our
knuckles his hollow frame.

After some moments' silence the Professor was himself again. Otto
Liedenbrock, yielding to his nature, forgot all the circumstances of our
eventful journey, forgot where we were standing, forgot the vaulted
cavern which contained us. No doubt he was in mind back again in his
Johannæum, holding forth to his pupils, for he assumed his learned air;
and addressing himself to an imaginary audience, he proceeded thus:

"Gentlemen, I have the honour to introduce to you a man of the
quaternary or post-tertiary system. Eminent geologists have denied his
existence, others no less eminent have affirmed it. The St. Thomases of
palæontology, if they were here, might now touch him with their fingers,
and would be obliged to acknowledge their error. I am quite aware that
science has to be on its guard with discoveries of this kind. I know
what capital enterprising individuals like Barnum have made out of
fossil men. I have heard the tale of the kneepan of Ajax, the pretended
body of Orestes claimed to have been found by the Spartans, and of the
body of Asterius, ten cubits long, of which Pausanias speaks. I have
read the reports of the skeleton of Trapani, found in the fourteenth
century, and which was at the time identified as that of Polyphemus; and
the history of the giant unearthed in the sixteenth century near
Palermo. You know as well as I do, gentlemen, the analysis made at
Lucerne in 1577 of those huge bones which the celebrated Dr. Felix
Plater affirmed to be those of a giant nineteen feet high. I have gone
through the treatises of Cassanion, and all those memoirs, pamphlets,
answers, and rejoinders published respecting the skeleton of
Teutobochus, the invader of Gaul, dug out of a sandpit in the Dauphiné,
in 1613. In the eighteenth century I would have stood up for
Scheuchzer's pre-adamite man against Peter Campet. I have perused a
writing, entitled Gigan—"

Here my uncle's unfortunate infirmity met him—that of being unable in
public to pronounce hard words.

"The pamphlet entitled Gigan—"

He could get no further.

"Giganteo—"

It was not to be done. The unlucky word would not come out. At the
Johannæum there would have been a laugh.

"Gigantosteologie," at last the Professor burst out, between two words
which I shall not record here.

Then rushing on with renewed vigour, and with great animation:

"Yes, gentlemen, I know all these things, and more. I know that Cuvier
and Blumenbach have recognised in these bones nothing more remarkable
than the bones of the mammoth and other mammals of the post-tertiary
period. But in the presence of this specimen to doubt would be to insult
science. There stands the body! You may see it, touch it. It is not a
mere skeleton; it is an entire body, preserved for a purely
anthropological end and purpose."

I was good enough not to contradict this startling assertion.

"If I could only wash it in a solution of sulphuric acid," pursued my
uncle, "I should be able to clear it from all the earthy particles and
the shells which are incrusted about it. But I do not possess that
valuable solvent. Yet, such as it is, the body shall tell us its own
wonderful story."

Here the Professor laid hold of the fossil skeleton, and handled it with
the skill of a dexterous showman.

"You see," he said, "that it is not six feet long, and that we are still
separated by a long interval from the pretended race of giants. As for
the family to which it belongs, it is evidently Caucasian. It is the
white race, our own. The skull of this fossil is a regular oval, or
rather ovoid. It exhibits no prominent cheekbones, no projecting jaws.
It presents no appearance of that prognathism which diminishes the
facial angle.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) Measure that angle.
It is nearly ninety degrees. But I will go further in my deductions, and
I will affirm that this specimen of the human family is of the Japhetic
race, which has since spread from the Indies to the Atlantic. Don't
smile, gentlemen."

Nobody was smiling; but the learned Professor was frequently disturbed
by the broad smiles provoked by his learned eccentricities.

"Yes," he pursued with animation, "this is a fossil man, the
contemporary of the mastodons whose remains fill this amphitheatre. But
if you ask me how he came there, how those strata on which he lay
slipped down into this enormous hollow in the globe, I confess I cannot
answer that question. No doubt in the post-tertiary period considerable
commotions were still disturbing the crust of the earth. The
long-continued cooling of the globe produced chasms, fissures, clefts,
and faults, into which, very probably, portions of the upper earth may
have fallen. I make no rash assertions; but there is the man surrounded
by his own works, by hatchets, by flint arrow-heads, which are the
characteristics of the stone age. And unless he came here, like myself,
as a tourist on a visit and as a pioneer of science, I can entertain no
doubt of the authenticity of his remote origin."

The Professor ceased to speak, and the audience broke out into loud and
unanimous applause. For of course my uncle was right, and wiser men than
his nephew would have had some trouble to refute his statements.

Another remarkable thing. This fossil body was not the only one in this
immense catacomb. We came upon other bodies at every step amongst this
mortal dust, and my uncle might select the most curious of these
specimens to demolish the incredulity of sceptics.

In fact it was a wonderful spectacle, that of these generations of men
and animals commingled in a common cemetery. Then one very serious
question arose presently which we scarcely dared to suggest. Had all
those creatures slided through a great fissure in the crust of the
earth, down to the shores of the Liedenbrock sea, when they were dead
and turning to dust, or had they lived and grown and died here in this
subterranean world under a false sky, just like inhabitants of the upper
earth? Until the present time we had seen alive only marine monsters and
fishes. Might not some living man, some native of the abyss, be yet a
wanderer below on this desert strand?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](jce40.htm#fr_14.md) The facial angle is formed
by two lines, one touching the brow and the front teeth, the other from
the orifice of the ear to the lower line of the nostrils. The greater
this angle, the higher intelligence denoted by the formation of the
skull. Prognathism is that projection of the jaw-bones which sharpens or
lessons this angle, and which is illustrated in the negro countenance
and in the lowest savages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX. Forest Scenery Illuminated by Eletricity](jce41.md)
