[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgr01)  [Next](tgr03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NJ5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Think and Grow Rich*, by Napoleon Hill \[1938\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### TRIBUTES TO THE AUTHOR

### From Great American Leaders

<span class="small">"THINK AND GROW RICH" was 25 years in the making. It
is Napoleon Hill's newest book, based upon his famous Law of Success
Philosophy. His work and writings have been praised by great leaders in
Finance, Education, Politics, Government.</span>

<span id="img_00300"></span> ![Supreme Court of the United States,
Washington D.C.](img/00300.jpg)

Dear Mr. Hill:--

I have now had an opportunity to finish reading your Law of Success
textbooks and I wish to express my appreciation of the splendid work you
have done in the organization of this philosophy.

It would be helpful if every politician in the country would assimilate
and apply the 17 principles upon which your lessons are based. It
contains some very fine material which every leader in every walk of
life should understand.

I am happy to have had the privilege of rendering you some slight
measure of help in the. organization of this splendid course of "common
sense" philosophy.

Sincerely yours

<span id="img_00301"></span> ![Signature of President
Taft](img/00301.jpg)

<span class="small">(Former President and former Chief Justice of the
United States)</span>

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

**KING OF THE 5 AND 10 CENT STORES**

<span class="small">"By applying many of the 17 fundamentals of the Law
of Success philosophy we have built a great chain of successful stores.
I presume it would be no exaggeration of fact if I said that the
Woolworth Building might properly be called a monument to the soundness
of these principles."</span>

F. W. WOOLWORTH

**A GREAT STEAMSHIP MAGNATE**

<span class="small">"I feel greatly indebted for the privilege of
reading your Law of Success. If I had had this philosophy fifty years
ago, I suppose I could have accomplished all that I have done in less
than half the time. I sincerely hope the world will discover and reward
you."</span>

ROBERT DOLLAR

**FAMOUS AMERICAN LABOR LEADER**

<span class="small">"Mastery of the Law of Success philosophy is the
equivalent of an insurance policy against failure."</span>

SAMUEL GOMPERS

**A FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES**

<span class="small">"May I not congratulate you on your persistence. Any
man who devotes that much time . . . must of necessity make discoveries
of great value to others. I am deeply impressed by your interpretation
of the 'Master Mind' principles which you have so clearly
described."</span>

WOODROW WILSON

**A MERCHANT PRINCE**

<span class="small">"I know that your 17 fundamentals of success are
sound because I have been applying them in my business for more than 30
years."</span>

JOHN WANAMAKER

**WORLD'S LARGEST MAKER OF CAMERAS**

"I know that you are doing a world of good with your Law of Success.

I would not care to set a monetary value on this training because it
brings to the student qualities which cannot be measured by money,
alone."

GEORGE EASTMAN

**A NATIONALLY KNOWN BUSINESS CHIEF**

<span class="small">"Whatever success I may have attained I owe,
entirely, to the application of your 17 fundamental principles of the
Law of Success. I believe I have the honor of being your first
student."</span>

WM. WRIGLEY, JR.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tgr03)
