[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw403)  [Next](ataw405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

## CHAPTER IV.

### THE GOD ODIN, WODEN, OR WOTAN.

IN the Scandinavian mythology the chief god was Odin, the Woden, Wotan,
or Wuotan of the Germans. He is represented with many of the attributes
of the Greek god Zeus, and is supposed by some to be identical with him.
He dwelt with the *twelve* Æsir, or gods, upon Asgard, the Norse
Olympus, which arose out of Midgard, a land half-way between the regions
of frost and fire (to wit, in a temperate climate). The Scandinavian
Olympus was probably Atlantis. Odin is represented as a grave-looking
elderly man with a long beard, carrying in his hand a spear, and
accompanied by two dogs and two ravens. He was the father of poetry, and
the inventor of Runic writing.

The Chiapenese of Central America (the people whose language we have
seen furnishing such remarkable resemblances to Hebrew) claim to have
been the first people of the New World. Clavigero tells us ("Hist.
Antiq. del Messico," Eng. trans., 1807, vol. i.) that according to the
traditions of the Chiapenese there was a Votan who was the grandson of
the man who built the ark to save himself and family from the Deluge; he
was one of those who undertook to build the tower that should reach to
heaven., The Lord ordered him to people America. "He came *from the
East*." He brought seven families with him. He had been preceded in
America by two others, Igh and Imox. He built a great city in America
called "Nachan," City of the Serpents (the serpent that tempted Eve was
Nahash), from his own race, which was named Chan, a serpent. This Nachan
is supposed to have been Palenque. The date of

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

his journey is placed in the legends in the year 3000 of the world, and
in the tenth century B.C. He also founded three tributary monarchies,
whose capitals were Tulan, Mayapan, and Chiquimala. He wrote a book
containing a history of his deeds, and proofs that he belonged to the
tribe of Chanes (serpents). He states that "he is the third of the
Votans; that he conducted seven families from Valum-Votan to this
continent, and assigned lands to them; that be determined to travel
until he came to the root of heaven and found his relations, the
Culebres, and made himself known to them; that he accordingly made four
voyages to Chivim; that he arrived in Spain; that he went to Rome; that
he saw the house of God building; that be went by the road which his
brethren, the Culebres, had bored; that he marked it, and that he passed
by the houses of the thirteen Culebres. He relates that, in returning
from one of his voyages, he found seven other families of the Tzequil
nation who had joined the first inhabitants, and recognized in them the
same origin as his own, that is, of the Culebres; he speaks of the place
where they built the first town, which from its founders received the
name of Tzequil; he affirms that, having taught them the refinement of
manners in the use of the table, table-cloths, dishes, basins, cups, and
napkins, they taught him the knowledge of God and his worship; his first
ideas of a king, and obedience to him; that he was chosen captain of all
these united families."

It is probable that Spain and Rome are interpolations. Cabrera claims
that the Votanites were Carthaginians. He thinks the Chivim of Votan
were the Hivim, or Givim, who were descended of Heth, son of Canaan,
Phœnicians; they were the builders of Accaron, Azotus, Ascalon, and
Gaza. The Scriptures refer to them as Hivites (Givim) in Deuteronomy
(chap. ii., verse 32), and Joshua (chap. xiii., verse 4). He claims that
Cadmus and his wife Hermione were of this stock; and according to Ovid
they were metamorphosed into snakes (Culebres). The name Hivites in
Phœnician signifies a snake.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

Votan may not, possibly, have passed into Europe; be may have travelled
altogether in Africa. His singular allusion to "a way which the Culebres
had bored" seems at first inexplicable; but Dr. Livingstone's last
letters, published 8th November, 1869, in the "Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society," mention that "tribes live in underground houses
in Rua. Some excavations are said to be thirty miles long, and have
running rills in them; a whole district can stand a siege in them. The
'writings' therein, I have been told by some of the people, are drawings
of animals, and not letters; otherwise I should have gone to see them.
People very dark, well made, and outer angle of eyes slanting inward."

And Captain Grant, who accompanied Captain Speke in his famous
exploration of the sources of the Nile, tells of a tunnel or subway
under the river Kaoma, on the highway between Loowemba and Marunga, near
Lake Tanganyika. His guide Manua describes it to him:

"I asked Manua if he had ever seen any country resembling it. His reply
was, 'This country reminds me of what I saw in the country to the south
of the Lake Tanganyika, when travelling with an Arab's caravan from
Unjanyembeh. There is a river there called the Kaoma, running into the
lake, the sides of which are similar in precipitousness to the rocks
before us.' I then asked, 'Do the people cross this river in boats?'
'No; they have no boats; and even if they had, the people could not
land, as the sides are too steep: they pass underneath the river by a
natural tunnel, or subway.' He and all his party went through it on
their way from Loowemba to Ooroongoo, and returned by it. He described
its length as having taken them from sunrise till noon to pass through
it, and so high that, if mounted upon camels, they could not touch the
top. Tall reeds, the thickness of a walking-stick, grew inside, the road
was strewed with white pebbles, and so wide--four hundred yards--that
they could see their way tolerably well while passing through it. The
rocks looked as if they had been planed by artificial means. Water never
came through from the river overhead; it was procured by digging wells.
Manua added that the people of Wambweh take shelter in this tunnel, and

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

live there with their families and cattle, when molested by the Watuta,
a warlike race, descended from the Zooloo Kafirs.

But it is interesting to find in this book of Votan, however little
reliance we may place in its dates or details, evidence that there was
actual intercourse between the Old World and the New in remote ages.

Humboldt remarks:

"We have fixed the special attention of our readers upon this Votan, or
Wodan, an American who appears of the same family with the Wods or Odins
of the Goths and of the people of Celtic origin. Since, according to the
learned researches of Sir William Jones, Odin and Buddha are probably
the same person, it is curious to see the names of *Bondvar*,
*Wodansday*, and Votan designating in India, Scandinavia, and in Mexico
the day of a brief period." ("Vues des Cordilleras," p. 148, ed. 1810.)

There are many things to connect the mythology of the Gothic nations
with Atlantis; they had, as we have seen, flood legends; their gods
Krodo and Satar were the Chronos and Saturn of Atlantis; their Baal was
the Bel of the Phœnicians, who were closely connected with Poseidon and
Atlas; and, as we shall see hereafter, their language has a distinct
relationship with the tongues of the Arabians, Cushites, Chaldeans, and
Phœnicians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Pyramid, The Cross, and The Garden of
Eden.](ataw405)
