[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw508)  [Next](ataw510.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

## CHAPTER IX.

### THE ANTIQUITY OF SOME OF OUR GREAT INVENTIONS.

IT may seem like a flight of the imagination to suppose that the
mariner's compass was known to the inhabitants of Atlantis. And yet, if
my readers are satisfied that the Atlantean, were a highly civilized
maritime people, carrying on commerce with regions as far apart as Peru
and Syria, we must conclude that they possessed some means of tracing
their course in the great seas they traversed; and accordingly, when we
proceed to investigate this subject, we find that as far back as we may
go in the study of the ancient races of the world, we find them
possessed of a knowledge of the virtues of the magnetic stone, and in
the habit of utilizing it. The people of Europe, rising a few centuries
since out of a state of semi-barbarism, have been in the habit of
claiming the invention of many things which they simply borrowed from
the older nations. This was the case with the mariner's compass. It was
believed for many years that it was first invented by an Italian named
Amalfi, A.D. 1302. In that interesting work, Goodrich's "Life of
Columbus," we find a curious history of the magnetic compass prior to
that time, from which we collate the following points:

"In A.D. 868 it was employed by the Northmen." ("The Landnamabok," vol.
i., chap. 2.) An Italian poem Of A.D. 1190 refers to it as in use among
the Italian sailors at that date. In the ancient language of the
Hindoos, the Sanscrit--which has been a dead language for twenty-two
hundred years--the

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

magnet was called "the precious stone beloved of Iron." The Talmud
speaks of it as "the stone of attraction;" and it is alluded to in the
early Hebrew prayers as *Kalamitah*, the same name given it by the
Greeks, from the reed upon which the compass floated. The Phœnicians
were familiar with the use of the magnet. At the prow of their vessels
stood the figure of a woman (Astarte) holding a cross in one hand and
pointing the way with the other; the cross represented the compass,
which was a magnetized needle, floating in water crosswise upon a piece
of reed or wood. The cross became the coat of arms of the
Phœnicians--not only, possibly, as we have shown, as a recollection of
the four rivers of Atlantis, but because it represented the secret of
their great sea-voyages, to which they owed their national greatness.
The hyperborean magician, Abaras, carried "a guiding arrow," which
Pythagoras gave him, "in order that it may be useful to him in all
difficulties in his long journey." ("Herodotus," vol. iv., p. 36.)

The magnet was called the "Stone of Hercules." Hercules was the patron
divinity of the Phœnicians. He was, as we have shown elsewhere, one of
the gods of Atlantis--probably one of its great kings and navigators.
The Atlanteans were, as Plato tells us, a maritime, commercial people,
trading up the Mediterranean as far as Egypt and Syria, and across the
Atlantic to "the whole opposite continent that surrounds the sea;" the
Phœnicians, as their successors and descendants, and colonized on the
shores of the Mediterranean, inherited their civilization and their
maritime habits, and with these that invention without which their great
voyages were impossible. From them the magnet passed to the Hindoos, and
from them to the Chinese, who certainly possessed it at an early date.
In the year 2700 B.C. the Emperor Wang-ti placed a magnetic figure with
an extended arm, like the Astarte of the Phœnicians, on the front of
carriages, the arm always turning and pointing to the south, which the
Chinese regarded as the

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

principal pole. (See Goodrich's "Columbus," p. 31, etc.) This
illustration represents one of these chariots:

 

<span id="img_44200"></span> ![](img/44200.jpg)  
CHINESE MAGNETIC CAR.

 

In the seventh century it was used by the navigators of the Baltic Sea
and the German Ocean.

The ancient Egyptians called the loadstone the bone of Haroeri, and iron
the bone of Typhon. Haroeri was the son of Osiris and grandson of Rhea,
a goddess *of the earth*, a queen of Atlantis, and *mother of Poseidon*;
Typhon was a wind-god and an evil genius, but also a son of Rhea, the
earth goddess. Do we find in this curious designation of iron and
loadstone as "bones of the descendants of the earth," an explanation of
that otherwise inexplicable Greek legend about Deucalion "throwing the
bones of the earth behind him, when instantly men rose from the ground,
and the world was repeopled?" Does it mean that by means of the magnet
he sailed, after the Flood, to the European colonies of Atlantis.
already thickly inhabited?

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

A late writer, speaking upon the subject of the loadstone, tells us:

"Hercules, it was said, being once overpowered by the heat of the sun,
drew his bow against that luminary; whereupon the god Phœbus, admiring
his intrepidity, gave him a golden cup, with which he sailed over the
ocean. This cup was the compass, which old writers have called *Lapis
Heracleus*. Pisander says *Oceanus lent him the cup*, and Lucian says it
was a sea-shell. Tradition affirms that the magnet originally was not on
a pivot, but set to float on water in a cup. The old antiquarian is
wildly theoretical on this point, and sees a compass in the Golden
Fleece of Argos, in the oracular needle which Nero worshipped, and in
everything else. Yet undoubtedly there are some curious facts connected
with the matter. Osonius says that Gama and the Portuguese got the
compass from some pirates at the Cape of Good Hope, A.D. 1260. M.
Fauchet, the French antiquarian, finds it plainly alluded to in some old
poem of Brittany belonging to the year A.D. 1180. Paulo Venetus brought
it in the thirteenth century from China, where it was regarded as
oracular. Genebrand says Melvius, a Neapolitan, brought it to Europe in
A.D. 1303. Costa says Gama got it from Mohammedan seamen. But all
nations with whom it was found *associate it with regions where
Heraclean myths prevailed*. And one of the most curious facts is that
the ancient Britons, as the Welsh do to-day, call a pilot *llywydd*
(lode). Lodemanage, in Skinner's 'Etymology,' is the word for the price
paid to a pilot. But whether this famous, and afterward deified, mariner
(Hercules) had a compass or not, we can hardly regard the association of
his name with so many Western monuments as accidental."

Hercules was, as we know, a god of Atlantis, and Oceanos, who lent the
magnetic cup to Hercules, was the Dame by which the Greeks designated
the Atlantic Ocean. And this may be the explanation of the recurrence of
a cup in many antique paintings and statues. Hercules is often
represented with a cup in his hand; we even find the cup upon the handle
of the bronze dagger found in Denmark, and represented in the chapter on
the Bronze Age, in this work. (See [p. 254](ataw308.htm#page_254.md)
*ante*.)

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

So "oracular" an object as this self-moving needle, always pointing to
the north, would doubtless affect vividly the minds of the people, and
appear in their works of art. When Hercules left the coast of Europe to
sail to the island of Erythea in the Atlantic, in the remote west, we
are told, in Greek mythology (Murray, p. 257), that he borrowed "the
cup" of Helios, in (with) which "he was accustomed to sail every night."
Here we seem to have a reference to the magnetic cup used in

 

<span id="img_44400"></span> ![](img/44400.jpg)  
ANCIENT COINS OF TYRE.

 

night sailing; and this is another proof that the use of the magnetic
needle in sea-voyages was associated with the Atlantean gods.

Lucian tells us that a sea-shell often took the place of the cup, as a
vessel in which to hold the water where the needle floated, and hence
upon the ancient coins of Tyre we find a sea-shell represented.

Here, too, we have the Pillars of Hercules, supposed to have been placed
at the mouth of the Mediterranean, and the tree of life or knowledge,
with the serpent twined around it, which appears in Genesis; and in the
combination of the two pillars and the serpent we have, it is said, the
original source of our dollar mark \[$\].

Compare these Phœnician coins with the following representation

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

of a copper coin, two inches in diameter and three lines thick, found
nearly a century ago by Ordonez, at the city of Guatemala. "M. Dupaix
noticed an indication of the use of the compass in the centre of one of
the sides, the figures on the same side representing a kneeling,
bearded, turbaned man between two fierce heads, perhaps of crocodiles,
which appear to defend the entrance to a mountainous and wooded country.
The reverse presents a serpent coiled around a fruit-tree, and an eagle
on a hill." (Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iv., p. 118.) The mountain
leans to one side: it is a "culhuacan," or crooked mountain.

We find in Sanchoniathon's "Legends of the Phœnicians that Ouranus, the
first god of the people of Atlantis, "devised

 

<span id="img_44500"></span> ![](img/44500.jpg)  
COIN FROM CENTRAL AMERICA.

 

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bætulia,
*contriving stones that moved as having life*, which were supposed to
fall from heaven." These stones were probably magnetic loadstones; in
other words, Ouranus, the first god of Atlantis, devised the mariner's
compass.

I find in the "Report of United States Explorations for a Route for a
Pacific Railroad" a description of a New Mexican Indian priest, who
foretells the result of a proposed war by placing a piece of wood in a
bowl of water, and causing it to

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

turn to the right or left, or sink or rise, as he directs it. This is
incomprehensible, unless the wood, like the ancient Chinese compass,
contained a piece of magnetic iron hidden in it, which would be
attracted or repulsed, or even drawn downward, by a piece of iron held
in the hand of the priest, on the outside of the bowl. If so, this trick
was a remembrance of the mariner's compass transmitted from age to age
by the medicine men. The reclining statue of Chac-Mol, of Central
America, holds a bowl or dish upon its breast.

Divination was the *ars Etrusca*. The Etruscans set their temples
squarely with the cardinal points of the compass; so did the Egyptians,
the Mexicans, and *the Mound Builders of America*. Could they have done
this without the magnetic compass?

The Romans and the Persians called the line of the axis of the globe
*cardo*, and it was to *cardo* the needle pointed. Now "*Cardo* was the
name of the mountain on which the human race took refuge from the Deluge
. . . the primitive geographic point for the countries which were the
cradle of the human race." (Urquhart's "Pillars of Hercules," vol. i.,
p. 145.) From this comes our word "cardinal," as the cardinal points.

Navigation.--Navigation was not by any means in a rude state in the
earliest times:

"In the wanderings of the heroes returning from Troy, Aristoricus makes
Menelaus circumnavigate Africa more than 500 years before Neco sailed
from Gadeira to India." ("Cosmos," vol. ii., p. 144.)

"In the tomb of Rameses the Great is a representation of a naval combat
between the Egyptians and some other people, supposed to be the
Phœnicians, whose huge ships are propelled by sails." (Goodrich's
"Columbus," p. 29.)

The proportions of the fastest sailing-vessels of the present day are
about 300 feet long to 50 wide and 30 high; these were precisely the
proportions of Noah's ark--300 cubits long, 50 broad, and 30 high.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

"Hiero of Syracuse built, under the superintendence of Archimedes, a
vessel which consumed in its construction the material for fifty
galleys; it contained galleries, gardens, stables, fish-ponds, mills,
baths, a temple of Venus, and an engine to throw stones three hundred
pounds in weight, and arrows thirty-six feet long. The floors of this
monstrous vessel were inlaid with scenes from Homer's 'Iliad.'"
(*Ibid*., p. 30.)

The fleet of Sesostris consisted of four hundred ships; and when
Semiramis invaded India she was opposed by four thousand vessels.

It is probable that in the earliest times the vessels were sheeted with
metal. A Roman ship of the time of Trajan has been recovered from Lake
Ricciole after 1300 years. The outside was covered with sheets of lead
fastened with small copper nails. Even the use of iron chains in place
of ropes for the anchors was known at an early period. Julius Cæsar
tells us that the galleys of the Veneti were thus equipped. (Goodrich's
"Columbus," p. 31.)

Gunpowder.--It is not impossible that even the invention of gunpowder
may date back to Atlantis. It was certainly known in Europe long before
the time of the German monk, Berthold Schwarz, who is commonly credited
with the invention of it. It was employed in 1257 at the siege of
Niebla, in Spain. It was described in an Arab treatise of the thirteenth
century. In A.D. 811 the Emperor Leo employed fire-arms. "Greek-fire" is
supposed to have been gunpowder mixed with resin or petroleum, and
thrown in the form of fuses and explosive shells. It was introduced from
Egypt A.D. 668. In A.D. 690 the Arabs used fire-arms against Mecca,
bringing the knowledge of them from India. *In A.D. 80 the Chinese
obtained from India a knowledge of gunpowder*. There is reason to
believe that the Carthaginian (Phœnician) general, Hannibal, used
gunpowder in breaking a way for his army over the Alps. The Romans, who
were ignorant of its use, said that Hannibal made his way by making
fires against the rocks, and pouring

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

vinegar and water over the ashes. It is evident that fire and vinegar
would have no effect on masses of the Alps great enough to arrest the
march of an army. Dr. William Maginn has suggested that the wood was
probably burnt by Hannibal to obtain charcoal; and the word which has
been translated "vinegar" probably signified some preparation of nitre
and sulphur, and that Hannibal made gunpowder and blew up the rocks. The
same author suggests that the story of Hannibal breaking loose from the
mountains where he was surrounded on all sides by the Romans, and in
danger of starvation, by fastening firebrands to the horns of two
thousand oxen, and sending them rushing at night among the terrified
Romans, simply refers to the use of rockets. As Maginn well asks, how
could Hannibal be in danger of starvation when he had two thousand oxen
to spare for such an experiment? And why should the veteran Roman troops
have been so terrified and panic-stricken by a lot of cattle with
firebrands on their horns? At the battle of Lake Trasymene, between
Hannibal and Flaminius, we have another curious piece of information
which goes far to confirm the belief that Hannibal was familiar with the
use of gunpowder. In the midst of the battle there was, say the Roman
historians, an "earthquake;" the earth reeled under the feet of the
soldiers, a tremendous crash was heard, a fog or smoke covered the
scene, the earth broke open, and the rocks fell upon the heads of the
Romans. This reads very much as if the Carthaginians had decoyed the
Romans into a pass where they had already planted a mine, and had
exploded it at the proper moment to throw them into a panic. Earthquakes
do not cast rocks up in the air to fall on men's heads!

And that this is not all surmise is shown by the fact that a city of
India, in the time of Alexander the Great, defended itself by the use of
gunpowder: it was said to be a favorite of the gods, because thunder and
lightning came from its walls to resist the attacks of its assailants.

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

As the Hebrews were a branch of the Phœnician race, it is not surprising
that we find some things in their history which look very much like
legends of gunpowder.

When Korah, Dathan, and Abiram led a rebellion against Moses, Moses
separated the faithful from the unfaithful, and thereupon "the ground
clave asunder that was under them: and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained
unto Korah, and all their goods. . . . And there came out a fire from
the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered
incense. . . . But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed
the people of the Lord." (Numb. xvi., 31-41.)

This looks very much as if Moses had blown up the rebels with gunpowder.

Roger Bacon, who himself rediscovered gunpowder, was of opinion that the
event described in Judges vii., where Gideon captured the camp of the
Midianites with the roar of trumpets, the crash caused by the breaking
of innumerable pitchers, and the flash of a multitude of lanterns, had
reference to the use of gunpowder; that the noise made by the breaking
of the pitchers represented the detonation of an explosion, the flame of
the lights the blaze, and the noise of the trumpets the thunder of the
gunpowder. We can understand, in this wise, the results that followed;
but we cannot otherwise understand how the breaking of pitchers, the
flashing of lamps, and the clangor of trumpets would throw an army into
panic, until "every man's sword was set against his fellow, and the host
fled to Beth-shittah;" and this, too, without any attack upon the part
of the Israelites, for "they stood every man in his place around the
camp; and all the host ran and cried and fled."

If it was a miraculous interposition in behalf of the Jews, the Lord
could have scared the Midianites out of their wits without the smashed
pitchers and lanterns; and certain it is

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

the pitchers, and lanterns would not have done the work with out a
miraculous interposition.

Having traced the knowledge of gunpowder back to the most remote times,
and to the different races which were descended from Atlantis, we are
not surprised to find in the legends of Greek mythology events described
which are only explicable by supposing that the Atlanteans possessed the
secret of this powerful explosive.

A rebellion sprang up in Atlantis (see Murray's "Manual of Mythology,"
p. .30) against Zeus; it is known in mythology as the "War of the
Titans:"

"The struggle lasted many years, all the might which the Olympians could
bring to bear being useless, until, on the advice of Gæa, Zeus set free
the Kyklopes and the Hekatoncheires" (that is, brought the ships into
play), "of whom the former fashioned thunder-bolts for him, while the
latter advanced on his side with force equal to the shock of an
earthquake. The earth trembled down to lowest Tartarus as Zeus now
appeared with his terrible weapon and new allies. Old Chaos thought his
hour had come, as from a continuous blaze of thunder-bolts the earth
took fire, and the waters seethed in the sea. The rebels were partly
slain or consumed, and partly hurled into deep chasms, with rocks and
hills reeling after them."

Do not these words picture the explosion of a mine with a "force equal
to the shock of an earthquake?"

We have already shown that the Kyklopes and Hekatoncheires were probably
great war-ships, armed with some explosive material in the nature of
gunpowder.

Zeus, the king of Atlantis, was known as "the thunderer," and was
represented armed with thunder-bolts.

Some ancient nation must, in the most remote ages, have invented
gunpowder; and is it unreasonable to attribute it to that "great
original race" rather than to any one people of their posterity, who
seem to have borrowed all the other arts from them; and who, during many
thousands of years, did

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

not add a single new invention to the list they received from Atlantis?

Iron.--have seen that the Greek mythological legends asserted that
before the submergence of the great race over whom their gods reigned
there had been not only an Age of Bronze but an Age of Iron. This metal
was known to the Egyptians in the earliest ages; fragments of iron have
been found in the oldest pyramids. The Iron Age in Northern Europe far
antedated intercourse with the Greeks or Romans. In the mounds of the
Mississippi Valley, as I have shown, the remains of iron implements have
been found. In the "Mercurio Peruano" (tom. i., p. 201, 1791) it is
stated that "anciently the Peruvian sovereigns worked magnificent iron
mines at Ancoriames, on the west shore of Lake Titicaca." "It is
remarkable," says Molina, "that iron, which has been thought unknown to
the ancient Americans, had particular names in some of their tongues."
In official Peruvian it was called *quillay*, and in Chilian *panilic*.
The Mound Builders fashioned implements out of meteoric iron. (Foster's
"Prehistoric Races," p. 333.)

As we find this metal known to man in the earliest ages on both sides of
the Atlantic, the presumption is very strong that it was borrowed by the
nations, east and west, from Atlantis.

Paper.--The same argument holds good as to paper. The oldest Egyptian
monuments contain pictures of the papyrus roll; while in Mexico, as I
have shown, a beautiful paper was manufactured and formed into books
shaped like our own. In Peru a paper was made of plantain leaves, and
books were common in the earlier ages. Humboldt mentions books of
hieroglyphical writings among the Panoes, which were "bundles of their
paper resembling our volumes in quarto."

Silk Manufacture.--The manufacture of a woven fabric of great beauty out
of the delicate fibre of the egg-cocoon of a worm could only have
originated among a people who had attained the highest degree of
civilization; it implies the

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

art of weaving by delicate instruments, a dense population, a patient,
skilful, artistic people, a sense of the beautiful, and a wealthy and
luxurious class to purchase such costly fabrics.

We trace it back to the most remote ages. In the introduction to the
"History of Hindostan," or rather of the Mohammedan Dynasties, by
Mohammed Cassim, it is stated that in the year 3870 B.C. an Indian king
sent various silk stuffs as a present to the King of Persia. The art of
making silk was known in China more than two thousand six hundred years
before the Christian era, at the time when we find them first possessed
of civilization. The Phœnicians dealt in silks in the most remote past;
they imported them from India and sold them along the shores of the
Mediterranean. It is probable that the Egyptians understood and
practised the art of manufacturing silk. It was woven in the island of
Cos in the time of Aristotle. The "Babylonish garment" referred to in
Joshua (chap. vii., 21), and for secreting which Achan lost his life,
was probably a garment of silk; it was rated above silver and gold in
value.

It is not a violent presumption to suppose that an art known to the
Hindoos 3870 B.C., and to the Chinese and Phœnicians at the very
beginning of their history--an art so curious, so extraordinary--may
have dated back to Atlantean times.

Civil Government.--Mr. Baldwin shows ("Prehistoric Nations," p. 114)
that the Cushites, the successors of the Atlanteans, whose very ancient
empire extended from Spain to Syria, were the first to establish
independent municipal republics, with the right of the people to govern
themselves; and that this system was perpetuated in the great Phœnician
communities; in "the fierce democracies" of ancient Greece; in the
"village republics" of the African Berbers and the Hindoos; in the "free
cities" of the Middle Ages in Europe; and in the independent governments
of the Basques, which continued down to our own day. The Cushite state
was an aggregation

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

of municipalities, each possessing the right of self-government, but
subject within prescribed limits to a general authority; in other words,
it was precisely the form of government possessed to-day by the United
States. It is a surprising thought that the perfection of modern
government may be another perpetuation of Atlantean civilization.

Agriculture.--The Greek traditions of "the golden apples of the
Hesperides" and "the golden fleece" point to Atlantis. The allusions to
the golden apples indicate that tradition regarded the "Islands of the
Blessed" in the Atlantic Ocean as a place of orchards. And when we turn
to Egypt we find that in the remotest times many of our modern garden
and field plants were there cultivated. When the Israelites murmured in
the wilderness against Moses, they cried out (Numb., chap. xi., 4, 5),
"Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish which we did eat
in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the Melons, and the leeks, and the
onions, and the garlic." The Egyptians also cultivated wheat, barley,
oats, flax, hemp, etc. In fact, if we were to take away from civilized
man the domestic animals, the cereals, and the field and garden
vegetables possessed by the Egyptians at the very dawn of history, there
would be very little left for the granaries or the tables of the world.

Astronomy.--The knowledge of the ancients as to astronomy was great and
accurate. Callisthenes, who accompanied Alexander the Great to Babylon,
sent to Aristotle a series of Chaldean astronomical observations which
he found preserved there, recorded on tablets of baked clay, and
extending back as far as 2234 B.C. Humboldt says, "The Chaldeans knew
the mean motions of the moon with an exactness which induced the Greek
astronomers to use their calculations for the foundation of a lunar
theory." The Chaldeans knew the true nature of comets, and could
foretell their reappearance. "A lens of considerable power was found in
the ruins of Babylon; it was an inch and a half in diameter and
nine-tenths of an inch

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

thick." (Layard's "Nineveh and Babylon," pp. 16,17.) Nero used optical
glasses when be watched the fights of the gladiators; they are supposed
to have come from Egypt and the East. Plutarch speaks of optical
instruments used by Archimedes "to manifest to the eye the largeness of
the sun." "There are actual astronomical calculations in existence, with
calendars formed upon them, which eminent astronomers of England and
France admit to be genuine and true, and which carry back the antiquity
of the science of astronomy, together with the constellations, to within
a few years of the Deluge, even on the longer chronology of the
Septuagint." ("The Miracle in Stone," p. 142.) Josephus attributes the
invention of the constellations to the family of the antediluvian Seth,
the son of Adam, while Origen affirms that it was asserted in the Book
of Enoch that in the time of that patriarch the constellations were
already divided and named. The Greeks associated the origin of astronomy
with Atlas and Hercules, Atlantean kings or heroes. The Egyptians
regarded Taut (At?) or Thoth, or *At*-hotes, as the originator of both
astronomy and the alphabet; doubtless he represented a civilized people,
by whom their country was originally colonized. Bailly and others assert
that astronomy "must have been established when the summer solstice was
in the first degree of Virgo, and that the solar and lunar zodiacs were
of similar antiquity, which would be about four thousand years before,
the Christian era. They suppose the originators to have lived in about
the *fortieth degree of north latitude*, and to have been a
highly-civilized people." It will be remembered that the fortieth degree
of north latitude passed through Atlantis. Plato knew (" Dialogues,
Phædo," 108) that the earth "is a body in the centre of the heavens"
held in equipoise. He speaks of it as a "round body," a "globe;" he even
understood that it revolved on its axis, and that these revolutions
produced day and night. He says--"Dialogues, Timæus"--"The earth
circling around the pole (which is extended through the universe) be
made to be

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

the artificer of night and day." All this Greek learning was probably
drawn from the Egyptians.

Only among the Atlanteans in Europe and America do we find traditions
preserved as to the origin of all the principal inventions which have
raised man from a savage to a civilized condition. We can give in part
the very names of the inventors.

Starting with the Chippeway legends, and following with the Bible and
Phœnician records, we make a table like the appended:

<table data-border="CELLSPACING=1" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p><em>The Invention or Discovery.</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><em></em>
<p>The Race.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><em></em>
<p>The Inventors.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Fire</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Atlantean</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Phos, Phur, and Phlox.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The bow and arrow</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Chippeway</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Manaboshu.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The use of flint</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The use of copper</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The manufacture of bricks</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Atlantean</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Autochthon and Technites.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Agriculture and hunting</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Argos and Agrotes.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Village life, and the rearing of flocks</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Amynos and Magos.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The use of salt</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Misor and Sydyk.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The use of letters</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Taautos, or Taut.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Navigation</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The Cabiri, or Corybantes.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The art of music</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Hebrew</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Jubal.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Metallurgy, and the use of iron</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Tubal-cain.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The syrinx</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Greek</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Pan.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The lyre</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Hermes.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

We cannot consider all these evidences of the vast antiquity of the
great inventions upon which our civilization mainly rests, including the
art of writing, which, as I have shown, dates back far beyond the
beginning of history; we cannot remember that the origin of all the
great food-plants, such as wheat, oats, barley, rye, and maize, is lost
in the remote past; and that all the domesticated animals, the horse,
the ass, the ox, the sheep, the goat, and the hog had been reduced to
subjection to man in ages long previous to written history, without
having the conclusion forced upon us irresistibly that beyond Egypt and
Greece, beyond Chaldea and China, there existed a mighty civilization,
of which these states were but the broken fragments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: The Aryan Colonies From Atlantis.](ataw510.md)
