[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw402)  [Next](ataw404.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

## CHAPTER III.

### THE GODS OF THE PHŒNICIANS ALSO KINGS OF ATLANTIS.

NOT alone were the gods of the Greeks the deified kings of Atlantis, but
we find that the mythology of the Phœnicians was drawn from the same
source.

For instance, we find in the Phœnician cosmogony that the Titans
(Rephaim) derive their origin from the Phœnician gods Agrus and Agrotus.
This connects the Phœnicians with that island in the remote west, in the
midst of ocean, where, according to the Greeks, the Titans dwelt.

According to Sanchoniathon, *Ouranos* was the son of Autochthon, and,
according to Plato, Autochthon was one of the ten kings of Atlantis. He
married his sister Ge. He is the Uranos of the Greeks, who was the son
of *Gæa* (the earth), whom he married. The Phœnicians tell us, "Ouranos
had by Ge four sons: Ilus (El), who is called Chronos, and Betylus
(Beth-El), and Dagon, which signifies bread-corn, and Atlas (Tammuz?)."
Here, again, we have the names of two other kings of Atlantis. These
four sons probably represented four races, the offspring of the earth.
The Greek Uranos was the father of Chronos, and the ancestor of Atlas.
The Phœnician god Ouranos had a great many other wives: his wife Ge was
jealous; they quarrelled, and he attempted to kill the children he had
by her. This is the legend which the Greeks told of Zeus and Juno. In
the Phœnician mythology Chronos raised a rebellion against Ouranos, and,
after a great battle, dethroned him. In the Greek legends it is Zeus who
attacks and overthrows his father, Chronos. Ouranos had a daughter
called Astarte

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Ashtoreth),
another called Rhea. "And Dagon, after he had found out bread-corn and
the plough, was called Zeus-Arotrius."

We find also, in the Phœnician legends, mention made of Poseidon,
founder and king of Atlantis.

Chronos gave Attica to his daughter Athena, as in the Greek legends. In
a time of plague be sacrificed his son to Ouranos, and "circumcised
himself, and compelled his allies to do the same thing." It would thus
appear that this singular rite, practised as we have seen by the
Atlantidæ of the Old and New Worlds, the Egyptians, the Phœnicians, the
Hebrews, the Ethiopians, the Mexicans, and the red men of America, dates
back, as we might have expected, to Atlantis.

"Chronos visits the different regions of the habitable world."

He gave Egypt as a kingdom to the god Taaut, who had invented the
alphabet. The Egyptians called him Thoth, and he was represented among
them as "the god of letters, the clerk of the under-world," bearing a
tablet, pen, and palm-branch.

This not only connects the Phœnicians with Atlantis, but shows the
relations of Egyptian civilization to both Atlantis and the Phœnicians.

There can be no doubt that the royal personages who formed the gods of
Greece were also the gods of the Phœnicians. We have seen the Autochthon
of Plato reappearing in the Autochthon of the Phœnicians; the Atlas of
Plato in the Atlas of the Phœnicians; the Poseidon of Plato in the
Poseidon of the Phœnicians; while the kings Mestor and Mneseus of Plato
are probably the gods Misor and Amynus of the Phœnicians.

Sanchoniathon tells us, after narrating all the discoveries by which the
people advanced to civilization, that the Cabiri set down their records
of the past by the command of the god Taaut, "and they delivered them to
their successors and to foreigners, of whom one was Isiris (Osiris), the
inventor of the three letters, the brother of Chua, who is called the
first Phœnician."

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Lenormant and
Chevallier, "Ancient History of the East," vol. ii., p. 228.)

This would show that the first Phœnician came long after this line of
the kings or gods, and that he was a foreigner, as compared with them;
and, therefore, that it could not have been the Phœnicians proper who
made the several inventions narrated by Sanchoniathon, but some other
race, from whom the Phœnicians might have been descended.

And in the delivery of their records to the foreigner Osiris, the god of
Egypt, we have another evidence that Egypt derived her civilization from
Atlantis.

Max Müller says:

"The Semitic languages also are all varieties of one form of speech.
Though we do not know that primitive language from which the Semitic
dialects diverged, yet we know that at one time such language must have
existed. . . . We cannot derive Hebrew from Sanscrit, or Sanscrit from
Hebrew; but we can well understand bow both may have proceeded from one
common source. They are both channels supplied from one river, and they
carry, though not always on the surface, floating materials of language
which challenge comparison, and have already yielded satisfactory
results to careful analyzers." ("Outlines of Philosophy of History,"
vol. i., p. 475.)

There was an ancient tradition among the Persians that the Phœnicians
migrated from the shores of the Erythræan Sea, and this has been
supposed to mean the Persian Gulf; but there was a very old city of
Erythia, in utter ruin in the time of Strabo, which was built in some
ancient age, long before the founding of Gades, near the site of that
town, on the Atlantic coast of Spain. May not this town of Erythia have
given its name to the adjacent sea? And this may have been the
starting-point of the Phœnicians in their European migrations. It would
even appear that there was an island of Erythea. In the Greek mythology
the tenth labor of Hercules consisted in driving away the cattle of
Geryon, who lived in the island of Erythea, "an island somewhere in the
remote west, *beyond the* 

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Pillars of
Hercules*." (Murray's "Mythology," p. 257.) Hercules stole the cattle
from this remote oceanic island, and, returning drove them "through
Iberia, Gaul, over the Alps, and through Italy." (*Ibid*.) It is
probable that a people emigrating from the Erythræan Sea, that is, from
the Atlantic, first gave their name to a town on the coast of Spain, and
at a later date to the Persian Gulf--as we have seen the name of York
carried from England to the banks of the Hudson, and then to the Arctic
Circle.

The builders of the Central American cities are reported to have been a
bearded race. The Phœnicians, in common with the Indians, practised
human sacrifices to a great extent; they worshipped fire and water,
adopted the names of the animals whose skins they wore--that is to say,
they had the totemic system--telegraphed by means of fires, poisoned
their arrows, offered peace before beginning battle, and used drums.
(Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. v., p. 77.)

The extent of country covered by the commerce of the Phœnicians
represents to some degree the area of the old Atlantean Empire. Their
colonies and trading-posts extended east and west from the shores of the
Black Sea, through the Mediterranean to the west coast of Africa and of
Spain, and around to Ireland and England; while from north to south they
ranged from the Baltic to the Persian Gulf. They touched every point
where civilization in later ages made its appearance. Strabo estimated
that they had three hundred cities along the west coast of Africa. When
Columbus sailed to discover a new world, or re-discover an old one, he
took his departure from a Phœnician seaport, founded by that great race
two thousand five hundred years previously. This Atlantean sailor, with
his Phœnician features, sailing from an Atlantean port, simply re-opened
the path of commerce and colonization which had been closed when Plato's
island sunk in the sea. And it is a curious fact that Columbus had the
antediluvian world in his mind's eye even then, for when he reached the
mouth of

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

the Orinoco he thought it was the river Gihon, that flowed out of
Paradise, and he wrote home to Spain, "There are here great indications
suggesting the proximity of the earthly Paradise, for not only does it
correspond in mathematical position with the opinions of the holy and
learned theologians, but all other signs concur to make it probable."

Sanchoniathon claims that the learning of Egypt, Greece, and Judæa was
derived from the Phœnicians. It would appear probable that, while other
races represent the conquests or colonizations of Atlantis, the
Phœnicians succeeded to their arts, sciences, and especially their
commercial supremacy; and hence the close resemblances which we have
found to exist between the Hebrews, a branch of the Phœnician stock, and
the people of America.

Upon the Syrian sea the people live  
Who style themselves Phœnicians. . . .  
These were *the first great founders of the world*--  
Founders of cities and of mighty states--  
Who showed a path through seas before unknown.  
In the first ages, when the sons of men  
Knew not which way to turn them, they assigned  
To each his first department; they bestowed  
Of land a portion and of sea a lot,  
And sent each wandering tribe far off to share  
A different soil and climate. Hence arose  
The great diversity, so plainly seen,  
'Mid nations widely severed.

Dyonysius of Susiana, A.D. 3,

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The God Odin, Woden, or Wotan.](ataw404.md)
