[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ataw307)  [Next](ataw309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0020ML528/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantis, the Antediluvian World*, by Ignatius Donnelly, \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

## CHAPTER VIII.

### THE BRONZE AGE IN EUROPE.

THERE exist in Europe the evidences of three different ages of human
development:

1\. The Stone Age, which dates back to a vast antiquity. It is
subdivided into two periods: an age of rough stone implements; and a
later age, when these implements were ground smooth and made in improved
forms.

2\. The Bronze Age, when the great mass of implements were manufactured
of a compound metal, consisting of about nine parts of copper and one
part of tin.

3\. An age when iron superseded bronze for weapons and cutting tools,
although bronze still remained in use for ornaments. This age continued
down to what we call the Historical Period, and embraces our present
civilization; its more ancient remains are mixed with coins of the
Gauls, Greeks, and Romans.

The Bronze Period has been one of the perplexing problems of European
scientists. Articles of bronze are found over nearly all that continent,
but in especial abundance in Ireland and Scandinavia. They indicate very
considerable refinement and civilization upon the part of the people who
made them; and a wide diversity of opinion has prevailed as to who that
people were and where they dwelt.

In the first place, it was observed that the age of bronze (a compound
of copper and tin) must, in the natural order of things, have been
preceded by an age when copper and tin were used separately, before the
ancient metallurgists had discovered

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

the art of combining them, and yet in Europe the remains of no such age
have been found. Sir John Lubbock says ("Prehistoric Times," p. 59),
"The absence of implements made either of copper or tin seems to me to
indicate that *the art of making bronze was introduced into, not
invented in, Europe*." The absence of articles of copper is especially
marked, nearly all the European specimens of copper implements have been
found in Ireland; and yet out of twelve hundred and eighty-three
articles of the Bronze Age, in the great museum at Dublin, only thirty
celts and one sword-blade are said to be made of pure copper; and even
as to some of these there seems to be a question.

Where on the face of the earth are we to find a Copper Age? Is it in the
barbaric depths of that Asia out of whose uncivilized tribes all
civilization is said to have issued? By no means. Again we are compelled
to turn to the West. In America, from Bolivia to Lake Superior, we find
everywhere the traces of a long-enduring Copper Age; bronze existed, it
is true, in Mexico, but it held the same relation to the copper as the
copper held to the bronze in Europe--it was the exception as against the
rule. And among the Chippeways of the shores of Lake Superior, *and
among them alone*, we find any traditions of the origin of the
manufacture of copper implements; and on the shores of that lake we find
pure copper, out of which the first metal tools were probably hammered
before man had learned to reduce the ore or run the metal into moulds.
And on the shores of this same American lake we find the ancient mines
from which some people, thousands of years ago, derived their supplies
of copper.

Sir W. R. Wilde says, "It is remarkable that so few antique copper
implements have been found (in Europe), although a knowledge of that
metal must have been the preliminary stage in the manufacture of
bronze." He thinks that this may be accounted for by supposing that "but
a short time elapsed between the knowledge of smelting and casting
copper ore

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

 

<span id="img_23900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/23900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23900.jpg)</span>  
IMPLEMENTS AND ORNAMENTS OF THE BRONZE AGE.

 

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

and the introduction of tin, and the subsequent manufacture and use of
bronze."

But here we have in America the evidence that thousands of years must
have elapsed during which copper was used alone, before it was
discovered that by adding one-tenth part of tin it gave a harder edge,
and produced a superior metal.

The Bronze Age cannot be attributed to the Roman civilization. Sir John
Lubbock shows ("Prehistoric Times," p. 21) that bronze weapons have
never been found associated with Roman coins or pottery, or other
remains of the Roman Period; that bronze articles have been found in the
greatest abundance in countries like Ireland and Denmark, which were
never invaded by Roman armies; and that the character of the
ornamentation of the works of bronze is not Roman in character, and that
the Roman bronze contained a large proportion of lead, which is never
the case in that of the Bronze Age.

It has been customary to assume that the Bronze Age was due to the
Phœnicians, but of late the highest authorities have taken issue with
this opinion. Sir John Lubbock (*Ibid*., p. 73) gives the following
reasons why the Phœnicians could not have been the authors of the Bronze
Age: First, the ornamentation is different. In the Bronze Age "this
always consists of geometrical figures, and we rarely, if ever, find
upon them representations of animals and plants, while on the ornamented
shields, etc., described by Homer, as well as in the decoration of
Solomon's Temple, animals and plants were abundantly represented." The
cuts on p. 242 will show the character of the ornamentation of the
Bronze Age. In the next place, the form of burial is different in the
Bronze Age from that of the Phœnicians. "In the third place, the
Phœnicians, so far as we know them, were well acquainted with the use of
iron; in Homer we find the warriors already armed with iron weapons, and
the tools used in preparing the materials for Solomon's Temple were of
this metal."

This view is also held by M. de Fallenberg, in the "Bulletin

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

 

<span id="img_24200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/24200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24200.jpg)</span>  
ORNAMENTS OF THE BRONZE AGE.

 

de la Société des Sciences" of Berne. (See "Smithsonian Rep.," 1865-66,
p. 383.) He says,

"It seems surprising that the nearest neighbors of the Phœnicians--the
Greeks, the Egyptians, the Etruscans, and the Romans--should have
manufactured *plumbiferous* bronzes, while

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

the Phœnicians carried to the people of the North only pure bronzes
without the alloy of lead. If the civilized people of the Mediterranean
added lead to their bronzes, it can scarcely be doubted that the
calculating Phœnicians would have done as much, and, at least, with
distant and half-civilized tribes, have replaced the more costly tin by
the cheaper metal. . . . On the whole, then, I consider that the first
knowledge of bronze may have been conveyed to the populations of the
period tinder review not only by the Phœnicians, but by other civilized
people dwelling more to the south-east."

Professor E. Desor, in his work on the "Lacustrian Constructions of the
Lake of Neuchatel," says,

"The Phœnicians certainly knew the use of iron, and it can scarcely be
conceived why they should have excluded it from their commerce on the
Scandinavian coasts. . . . The Etruscans, moreover, were acquainted with
the use of iron as well as the Phœnicians, and it has already been seen
that the composition of their bronzes is different, since it contains
lead, which is entirely a stranger to our bronze epoch. . . . We must
look, then, *beyond* both the Etruscans and Phœnicians in attempting to
identify the commerce of the Bronze Age of our palafittes. It will be
the province of the historian to inquire whether, exclusive of
Phœnicians and Carthaginians, there may not have been some maritime and
commercial people who carried on a traffic through the ports of Liguria
with the populations of the age of bronze of the lakes of Italy *before
the discovery of iron*. We may remark, in passing, that there is nothing
to prove that the Phœnicians were the first navigators. History, on the
Contrary, positively mentions prisoners, under the name of Tokhari, who
were vanquished in a naval battle fought by Rhamses III. in the
thirteenth century before our era, and whose physiognomy, according to
Morton, would indicate the Celtic type. Now there is room to suppose
that if these Tokhari were energetic enough to measure their strength on
the sea with one of the powerful kings of Egypt, they must, with
stronger reason, have been in a condition to carry on a commerce along
the coasts of the Mediterranean, and perhaps of the Atlantic. If such a
commerce really existed before the time of the Phœnicians, it would not
be limited to the southern slope of the Alps; it

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

would have extended also to the people of the age of bronze in
Switzerland. The introduction of bronze would thus ascend to a very high
antiquity, doubtless beyond the limits of the most ancient European
races."

For the merchants of the Bronze Age we must look beyond even the
Tokhari, who were contemporaries of the Phœnicians.

 

<span id="img_24400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/24400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24400.jpg)</span>  
CELTIC WARRIOR, FROM EGYPTIAN MONUMENTS.

 

The Tokhari, we have seen, are represented as taken prisoners, in a
sea-fight with Rhamses III., of the twentieth dynasty, about the
thirteenth century B.C. They are probably the *Tochari* of Strabo. The
accompanying figure represents one of these people as they appear upon
the Egyptian monuments. (See Nott and Gliddon's "Types of Mankind," p.
108.) Here we have, not an inhabitant of Atlantis, but probably a
representative of one of the mixed races that sprung from its colonies.

Dr. Morton thinks these people, as painted on the Egyptian monuments, to
have "strong Celtic features. Those familiar with the Scotch Highlanders
may recognize a speaking likeness."

It is at least interesting to have a portrait of one of the daring race
who more than three thousand years ago left the west of Europe in their
ships to attack the mighty power of Egypt.

They were troublesome to the nations of the East for many centuries; for
in 700 B.C. we find them depicted on the Assyrian monuments. This figure
represents one of the Tokhari of the time of Sennacherib. It will be
observed that the headdress (apparently of feathers) is the same in both
portraits, al, though separated by a period of six hundred years.

It is more reasonable to suppose that the authors of the

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bronze Age of
Europe were the people described by Plato, who were workers in metal,
who were highly civilized, who preceded in time all the nations which
wecall ancient. It was this people who passed through an age of copper
before they reached the age of bronze, and whose colonies in America
represented this older form of metallurgy as it existed for many
generations.

 

<span id="img_24500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/24500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24500.jpg)</span>  
CELTIC WARRIOR, FROM ASSYRIAN MONUMENTS.

 

Professor Desor says:

"We are asked if the preparation of bronze was not an indigenous
invention which had originated on the slopes of the Alps? . . . In this
idea we acquiesced for a moment. But we are met by the objection that,
if this were so, the natives, like the ancient tribes of America, would
have commenced by manufacturing utensils of *copper*; yet thus far no
utensils of this metal have been found except a few in the strand of
Lake Garda. The great majority of metallic objects is of bronze, which
necessitated the employment of tin, and this could not be obtained
except by commerce, inasmuch as it is a stranger to the Alps. It would
appear, therefore, more natural to admit that the art of combining tin
with copper--in other words, *that the manufacture of bronze--was of
foreign importation*." He then shows that, although copper ores are
found in the Alps, the probability is that even "the copper also was of
foreign importation. Now, in view of the prodigious quantity of bronze
manufactured at that epoch, this single branch of commerce must itself
have *necessitated the most incessant commercial communications*."

And as this commerce could not, as we have seen, have been carried on by
the Romans, Greeks, Etruscans, or Phœnicians,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

because their civilizations flourished during the Iron Age, to which
this age of bronze was anterior, where then are we to look for a great
maritime and commercial people, who carried vast quantities of copper,
tin, and bronze (unalloyed by the lead of the south of Europe) to
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Ireland, England, France, Spain, Switzerland,
and Italy? Where can we find them save in that people of Atlantis, whose
ships, docks, canals, and commerce provoked the astonishment of the
ancient Egyptians, as recorded by Plato. The Toltec root for water is
*Atl*; the Peruvian word for copper is *Anti* (from which, probably, the
Andes derived their name, as there was a province of Anti on their
slopes): may it not be that the name of Atlantis is derived from these
originals, and signified the copper island, or the copper mountains in
the sea? And from these came the thousands of tons of copper and tin
that must, during the Bronze Age, have been introduced into Europe?
There are no ancient works to indicate that the tin mines of Cornwall
were worked for any length of time in the early days (see "Prehistoric
Times," p. 74). Morlot has pointed out that the bronze implements of
Hallstadt, in Austria, were of foreign origin, because they contain no
lead or silver.

Or, if we are to seek for the source of the vast amount of copper
brought into Europe somewhere else than in Atlantis, may it not be that
these supplies were drawn in large part from the shores of Lake Superior
in America? The mining operations of some ancient people were there
carried on upon a gigantic scale, not only along the shores of the lake
but even far out upon its islands. At Isle Royale vast works were found,
reaching to a depth of sixty feet; great intelligence was shown in
following up the richest veins even when interrupted; the excavations
were drained by underground drains. On three sections of land on this
island the amount of mining exceeded that mined in twenty years in one
of our largest mines, with a numerous force constantly employed. In one
place the excavations extended in a nearly continuous line for two
miles. No

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

remains of the dead and no mounds are found near these mines: it would
seem, therefore, that the miners came from a distance, and carried their
dead back with them. Henry Gillman ("Smithsonian Rep.," 1873, p. 387)
supposes that the curious so-called "Garden Beds" of Michigan were the
fields from which they drew their supplies of food. He adds,

"The discoveries in Isle Royale throw a new light on the character of
the 'Mound Builders,' giving us a totally distinct conception of them,
and dignifying them with something of the prowess and spirit of
adventure which we associate with the higher races. The copper, the
result of their mining, to be available, must, in all probability, have
been conveyed in vessels, great or small, across a treacherous and
stormy sea, whose dangers are formidable to us now, being dreaded even
by our largest craft, and often proving their destruction. Leaving their
homes, those men dared to face the unknown, to brave the hardships and
perils of the deep and of the wilderness, actuated by an ambition which
we to-day would not be ashamed to acknowledge."

Such vast works in so remote a land must have been inspired by the
commercial necessities of some great civilization; and why not by that
ancient and mighty people who covered Europe, Asia, and Africa with
their manufactures of bronze--and who possessed, as Plato tells us,
enormous fleets trading to all parts of the inhabited world--whose
cities roared with the continual tumult of traffic, whose dominion
extended to Italy and Egypt, and who held parts of "the great opposite
continent" of America under their control? A continuous water-way led,
from the island of Atlantis to the Gulf of Mexico, and thence up the
Mississippi River and its tributaries almost to these very mines of Lake
Superior.

Arthur Mitchell says ("The Past in the Present," p. 132),

"The discovery of bronze, and the knowledge of how to make it, may, as a
mere intellectual effort, be regarded as rather above than below the
effort which is involved in the discovery and use of iron. As regards
bronze, there is first the discovery

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

of copper, and the way of getting it from its ore; then the discovery of
tin, and the way to get it from its ore; and then the further discovery
that, by an admixture of tin with copper in proper proportions, an alloy
with the qualities of a hard metal can be produced. It is surely no
mistake to say that there goes quite as much thinking to this as to the
getting of iron from its ore, and the conversion of that iron into
steel. There is a considerable leap from stone to bronze, but the leap
from bronze to iron is comparatively small. . . . It seems highly
improbable, if not altogether absurd, that the human mind, at some
particular stage of its development, should here, there, and
everywhere--independently, and as the result of reaching that
stage--discover that an alloy of copper and tin yields a hard metal
useful in the manufacture of tools and weapons. There is nothing
analogous to such an occurrence in the known history of human progress.
It is infinitely more probable that bronze was discovered in one or more
centres by one or more men, and that its first use was solely in such
centre or centres. That the invention should then be perfected, and its
various applications found out, and that it should thereafter spread
more or less broadly over the face of the earth, is a thing easily
understood."

We will find the knowledge of bronze wherever the colonies of Atlantis
extended, and nowhere else; and Plato tells us that the people of
Atlantis possessed and used that metal.

The indications are that the Bronze Age represents the coming in of a
new people--a civilized people. With that era, it is believed, appears
in Europe for the first time the domesticated animals-the horse, the ox,
the sheep, the goat, and the hog. (Morlot, "Smithsonian Rep.," 1860, p.
311.) It was a small race, with very small hands; this is shown in the
size of the sword-hilts: they are not large enough to be used by the
present races of Europe. They were a race with long skulls, as
contradistinguished. from the round heads of the Stone Period. The
drawings on the following page represent the types of the two races.

This people must have sent out colonies to the shores of France, Spain,
Italy, Ireland, Denmark, and Norway, who bore

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

 

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p><span id="img_24900"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/24900.jpg"><img src="tn/24900.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
A SKULL OF THE AGE OF STONE, DENMARK (¼ NATURAL SIZE).</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p><span id="img_24901"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/24901.jpg"><img src="tn/24901.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
A SKULL OF THE EARLIEST TIMES OF THE AGE OF IRON, DEMARK (¼ NATURAL SIZE).</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

with them the arts and implements of civilized life. They raised crops
of grain, as is proved by the bronze sickles found in different parts of
Europe.

It is not even certain that their explorations did not reach to Iceland.
Says Humboldt,

"When the Northmen first landed in Iceland (A.D. 875), although the
country was uninhabited, they found there Irish books, mass-bells, and
other objects which had been left behind by earlier visitors, called
Papar; these papæ (fathers) were the clerici of Dicuil. If, then, as we
may suppose from the testimony here referred to, these objects belonged
to Irish monks (papar), who had come from the Faroe Islands, why should
they have been termed in the native sagas 'West men' (Vestmen), '*who
had come over the sea from the westward*' (kommer til vestan um haf)?"
(Humboldt's "Cosmos," vol. ii., 238.)

If they came "from the West" they could not have come from Ireland; and
the Scandinavians may easily have mistaken Atlantean books and bells for
Irish books and mass-bells. They do not say that there were any
evidences that these relics belonged to a people who had recently
visited the island; and, as they found the island uninhabited, it would
be impossible for them to tell how many years or centuries had elapsed
since the books and bells were left there.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

The fact that the implements of the Bronze Age came from some common
centre, and did not originate independently in different countries, is
proved by the striking similarity which exists between the bronze
implements of regions as widely separated as Switzerland, Ireland,
Denmark, and Africa. It is not to be supposed that any overland
communication existed in that early age between these countries; and the
coincidence of design which we find to exist can only be accounted for
by the fact that the articles of bronze were obtained from some
sea-going people, who carried on a commerce at the same time with all
these regions.

Compare, for instance, these two decorated bronze celts. the first from
Ireland, the second from Denmark; and then compare

 

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p><span id="img_25000"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/25000.jpg"><img src="tn/25000.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
IRISH CELT.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="50%"><p><span id="img_25001"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/25001.jpg"><img src="tn/25001.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
DANISH CELT.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

 

<span id="img_25100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25100.jpg)</span>  
LEAF SHAPED BRONZE SWORDS.

 

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

both these with a stone celt found in a mound in Tennessee, given below.
Here we have the same form precisely.

 

<span id="img_25300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25300.jpg)</span>  
STONE CELT, MOUND IN TENNESSEE.

 

Compare the bronze swords in the four preceding illustrations-from
Ireland, Sweden, Switzerland, and Denmark--and then observe the same
very peculiar shape--the leaf-shape, as it is called--in the stone sword
from Big Harpeth River, Tennessee.

We shall find, as we proceed, that the Phœnicians were unquestionably
identified with Atlantis, and that it was probably from Atlantis they
derived their god Baal, or Bel, or El, whose name crops out in the Bel
of the Babylonians, the Elohim, and the Beelzebub of the Jews, and the
Allah of the Arabians, And we find that this great deity, whose worship
extended so widely among the Mediterranean races, was known and adored
also upon the northern and western coasts of Europe. Professor Nilsson
finds traces of Baal worship in Scandinavia; he tells us that the
festival of Baal, or Balder, was celebrated on midsummer's night in
Scania, and far up into Norway, almost to the Loffoden Islands, until
within the last fifty years. The feast of Baal, or Beltinne, was
celebrated in Ireland to a late period. I argue from these facts, not
that the worship of Baal came to Ireland and Norway from Assyria or
Arabia, but that the same great parent-race which carried the knowledge
of Baal to the Mediterranean brought it also to the western coasts of
Europe, and with the adoration of Baal they imported also the implements
of bronze now found in such abundance in those regions.

The same similarity of form exists in the bronze knives from Denmark and
Switzerland, as represented in the [illustrations on p.
254](#img_25400).

In the central figure we have a representation of an Egyptian-looking
man holding a cup before him. We shall see,

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

 

<span id="img_25400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25400.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE KNIVES FROM DENMARK.

<span id="img_25401"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25401.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE KNIVES FROM SWITZERLAND.

 

as we proceed, that the magnetic needle, or "mariner's compass," dates
back to the days of Hercules, and that it consisted ofa bar of
magnetized iron floating upon a piece of wood *in a cup*. It is possible
that in this ancient relic of the Bronze Age we have a representation of
themagnetic cup. The magnetic needle must certainly have been an object
of great interest to a people who, through its agency, were able to
carry on commerce on all the shores of Europe, from the Mediterranean to
the Baltic. The second knife represented above has upon its handle a
wheel, or cross surrounded by a ring, which, we shall see here after,
was pre-eminently the symbol of Atlantis.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

 

<span id="img_25500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25500.jpg)</span>  
HUT URN, ALBANO.

 

If we are satisfied that these implements of bronze were the work of the
artisans of Atlantis--of the antediluvians--they must acquire additional
and extraordinary interest in our eyes, and we turn to them to earn
something of the habits and customs of "that great, original,
broad-eyed, sunken race."

We find among the relies of the Bronze Age an urn, which probably gives
us some idea of the houses of the Atlanteans: it is evidently made to
represent a house, and shows us even the rude fashion in which they
fastened their doors. The Mandan Indiana built round houses very much of
this appearance.

 

<span id="img_25501"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25501.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25501.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE LAKE VILLAGE.

 

The museum at Munich contains a very interesting piece of pottery, which
is supposed to represent one of the lake villages or hamlets of the era
when the people of Switzerland dwelt in houses erected on piles driven
into the bottom of the lakes of that country. The accompanying
illustration represents it. The double spiral ornament upon it shows
that it belongs to the Bronze Age.

Among the curious relies of the Bronze Age are a number of razor-like
knives; from which we may conclude that the habit of shaving the whole
or some part of the face or head

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

dates back to a great antiquity. The illustrations below represent them.

These knives were found in Denmark. The figures upon them represent
ships, and it is not impossible that their curious appendages may have
been a primitive kind of sails.

An examination of the second of these bronze knives reveals a singular
feature: Upon the handle of the razor there are *ten* 

 

<span id="img_25600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25600.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE RAZOR-KNIVES.

 

series of lines; the stars in the sky are *ten* in number; and there
were probably *ten* rings at the left-hand side of the figure, two being
obliterated. There were, we are told, ten sub-kingdoms in Atlantis; and
precisely as the thirteen stripes on the American flag symbolize the
thirteen original States of the Union, so the recurrence of the figure
ten in the emblems upon

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

 

<span id="img_25700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25700.jpg)</span>  
ANCIENT GALLEY, FROM A ROMAN COIN.

 

this bronze implement may have reference to the ten subdivisions of
Atlantis. The large object in the middle of this ship may be intended to
represent a palm-tree--the symbol, as we shall see, in America, of
Aztlan, or Atlantis. We have but to compare the pictures of the ships
upon these ancient razor-knives with the accompanying representations of
a Roman galley and a ship of William the Conqueror's time, to see that
there can be no question that they represented the galleys of that
remote age. They are doubtless faithful portraits of the great vessels
which Plato described as filling the harbors of Atlantis.

 

<span id="img_25701"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25701.jpg)</span>  
SHIP OF WILLIAM THE CONQUERER.

 

We give on [page 258 a representation of a bronze dagger found in
Ireland](#img_25801), a strongly-made weapon. The cut below it
represents the only implement of the Bronze Age yet found containing an
inscription. It has been impossible to decipher it, or even to tell to
what group of languages its alphabet belongs.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

 

<span id="img_25800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25800.jpg)</span>  
IRISH BRONZE DAGGER.

 

It is proper to note, in connection with a discussion of the Bronze Age,
that our word bronze is derived from the Basque, or Iberian *broncea*,
from which the Spanish derive *bronce*, and the Italians *bronzo*. The
copper mines of the Basques were extensively worked at a very early age
of the world, either by the people of Atlantis or by the Basques
themselves, a colony from Atlantis. The probabilities are that the name
for bronze, as well as the metal itself, dates back to Plato's island.

 

<span id="img_25801"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25801.jpg)</span>  
INSCRIBED CELT.

 

I give some illustrations on pages 239 and 242 of ornaments and
implements of the Bronze Age, which may serve to throw light upon the
habits of the ancient people. It will be seen that they had reached a
considerable degree of civilization; that they raised crops of grain,
and cut them with sickles; that their women ornamented themselves with
bracelets, armlets, earrings, finger-rings, hair-pins, and amulets; that
their mechanics used hammers, adzes, and chisels; and that they
possessed very fair specimens of pottery. Sir John Lubbock argues
("Prehistoric Times," pp. 14, 16, etc.):

"A new civilization is indicated not only by the mere presence of bronze

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

 

<span id="img_25900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/25900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25900.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE HAIR PINS.

 

but by the beauty and variety of the articles made from it. We find not
only, as before, during the Stone Age, axes, arrows, and knives, but, in
addition, swords, lances, sickles, fish-hooks, ear-rings, bracelets,
pins, rings, and a variety of other articles."

If the bronze implements of Europe had been derived from the Phœnicians,
Greeks, Etruscans, or Romans, the nearer we approached the site of those
nations the greater should be the number of bronze weapons we would
find; but the reverse is the case. Sir John Lubbock ("Prehistoric
Times," p. 20) shows that more than three hundred and fifty bronze
swords have been found in Denmark, and that the Dublin Museum contains
twelve hundred and eighty-three bronze weapons found in Ireland;
"while," he says, "I have only been able to hear of six bronze swords in
all Italy." This state of things is inexplicable unless we suppose that
Ireland and Denmark received their bronze implements directly from some
maritime nation whose

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

site was practically as near their shores as it was to the shores of the
Mediterranean. We have but to look at [our map on page
43](ataw105.htm#img_04700), *ante*, to see that Atlantis was
considerably nearer to Ireland than it was to Italy.

The striking resemblance between the bronze implements found in the
different portions of Europe is another proof that they were derived
from one and the same source--from some great mercantile people who
carried on their commerce at the same time with Denmark, Norway,
Ireland, Spain, Greece, Italy, Egypt, Switzerland, and Hungary. Mr.
Wright ("Essays on Archæology," p. 120) says, "Whenever we find the
bronze swords or celts, whether in Ireland, in the far west, in
Scotland, in distant Scandinavia, in Germany, or still farther east, in
the Sclavonic countries, they are the same--*not similar in character,
but identical*." Says Sir John Lubbock ("Prehistoric Times," p. 59),
"Not only are the several varieties of celts

 

<span id="img_26000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26000.jpg)</span>  
VASES FROM MOUNDS IN THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY.

 

found throughout Europe alike, but some of the swords, knives, daggers,
etc., are so similar that they seem as if they must have been cast by
the same maker."

What race was there, other than the people of Atlantis, that existed
before the Iron Age-before the Greek, Roman, Etruscan,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

and Phœnician--that was civilized, that worked in metals, that carried
on a commerce with all parts of Europe? Does history or tradition make
mention of any such?

We find a great resemblance between the pottery of the Bronze Age in
Europe and the pottery of the ancient inhabitants of America. The two
figures on page [260](#page_260) represent vases from one of the mounds
of the Mississippi Valley. Compare them with the following from the lake
dwellings of Switzerland:

 

<span id="img_26100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26100.jpg)</span>  
VASES FROM SWITZERLAND.

 

It will be seen that these vases could scarcely stand upright
unsupported; and we find that the ancient inhabitants of Switzerland had
circles or rings of baked earth in which they placed them when in use,
as in the annexed figure. The Mound Builders used the same contrivance.

 

<span id="img_26101"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26101.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26101.jpg)</span>  
ANCIENT SWISS VASE AND SUPPORTER.

 

The [illustrations of discoidal stones on page 263](#img_26300) are from
the "North Americans of Antiquity," p. 77. The objects represented were
taken from an ancient mound in Illinois. It would be indeed surprising
if two distinct peoples, living in two different continents, thousands
of miles

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

 

<span id="img_26200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26200.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE CHISELS.

 

apart, should, without any intercourse with each other, not only form
their vases in the same inconvenient form, but should hit upon the same
expedient as a remedy.

We observe, in the American spear-head and the Swiss hatchets, on the
opposite page, the same overlapping), of the metal around the staff, or
handle--a very peculiar mode of uniting them together, which has now
passed out of use.

 

<span id="img_26201"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26201.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26201.jpg)</span>  
SPIRALS, FROM SCOTLAND.

 

A favorite design of the men of the Bronze Age in Europe is the spiral
or double-spiral form. It appears on the face of the urn in the shape of
a lake dwelling, which is given on p. 255; it also appears in the rock
sculptures of Argyleshire, Scotland, here shown.

 

<span id="img_26202"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26202.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26202.jpg)</span>  
SPIRAL, FROM NEW MEXICO.

 

We find the same figure in an ancient fragment of pottery from the
Little Colorado, as given in the "United States Pacific Railroad Survey
Report," vol. iii., p. 49, art. *Pottery*. It was part of a large
vessel. The annexed illustration represents this.

The same design is also found in ancient rock etchings of the Zuñis of
New Mexico, of which the [cut on p. 265](#img_26500) is an illustration.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

 

<span id="img_26300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26300.jpg)</span>  
DISCOIDAL STONES, ILLINOIS.

<span id="img_26301"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26301.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26301.jpg)</span>  
COPPER SPEAR-HEAD, LAKE SUPERIOR.

<span id="img_26302"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26302.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26302.jpg)</span>  
BRONZE HATCHETS, SWITZERLAND.

 

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

 

<span id="img_26500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26500.jpg)</span>  
SPIRAL, FROM NEW MEXICO.

 

We also find this figure repeated upon vase from a Mississippi Valley
mound, which we give elsewhere. (See [p. 260](#page_260).)

It is found upon many of the monuments of Central America. In the
Treasure House of Atreus, at Mycenæ, Greece, a fragment of a pillar was
found which is literally covered with this double spiral design. (See
"Rosengarten's Architectural Styles," p, 59.)

This Treasure House of Atreus is one of the oldest buildings in Greece.

 

<span id="img_26501"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26501.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26501.jpg)</span>  
SHELL ORNAMENT, MOUND NEAR NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE.

We find the double-spiral figure upon a shell ornament found on the
breast of a skeleton, in a carefully constructed stone coffin, in a
mound near Nashville, Tennessee.

Lenormant remarks ("Anc. Civil.," vol. ii., p. 158) that the bronze
implements found in Egypt, near Memphis, had been buried for six
thousand years; and that at that time, as the Egyptians had a horror of
the sea, some commercial nation must have brought the tin, of which the
bronze was in part composed, from India, the Caucasus, or Spain, the
nearest points to Egypt in which tin is found.

Heer has shown that the civilized plants of the lake dwellings are not
of Asiatic, but of African, and, to a great extent, of Egyptian origin.
Their stone axes are made largely of jade or

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

 

<span id="img_26600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26600.jpg)</span>  
COPPER AXE, FROM A MOUND NEAR LAPORTE, INDIANA.

<span id="img_26601"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/26601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26601.jpg)</span>  
COPPER AXE, WATEFORD IRELAND.

 

nephrite, a mineral which, strange to say, geologists *have not found in
place on the continent of Europe*." (Foster's "Prehistoric Races," p.
44.)

Compare this picture of a copper axe from a mound near Laporte, Indiana,
with this representation of a copper axe of the Bronze Age, found near
Waterford, Ireland. Professor Foster pronounces them almost identical.

Compare this specimen of pottery from the lake dwellings of Switzerland
with the following specimen from San José,

<table data-border="0" width="779">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="MIDDLE" width="50%"><p><span id="img_26602"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/26602.jpg"><img src="tn/26602.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
FRAGMENT OF POTTERY, LAKE NEUFCHATEL, SWITZERLAND.</p></td>
<td data-valign="MIDDLE" width="50%"><p><span id="img_26603"></span> <span data-align="CENTER"> <a href="img/26603.jpg"><img src="tn/26603.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></span><br />
FRAGMENT OF POTTERY, SAN JOSÉ, MEXICO.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mexico. Professor
Foster calls attention to the striking resemblance in the designs of
these two widely separated works of art, one belonging to the Bronze Age
of Europe, the other to the Copper Age of America.

These, then, in conclusion, are our reasons for believing that the
Bronze Age of Europe has relation to Atlantis:

1\. The admitted fact that it is anterior in time to the Iron Age
relegates it to a great antiquity.

2\. The fact that it is anterior in time to the Iron Age is

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

conclusive that it is not due to any of the known European or Asiatic
nations, all of which belong to the Iron Age.

3\. The fact that there war. in Europe, Asia, or Africa no copper or tin
age prior to the Bronze Age, is conclusive testimony that the
manufacture of bronze was an importation into those continents from some
foreign country.

4\. The fact that in America alone of all the world is found the Copper
Age, which must necessarily have preceded the Bronze Age, teaches us to
look to the westward of Europe and beyond the sea for that foreign
country.

5\. We find many similarities in forms of implements between the Bronze
Age of Europe and the Copper Age of America.

6\. If Plato told the truth, the Atlanteans were a great commercial
nation, trading to America and Europe, and, at the same time, they
possessed bronze, and were great workers in the other metals.

7\. We shall see hereafter that the mythological traditions of Greece
referred to a Bronze Age which preceded an Iron Age, and placed this in
the land of the gods, which was an island in the Atlantic Ocean, beyond
the Pillars of Hercules; and this land was, as we shall see, clearly
Atlantis.

8\. As we find but a small development of the Bronze Age in America, it
is reasonable to suppose that there must have been some intermediate
station between America and Europe, where, during a long period of time,
the Bronze Age was developed out of the Copper Age, and immense
quantities of bronze implements were manufactured and carried to Europe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Artificial Deformation of the Skull.](ataw309)
