[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1236) 
[Next](sbe1238) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1">1:9:1</span></span>

### NINTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:1">1:9:1:1</span></span>1.
Now <span id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_581) when (the Adhvaryu) says, 'The
divine Hot*ri*s are summoned for the proclamation of success,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

the human one is called upon for the song of praise (sûkta-vâka);' and
when the Hot*ri* thereupon recites, he recites good words only <span
id="fr_586"></span>[1](#fn_582): he thereby invokes a blessing on the
sacrificer. It is indeed after the sacrifice that he thus invokes a
blessing. A twofold reason there is for his invoking the blessing after
the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:2">1:9:1:2</span></span>2. He who
sacrifices, assuredly, is the producer of the sacrifice, since it is by
his order that, the priests spread it, that they produce it. He (the
Hot*ri*) now invokes a blessing; and that blessing invoked by him, the
sacrifice, on its part, realises for this (sacrificer), knowing as it
does that he has produced it. For this reason he invokes a blessing
after the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:3">1:9:1:3</span></span>3. He who
sacrifices, assuredly, pleases the gods. Having pleased the gods by that
sacrifice,--that is, partly by *Ri*k-verses, partly by Ya*g*us-formulas,
and partly by oblations,--he obtains a share among them.

When he has obtained a share among them, then (the Hot*ri*) invokes a
blessing (on him); and that (blessing, invoked by him, the gods realise
for this sacrificer), knowing as they do that he has pleased them. For
this reason also he invokes a blessing after the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:4">1:9:1:4</span></span>4. He
intones <span id="fr_587"></span>[2](#fn_583),--'Successful this has
turned out, O heaven and earth--,' for successful indeed it has turned
out, when one has completed the sacrifice.--'We have completed the song
of praise, and the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

utterance of worship <span id="fr_588"></span>[1](#fn_584),' for indeed
these two, the singing of praises and the utterance of worship, form the
sacrifice: and accordingly he thereby says, 'We have accomplished the
sacrifice, we have obtained possession of the sacrifice.'--'Thou, O
Agni, art the voice of praise at the listening <span
id="fr_589"></span>[2](#fn_585) of heaven and earth,' he thereby says to
Agni, 'Thou art the voice of praise, while heaven and earth
listen.'--'May heaven and earth be propitious to thee, O sacrificer, at
this sacrifice!' whereby he says, 'May heaven and earth abound in food
for thee, O sacrificer, at this sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:5">1:9:1:5</span></span>5. 'They,
propitious to the cattle <span id="fr_590"></span>[3](#fn_586), profuse
in gifts,' he thereby says, 'May they both be propitious to the cattle,
and profuse in gifts.'--'They, the fearless and inscrutable <span
id="fr_591"></span>[4](#fn_587);' he thereby says, 'Mayest thou not be
afraid of anybody; may no one obtain before thee this thy wealth!'

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:6">1:9:1:6</span></span>6. 'They,
of wide abode, the afforders of safety;' he thereby says, 'May they both
be possessed of wide abodes and exempt from danger.'--'They, the
rain-skied, the water-pouring,' he thereby says, 'May they both be
possessed of rain.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:7">1:9:1:7</span></span>7. 'They,
the genial and beneficent;' he thereby says, 'May they both be genial
and beneficent.'--'They, the rich in sap and substance;' he thereby
says, 'May they both abound in moisture and afford the means of
subsistence.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:8">1:9:1:8</span></span>8. 'They,
of easy access and good abode;' he thereby says, 'May yonder (sky),
which thou approachest from below, afford thee easy access; may this
(earth) on which thou abidest (or movest) afford thee good
abode.'--'With their knowledge--,' thereby he says, 'Both of these
approving--'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:9">1:9:1:9</span></span>9. 'Agni
has graciously accepted this oblation, he has grown in strength, he has
acquired greater power,' he thereby refers to Agni's
butter-portion.--'Soma has graciously accepted this oblation, he has
grown in strength, he has acquired greater power,' he thereby refers to
Soma's butter-portion.--'Agni has graciously accepted this oblation, he
has grown in strength, he has acquired greater power,' he thereby refers
to the indispensable cake which is (offered) on both occasions (the new-
and full-moon sacrifice).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:10">1:9:1:10</span></span>10. And
in the same way according to the respective deities. 'The
butter-drinking gods have graciously accepted the butter, they have
grown in strength, they have acquired greater power;' thereby he refers
to the fore-offerings and after-offerings; for the butter-drinking gods
truly are the fore-offerings and after-offerings.--'Agni, by virtue of
his Hot*ri*-ship, has graciously accepted this oblation, he has

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

grown in strength, the has acquired greater power;' thereby he refers to
Agni, in virtue of his Hot*ri*ship. With 'has graciously accepted' the
thus enumerates those deities to whom offering has been made: in saying
'Such a one has graciously accepted the oblation, such a one has
graciously accepted the oblation,' he accordingly prays for the
accomplishment of the sacrifice; for whatever oblation the gods
graciously accept, by that he gains great things: hence he says, '(he)
has graciously accepted it.' And '(he) has grown in strength' he says,
because what the gods delight in, they make mountain high: for this
reason he says '(he) has increased.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:11">1:9:1:11</span></span>11.
'(He) has acquired (lit. made for himself) greater power' he says; for
assuredly the power of the gods is the sacrifice: it is the latter
therefore which they make still greater; and for this reason he says
'(he) has acquired greater power.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:12">1:9:1:12</span></span>12.
'May he prosper in this sacrifice which goes to the gods!' he thereby
says, 'May he be successful in this sacrifice which goes to the
gods.'--'Thus prays this sacrificer, N.N. <span
id="fr_592"></span>[1](#fn_588);' here he gives the name, and thereby
makes him directly successful in his prayer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:13">1:9:1:13</span></span>13. 'He
prays for long life,' what there (viz. at the invocation of the
i*d*â) <span id="fr_593"></span>[2](#fn_589) was (called implicitly)
'future worship of the gods,' that is here (called) expressly 'long
life.'

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:14">1:9:1:14</span></span>14. 'He
prays for abundant offspring,'--what then was 'more abundant offering,'
that is here expressly 'abundant offspring.' He who proceeds in this way
will ensure dominion. He may, however, say, 'He prays for future worship
of the gods,' for thereby (he ensures) long life, offspring,
cattle <span id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_590).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:15">1:9:1:15</span></span>15. 'He
prays for more abundant offering,' thereby (he prays for) that same
object. 'He prays for dominion over his co-evals (or countrymen);'--his
co-evals, doubtless, are his vital airs, for he is born along with his
vital airs: hence he thereby prays for vital airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:16">1:9:1:16</span></span>16. 'He
prays for a heavenly abode;'--he who sacrifices assuredly sacrifices
with the desire that there may be for him also (a place) in the world of
the gods: he thereby confers on him a share in the world of the
gods <span id="fr_595"></span>[2](#fn_591). 'May he obtain, may he
accomplish what he prays for through this offering!' he thereby says,
'May all, that he prays for through this offering, be fulfilled to him!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:17">1:9:1:17</span></span>17.
These five prayers for blessings he offers now, and three (he offered)
at the i*d*â, these are eight. Of eight syllables, truly, consists the
gâyatrî metre, and the gâyatrî means vigour: hence he thereby imparts
vigour to the prayers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:18">1:9:1:18</span></span>18. Let
him not offer more than these; for if he offered more, he would do what
is in excess; and what is in excess at the sacrifice, that remains over

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

for the benefit of his spiteful enemy: hence he should not offer more
(prayers) than these.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:19">1:9:1:19</span></span>19.
Even less,--seven (he may offer) <span
id="fr_596"></span>[1](#fn_592).--'May the gods vouchsafe him that!' he
thereby says, 'May the gods grant him that.'--'May the god Agni solicit
that from the gods, we men from Agni--,' he thereby says, 'May the god
Agni solicit that from the gods, and we will then solicit it for this
(sacrificer) from Agni--'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:20">1:9:1:20</span></span>20.
'--What was searched for and found <span
id="fr_597"></span>[2](#fn_593);' they indeed searched for the
sacrifice, and found it: therefore he says, 'what was searched for and
found.'--And 'may both heaven and earth guard this one (enam) from
anxiety!' he thereby says, 'may both heaven and earth protect him from
suffering.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:21">1:9:1:21</span></span>21.
Here now some say, 'And may both heaven and earth guard me (mâ <span
id="fr_598"></span>[3](#fn_594)) . . .,' arguing that in this way the
Hot*ri* does not exclude himself from the benediction. Let him not,
however, say this; for, surely, the benediction at the sacrifice is for
the sacrificer: what then have the officiating priests to do with it?
Whatever blessing the officiating priests invoke at the sacrifice, that
is for the sacrificer only. On the other hand, whoever says, 'and may
both heaven and earth guard me . . .,' does not establish

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

that blessing anywhere: let him therefore say, 'and may both heaven and
earth guard this one. . . .'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:22">1:9:1:22</span></span>22.
'Hither lies the course of any boon;' he thereby makes over to this
(sacrificer) whatever is excellent in the sacrifice: for this reason he
says, 'hither lies the course of any boon.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:23">1:9:1:23</span></span>23.
'And this adoration (shall be offered) to the gods!' having attained the
completion of the sacrifice, he thereby renders adoration to the gods:
for this reason he says, 'and this adoration to the gods!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:24">1:9:1:24</span></span>24.
Thereupon he pronounces the 'All-hail and blessing' (*s*am-yos) <span
id="fr_599"></span>[1](#fn_595). Now it was *S*amyu Bârhaspatya who
perceived, in its true nature, the consummation of the sacrifice. He
went to share in the world of the gods. Thereupon that (knowledge) was
entirely lost to men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:25">1:9:1:25</span></span>25. It
then became known to the *Ri*shis, that *S*amyu Bârhaspatya had
perceived, in its true nature, the consummation of the sacrifice, and
had gone to share in the world of the gods. By pronouncing the
*s*amyo*h*, they attained to that same consummation of the sacrifice
which *S*amyu Bârhaspatya had perceived; and to that same consummation
of the sacrifice, which Samyu Bârhaspatya had perceived, this (Hot*ri*)

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

attains by pronouncing the *s*am-yo*h*. For this reason he pronounces
the 'All-hail and blessing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:26">1:9:1:26</span></span>26. He
intones, 'We long for that All-hail and blessing (*s*am-yo*h*);' whereby
he says, 'We long for that consummation of the sacrifice which *S*amyu
Bârhaspatya perceived.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:27">1:9:1:27</span></span>27.
'Success to the sacrifice, success to the lord of sacrifice!' he who
wishes for the consummation of the sacrifice, thereby wishes success to
the sacrifice and success to the lord of sacrifice.--'Bliss (svasti) to
us, bliss to men!' he thereby says, 'May we enjoy bliss among the gods,
bliss among men!'--'May the means of salvation ascend on high!' he
thereby says, 'May this sacrifice secure for us the world of the gods!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:28">1:9:1:28</span></span>28.
'All-hail, for us, to the two-footed, all-hail to the four-footed <span
id="fr_600"></span>[1](#fn_596)!' for so far as the two-footed and the
four-footed (extend), so far does this universe (extend). Having now
attained the consummation of the sacrifice, he bids All-hail to this
(sacrificer), and for this reason he says, 'All-hail, for us, to the
two-footed, all-hail to the four-footed!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:9:1:29">1:9:1:29</span></span>29. He
then touches (the earth) thus with this (finger) <span
id="fr_601"></span>[2](#fn_597). Non-human, verily, he becomes at the

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

time when he is chosen for the office of sacrificial priest; and, this
earth being a safe standing-place, he thereby (viz. by touching the
earth) stands on this safe standing-place; and he thereby also again
becomes human: for this reason he thus touches (the earth) with this
(finger).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[247:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_585) The author now
proceeds to give in detail the formulas to be recited by the Hot*ri*
during the ceremonies treated in the preceding Brâhma*n*a (see [p.
236](sbe1235.htm#page_236), note [2](sbe1236.htm#fn_553)); pars. 1-23
treating of the sûktavâka; pars. 24-29 of the *s*amyuvâka.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[248:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_586) Sûktaiva tad âha,
which the commentator paraphrases by sûktâṅy âha. It is apparently
intended as an explanation of the term sûktavaka. The word sûkta here
has exceptionally the accent on the penultimate.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[248:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_587) See [p.
240](sbe1236.htm#page_240), note [2](sbe1236.htm#fn_561). The formulas
are given Taitt. Br. III, 5, 10; Â*s*v. *S*. I, 9, 1.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[249:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_588) 'Sûktavâkam uta
namovâkam.' Our author seems to refer these terms to the *Ri*k-verses
and the Ya*g*us-formulas used during the sacrifice. Sâya*n*a, on Taitt.
S. II, 6, 9, takes 'namovâka' in a more restricted sense, viz. as
referring to the formula 'namo devebhya*h*.' Both the Black Ya*g*ur-vela
and Â*s*v. *S*. add '*ri*dhyâsma sûkto*k*yam,' which has probably to be
taken in the sense of 'May we accomplish that which is expressed in the
sûktas.' \[Sâya*n*a, 'May we succeed with the sûkta yet to be
pronounced.'\]

<span id="fn_585"></span>[249:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_589) For upa*s*rutî the
Black Ya*g*ur-veda has upa*s*rito, which Sâya*n*a explains, 'Since thou
art established in heaven and earth, thou art able to recite the sûkta.'

<span id="fn_586"></span>[249:3](sbe1237.htm#fr_590) *S*a*m*gavî seems
to be a corruption of *S*a*m*gayî (propitious to the household), which
is the reading of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda and Â*s*v. *S*. (cf. Rig-veda
IX, 97, 17).

<span id="fn_587"></span>[249:4](sbe1237.htm#fr_591) ? Apravede,
according to Sâya*n*a, on Taitt. S. I, 1, 13, in an active sense, 'they
who do not tell of, do not betray, our faults' (hence 'verschwiegen,'
reticent, discreet, St. Petersb. Dict.) 'Difficult to obtain,'
Harisvâmin. Our author apparently takes it in the sense of 'not obtained
before.'

<span id="fn_588"></span>[251:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_592) Â*s*v. *S*. reads
twice asau 'N.N., N.N.;' and the commentary remarks that the Hot*ri* has
here to pronounce both the ordinary name of the sacrificer, and his
nâkshatra name (i.e. the mystic name given him for the duration of the
sacrifice, and derived from the respective lunar mansion, or its
tutelary deity). This practice was probably not yet in vogue in the time
of our author. Cf. Weber, Nakshatra II, p. 316 seq.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[251:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_593) See I, 8, 1, 30
seq.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[252:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_594) The ritual of the
Black Ya*g*ur-veda (Taitt. Br. III, 5, 10; Taitt. S. II, 6, 9, 7) and
the Â*s*v. *S*. prescribe both these formulas. The order of formulas
also, as there given, differs somewhat from that of our work.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[252:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_595) The Black
Ya*g*ur-veda and Â*s*v. *S*. insert here, 'He prays for all that is dear
to him.'

<span id="fn_592"></span>[253:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_596) That is, if he
chooses to omit the second formula mentioned in par. 14.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[253:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_597) 'Ish*t*a*m* *k*a
vitta*m* *k*a.' This is also the reading of the Â*s*v. *S*. (? 'What was
wished for and obtained'). The Kâ*n*va text reads 'ish*t*a*m* *k*a
vitta*m* *k*âbhût.' Our author seems here to refer to the legend in I,
5, 2, 6 seq., or to that in I, 6, 2, 1 seq. The reading of the Black
Ya*g*us, ish*t*a*m* *k*a vîta*m* *k*a, 'what has been offered up and
accepted (eaten by the gods),' is probably the original and correct one.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[253:3](sbe1237.htm#fr_598) The Kâ*n*va
recension, the Black Ya*g*ur-veda, and Â*s*v. *S*. read no, 'us.'

<span id="fn_595"></span>[254:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_599) See [p.
247](sbe1236.htm#page_247), note [2](#fn_581). The original meaning of
the terms *s*am yos, as they occur in the Rig-veda, is happily rendered
by Professor Max Müller (Translation of the Rig-veda, I, p. 182) by
'health and wealth.' In the sacrificial ceremonial a deeper significance
bas come to be attached to this benedictory formula, for which it is
difficult to find an exact equivalent. The entire *s*amyuvâka, as here
given, forms part of a khila to the last book of the *Ri*k-Sa*m*hitâ;
cf. Max Müller's edition, vol. vi. p. 32; A. Weber, Ind. Stud. IV, p.
431. The Black Ya*g*us version of the legend regarding *S*amyu
Bârhaspatya (Taitt. S. II, 6, 10) is quite different from ours; they
were both invented to explain *s*am yos.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[255:1](sbe1237.htm#fr_600) This formula occurs
almost identically in Rig-veda VI, 74, 1; VII, 54, 1; (IX, 69, 7.) Cf.
Max Müller, Translation of the Rig-veda, I, p. 180, where attention is
drawn to a somewhat similar phrase in the Umbric prayers of the Eugubian
tables.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[255:2](sbe1237.htm#fr_601) In Kâty. III, 6, 21
the touching of the altar is prescribed, with the text Vâ*g*. S. II, 19
b; the commentators differ as to whether the sacrificer or the Adhvaryu
is to do this. The Kâ*n*va Sa*m*hitâ omits that formula, and hence
assigns this touching to the Hot*ri*. Harisvâmin remarks that the
Hot*ri* touches the earth with the little finger of his right hand, as
stated in the Kâ*n*va recension. The latter reads 'with the little
finger.' No mention is made in the Â*s*v. *S*. of this touching of the
earth on the part of the Hot*ri*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 9, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe1238)
