[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1205) 
[Next](sbe1207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4">1:1:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:1">1:1:4:1</span></span>1. He now
takes the black antelope skin <span id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_121), for
completeness of the sacrifice. For once upon a time the sacrifice
escaped the gods, and having become a black antelope roamed about. The
gods having thereupon found it and stripped it of its skin, they brought
it (the skin) away with them.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:2">1:1:4:2</span></span>2. Its
white and black hairs represent the *Rik*-verses and the Sâman-verses;
to wit, the white the Sâman and the black the *Rik*; or conversely, the
black the Sâman and the white the *Rik*. The brown and the yellow ones,
on the other hand, represent the Ya*g*us-texts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:3">1:1:4:3</span></span>3. Now
this same threefold science is the sacrifice; that manifold form, that
(varying) colour of this (science) is what is (represented by) this
black antelope skin. For the completeness of the sacrifice (he takes the
skin): hence the rite of initiation (for the Soma-sacrifice) is likewise
performed on the black antelope skin;--for the completion of the
sacrifice: hence it is also used for husking and bruising (the rice) on,
in order that nothing of the oblation may get spilt; and that, if any
grain or flour should now be spilt on it, the sacrifice would still
remain securely established in the sacrifice. For this reason it is used
for husking and bruising upon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:4">1:1:4:4</span></span>4. He
thus takes the black antelope skin, with the text (Vâ*g*. S: I, 14 a):
'Bliss-bestowing (*s*arman) art thou!' For *k*arman ('hide') is the name
of that (skin of the) black deer used among men, but *s*arman (bliss) is
(that used) among the gods; and for this reason he says,
'Bliss-bestowing art thou!' He shakes it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14
b), 'Shaken off is the Rakshas, shaken off are the enemies!' whereby he
repels from it the evil spirits, the Rakshas. He shakes it whilst
holding it apart from the vessels <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122);
whereby he shakes off whatever impure matter there may have been on it.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:5">1:1:4:5</span></span>5. He
spreads it (on the ground with the hairy side upwards, and) with its
neck-part turned to the west <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123), with
the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14 c): 'The skin of Aditi art thou! May Aditi
acknowledge thee!' For Aditi is this earth, and whatever is on her, that
serves as a skin to her: for this reason he says, 'The skin of Aditi art
thou!' And 'may Aditi acknowledge thee!' he says, because one who is
related (to another) acknowledges (him). Thereby he establishes a mutual
understanding between her and the black antelope skin, (thinking) 'they
will not hurt each other.' While it is still being held down with his
left hand,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:6">1:1:4:6</span></span>6. He at
once takes the mortar with his right hand, fearing lest the evil
spirits, the Rakshas, might rush in here in the meantime. For the priest
(brâhma*n*a) <span id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124) is the repeller of
the Rakshas: therefore, whilst it is still being held down with his left
hand,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:7">1:1:4:7</span></span>7. He
puts the mortar (on it), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14 d, e): 'A wooden
stone (adri) art thou!'

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

or 'A broad-bottomed stone (grâvan) art thou!' For, just as there (in
the Soma-sacrifice) they press king Soma out with stones (grâvan), thus
here also he prepares the oblation (havirya*gñ*a) by means of the mortar
and pestle, and the large and small mill-stones <span
id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125). Now 'stones (adraya*h*)' is the common
name of these, and therefore he says, 'a stone art thou.' And 'wooden,'
he calls it, because this one (the mortar) really is made of wood <span
id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126). Or, he says, 'a broad-bottomed stone
(grâvan) art thou,' because it is both a stone and broad-bottomed. He
adds: 'May Aditi's skin acknowledge (receive) thee!' whereby he
establishes a mutual understanding between it (the mortar) and the black
antelope skin, thinking: 'they will not injure each other.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:8">1:1:4:8</span></span>8. He
then pours the (two portions of) rice (from the winnowing basket into
the mortar), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 15 a): 'Thou art the body of
Agni, thou the releaser of speech!' For it is (material for) sacrifice,
and hence (by being offered in the fire) it becomes Agni's body. 'The
releaser of speech,' he adds, because he now releases that speech which
he restrained when he was about to take the rice (from the cart). The
reason why he now releases his speech, is that the sacrifice has now
obtained a firm footing in the mortar, that it has become diffused; and
for this reason he says, 'the releaser of speech!'

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:9">1:1:4:9</span></span>9. Should
he, however (by some accident), utter any human sound before this time,
let him in that case mutter some *Rik* or Ya*g*us-text addressed to
Vish*n*u <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127); for Vish*n*u is the
sacrifice, so that he thereby again obtains a hold on the sacrifice, and
penance is thereby done by him (for not keeping silent). He adds: 'For
the pleasure of the gods I seize thee!' for the oblation is taken with
the intention 'that it shall gladden the gods.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:10">1:1:4:10</span></span>10. He
now takes the pestle, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14 b), 'A large,
wooden stone art thou!' for it is a large stone, and made of wood, too.
He thrusts it down, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14 c), 'Do thou prepare
this oblation for the gods <span id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_128)! do
thou prepare it thoroughly!' thereby saying, 'Get this oblation ready
for the gods! get it quite ready!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:11">1:1:4:11</span></span>11. He
then calls the Havishk*ri*t <span id="fr_129"></span>[3](#fn_129)
(preparer of the sacrificial food), 'Havishk*ri*t, come hither!
Havishk*ri*t, come hither!' The Havishk*ri*t <span
id="fr_130"></span>[4](#fn_130) no doubt is speech, so that he thereby
frees speech from

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

restraint. And speech, moreover, represents sacrifice <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131), so that he thereby again calls the
sacrifice to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:12">1:1:4:12</span></span>12. Now
there are four different forms of this call, viz. 'come hither (ehi)!'
in the case of a Brâhman; 'approach (âgahi)!' and 'hasten hither
(âdrava)!' in the case of a Vai*s*ya and a member of the military caste
(râ*g*anyabandhu <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132)); and 'run hither
(âdhâva)!' in that of a *S*ûdra. On this occasion he uses the call that
belongs to a Brâhman, because that one is best adapted for a sacrifice,
and is besides the most gentle:. let him therefore say, 'come hither
(ehi)!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:13">1:1:4:13</span></span>13. Now
in former times it was no other than the wife (of the sacrificer) who
rose at this (call, to act) as Havishk*ri*t; therefore now also (she or)
some one (priest) <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133) rises in answer
to this call. And at the time when he (the Adhvaryu) calls the
Havishk*ri*t, one of the priests <span id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134)
beats the two mill-stones.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The reason why
they produce this discordant noise, is this:

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:14">1:1:4:14</span></span>14.
Manu was in possession of a bull <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135).
Into him had entered an Asura-killing, foe-killing voice; and by his
snorting and roaring the Asuras and Rakshas were continually being
crushed. Thereupon the Asuras said to one another: 'Evil, alas! this
bull inflicts upon us! how can we possibly destroy him?' Now Kilâta and
Âkuli were the two priests (brahman) of the Asuras.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:15">1:1:4:15</span></span>15.
These two said, 'God-fearing, they say, is Manu: let us two then
ascertain!' They then went to him and said: 'Manu! we will sacrifice for
thee!' He said: 'Wherewith?' They said: 'With this bull!' He said: 'So
be it!' On his (the bull's) being killed the voice went from him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:16">1:1:4:16</span></span>16. It
entered into Manâvî, the wife of Manu; and when they heard her speak,
the Asuras and Rakshas were continually being crushed. Thereupon the
Asuras said to one another: 'Hereby even greater evil is inflicted on
us, for the human voice speaks more!' Kilâta and Âkuli then said:
'God-fearing, they say, is Manu: let us then ascertain!' They went to
him and said: 'Manu! we will sacrifice for thee!' He said: 'Wherewith?'

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They said: 'With
this thy wife!' He said: 'So be it!' And on her being killed that voice
went from her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:17">1:1:4:17</span></span>17. It
entered into the sacrifice itself, into the sacrificial vessels; and
thence those two (Asura priests) were unable to expel it. This same
Asura-killing, foe-killing voice sounds forth (from the millstones when
they are beaten with the wedge). And for whomsoever that knows this,
they produce this discordant noise on the present occasion, his enemies
are rendered very miserable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:18">1:1:4:18</span></span>18. He
beats the mill-stones with the wedge, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 a):
'A honey-tongued cock (kukku*t*a <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136))
art thou (O wedge)!' For honey-tongued indeed was he (the bull) for the
gods, and poison-tongued for the Asuras: hence he thereby says: 'What
thou wert for the gods, that be thou for us!' He adds: 'Sap and strength
do thou call hither! with thy help may we conquer in every battle!' In
these words there is nothing that is obscure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:19">1:1:4:19</span></span>19.
Thereupon <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137) he (the Adhvaryu) takes
the winnowing basket, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 14 b): 'Rain-grown art
thou!' For rain-grown it is indeed, whether it be made of reeds or of
cane or of rushes, since it is the rain that makes these grow.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:20">1:1:4:20</span></span>20. He
then pours out the (threshed) rice (from the mortar into the winnowing
basket), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 c): 'May the rain-grown
acknowledge (receive) thee!' For rain-grown also are these (grains),
whether they be rice or barley, since it is the rain that makes them
grow. By these words he establishes an understanding between them and
the winnowing basket, in the hope 'that they will not injure each
other.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:21">1:1:4:21</span></span>21. He
now winnows (the rice), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 d): 'Cleared off
is the Rakshas! cleared off are the evil-doers!' The husks (which have
fallen on the ground) he throws away <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138), with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 e),
'Expelled is the Rakshas!' for those evil spirits, the Rakshas, he
thereby expels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:22">1:1:4:22</span></span>22. He
then separates (the husked grains from the unhusked), with the text
(Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 f): 'May the wind separate you!' For it is that wind
(which is produced by the winnowing) which here purifies (or blows,
pavate); and it is the wind that separates everything here (on earth)
that undergoes separation: therefore it also separates here those (two
kinds of grain) from each other. Now when they are undergoing this
process, and whilst he is separating <span
id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139) (the husked, so as to drop them into a
pot),--

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:23">1:1:4:23</span></span>23. He
addresses (those in the pot) thus (Vâ*g*. S. I, 16 g): 'May the divine
Savit*ri*, the golden-handed, receive you with a flawless <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) hand!' By this he says: 'May they be
well received!' He then cleans them thrice <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141); for threefold is the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:4:24">1:1:4:24</span></span>24.
Here now some clean them with the formula: 'For the gods get clean! for
the gods get clean!' But let him not do so: for this oblation is
intended for some particular deity; and if he were to say, 'For the gods
get clean!' he would make it one intended for all the deities, and would
thereby raise a quarrel among the deities. Let him therefore do the
cleaning silently!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[23:1](sbe1205.htm#fr_120) After he has done
the sprinkling, he puts the remaining water away in some place where
nobody is allowed to walk \[as between the pra*n*îtâs and the Âhavanîya;
or (according to Âpastamba) before, or east of, the Gârhapatya, since
nobody is allowed to pass between the Gârhapatya and Âhavanîya. The two
strainers also remain in the sprinkling water\]. Kâty. *S*r. II, 3, 40.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[23:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_121) The skin of the
black antelope may be regarded as one of the symbols of Brâhmanical
worship and civilisation. Thus it is said in Manu II, 22-23: 'That which
lies between these two mountain ranges (the Himâlaya and the Vindhya),
from the eastern to the western ocean, the wise know as Âryâvarta (the
land of the Âryas). Where the black antelope naturally roams about, that
should be known as the land suitable for sacrifice; what lies beyond
that is the country of the Mle*kkh*as (barbarians).'

<span id="fn_122"></span>[24:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_122) According to some
exegetes the Adhvaryu himself must step beyond (i.e. aside from) the
vessels when he shakes the skin; according to others, he should not
move, but only hold the skin <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> apart from
the vessels, so that no impure matter should fall on them. Some also
maintain that the skin should only be shaken once, whilst others think
it should be done three times. Cf. Kâty. *S*r. II, 4, 2. Schol.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[25:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_123) Special mention is
here made of this feature, since as a rule (Kâty. I, 10, 4) the skin is
spread with its neck-part turned eastwards. He lays it down on the north
side of the sacrificial ground, either west of the utkara (the mound
formed by the earth dug out in constructing the altar, and by other
rubbish) or exactly north of the Gârhapatya. Schol. on Kâty. II, 4, 3.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[25:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_124) Only a Brâhman can
perform sacrifice. If, as is permitted in certain ceremonies, a
Kshatriya or Vai*s*ya officiates, he, as it were, becomes a Brâhman (and
is addressed as such) for the occasion, by means of the dîkshâ, or rite
of initiation. Cf. *S*at. Br. III, 2, I, 39; XIII, 4, 1, 3.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[26:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_125) Here, as in I, 5, 2,
11 (havirya*gñ*e ’tha saumye ’dhvare), we have the simple division of
the Srauta-sacrifices into oblations (of ghee, milk, rice, barley, &c.)
and libations (of Soma). More usually the pa*s*ubandhu, or
animal-sacrifice, is added as a third division. See also I, 7, 2, 10.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[26:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_126) The mortar
(ulûkhala) and pestle (musala) are to be made of very hard wood, viz.
both of vara*n*a wood (Cratæga Roxburghii), or the mortar of palâ*s*a
wood (Butea Frondosa), and the pestle of <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>
khadira wood (Acacia Catechu). The former is to be of the height of the
knee, and the latter three aratnis (cubits) long. Schol. on Kâty. I, 3,
36; M. Müller, Die Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen, Zeitsch. der D.
Morg. Ges. IX, p. xl.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[27:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_127) Kâty. *S*r. II, 2,
6-7 lays down the general rule, that if the Brahman or Adhvaryu (and
according to some, the sacrificer also) by some slip were to utter any
sound during the time for which restraint of speech (vâg-yama) is
enjoined, they must atone for the transgression by muttering some mantra
addressed to Vish*n*u, such as the couplet (Vâ*g*. S. V, 38, 45),
'Widely, O Vish*n*u, stride!' &c., or the formula (ib. I, 4), 'O
Vish*n*u, preserve the sacrifice!'

<span id="fn_128"></span>[27:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_128) Or 'for the god,'
'for the goddess,' as the case may be.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[27:3](sbe1206.htm#fr_129) Or, he pronounces
the havishk*ri*t formula, see next note. According to Kâty. *S*r. II, 4,
13 he calls out three separate times.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[27:4](sbe1206.htm#fr_130) Havishk*ri*t denotes
not only the person that prepares the oblation, but also this formula by
which that person is called.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[28:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_131) Viz. in the shape of
the sacrificial formulas.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[28:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_132) This inversion of
the order of the second (or Kshatriya) and third (or Vai*s*ya) castes is
rather strange. The Sûtras of Bhâradv., Âpast., and Hira*n*y. assign the
same formulas to the several castes as here. Cf. Hillebrandt, Neu- and
Vollmondsopfer, p. 29.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[28:3](sbe1206.htm#fr_133) According to the
Schol. on Kâty. *S*r. II, 4, 13, either the wife of the patron or the
Âgnîdhra (the priest who kindles the fire) acts as Havishk*ri*t. Mahîdh.
on Vâ*g*. S. I, 15 includes the patron (sacrificer) himself, unless
ya*g*amâna*h* patnî is a misprint for ya*g*amânapatnî. According to
Âpastamba, 'either a maidservant or the wife grinds; or the wife
threshes and the *S*ûdra woman grinds' (cf. Schol. on Kâty. *S*r. II, 5,
7). Similarly Bhâradv. and Hira*n*y.; cf. Hillebrandt, p. 38, n. 2.
Similar cases of differences between the ritualistic practices of the
present time and those of former times are very frequently alluded to in
the ritualistic books; and are of especial interest, as they afford some
insight into the gradual development of the sacrificial ceremonial. Cf.
Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 156 seq.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[28:4](sbe1206.htm#fr_134) Viz. the Âgnîdhra,
whilst seated north of the expansion <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>
(vihâra) of the fires; he strikes with the wedge (*s*amyâ, a stick of
khadira wood, usually some six or eight inches long, used for placing
under the lower grindstone on the north side, so as to make it incline
towards east) twice the lower and once the upper grindstone. Schol. on
Kâty. *S*r. II, 4, 15.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[29:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_135) This bull of Manu
has been compared by Dr. Kuhn (Zeitschrift für Vergl. Sprachf. IV, 91
seq.) with the Minotaur of the Greeks. Cf. also J. Muir, Original
Sanskrit Texts, vol. i. p. 188 seq.; and Professor Weber's Translation
of the first Adhyâya, Ind. Streifen, I, p. 50.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[30:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_136) Mahîdhara offers the
following etymological derivation of this word: 1. from kva kva, 'where?
where?' \['He who, wishing to kill the Asuras, roams about everywhere,
crying "where, where are the Asuras?"'\]; 2. from kuk, 'a hideous
noise,' and ku*t*, 'to spread;' or 3. one who, in order to frighten the
Asuras, utters a sound resembling that of the bird called kukku*t*a
(cock). Professor Weber translates it by 'Brüller' (roarer, crier).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[30:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_137) Viz. when the rice
has been husked (by the Havishk*ri*t in the mortar). Schol. on Katy. Sr.
II, 4, 16.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[31:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_138) He puts them into
the central one of the potsherds for the Agni cake, and throws them on
the utkara, or heap of rubbish (cf. p. 25, note 1). Schol. on Kâty.
*S*r. II, 4, 19. Before he proceeds with his work, he has to touch
water; cf. p. 2, note 2.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[31:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_139) He separates them
whilst holding the mouth of the winnowing basket sideways or
horizontally, and makes the husked ones fall into the pot. Schol. on
Katy. *S*r. II, 4, 20. According to the Paddhati, he now puts the
unhusked once more into the mortar and threshes them again, and then
pouring them back into the basket repeats the same process.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[32:1](sbe1206.htm#fr_140) Viz. with the
fingers joined together so as not to allow any grains to fall to the
ground. Mahîdh.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[32:2](sbe1206.htm#fr_141) By removing the
minute husks and grains (ka*n*a) he makes the husked grains (ta*nd*ula)
free from dust and shiny (this is apparently done by repeated
winnowings). Schol. on Katy. Sr. II, 4, 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 1. Second Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe1207)
