[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1223) 
[Next](sbe1225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3">1:5:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:1">1:5:3:1</span></span>1. The
fore-offerings (prayâ*g*a), assuredly, are the seasons: hence there are
five of them, for there are five seasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:2">1:5:3:2</span></span>2. The
gods and the Asuras, both of them sprang from Pra*g*âpati, were once
contending for this sacrifice, (which is) their father Pra*g*âpati, the
year: 'Ours it (he) shall be!' 'Ours it (he) shall be!' they said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:3">1:5:3:3</span></span>3. Then
the gods went on praising and toiling. They saw these fore-offerings and
worshipped with them. By means of them they gained (pra-*g*i) the
seasons, the year; they deprived their rivals of the seasons, of the
year: hence (the fore-offerings are) victories (pra*g*aya), for,
assuredly, pra*g*aya is the very same term as prayâ*g*a
(fore-offering) <span id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_355). And in the same
way this one (the sacrificer) wins by means of them the seasons, the
year; deprives his rivals of the seasons, of the year. This is the
reason why he performs the fore-offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:4">1:5:3:4</span></span>4. The
sacrificial food at these offerings consists of

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

clarified butter. Now the butter, indeed, is a thunderbolt, and with
that thunderbolt, the butter, the gods gained the seasons, the year, and
deprived their rivals of the seasons, of the year. And with that
thunderbolt, the butter, he now, in the same way, gains the seasons, the
year, and deprives his enemies of the seasons, of the year. For this
reason clarified butter forms the sacrificial food at these (offerings).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:5">1:5:3:5</span></span>5. Now
this butter is the year's own liquor: hence the gods gained it (the
year) by means of its own liquor; and in the same way he also now gains
it by means of its own liquor. This is the reason why clarified butter
forms the sacrificial food at these (fore-offerings).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:6">1:5:3:6</span></span>6. Let
him (the Adhvaryu) not move from that same spot where he may be standing
when he calls for the fore-offerings. A battle, it is true, is witnessed
whenever any one performs the fore-offerings, and whichever of the two
combatants is worsted, that one, no doubt, retreats; and he who obtains
the victory, advances still nearer: he (the Adhvaryu) might therefore
(feel inclined to) step nearer and nearer (to the fire), and offer the
oblations (while moving) nearer and nearer <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_356).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:7">1:5:3:7</span></span>7. This,
however, he should not do; he should not move from that same spot where
he may be standing when he calls for the fore-offerings. Let

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

him rather offer the (five) oblations in that part (of the fire) where
he thinks there is the fiercest blaze; for only by being offered in
blazing (fire), oblations are successful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:8">1:5:3:8</span></span>8. He
(the Adhvaryu), having called (on, and having been responded to by, the
Âgnîdhra), says (to the Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the offering-prayer
(yâ*g*yâ) to the Samidhs (kindling-sticks)!' Thereby he kindles the
spring; the spring, when kindled, kindles the other seasons; the
seasons, when kindled, generate the creatures and ripen the plants. In
the same (formula) he also implies the (four) remaining seasons, and in
order to avoid sameness, he introduces the others by merely saying each
time, 'Pronounce the offering-prayer!' For were he to say, 'Pronounce
the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât!' 'Pronounce the offering-prayer to the
I*d*s!' and so on, he would commit (the fault of) repetition: hence he
introduces the remaining (seasons or fore-offerings) by merely saying
each time, 'Pronounce the offering-prayer <span
id="fr_360"></span>[1](#fn_357)!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:9">1:5:3:9</span></span>9. He
(the Hot*ri*) now pronounces the offering-prayer (yâ*g*yâ) to the
Samidhs. The samidh (kindler), doubtless, is the spring. The gods, at
that time, appropriated the spring, and deprived their rivals of the
spring; and now this one (the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

sacrificer) also appropriates the spring, and deprives his rivals of the
spring: this is the reason why he pronounces the offering-prayer to the
Samidhs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:10">1:5:3:10</span></span>10.
After that he pronounces the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât. Tanûnapât,
doubtless, is the summer; for the summer burns the bodies (tanûn tapati)
of these creatures. The gods, at that time, appropriated the summer, and
deprived their rivals of the summer; and now this one also appropriates
the summer, and deprives his rivals of the summer: this is the reason
why he pronounces the offering-prayer to Tanûnapât.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:11">1:5:3:11</span></span>11. He
then pronounces the offering-prayer to the I*d*s. The I*d*s (praises),
doubtless, are the rains; they are the rains, inasmuch as the vile,
crawling (vermin) <span id="fr_361"></span>[1](#fn_358) which shrink
during the summer and winter, then (in the rainy season) move about in
quest of food, as it were, praising (î*d*) the rains: therefore the
I*d*s are the rains. The gods, at that time, appropriated the rains, and
deprived their rivals of the rains; and now this one also appropriates
the rains, and deprives his rivals of the rains: this is the reason why
he pronounces the offering-prayer to the I*d*s.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:12">1:5:3:12</span></span>12. He
then pronounces the offering-prayer to the Barhis (covering of
sacrificial grass on the altar). The barhis, doubtless, is the autumn;
the barhis is the autumn, inasmuch as these plants which shrink during
the summer and winter grow by the rains, and in autumn lie spread open
after the fashion of barhis: for this reason the barhis is the autumn.
The gods, at that time, appropriated the autumn, and deprived their
rivals of the autumn;

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

and now this one also appropriates the autumn, and deprives his rivals
of the autumn: this is why he pronounces the prayer to the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:13">1:5:3:13</span></span>13. He
then pronounces the offering-prayer with 'Svâhâ! Svâhâ <span
id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_359)!' The Svâhâ-call, namely, marks the end
of the sacrifice, and the end of the year is the winter, since the
winter is on the other (remoter) side of the spring. By the end (of the
sacrifice) the gods, at that time, appropriated the end (of the year);
by the end they deprived their rivals of the end; and by the end this
one also now appropriates the end; by the end he deprives his rivals of
the end: this is why he pronounces the offering-prayers with 'Svâhâ!
Svâhâ!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:14">1:5:3:14</span></span>14. Now
the spring, assuredly, comes into life again out of the winter, for out
of the one the other is born again: therefore he who knows this, is
indeed born again in this world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:15">1:5:3:15</span></span>15. In
order to avoid sameness he prays (alternately) with 'may they accept!'
and 'may he (or it) accept <span id="fr_363"></span>[2](#fn_360)!' for
he would commit (the fault) of repetition,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

if he were to pray with 'may they accept!' each time, or with 'may he
accept!' each time. By 'may they accept!' doubtless, females (are
implied); and by 'may he accept!' a male (is implied): thereby a
productive union is effected, and for this reason he prays (alternately)
with 'may they accept!' and 'may he (or it) accept!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:16">1:5:3:16</span></span>16. Now
at the fourth fore-offering, to the barhis, he pours (butter) together
(into the *g*uhû <span id="fr_364"></span>[1](#fn_361)). The barhis,
namely, represents descendants, and the butter seed: hence seed is
thereby infused into the descendants, and by that infused seed
descendants are generated again and again. For this reason he pours
together (butter) at the fourth fore-offering, that to the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:17">1:5:3:17</span></span>17.
Now, a battle, as it were, is going on here when any one performs the
fore-offerings; and whichever of the two combatants a friend (an ally)
joins, he obtains the victory: hence a friend thereby joins the *g*uhû
from out of the upabh*ri*t, and by him it (or he) obtains the victory.
This is why he pours together (butter) at the fourth fore-offering, that
to the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:18">1:5:3:18</span></span>18. The
sacrificer, doubtless, (stands) behind the *g*uhû, and he who means evil
to him, (stands)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

behind the upabh*ri*t: hence he thereby makes the spiteful enemy pay
tribute to the sacrificer. The consumer, doubtless, (stands) behind the
*g*uhû, and the one to be consumed behind the upabh*ri*t hence he
thereby makes the one that is to be consumed pay tribute to the
consumer. This is the reason why he pours (butter) together at the
fourth fore-offering, that to the barhis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:19">1:5:3:19</span></span>19. He
pours (the butter) together without (the two spoons) touching (each
other). If he were to touch (the one spoon with the other) he would
touch the sacrificer with his spiteful enemy, he would touch the
consumer with the one to be consumed: for this reason he pours (the
butter) together without touching.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:20">1:5:3:20</span></span>20. He
holds the *g*uhû over the upabh*ri*t). Thereby he keeps the sacrificer
above his spiteful enemy, he keeps the consumer above the one to be
consumed: for this reason he holds the *g*uhû over (the upabh*ri*t).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:21">1:5:3:21</span></span>21. The
gods once said, 'Well then, now that the battle has been won, let us
establish the entire sacrifice on a firm basis; and should the Asuras
and Rakshas (again) trouble us, our sacrifice will then be firmly
established!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:22">1:5:3:22</span></span>22. At
the last fore-offering they established the entire sacrifice by means of
the Svâhâ ('hail!'). With 'Svâhâ Agni!' they established the
butter-portion for Agni; with 'Svâhâ Soma!' they established the
butter-portion for Soma; and with (the second) 'Svâhâ Agni!' they
established that indispensable sacrificial cake which there is on both
occasions (i.e. at the new- and full-moon sacrifices).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:23">1:5:3:23</span></span>23. And
so with the (other) deities

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

respectively <span id="fr_365"></span>[1](#fn_362). With 'Svâhâ the
butter-drinking gods!' they established the fore-offerings and the
after-offerings (anuyâ*g*as), for the fore-offerings and
after-offerings, doubtless, represent the butter-drinking gods. With the
formula 'May Agni graciously accept of the butter!' they established
Agni as Svish*t*ak*ri*t ('maker of good offering'), for Agni is indeed
the maker of good offering. And till this day that sacrifice stands as
firm as the gods established it. This is the reason why at the last
fore-offering he prays with Svâhâ! Svâhâ!' according to the number of
oblations (there are at the chief sacrifice). After he (the sacrificer)
has won his battle, he establishes the entire sacrifice on a firm basis,
so that, if after this he should violate the proper order of the
sacrifice, he need not heed it; for he will know that his sacrifice is
firmly established. Now what with exclaiming 'Vashat,' with offering,
and with calling out 'Svâhâ,' this same sacrifice was well-nigh
exhausted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:24">1:5:3:24</span></span>24. The
gods were anxious as to how they might replenish it, how they might
again render it efficient and practise (worshipping) with it, when
efficient.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:5:3:25">1:5:3:25</span></span>25. Now
what was left in the *g*uhû of the butter wherewith they had established
the sacrifice, with that they sprinkled the havis (dishes, or kinds, of
sacrificial food) one after another, and thereby replenished them and
again rendered them efficient, because the butter is indeed efficient.
Hence after offering the last fore-offering, he sprinkles the havis one
after another, and thereby replenishes them and again renders them
efficient, because the butter is indeed efficient <span
id="fr_366"></span>[2](#fn_363). Hence also from whatever sacrificial

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

food he (afterwards at the principal oblations) cuts off (a portion for
a deity), that he again sprinkles (with butter), that he replenishes and
renders efficient for the (Svish*t*ak*ri*t) maker of good offering. But
when he cuts off the portion for the maker of good offering, then he
does not again sprinkle (the sacrificial food out of which the portion
has been cut), since after that he will not make any other oblation in
the fire from the sacrificial food <span
id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_364).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_355"></span>[144:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_358) In reality
prayâ*g*a (from ya*g*, 'to sacrifice') has, of course, nothing to do
with pra*g*aya (from *g*i, 'to conquer').

<span id="fn_356"></span>[145:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_359) Though the author
does not state expressly that this change of position in performing the
five fore-offerings is advocated by some other ritualists, he apparently
argues in this passage against an actually adopted theory and practice,
which the Sûtras also mention as optional. In the case of the Adhvaryu
changing his position, he is at each successive fore-offering to pour
the butter on a part of the fire east of the preceding one. Kâty. III,
2, 18-21.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[146:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_360) On the necessity of
avoiding sameness of ritualistic practices cf. note on I, 3, 2, 8. The
five fore-offerings (prayâ*g*a, here identified with the five seasons)
are addressed respectively to the kindling-sticks (samidh), to Tanûnapât
(or Narâ*s*a*m*sa, both mystical forms of Agni), to the I*d*s
(personifications of the forms of devotional feeling), to the
sacrificial grass-covering of the altar (barhis), and to Agni and Soma
(or other deities). Since, in introducing the first fore-offering, the
Adhvaryu has mentioned its recipient, he is not to do so in the case of
the remaining four.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[147:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_361) Such as lizards,
alligators. Sâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[148:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_362) See further on,
par. 22. As to Svâhâ! marking the conclusion of the sacrifice, see the
Samish*t*aya*g*us I, 9, 2, 25-28.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[148:2](sbe1224.htm#fr_363) The first
offering-prayer (to the logs) is 'yê ya*g*âmahe samidha*h*, samidho agna
â*g*yasya vyantû vâusha*t*!' i.e. 'we who pronounce the offering-prayer
to the Samidhs,--the Samidhs, O Agni, may accept the butter! vâusha*t*!'
Similarly at the other fore-offerings; but at the second and fourth,
where the object of worship is a single one (viz. Tanûnapât and the
Barhis respectively), 'may he (or it) accept (vetu)!' has to be
substituted for 'may they accept (vyantu)!' The difference of number in
these verbal forms is symbolically explained as implying a distinction
of sex, for the reason that there may be more wives to one man, but only
one husband to a woman. The elliptic expression ye ya*g*âmahe is thus
explained by Sâya*n*a on Taitt. S. I, 6, 11: 'All we Hot*ri* priests
that are urged on by the Adhvaryu calling "Recite (thou)!" we do recite,
we do pronounce <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> the yâ*g*yâ.' This
introductory part of the offering-formula is called âgur, 'acclamation,
assent' (Â*s*v. I, 5, 4); it is alluded to in Mahâbhâr. Vanap. I2480
(cf. Muir, O. S. T. I, p. 135), and apparently by Pâ*n*. VIII, 2, 88
(cf. Haug, Ait. Br. II, p. 133 n.).

<span id="fn_361"></span>[149:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_364) In making the
oblation, the Adhvaryu holds the *g*uhû over the upabh*ri*t and pours
some of the butter from the *g*uhû over the spout of the upabh*ri*t into
the fire. At the third prayâ*g*a he empties all the butter remaining in
the *g*uhû into the fire, and thereupon, for the fourth oblation,
replenishes the empty spoon with half the contents of the upabh*ri*t,
after which he proceeds as before.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[151:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_365) Cf. [p.
118](sbe1218.htm#page_118), note [3](sbe1218.htm#fn_309). The words
'Svâhâ Agnim' &c. are preceded by 'ye ya*g*âmahe,' see before, [p.
148](#page_148), note [2](#fn_360).

<span id="fn_363"></span>[151:2](sbe1224.htm#fr_366) After the Adhvaryu
has performed the last fore-offering, he <span id="page_152">p.
152</span> steps back behind the altar and sitting down beside the
dishes of sacrificial food, anoints, with the butter remaining in the
*g*uhû, first the (butter in the) dhruvâ, then the several sacrificial
dishes; and finally the (butter in the) upabh*ri*t. Kâty. III, 3, 9.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[152:1](sbe1224.htm#fr_367) What remains of the
dish of sacrificial food, after the oblation to Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t (I,
7, 3, 1 seq.) has been made, is eaten by the priests and the sacrificer,
and in their case the several portions are basted with butter, as they
are cut off, but not the dish of food from which the portions have been
taken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 5, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1225)
