[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1256) 
[Next](sbe1258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2">2:5:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

##### B. THE VARU*N*APRAGHÂSA OFFERINGS.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:1">2:5:2:1</span></span>1. Now it
was by means of the Vai*s*vadeva that Pra*g*âpati produced living
beings. The beings produced by him ate (ghas) Varu*n*a's barley corn;
for originally the barley belonged to Varu*n*a. And from their eating
Varu*n*a's barley corn the name Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h* (is derived).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:2">2:5:2:2</span></span>2.
Varu*n*a seized them; and on being seized by Varu*n*a, they became rent
all over <span id="fr_881"></span>[1](#fn_877); and they lay and sat
them down breathing in and breathing out. The out-breathing and
in-breathing forsook them not, but all the other deities <span
id="fr_882"></span>[2](#fn_878) forsook them; and owing to these two,
the creatures did not perish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:3">2:5:2:3</span></span>3.
Pra*g*âpati healed them by means of that oblation: both the creatures
that were born and those that were unborn he delivered from Varu*n*a's
noose; and his creatures were born without disease and blemish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:4">2:5:2:4</span></span>4. Now
when this (sacrificer) performs these offerings in the fourth month
(after the Vai*s*vadeva), he does so either because thus Varu*n*a does
not seize his offspring, or because the gods performed (the same
offering); and both the children that have been born to him and those
that are yet unborn he thereby delivers from Varu*n*a's noose, and his
children are born without disease and blemish. This is why he performs
these offerings in the fourth month.

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:5">2:5:2:5</span></span>5. At
this (sacrifice) there are two altars and two fires <span
id="fr_883"></span>[1](#fn_879). The reason why there are two altars and
two

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

fires, is that thereby one frees the creatures from Varu*n*a's noose
both ways,--on the one side (he frees) the upright, and on the other
those looking to the ground: this is why there are two altars and two
fires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:6">2:5:2:6</span></span>6. On the
northern (uttara) altar he raises the uttara-vedi (upper or north
altar), not on the southern one. Varu*n*a, doubtless, is the nobility,
and the Maruts are the people: he thus makes the nobility superior
(uttara) to the people; and hence people here serve the Kshatriya,
placed above them. This is why he raises the uttara-vedi on the
northern, not on the southern altar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:7">2:5:2:7</span></span>7. In the
first place there are those five oblations <span
id="fr_884"></span>[1](#fn_880). For by means of those five oblations
Pra*g*âpati produced the creatures, with them he freed the creatures
both ways from Varu*n*a's noose,--on the one side (he freed) the
upright, and on the other those that tend to the ground: this is why
there are those five oblations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:8">2:5:2:8</span></span>8. Then
follows a cake on twelve potsherds for Indra and Agni. Indra and Agni
indeed are the out-breathing and in-breathing: thus this is like

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

doing a good turn to one who has done him a good turn; for it is owing
to these two that his creatures <span id="fr_885"></span>[1](#fn_881)
did not perish. Hence he now restores his creatures by means of the
out-breathing and in-breathing, bestows out-breathing and in-breathing
on them: this is why there is a cake on twelve potsherds for Indra and
Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:9">2:5:2:9</span></span>9. On
both (fires) there is an oblation of curds. It is on milk that the
creatures subsist and by means of milk that they were preserved: hence
it is with that by which they were preserved and whereon they subsist,
that he delivers them both ways from Varu*n*a's noose,--on the one side
(he delivers) the upright and on the other those looking to the ground.
This is why there is an oblation of curds on both (fires).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:10">2:5:2:10</span></span>10. The
northern one is offered to Varu*n*a, since it was Varu*n*a who seized
his (Pra*g*âpati's) creatures: hence he thereby directly delivers them
from Varu*n*a's noose. The southern one is offered to the Maruts. It is
for the sake of diversity that it is offered to the Maruts; for a
repetition he would undoubtedly commit, were he to offer both to
Varu*n*a. Moreover, it was from the south that the Maruts intended to
slay his (Pra*g*âpati's) creatures, and with that share he propitiated
them: for this reason the southern (oblation of curds) belongs to the
Maruts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:11">2:5:2:11</span></span>11.
Upon both (dishes of curds) he scatters karîra-fruits <span
id="fr_886"></span>[2](#fn_882); for with karîra-fruits Pra*g*âpati

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

bestowed happiness (ka) on the creatures, and so does he (the
sacrificer) thereby bestow happiness on the creatures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:12">2:5:2:12</span></span>12.
Upon both of them he also scatters *s*amî-leaves; for with *s*amî-leaves
Pra*g*âpati bestowed bliss (*s*am) on the creatures, and so does he now
thereby bestow bliss on the creatures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:13">2:5:2:13</span></span>13.
Then follows a cake on one potsherd for Ka (Pra*g*âpati); for by that
cake on one potsherd to Ka Pra*g*âpati indeed bestowed happiness (ka) on
the creatures, and so does he (the sacrificer) now bestow happiness on
the creatures by that one-cup cake: this is why there is a cake on one
potsherd for Ka.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:14">2:5:2:14</span></span>14. And
on the first day, after husking and slightly roasting barley on the
Dakshi*n*âgni, they prepare therewith as many dishes of karambha <span
id="fr_887"></span>[1](#fn_883) as there are members of the
(sacrificer's) family, exceeded by one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:15">2:5:2:15</span></span>15. At
the same time they also prepare a ram and a ewe; and if he be able to
procure wool other than from e*d*aka sheep, let him wash it and stick it
on both the ram and the ewe; but should he not be able to procure wool
other than from e*d*aka sheep, tufts of ku*s*a grass may also be (used).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:16">2:5:2:16</span></span>16. The
reason why there are a ram and a ewe is chat the ram manifestly is
Varu*n*a's victim, so that he thereby manifestly delivers the creatures
from Varu*n*a's noose. They are made of barley, because it was when they
(the creatures) had eaten barley that Varu*n*a seized them. A pair they
form, so that he

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

delivers the creatures from Varu*n*a's noose through conjugal union.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:17">2:5:2:17</span></span>17. The
ewe he places on the southern, and the ram on the northern dish of
curds; for in this way alone a proper union is effected, since the woman
lies on the left (or north) side of the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:18">2:5:2:18</span></span>18. The
Adhvaryu places all the (other) sacrificial dishes upon the northern
altar; and the Pratiprasthât*ri* places on the southern altar that dish
of curds (belonging to the Maruts).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:19">2:5:2:19</span></span>19.
Having thus placed the sacrificial dishes, he churns the fire; and
having churned it and placed it on (the hearth) <span
id="fr_888"></span>[1](#fn_884), he offers thereon, The Adhvaryu in the
first place says (to the Hot*ri*) <span id="fr_889"></span>[2](#fn_885),
'Recite to the fire that is being kindled!' Both (the Adhvaryu and the
Pratiprasthât*ri*) then put firewood on (the fire) and both reserve one
kindling-stick each; and they both pour out the first libation (âghâra).
Thereupon the Adhvaryu says, 'Agnîdh, trim the fire!' Although the
summons is given, the trimming does not take place (immediately) <span
id="fr_890"></span>[3](#fn_886)

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:20">2:5:2:20</span></span>20.
Thereupon the Pratiprasthât*ri* returns (to where the sacrificer's wife
is seated). When he is about to lead the wife away, he asks her, 'With

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

whom holdest thou intercourse?' Now when a woman who belongs to one
(man) carries on intercourse with another, she undoubtedly commits (a
sin) against Varu*n*a. He therefore thus asks her, lest she should
sacrifice with a secret pang in her mind; for when confessed the sin
becomes less, since it becomes truth; this is why he thus asks her. And
whatever (connection) she confesses <span
id="fr_891"></span>[1](#fn_887) not, that indeed will turn out injurious
to her relatives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:21">2:5:2:21</span></span>21. He
then makes her say the text (III, 44), 'We invoke the Maruts, the
voracious consumers of enemies, delighting in their porridge.' This
(verse) is (of like import) as the invitatory prayer she therewith
invites them to these dishes <span id="fr_892"></span>[2](#fn_888).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:22">2:5:2:22</span></span>22. Of
these (dishes) there is one for each descendant; as many (children) as
there are in the (sacrificer's) family, so many (dishes) there are,
exceeded by one. There being one for each descendant, he thereby
delivers from Varu*n*a's noose one by one the children born to him; and
there being an additional one, he thereby delivers from Varu*n*a's

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

noose those children of his that are as yet unborn: this is why there
are (the same number of dishes) exceeded by one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:23">2:5:2:23</span></span>23. (In
the form of) dishes they are, because it is from dishes that food is
eaten; and of barley they are prepared, because it was when they (the
creatures) had eaten the barley corn that Varu*n*a seized them. From the
winnowing basket she offers, because food is prepared by means of the
winnowing basket. The wife offers (together with her husband): thus he
delivers his offspring from Varu*n*a's noose through conjugal union.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:24">2:5:2:24</span></span>24. She
offers previously to the sacrifice, previously to the oblations, since
the people do not eat offerings, and the Maruts are the people. Now when
Pra*g*âpati's creatures, being seized by Varu*n*a, became rent all over,
and sat and lay them down, breathing in and breathing out, then the
Maruts destroyed their sin; and so do the Maruts now destroy the sin of
his (the sacrificer's) offspring. This is why she offers previously to
the sacrifice, previously to the oblations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:25">2:5:2:25</span></span>25.
He <span id="fr_893"></span>[1](#fn_889) offers in the southern fire,
with the text (III, 45), 'Whatever (sin we have committed) in the
village and forest,'--for both in the village and in the forest sin is
committed;--'whatever in society and in our own self,'--by 'whatever (we
have committed) in society,' he means to say 'against man;' and by
'whatever in our own self' (indriya), he means to say 'against the
gods;'--'whatever sin

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

we have here committed, that we expiate by offering, Svâhâ!'--whereby he
says 'whatsoever sin we have committed, from all that we rid ourselves.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:26">2:5:2:26</span></span>26.
Thereupon he mutters the (verse) addressed to Indra and referring to the
Maruts.--Now when the Maruts destroyed the sin of Pra*g*âpati's
creatures, he thought within himself, 'I hope they will not destroy my
creatures.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:27">2:5:2:27</span></span>27. He
muttered that (verse) addressed to Indra and referring to the Maruts.
Indra indeed is the nobility, and the Maruts are the people; and the
nobility are the controllers of the people: 'They shall be controlled,'
he thought; and therefore (that verse, Vâ*g*. S. III, 46) is addressed
to Indra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:28">2:5:2:28</span></span>28.
'Let there not, O Indra, be (fight) for us here in battles with the
gods, since there is a share for thee in the sacrifice, O fiery
one!--for thee, the mighty showerer of gifts, whose Maruts the song of
the offerer stream-like celebrates.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:29">2:5:2:29</span></span>29. He
then makes her say the text (Vâ*g*. S. III, 47), 'The men skilled in the
work have done the work,'--those skilled in the work have indeed done
the work;--'with pleasing song;'--for with song they have done it.
'Having done the work for the gods;'--for the gods indeed they have done
the work; 'go home, ye companions!'--they are now together with her
while she is led thither from an other place: hence she says, 'ye
companions' (sa*k*âbhû, 'being together'). 'Go home,' she says, because
that wife doubtless is the hind part of the sacrifice, and he has just
now made her take her seat to the east of the sacrifice. 'Home'
doubtless means the house, and the house is a resting-place: hence he
thereby makes her rest in that resting-place, the house.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:30">2:5:2:30</span></span>30.
Having led her back (to her seat) the Pratiprasthât*ri* returns (to his
place by the side of the southern altar). They now trim the fire <span
id="fr_894"></span>[1](#fn_890). When the fire has been trimmed, both
(the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri*) make the second libation (of
butter). Thereupon the Adhvaryu, having called (on the Âgnîdhra) for the
'*S*rausha*t*,' chooses the Hot*ri*. The chosen Hot*ri* then seats
himself on the Hot*ri*'s seat beside the northern altar; and having
seated himself, he urges (the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri*) to
proceed. Being thus urged to proceed, they both take up the spoons and
step across (to the south side of the fires). After stepping across and
calling for the '*S*rausha*t*,' the Adhvaryu says (to the Hot*ri*),
'Pronounce the offering-prayer on the kindling-sticks!' and 'Pronounce
the offering-prayer!' at each (subsequent fore-offering). Pouring (the
butter in the spoons) together (into the *g*uhû) at the fourth <span
id="fr_895"></span>[2](#fn_891), they both proceed with the nine
fore-offerings <span id="fr_896"></span>[3](#fn_892).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:31">2:5:2:31</span></span>31.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu says (to the Hot*ri*),

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Pronounce the
invitatory prayer to Agni!' referring to Agni's butter-portion <span
id="fr_897"></span>[1](#fn_893). Both (the Adhvaryu and
Pratiprasthât*ri*) having taken four 'cuttings' of butter, they step
across (to the north side of their respective fires). Having stepped
across and called for the '*S*rausha*t*,' the Adhvaryu says (to the
Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the offering-formula to Agni!' After the 'Vasha*t*'
has been uttered, they both pour out the oblation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:32">2:5:2:32</span></span>32. The
Adhvaryu then says, 'Pronounce (the invitatory prayer) to Soma!'
referring to Soma's butter-portion. Both having taken four cuttings of
butter, they step across. Having stepped across and called for the
'*S*rausha*t*,' the Adhvaryu says (to the Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the
offering-prayer to Soma!' After the 'Vasha*t*' has been uttered, they
both pour out the oblation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:33">2:5:2:33</span></span>33.
Thus whatever has to be done by speech, that the Adhvaryu does, and not
the Pratiprasthât*ri*. Now as to why the Adhvaryu alone calls for the
'*S*rausha*t*.' Here indeed when the 'Vasha*t*' is pronounced,

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:34">2:5:2:34</span></span>34. The
Pratiprasthât*ri* is merely the imitator of what is done (by the
Adhvaryu). For Varu*n*a is the nobility, and the Maruts are the people:
hence he thereby makes the people the imitators, the followers of the
nobility. But were the Pratiprasthât*ri* also to call for the
'*S*rausha*t*,' he would doubtless make the people equal in power to the
nobility: for this reason the Pratiprasthât*ri* does not call for the
'*S*rausha*t*.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:35">2:5:2:35</span></span>35. The
Pratiprasthât*ri* sits down, after taking the two offering-spoons in his
hand. The Adhvaryu then

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

proceeds with those oblations,--viz. Agni's cake on eight potsherds,
Soma's pap, Savit*ri*'s cake on twelve or eight potsherds, Sarasvatî's
pap, Pûshan's pap, and Indra and Agni's cake on twelve potsherds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:36">2:5:2:36</span></span>36.
Thereupon, being about to proceed with those two oblations of curds,
(the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri*) exchange (the ram and ewe): the ram
which was on the Maruts' (dish of curds) he (the Adhvaryu) places on
that of Varu*n*a; and the ewe which was on Varu*n*a's (dish of curds) he
(the Pratiprasthât*ri*) places on that of the Maruts. Now the reason why
they make this exchange, is this,--Varu*n*a is the nobility, and the
male represents energy: hence they thereby bestow energy on the
nobility. The female, on the other hand, is without energy; and the
Maruts are the people: hence they thereby cause the people to be without
energy. This is why they make this exchange.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:37">2:5:2:37</span></span>37. The
Adhvaryu now says (to the Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the invitatory prayer to
Varu*n*a!' He then pours an 'under-layer' of butter (into the *g*uhû),
takes two cuttings from Varu*n*a's curds, and with either of the two
cuttings puts the rant (in the spoon). He then pours butter thereon,
replenishes (the place whence) the two cuttings (have been made), and
steps across (to the south side of the fire). After stepping across and
calling for the '*S*rausha*t*,' he says (to the Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the
offering-prayer to Varu*n*a!' and, on the 'Vashat' being uttered, he
pours out the oblation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:38">2:5:2:38</span></span>38.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu takes both spoons in his left hand; and taking
hold of the Pratiprasthât*ri*'s garment, says (to the Hot*ri*),
'Pronounce the invitatory prayer to the Maruts!' The

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pratiprasthât*ri*
then makes an 'under-layer' of butter (in his *g*uhû and two cuttings
from the curds of the Maruts, and with either of the two cuttings puts
the ewe (in the spoon). He then pours butter thereon, replenishes (the
place of) the two cuttings, and steps across (to the south of the fire).
The Adhvaryu, having called for the '*S*rausha*t*,' says (to the
Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the offering-prayer to the Maruts!' and on the
'Vasha*t*' being uttered, (the Pratiprasthât*ri*) he pours out the
oblation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:39">2:5:2:39</span></span>39. The
Adhvaryu then proceeds with the cake on eleven potsherds for Ka; and
having made that offering, he says, 'Pronounce the invitatory prayer to
Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t (" the maker of good offering")!' The Adhvaryu then
takes cuttings from all (his) oblations, one from each; and the
Pratiprasthât*ri* also takes one cutting from that oblation of curds (to
the Maruts). They then pour twice butter upon (the portions), and step
across (to the south side of the fires). On stepping across and calling
for the '*S*rausha*t*,' the Adhvaryu says, 'Pronounce the
offering-prayer to Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t;' and after the (concluding)
'Vasha*t*,' they both pour out the oblation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:40">2:5:2:40</span></span>40. The
Adhvaryu now cuts off the fore-portion. Having then cut off the I*d*â
piece by piece, he hands it to the Pratiprasthât*ri*; and the
Pratiprasthât*ri* puts thereon two cuttings from the Maruts' curds. He
(the Adhvaryu) then pours twice butter thereon. After invoking (the
I*d*â), they cleanse themselves <span id="fr_898"></span>[1](#fn_894).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:41">2:5:2:41</span></span>41.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu says, 'O Brahman, shall I step forward?' Having
put on the (remaining) kindling-stick <span
id="fr_899"></span>[2](#fn_895) he says, Agnîdh, trim the fire!

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He, the Adhvaryu,
then pours the clotted butter <span id="fr_900"></span>[1](#fn_896) (in
the p*ri*shadâ*g*ya-upabh*ri*t) into the two spoons (the *g*uhû and
upabh*ri*t); and the Pratiprasthât*ri* also, if he have any clotted
butter, divides it into two parts and pours it (into the two spoons);
but if there is no clotted butter, he divides the butter in the
upabh*ri*t in two parts and pours them out separately. Then both step
across (to the south side of the fires). The Adhvaryu, having stepped
across and called for the '*S*rausha*t*,' says (to the Hot*ri*),
'Pronounce the offering-formula to the gods!' and, 'Pronounce the
offering-formula!' at each (subsequent after-offering). Thus they both
perform the nine after-offerings <span id="fr_901"></span>[2](#fn_897),
pouring together (the butter from the spoons) at the (or at every)
fourth after-offering. The reason why there are nine fore-offerings and
nine after-offerings, is that he thereby delivers the creatures both
times from Varu*n*a's noose,--by the former (he delivers) the upright
and by the latter those looking to the ground: for this reason there are
nine fore-offerings and nine after-offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:42">2:5:2:42</span></span>42.
They both then separate the spoons <span
id="fr_902"></span>[3](#fn_898), after laying them (on the altars).
Having separated the spoons, and anointed the enclosing-sticks; and
having thereupon taken hold of the (middle) enclosing-stick,

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

and called for the (Âgnîdhra's) '*S*rausha*t*,' the Adhvaryu thus
addresses (the Hot*ri*) <span id="fr_903"></span>[1](#fn_899), 'The
divine Hot*ri*s are summoned for the proclamation of success; the human
is called upon for the song of praise!' The Hot*ri* then intones the
song of praise (sûktavâka). Thereupon both seize their prastara-bunches
and throw them (into the fires); both take a single straw each therefrom
and remain sitting by (the fires); when the Hot*ri* recites the song of
praise,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:43">2:5:2:43</span></span>43. The
Âgnîdhra says, 'Throw after!' Both (the Adhvaryu and Pratiprasthât*ri*)
throw (the stalk) after (the prastara); and both touch themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:44">2:5:2:44</span></span>44. He
(the Âgnîdhra) then says <span id="fr_904"></span>[2](#fn_900),
'Discourse (with me)!' \[The Adhvaryu asks,\] 'Has he gone (to the
gods), Agnîdh? He has gone!'--'Bid (the gods) hear!'--'Yea, may (one)
hear!'--'Goodspeed to the divine Hot*ri*s! Success to the human!'---The
Adhvaryu also (afterwards) <span id="fr_905"></span>[3](#fn_901) says
(to the Hot*ri*), 'Pronounce the "All-hail and blessing!"' They both
throw the enclosing-sticks (into the fire); and after taking up the
spoons together, they both place them on the wooden sword <span
id="fr_906"></span>[4](#fn_902).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:45">2:5:2:45</span></span>45.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu returns (to the Gârhapatya fire) and performs the
Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as <span id="fr_907"></span>[5](#fn_903). The
Pratiprasthât*ri*, in the meantime,

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

remains waiting. After performing the Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as, the Adhvaryu
steps up (to the northern fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:46">2:5:2:46</span></span>46. He
(the Adhvaryu) performs the three Samish*t*aya*g*us (with the respective
texts) <span id="fr_908"></span>[1](#fn_904); the Pratiprasthât*ri*
takes up his spoon (and performs those oblations) silently.--The same
garments, worn by the sacrificer and his wife at the Vai*s*vadeva,
should be put on also on this occasion. They now take (the havis) mixed
with the burnt scrapings of the Varu*n*a curds, and betake themselves to
(the place of) the expiatory bath (avabh*ri*tha). This (ablution) stands
in relation to Varu*n*a, (being performed) with a view to deliverance
from Varu*n*a's power. No Sâman-hymn is sung on this occasion, for at
this (sacrifice) nothing whatever is performed with a Sâman-hymn. Having
silently walked thither and entered (the water), he (the Adhvaryu)
immerses (the vessel containing the scrapings).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:47">2:5:2:47</span></span>47.
With the text (Vâ*g*. S. III, 48), 'O laving bath, laving thou glidest
along: with the help of the gods may I wipe out the sin committed
against the gods, and with the help of mortals the sin committed against
mortals! Preserve me, O God, from injury from the fiercely-howling
(demon)!' Those (garments worn while bathing) <span
id="fr_909"></span>[2](#fn_905) he may give

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

to whichever (priest) he chooses, since they are not the garments of an
initiated person. Even as a snake casts its skin, so does he cast away
all his sin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:5:2:48">2:5:2:48</span></span>48.
Thereupon they shave (the sacrificer's) hair and beard; and take up the
two fires <span id="fr_910"></span>[1](#fn_906),--for only after
changing his place (to the ordinary sacrificial ground) he performs that
(other) sacrifice <span id="fr_911"></span>[2](#fn_907), since it is not
proper that he should perform the Agnihotra on the uttaravedi: for this
reason he changes his place. Having gone to the house <span
id="fr_912"></span>[3](#fn_908) and 'churned out' the fires, he performs
the full-moon offering. These seasonal offerings doubtless are detached
sacrifices; whereas the full-moon offering is a regular, established
sacrifice: hence he finally establishes himself by means of that regular
sacrifice; and therefore he changes his place (to the ordinary
sacrificial ground).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_877"></span>[391:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_881) Paridîr*n*a, i.e.
swollen, dropsical.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[391:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_882) In the St. Petersb.
Dict. devatâ is here taken as 'organ of sense.'

<span id="fn_879"></span>[392:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_883) For the performance
of the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h* the Adhvaryu and his assistant, the
Pratiprasthât*ri*, have to prepare,--to the east of the Âhavanîya, and
at the distance of at least three steps (prakrama) from it,--two altars,
separate from each other by about a span (of thumb and fore-finger), one
south of the other. The northern one, belonging to the Adhvaryu, is to
measure between four and five cubits along the west side, and between
three and four cubits along the east side; the two sides being between
six and eight cubits distant from each other. The southern altar,
reserved for the Pratiprasthât*ri*; is to be of the usual size of the
altar at the havirya*gñ*â. The ceremonies, detailed in I, 2, Brâhma*n*as
4 and 5, have to be performed also on the present occasion. In the
middle of the east side of the northern altar a stake is fixed in the
ground. On the north side of the northern altar, and contiguous with it,
a pit (*k*âtvâla), 1⅓ cubits (the length of the wedge) square, is dug,
so as to be separated on the west from the utkara (heap of rubbish) by a
narrow passage. With the mould dug up from the pit, the so-called
uttara-vedi (upper or north altar) is raised on the northern altar,
either of the same dimensions as the pit (1⅓ cubits square) or one third
of the area of the northern altar, and so that the stake marks the
middle of its east side. In the centre of this mound he makes a hollow
(or 'navel'), a span square; and the whole mound is then bestrewed with
fine gravel. The texts used while tracing the sides of the pit, thrice
throwing the wooden sword within the marked-off space, and raising the
uttara-vedi, are given Vâ*g*. S. V, 9-10. During the night the
uttara-vedi remains covered with udumbara or plaksha branches or with
sacrificial grass. Next morning the two fires for the newly-constructed
fireplaces are taken from the Âhavanîya, either by dividing the latter
into two equal parts, or by means of two bundles of firewood (threefold
bound, see [p. 389](sbe1256.htm#page_389), note
[1](sbe1256.htm#fn_870)), lighted at it, and carried eastwards in a pan
covered with sand or mould. While the fires, together with the lustral
water and a spoonful of ghee, taken from the pot by five ladlings with
the sruva, are taken eastward, the Hot*ri* thrice recites the verse 'Pra
devyam deva,' &c.; and the Pratiprasthât*ri* draws, with the wooden
sword, a line from the Âhavanîya to the south-west corner (or 'right
hip') of the northern altar, or to the uttara-vedi. The Adhvaryu,
standing between the two altars, then besprinkles the uttara-vedi with
water, while muttering the <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> texts
Vâ*g*. S. V, II; whereupon he pours out on it crosswise the spoonful of
clarified butter, with the texts V, 12; and lays, with the mantras V,
13, three enclosing-sticks (paridhi) of pîtadâru wood round the 'navel'
(see I, 3, 4, 2 seq.), and puts bdellium, fragrant reed-grass, and the
front-hair of a ram on the 'navel' as a foundation (sambhâra, see II, 1,
1, 1 seq.) for the fire, which is then laid down thereon. On a
hearth-mound (khara), a cubit square, formed on the southern altar, the
Pratiprasthât*ri* also lays down his fire, after performing the usual
fivefold lustration (see [p. 2](sbe1203.htm#page_2)). Thereupon the
pra*n*îtâ-water is brought forward in the way set forth at I, 1, 1, 12
seq. Kâty. V, 3, 9-4, 21. For a different mode of transferring the fire
to the special fire-places, see [p. 396](#page_396), note [1](#fn_884).

<span id="fn_880"></span>[393:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_884) See II. 5, 1, 11,
with note.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[394:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_885) That is, his
offspring and cattle.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[394:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_886) The fruit of
Capparis Aphylla. According to Sâya*n*a, on Taitt. I, 8, 3, it is
karîra-shoots--which he says resemble the Soma-creeper (somavallî)--that
are so used; but he also mentions that some authorities take karîra to
mean the fruit. According to a sûtra he <span id="page_395">p.
395</span> quotes, above a hundred *s*amî-leaves and above a thousand
karîras should be strewn over the two dishes of curds. Cf. Taitt. Br. I,
6, 5, 5.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[395:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_887) A kind of porridge
prepared with roasted barley, coarsely ground, and sour curds.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[396:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_888) The author here
apparently alludes to a different way of transferring the fire to the
new fire-places from that detailed by Kâtyâyana (see [p.
392](#page_392), note [1](#fn_879)). The same mode seems to be referred
to by the Paddhati on Katy. V, 4 (p. 467). According to this mode
(called sarnâropa*n*a, or mounting of the fire), the old fires are
'taken up' by means of the two ara*n*is being lighted, or rather heated,
at them, and then 'churned out' and placed on the newly-prepared
hearth-mounds.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[396:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_889) For the detailed
course of procedure, see I, 3, 5, I seq.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[396:3](sbe1257.htm#fr_890) Asa*m*s*ri*sh*t*am
eva bhavati sampreshitam. The Kâ*n*va recension reads, asa*m*s*ri*sh*t*a
evâgnir bhavati sampreshita*h*. Cf. par. 30.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[397:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_891) According to Kâty.
V, 5, 7-9, she is either to give the total number or the names of her
lovers, or to hold up as many stalks of grass. \[If she have none, she
is to reply, 'with no one else.' Comm.\]--'He makes the wife speak
(confess): (thereby) he renders her pure, and then he leads her to
penance. Were she not to reveal (the name of) a paramour she has, she
would harm a dear relative. Let her declare "N.N. is my paramour," by
thus declaring (any one) she causes him to be seized by Varu*n*a.'
Taitt. Br. I, 6, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[397:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_892) According to the
Black Ya*g*us, the Pratiprasthât*ri* mutters this formula, while leading
the mistress to the place of offering. The sacrificer then recites as
the invitatory prayer the verse given in par. 28 (Vâ*g*. S. III, 46);
while the offering-prayer (Vâ*g*. S. III, 45) and the text III, 47 (par.
29) are muttered by both the husband and wife. Taitt. I, 6, 5, 3 argues
against the practice of the wife being made to pronounce the anuvâkyâ.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[398:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_893) According to Kâty.
V, 5, 11, either the mistress alone offers, or she together with her
husband. In the latter case, the offering-formula (as well as the
dedicatory formula, 'This to the Maruts') is pronounced by both.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[400:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_894) The Kâ*n*va text
has more correctly, 'He trims both fires;' since it is the Âgnîdhra who
has to trim both the northern and southern fires. See par. 29.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[400:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_895) The recipients of
the first four fore-offerings are the same as at the normal havirya*gñ*a
(cf. [p. 146](sbe1224.htm#page_146) note), viz. 1. the kindling-sticks
(samidhs); 2. Tanûnapât (or Narâ*s*a*m*sa); 3. the I*d*s; 4. the Barhis.
The remaining ones are--5. the doors (of heaven); 6. dawn and night; 7.
the two divine Hot*ri*s; 8. the three goddesses (Sarasvatî, I*d*â, and
Bhâratî); 9. all the deities to whom offering is made during the
sacrifice (see I, 5, 3, 22 seq.). The objects of the first eight
offerings are identical with those of the first eight verses of the Âprî
hymns.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[400:3](sbe1257.htm#fr_896) Or, 'at every
fourth (fore-offering)?' According to the Paddhati on Kâty. V, 5, the
butter is poured together at the fourth and seventh prayâ*g*as. See also
I, 5, 3, 16.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[401:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_897) See I, 6, 1, 20
seq.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[403:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_898) See I, 8, 1, 18-43.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[403:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_899) See II, 5, 2, 19,
and I, 8, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[404:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_900) P*ri*shad-â*g*ya
(lit. mottled butter) is clarified butter mixed with sour milk.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[404:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_901) The recipients of
the nine after-offerings are as follows: 1. The divine Barhis; 2. the
divine doors; 3. the divine dawn and night; 4. the two divine
benefactresses (*g*osh*t*rî); 5. the two goddesses of potent sacrifice
(ûr*g*âhutî); 6. the two divine Hot*ri*s; 7. the three goddesses; 8. the
divine Narâ*s*a*m*sa; 9. the divine Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t. Cf. [p.
400](#page_400), note .

<span id="fn_898"></span>[404:3](sbe1257.htm#fr_902) See I, 8, 3, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[405:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_903) See I, 8, 3, 10
seq.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[405:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_904) See I, 8, 3, 20
seq.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[405:3](sbe1257.htm#fr_905) In thus briefly
recapitulating the chief points of the course of sacrificial
performance, the author's object is merely to assign to each officiating
priest--especially to the Adhvaryu and his assistant, the
Pratiprasthât*ri*--his special share of business. In the actual
performance, the pronunciation of the formula of 'All-hail and blessing'
(see I, 9, 1, 26), of course, comes after the throwing of the
enclosing-sticks into the fire (see I, 8, 3, 22).

<span id="fn_902"></span>[405:4](sbe1257.htm#fr_906) See I, 8, 3, 26.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[405:5](sbe1257.htm#fr_907) See I, 9, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[406:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_908) See [p.
390](sbe1256.htm#page_390), note [3](sbe1256.htm#fn_875).

<span id="fn_905"></span>[406:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_909) Kâty. V, 5, 30-33,
and the scholiasts supply the [following](errata.htm#10) particulars:
The sacrificer and his wife, accompanied by the priests, are to repair
to some quiet part of flowing water. The Adhvaryu then takes the
sacrificer by the arm and makes him enter the water. Thereupon he
himself enters, strews sacrificial grass on the water, puts a stick on
it, and thereon offers a spoonful of butter to Agni. Then follow six
oblations, viz. four fore-offerings, performed in the usual way (the one
to the Barhis being omitted); <span id="page_407">p. 407</span> an
oblation of butter to Varu*n*a, and another of the scrapings of curds to
Agni and Varu*n*a. Other authorities offer ten oblations instead of six,
viz. four fore-offerings, two 'butter-portions' to Agni and Soma, the
two oblations to Varu*n*a and Agni-Varu*n*a, and two after-offerings.
The Adhvaryu then immerses the butter-pot, with the text Vâ*g*. S. III,
48. Thereupon the sacrificer and his wife bathe without diving, but wash
each other's back. They then come out of the water and put on fresh
clothes.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[407:1](sbe1257.htm#fr_910) Viz. by lighting
(or heating) at them two ara*n*is or churning-sticks, by means of which
the fires are transferred to the old hearths. According to the Paddhati,
the remaining ceremonies of the ish*t*i, from the offering of the Barhis
(see I, 9, 2, 29) to the end, are performed previously to the lifting of
the fires.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[407:2](sbe1257.htm#fr_911) Viz. the full-moon
sacrifice, see II, 6, 2, 59, where, however, agnau instead of agnî. The
construction here is quite irregular. The Kâ*n*va text has:
ke*s*a*s*ma*s*rûptvâgnî samârohayata udavasâya hy etena ya*g*ate.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[407:3](sbe1257.htm#fr_912) That is, to the
ordinary sacrificial ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 5, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe1258)
