[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1253) 
[Next](sbe1255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3">2:4:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### IV. THE ÂGRAYA*N*ESH*T*I OR OFFERING OF FIRST-FRUITS.

This sacrifice is performed in spring and autumn--generally at new or
full moon--at the commencement of the harvest. The oblations, which, as
a rule, are prepared from new grain (viz. barley in spring, and rice in
autumn), consist of--1. a sacrificial cake contained on twelve potsherds
for Indra and Agni; 2. a *k*aru (mess of boiled grains) for the Vi*s*ve
Devâ*h*, prepared with water or milk; and 3. a cake on one potsherd for
heaven and earth. Kâty. IV, 6 and comm. According to the Paddhati, the
offering of first-fruits takes place after the new-moon offering, and
before the full-moon offering. At the beginning of the harvest of
Panicum Frumentaceum (*s*yâmâka), in the rainy season or in autumn; and
at that of bamboo

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

in summer, offerings of first-fruits are also made to Soma in the form
of a potful of boiled *s*yâmâka or bamboo grains respectively.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:1">2:4:3:1</span></span>1. Now
Kaho*d*a Kaushîtaki spake, 'This sap (of the plants) truly belongs to
those two, heaven and earth: having offered of this sap to the gods, we
will eat it.' 'That is why the offering of first-fruits is performed.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:2">2:4:3:2</span></span>2. And
Yâ*gñ*avalkya also spake:--The gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung
from Pra*g*âpati, once contended for superiority. The Asuras then
defiled, partly by magic, partly with poison, both kinds of
plants--those on which men and beasts subsist--hoping that in this way
they might over come the gods. In consequence of this neither did men
eat food, nor did beasts graze; and from want of food these creatures
well-nigh perished <span id="fr_825"></span>[1](#fn_821).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:3">2:4:3:3</span></span>3. Now
the gods heard as to how these creatures were perishing from want of
food. They spake unto one another, 'Come, let us rid them <span
id="fr_826"></span>[2](#fn_822) of this!'--'By what means?'--'By means
of the sacrifice.' By means of the sacrifice the gods then accomplished
all that they wanted to accomplish <span
id="fr_827"></span>[3](#fn_823); and so did the *Ri*shis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:4">2:4:3:4</span></span>4. They
then said, 'To which of us shall this belong?' They did not agree (each
of them exclaiming), 'Mine (it shall be)!' Not having come to an
agreement, they said, 'Let us run a race for this (sacrifice): whichever
of us beats (the others), his it shall be!' 'So be it!' they said, and
they ran a race.

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:5">2:4:3:5</span></span>5. Indra
and Agni won, and hence that Indra-Agni cake on twelve potsherds <span
id="fr_828"></span>[1](#fn_824); Indra and Agni having won a share in
it. And where Indra and Agni were standing when they had won, thither
all the gods followed them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:6">2:4:3:6</span></span>6. Now,
Indra and Agni are the Kshatra (nobility), and all the gods (or, the
All-gods) are the Vi*s* (common Âryan people); and wherever the Kshatra
conquers, there the Vi*s* is allowed to share. Thus they (Indra and
Agni) allowed the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h* (the All-gods) a share (in the
offering); and hence that pap of boiled (rice or barley) grain (offered)
to the All-gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:7">2:4:3:7</span></span>7. 'Let
him prepare it from old (grain) <span id="fr_829"></span>[2](#fn_825),'
say some; 'for Indra and Agni are the Kshatra (and he should therefore
use old grain for the Vai*s*vadeva pap) lest he (the sacrificer) should
exalt (the Vi*s*) to the level of the Kshatra.' Nevertheless let both
(the cake and *k*aru) consist of new (grain); for (by the very fact
that) the one is a cake and the other a pap, the nobility is not
equalled (by the people): hence they should both consist of new (grain).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:8">2:4:3:8</span></span>8. The
All-gods spake, 'This sap (of the rice and barley plants) truly belongs
to those two, heaven and earth: let us, then, allow those two a share in
it!' They accordingly assigned that share to them, to wit, the cake on
one potsherd offered to heaven

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

and earth <span id="fr_830"></span>[1](#fn_826). This is why there is a
cake on one potsherd (kapâla) for heaven and earth. Now this (earth) is,
doubtless, the cup (depository, kapâla) of that (sap) <span
id="fr_831"></span>[2](#fn_827); and she indeed is one only: hence (the
cake) consists of one potsherd.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:9">2:4:3:9</span></span>9. An
offence (is thereby committed) by him <span
id="fr_832"></span>[3](#fn_828); since, for whatever deity sacrificial
food may be taken out, the Svish*t*ak*ri*t (Agni, the maker of good
offering) is invariably allowed a share in it after (the respective
deity). But that (cake) he offers entire, and he does not cut off a
portion for the Svish*t*ak*ri*t this is an offence, and consequently
(that cake), when offered, turns upside down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:10">2:4:3:10</span></span>10.
Hence they say, 'That (cake) contained on one potsherd has turned upside
down: it will throw the kingdom into disorder.' No offence (is, however,
committed) by him, for the Âhavanîya is the support of oblations; and
if, after reaching the Âhavanîya, (the cake) were to turn upside down
ten times, he need not heed it. And if others ask as to who would care
to incur (the result of) such a combination (of errors), let him offer
nothing but butter; for clarified butter is manifestly the sap of

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

those two, heaven and earth, so that he thereby manifestly gladdens
those two with their own sap or essence: hence he need offer nothing but
butter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:11">2:4:3:11</span></span>11. By
performing that same sacrifice, the gods removed the magic spell as well
as the poison from both kinds of plants,--those on which men and beasts
subsist; and henceforward the men ate food and the cattle grazed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:12">2:4:3:12</span></span>12. Now
when he performs that sacrifice, he does so either for the reason that
no one will then defile (the plants) either by magic or poison; or
because the gods did so. And whatever share the gods assigned (to
themselves), that share he thereby makes over to them. Moreover, he
thereby renders wholesome and faultless both kinds of plants,--those on
which men and beasts subsist; and these creatures subsist on those
wholesome and faultless (plants) of his: this is why he performs that
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:13">2:4:3:13</span></span>13. The
priests' fee for this (sacrifice) consists of the first-born calf (of
the season); for that is, as it were, the first-fruits (of the cattle).
If he has already performed the new and full-moon offerings, let him
first perform those offerings <span id="fr_833"></span>[1](#fn_829), and
thereupon the present (offering of first-fruits). If, on the other hand,
he has not yet performed (the new and full-moon offerings), let them
cook a *k*âtushprâ*s*ya <span id="fr_834"></span>[2](#fn_830) pap on the
southern fire, and let the priests eat it.

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:4:3:14">2:4:3:14</span></span>14.
Verily, there are two kinds of gods: for the gods themselves, assuredly,
are gods; and those priests who have studied, and teach Vedic lore, are
the human gods. And in like manner as that is offered whereon the Vashat
has been pronounced, so is that (offering of first-fruits consecrated by
the feeding of the priests). Let him also, at this (sacrifice), give as
much as is in his power, for no offering, they say, should be without a
dakshi*n*â. At the Agnihotra (performed at the time of the
Âgraya*n*esh*t*i) let him not offer (milk obtained from the eating of
new corn) <span id="fr_835"></span>[1](#fn_831); for were he to offer
such at the Agnihotra, he would cause a conflict (between the deities of
the two offerings). The Âgraya*n*a is one thing, and the Agnihotra is
another: let him, therefore, not offer (new material) at the Agnihotra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_821"></span>[370:1](sbe1254.htm#fr_825) The Kâ*n*va text
has: Tâ etâ ubhayya*h* pra*g*â ana*s*anena not parâbabhûvu*h*.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[370:2](sbe1254.htm#fr_826) Viz. the plants,
according to the reading of the Kâ*n*va text: Hantâsâm oshadhînâ*m*
k*ri*tyâ*m* tvad visha*m* tvad apahanâmeti.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[370:3](sbe1254.htm#fr_827) The Kâ*n*va text
reads kalpyam instead of kalpam.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[371:1](sbe1254.htm#fr_828) The MS. of the
Kâ*n*va recension has: Tasmâd esha aindrâgno da*s*akapâla*h* purolâ*s*o
bhavati. The commentary on Kâty. IV, 6, 1, on the other hand, makes it a
cake on eleven potsherds.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[371:2](sbe1254.htm#fr_829) Or, he may do so.
Kâty. IV, 6, 7 leaves the option between new and old grain.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[372:1](sbe1254.htm#fr_830) This is a
'low-voiced' oblation, the invitatory and offering prayers thereat (with
the exception of the concluding 'Vausha*t*' and 'Om') being pronounced
in a low tone. See [p. 171](sbe1228.htm#page_171), note
[1](sbe1228.htm#fn_395); [p. 192](sbe1231.htm#page_192), note
[1](sbe1231.htm#fn_439).

<span id="fn_827"></span>[372:2](sbe1254.htm#fr_831) The Kâ*n*va text
has: 'The reason why it consists of one kapâla is that this earth is a
kapâla, and that she is one only.'

<span id="fn_828"></span>[372:3](sbe1254.htm#fr_832) The Kâ*n*va
recension has as follows:--As to this they say, 'It should not be a
one-cup cake, (because) therein a neglect is (involved).' Even so
(ida*m* nu): for whatever deity they take out sacrificial food, the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t is invariably made to share in it after (the respective
deity). That (cake) they offer whole: this is consequently a neglect.
Moreover, it turns round (paryâbhavati). As to this they say, 'That
(cake) has turned upside down,' &c.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[373:1](sbe1254.htm#fr_833) I do not know how
to account for the vâ. Sâya*n*a seems to take the passage thus:--'If he
be a Soma-sacrificer, or if he be performing the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa,
\[let him first perform that sacrifice, and\] let him then perform the
present one.' The Oxford MS. of the Kâ*n*va text has:--Etat tasya karma
ya î*g*âno vâ syâd dar*s*apûr*n*amâsâbhyâ*m* vâ ya*g*etâtha yo ’nî*g*âno
’nvâhâryapa*k*ana evaudanam *k*âtushprâ*s*yam pa*k*et tam brâhma*n*ebhya
upanidadhyât.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[373:2](sbe1254.htm#fr_834) See II, 1, 4, 4
seq.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[374:1](sbe1254.htm#fr_835) Kâty. has the rules
IV, 6, II: 'In the case of one, who only performs the Agnihotra (and no
longer the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa), the evening and morning
Agnihotra-oblation (at the time of the Âgraya*n*a) is performed with new
(corn).' 12, 'Or with the milk of (a cow) which has been fed with such
(new corn).' The Kâ*n*va text has: 'Now at the Agnihotra also some offer
(milk obtained from new corn), but let him not do so; for he would raise
a quarrel were he to offer (such milk).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 4, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1255)
