[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1239) 
[Next](sbe1241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1">2:1:1</span></span>

# SECOND KÂ*ND*A.

## THE AGNYÂDHÂNA, THE AGNIHOTRA, THE PI*ND*APIT*RI*YA*GÑ*A, THE ÂGRAYA*N*ESH*T*I, AND THE *K*ÂTURMÂSYÂNI.

### I. THE AGNYÂDHÂNA OR ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SACRED FIRES.

### FIRST ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

THE Agny-âdhâna (or Agny-âdheya), or ceremony of establishing a set of
sacrificial fires, on the part of a young householder, is, as a rule,
performed on the first day of the waxing moon. Some authorities also
allow the performance to take place at full moon, probably in order to
enable the newly-married couple to enter on their sacred duties with as
little delay as possible. Moreover, special benefits are supposed to
accrue to the performer of the ceremony from the conjunction of the new
moon with certain lunar asterisms; though the author of our work, at any
rate, does not seem greatly to encourage this practice, but rather to
urge the pious householder to set up fires of his own, whenever he feels
a longing for the sacrifice.

The normal performance of the Agnyâdhâna, as that of the full and
new-moon offerings, requires two days; the first of which is taken up
with preliminary rites, while the second--that is, the first day of the
respective half-moon--is devoted to the chief ceremonies, beginning with
the production of the sacred fire by friction. (See II, 1, 4, 8 seq.)

After the sacrificer has chosen his four officiating priests--viz. the
Brahman, Hot*ri*, Adhvaryu, and Âgnîdhra (or Agnîdh)--he proceeds,
together with them, to erect the two sheds or 'firehouses.' In order to
determine their exact sites, the Adhvaryu first draws from west to east
the so-called 'easterly' line (cf. I, 2, 5, 14), and on it marks, at 8,
11, or 12 prakramas or steps from each other, the centres of the
Gârhapatya and Âhavanîya fire-places, the outlines of which he then
traces, making each a square aratni or cubit in area, the former
circular, the latter square. The Dakshi*n*âgni

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

or Anvâhârya-pa*k*ana, if it is required at all, is of the same area,
but of semicircular form, and lies south of the space between the altar
and the Gârhapatya fire. The Gârhapatya fire-house is constructed with
its laths running either from west to east, or from south to north, and
a door on the south side; and so as to enclose both the Gârhapatya and
Dakshi*n*a fires. The Âhavanîya fire-house, on the other hand, with its
laths necessarily running from west to east, and an entrance from the
east, contains the Âhavanîya fire and the altar (vedi) adjoining it on
the west, and partly enclosing it with its 'shoulders' on the north and
south sides. The two houses are also open to each other on the inner
side; and sufficient space is left on all sides for freely moving around
the fires.

The Adhvaryu then procures a temporary fire,--either producing it by
friction, or obtaining it from certain specified sources in the
village,--and after the usual fivefold lustration of the Gârhapatya
fire-place (cf. [p. 2](sbe1203.htm#page_2)), he lays down the fire
thereon. Towards sunset the sacrificer \[while seated east of the
Âhavanîya house\] invokes the gods and manes with 'Gods, fathers!
fathers, gods! I sacrifice, being who I am; neither will I exclude him
whose I am: mine own shall be the offering, mine own the toiling, mine
own the sacrifice!' He then enters the Âhavanîya house from the east,
passes through it to the Gârhapatya, and sits down behind (west of) the
fire; his wife at the same time entering the Gârhapatya house from the
south and seating herself south of him,--both facing the east. Thereupon
the Adhvaryu hands to the sacrificer two pieces of wood (ara*n*i),--if
possible, of a*s*vattha, grown out of a *s*amî tree,--to be used next
morning for the production (or 'churning') of the sacred fire by one of
them (the upper ara*n*i) being rapidly drilled in a hole in the other
(or lower ara*n*i). \[The sacrificer and his wife then lay the upper and
lower sticks respectively on their laps; whereupon certain propitiatory
ceremonies are performed by them, and honours are paid to the priests
and the sticks; and the latter are finally deposited on a seat.\] In the
house of the Gârhapatya a he-goat may then be tied up for the night,
which, if it belong to the sacrificer, is to be presented by him to the
Âgnîdhra on the completion of the sacrifice.

After sunset the Adhvaryu measures out four vessels of husked rice
grains--each containing three handfuls, which quantity is considered
sufficient to furnish a meal for one man--on an ox-hide died red \[and
spread out with the hairy side upwards and the neck-part to the east\].
With this rice the (odana) *k*âtushprâ*s*ya, or '(pap) to be eaten by
the four (priests),' is prepared on the provisional Gârhapatya fire.
When it is ready, the Adhvaryu makes a hollow in the pap and pours
clarified butter into it. He then takes

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

three kindling-sticks (samidh), anoints them with some of that ghee, and
puts them on the fire one after another, with texts (cf. note on II, 1,
4, 5). Thereupon the sacrificer \[having paid due honours to the priests
by washing their feet and giving them perfumes and wreaths, &c., and
assigned to each his share\] bids them eat:

During the night the sacrificer and his wife have to remain awake and
keep up the fire. When the night clears up, the Adhvaryu extinguishes
the fire, or, if there is to be a Dakshi*n*âgni, he takes it southwards
and keeps it in a safe place till that fire is made up. He then draws
with the wooden sword three lines across the fire-place and proceeds
with the preparation of the hearth-mounds in the way set forth in the
first Brâhma*n*a of this Book.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:1">2:1:1:1</span></span>1. Now
when he equips (Agni, the fire) from this and that quarter, that is the
equipping (of the fire) with its equipments <span
id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_634). In whatever (objects) some of (the
nature of) Agni is inherent, therewith he equips (the fire); and in thus
equipping it he supplies it partly with splendour, partly with cattle,
partly with a mate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:2">2:1:1:2</span></span>2. In the
first place he (the Adhvaryu) draws (three) lines (with the wooden sword
on the Gârhapatya fire-place <span id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_635)).
Whatever part of this earth

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

is either trodden or spit upon, that he thereby removes from it; and he
thus establishes his fire on earth that is entirely proper for the
sacrifice: this is why he draws lines (across the fire-place).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:3">2:1:1:3</span></span>3. He
then sprinkles (the lines) with water. When he thus sprinkles (the
fire-place) with water, that is the equipment (of the fire) with water.
The reason why he brings water is that water is food; for water is
indeed food: hence when water comes to this world, food is produced
here. Thus he thereby supplies it (the fire) with food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:4">2:1:1:4</span></span>4. Water
(ap, fem.), moreover, is female, and fire (agni, masc.) is male; so that
he thereby supplies the latter with a productive mate. And since all
this (universe) is pervaded (or obtained, âpta) by water, he sets up the
fire, after he has obtained it by means of water <span
id="fr_640"></span>[1](#fn_636). This is why he brings water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:5">2:1:1:5</span></span>5. He
then brings (a piece of) gold. Now Agni at one time cast his eyes on the
waters <span id="fr_641"></span>[2](#fn_637): 'May I pair with them,' he
thought. He came together with them; and his seed became gold <span
id="fr_642"></span>[3](#fn_638). For this reason the latter shines like
fire, it being Agni's

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

seed. Hence it (gold) is found in water, for he (Agni) poured it into
the water. Hence also one does not cleanse oneself with it <span
id="fr_643"></span>[1](#fn_639), nor does one do anything else with it.
Now there is splendour (for the fire): for he thereby makes it to be
possessed of divine seed, bestows splendour on it; and sets up a fire
completely endowed with seed. That is why he brings gold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:6">2:1:1:6</span></span>6. He
then brings salt. Yonder sky assuredly bestowed that (salt as) cattle on
this earth: hence they say that salt soil is suitable for cattle. That
(salt), therefore, means cattle; and thus he thereby visibly supplies it
(the fire) with cattle; and the latter having come from yonder (sky) is
securely established on this earth. Moreover, that (salt) is believed to
be the savour (rasa) of those two, the sky and the earth <span
id="fr_644"></span>[2](#fn_640): so that he thereby supplies it (the
fire) with the savour of those two, the sky and the earth. That is why
he brings salt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:7">2:1:1:7</span></span>7. He
then brings (the earth of) a mole-hill (âkhu-karîsha) <span
id="fr_645"></span>[3](#fn_641). The moles certainly know the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

savour of this earth: hence, by entering deeper and deeper into this
earth, they (grow) very fat, knowing, as they do, its savour; and
wherever they know the savour of this earth to be, there they cast it
up. Hence he thereby supplies it (the fire) with the savour of this
earth: that is why he brings a molehill. Moreover, they say of one who
has attained prosperity (or splendour, *s*ri) that he is purîshya; and
purîsha and karîsha <span id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_642) doubtless mean
one and the same thing: it is, therefore, for his (Agni's or the
sacrificer's) attainment of splendour (*s*ri) that he brings a
mole-hill.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:8">2:1:1:8</span></span>8. He
then brings pebbles. Now the gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung
from Pra*g*âpati, once contended for superiority. This earth was then
trembling like a lotus-leaf; for the wind was tossing it hither and
thither: now it came near the gods, now it came near the Asuras. When it
came near the gods,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:9">2:1:1:9</span></span>9. They
said, 'Come, let us steady this resting-place; and when firm and steady,
let us set up

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

the two fires on it; whereupon we will exclude our enemies from any
share in it.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:10">2:1:1:10</span></span>10.
Accordingly, in like manner as one would stretch a skin by means of
wooden pins, they fastened down this resting-place; and it formed a firm
and steady resting-place. And when it was firm and steady, they set up
the two fires on it; and thereupon they excluded their enemies from any
share in it <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_643).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:11">2:1:1:11</span></span>11. And
in like manner that one (the Adhvaryu) now fastens down that
resting-place by means of pebbles; and on it, when firm and steady, he
sets up the two fires; whereupon he excludes the (sacrificer's) enemies
from any share in it. This is the reason why he brings pebbles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:12">2:1:1:12</span></span>12.
These then are the five equipments <span
id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_644): for fivefold is the sacrifice, fivefold
the animal victim; and five seasons there are in the year.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:13">2:1:1:13</span></span>13.
Now, as to this, they say, 'Six seasons there are in the year.' And in
that case the very deficiency (nyûna) itself is rendered a productive
union <span id="fr_649"></span>[1](#fn_645), since it is from the lower
part (nyûna, i.e. of the body) that offspring is here brought forth.
Thus also a progressive improvement <span
id="fr_650"></span>[2](#fn_646) (is assured to the sacrificer): for this
reason there are five equipments. And when (it is nevertheless insisted
on that) there are six seasons in the year, then Agni is the sixth of
them, and thus there is no deficiency.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:1:1:14">2:1:1:14</span></span>14.
Here also they say, 'He should not equip it even with a single
equipment!' For (they argue) all those (objects) are on this earth, and
hence, when he establishes the fire on this earth, the latter of itself
obtains all those equipments: he need not, therefore, equip it with a
single equipment. But let him nevertheless bring (those objects)
together; for when he establishes the fire on this (earth), then it
obtains all the equipments: and what (benefit) accrues from the
equipments being brought together, that also accrues to it <span
id="fr_651"></span>[3](#fn_647). Let him for that reason bring (the
objects) together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_634"></span>[276:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_638) The verb here
translated by 'to equip,' is sam-bh*ri*, 'to carry, or bring, together,
to collect;' and then 'to make the necessary preparations, to prepare;'
hence sambhâra, 'the preparation, outfit,' the technical term for the
objects employed in the preparation of the fire-place, with the view of
symbolically ensuring success to the fire. In paragraphs 3 seq. the
primary meaning 'to bring (together)' has been used, except where it
seemed desirable to preserve its technical sense.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[276:2](sbe1240.htm#fr_639) The three lines
drawn across the fire-place form a necessary part of its lustration; see
[p. 2](sbe1203.htm#page_2). According to the Paddhati on Kâty. IV, 8,
the Adhvaryu first makes the fivefold lustration of the hearth, and
thereupon again draws the mystic lines (? or draws the outline of the
fire-place, cf. Kâty. IV, 8, 16) and proceeds with the sambharas; viz.
he sprinkles the lines with water, while the sacrificer takes hold of
him from behind; then puts down a piece of gold, and on it throws salt
soil and the mould of a molehill, with which he forms the hearth-mound
(khara)--circular in <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> the case of the
Gârhapatya, square the Âhavanîya, and semicircular the Dakshi*n*âgni;
but each equal in area to a square aratni or cubit. Along the edge of
the mound he then lays pebbles close to each other \[50 on the
Gârhapatya, 73 on the Âhavanîya, and 22 on the Dakshi*n*âgni, according
to the Schol. on Kâty. IV, 8, 16\]. According to some authorities, the
piece of gold is laid on the top of the mound. He thus prepares
successively the Gârhapatya, Âhavanîya, and Dakshi*n*a hearths;
afterwards, if required, those of the Sabhya and Avasathya fires, which
are, like the Gârhapatya, of circular form.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[277:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_640) An etymological
play on the word ap, âpa*h*, 'water,' and the verb âp, 'to obtain,
pervade.'

<span id="fn_637"></span>[277:2](sbe1240.htm#fr_641) In the version of
this myth given Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 8, the waters courted by Agni are
called Varu*n*a's wives.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[277:3](sbe1240.htm#fr_642) Tâ*h* sambabhûva
tâsu reta*h* prâsi*ñk*at tad hira*n*yam abhavat.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[278:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_643) Sâya*n*a interprets
enena na dhâvayati by 'he does not clean (his teeth) with it;'--the St.
Petersb. Dict. by 'he does not get himself conveyed (driven) by it.' The
Kâ*n*va text has: Tasmâd enad apsv evânuvindanty apsu punanty apsu by
enat prâsi*ñk*an nainena dhâvayanti na ki*m* *k*ana kurvanti.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[278:2](sbe1240.htm#fr_644) Cf. Taitt. Br. I,
1, 3, 2: 'The sky and the earth were (originally) close together. On
being separated they said to each other, "Let there he a common
sacrificial essence (ya*gñ*iyam) for us!" What sacrificial essence there
was belonging to yonder sky, that it bestowed on this earth, that became
the salt (in the earth); and what sacrificial essence there was
belonging to this earth, that it bestowed on yonder sky, that became the
black (spots) in the moon. When he throws salt (on the fire-place), let
him think it to be that (viz. the black in the moon): it is on the
sacrificial essence of the sky and the earth that he sets up his fire.'

<span id="fn_641"></span>[278:3](sbe1240.htm#fr_645) On the mythic
connection of (the white, sharp teeth of) the <span id="page_279">p.
279</span> âkhu (mole, mouse, rat), as of that of the boar, with the
thunderbolt, see Dr. A. Kuhn's ingenious remarks, 'Herabkunft des Feuers
and des Göttertranks,' p. 202. According to Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 3, Agni
at one time concealed himself from the gods, and having become a mole,
dug himself into the earth; so that the mole-hills thrown up by him,
have some of Agni's nature attaching to them. The Taittirîyas also put
on the hearth the earth of an ant-hill, which the Brâhma*n*a (in the
same way as our author does of the molehill) represents as the savour
(or marrow, essence) of the earth.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[279:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_646) The primary meaning
of karîsha is 'that which is scattered, or strewn about,' hence 'refuse,
rubbish' (and âkhu-karîsha, 'mole-cast'). Its secondary meaning, as is
that of purîsha, is 'manure' (or perhaps also 'soft, rich mould'), an
article naturally valued by an agricultural population. See I, 2, 5, 17,
where purîsha is taken symbolically to represent cattle.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[280:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_647) The corresponding
myth of Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3, 5, though very different from ours, yet
presents one or two points of resemblance. According to it, nothing was
to be seen in the beginning except water and a lotus-leaf standing out
above it. Pra*g*âpati (being bent on creating the firm ground) bethought
himself that the lotus-stalk must rest on something; and having assumed
the form of a boar, he dived and brought up some of the earth. This he
spread out (prath) on the lotus-leaf, whence originated the earth
(p*ri*thivî), which he then fastened down by means of pebbles. Hence the
latter are put on the hearth in order to afford a firm foundation for
the fire.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[280:2](sbe1240.htm#fr_648) According to the
authorities of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda there are not five, but fourteen
sambhâras, seven of which are taken from the earth, viz. sand, salt, a
mole-hill, an ant-hill, mire from a dried-up pool, pebbles, and gold;
while the remaining seven consist of pieces of wood from the a*s*vattha,
udumbara, palâ*s*a (? two pieces), *s*amî, and vikankata trees, and from
some tree that has been struck by lightning. The sprinkling of water
about the fire-place is not counted by them as a sambhâra, but as one of
the usual acts of lustration. Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3 seq.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[281:1](sbe1240.htm#fr_649) Or, a deficient
pairing is effected (on account of the uneven number). I do not quite
understand Sâya*n*a's interpretation of the passage, the published text
of the commentary being apparently corrupt in one or two places, The
Kâ*n*va text reads: Tad âhu*h* sha*d* vâ *ri*tava*h* sa*m*vatsarasyeti
yadi vai sha*l* *ri*tava*h* sa*m*vatsarasya nyûnam u vai pra*g*anana*m*
nyûnâd vâ imâh pra*g*â*h* pra*g*âyante, &c.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[281:2](sbe1240.htm#fr_650) Literally, 'a
prevailing (or advancing) better-to-morrow,' *s*va*hs*reyasam uttarâvat.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[281:3](sbe1240.htm#fr_651) The drift of the
author's reasoning evidently is that it is safer, by putting those
objects on the fire-place, to make sure of the magic benefits of those
symbols being really secured to the fire, and thereby to the sacrificer.
The Kâ*n*va text of this paragraph, though differently worded, yields
the same sense; except that it refers to <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> the sacrificer himself and to the wishes he entertains in
collecting the objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe1241)
