[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1244) 
[Next](sbe1246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2">2:2:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:1">2:2:2:1</span></span>1. Now,
in performing that sacrifice, they slay it; and in pressing out the king
(Soma), they slay him; and in quieting and immolating the victim, they
slay it. The havirya*gñ*a they slay with the mortar and pestle, and with
the two mill-stones.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:2">2:2:2:2</span></span>2. When
slain, that sacrifice was no longer vigorous. By means of dakshi*n*âs
(gifts to the priests) the gods again invigorated it: hence the name
dakshi*n*â, because thereby they invigorated (dakshay) that

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (sacrifice).
Whatever, therefore, fails in this sacrifice when slain, that he now
again invigorates by means of gifts to the priests; whereupon the
sacrifice becomes successful: for this reason he makes gifts to the
priests.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:3">2:2:2:3</span></span>3. He may
give six (cows) <span id="fr_704"></span>[1](#fn_700); for six seasons,
indeed, there are in the year, and the sacrifice, Pra*g*âpati, is the
year: thus as great as the sacrifice is, as large as its extent is, by
so many (gifts, dakshi*n*âs) does he thereby invigorate it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:4">2:2:2:4</span></span>4. He may
give twelve; for twelve months there are in the year, and the sacrifice,
Pra*g*âpati, is the year: thus as great as the sacrifice is, as large as
its extent is, by so many (gifts) does he thereby invigorate it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:5">2:2:2:5</span></span>5. He may
give twenty-four; for twenty-four half-moons there are in the year, and
the sacrifice, Pra*g*âpati, is the year: thus as great as the sacrifice
is, as large as its extent is, by so many (gifts) does he thereby
invigorate it. Such is the measure of the priests' fees; but he may give
more, according to (the depth of) his faith. The reason why he gives
fees to the priests is this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:6">2:2:2:6</span></span>6.
Verily, there are two kinds of gods; for, indeed, the gods are the gods;
and the Brâhmans who have studied and teach sacred lore are the human
gods. The sacrifice of these is divided into two kinds: oblations
constitute the sacrifice to the gods; and gifts to the priests that to
the human gods,

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

the Brâhmans who have studied and teach sacred lore. With oblations one
gratifies the gods, and with gifts to the priests the human gods, the
Brâhmans who have studied and teach sacred lore. Both these kinds of
gods, when gratified, place him in a state of bliss (sudhâ) <span
id="fr_705"></span>[1](#fn_701).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:7">2:2:2:7</span></span>7. Even
as seed is poured into the womb, so the officiating priests place the
sacrificer in the (heavenly) world <span
id="fr_706"></span>[2](#fn_702), when he now makes gifts to those who,
he hopes, will make him go thither. Such, then, (is the manner) of gifts
to priests.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:8">2:2:2:8</span></span>8. Now
the gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati, were
contending with each other. They were both soulless, for they were
mortal, and he who is mortal is soulless. Among these two (classes of
beings) who were mortal, Agni alone was immortal; and it was through
him, the immortal, that they both lived. Now whichsoever (of the gods)
they (the Asuras) slew, he, indeed, was so (slain).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:9">2:2:2:9</span></span>9.
Thereupon the gods were left inferior. They went on praising and
practising austerities, hoping that they might be able to overcome their
enemies, the mortal Asuras. They beheld this immortal Agnyâdheya
(consecrated fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:10">2:2:2:10</span></span>10.
They said, 'Come, let us place that immortal element in our innermost
soul! When we have placed that immortal element in our innermost soul,
and become immortal and unconquerable, we shall overcome our
conquerable, mortal enemies.'

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:11">2:2:2:11</span></span>11.
They said, 'With both of us is this fire (Agni): let us then treat
openly with the Asuras <span id="fr_707"></span>[1](#fn_703).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:12">2:2:2:12</span></span>12.
They said, 'We shall set up (or, establish within ourselves, â-dhâ) the
two fires,--what will ye do then?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:13">2:2:2:13</span></span>13.
They replied, 'Then we shall lay it down (ni-dhâ), saying, Eat grass
here! eat wood here! cook pap here! cook meat here!' Now that fire,
which the Asuras thus laid down, is this same (fire) wherewith men
prepare their food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:14">2:2:2:14</span></span>14. The
gods then established that (fire) in their innermost soul; and having
established that immortal element in their innermost soul, and become
immortal and unconquerable, they overcame their mortal, conquerable
enemies. And so this one now establishes that immortal element in his
innermost soul; and--though there is for him no hope of immortality--he
obtains the full measure of life; for, indeed, he becomes unconquerable,
and his enemy, though striving to conquer, conquers him not. And,
accordingly, when one who has established his fires and one who has not
established his fires, vie with each other, he who has established his
fires overcomes the other, for, verily, he thereby becomes
unconquerable, he thereby becomes immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:15">2:2:2:15</span></span>15.
Now, when, on that occasion, they produce that (fire) by churning, then
he (the sacrificer) breathes (blows) upon it, when produced; for fire
indeed is breath: he thereby produces the one thus produced. He again
draws in his breath: thereby he establishes that (fire) in his innermost
soul; and that fire thus becomes established in his innermost soul <span
id="fr_708"></span>[2](#fn_704).

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:16">2:2:2:16</span></span>16.
Having kindled it, he makes it blaze, thinking, 'Herein I will worship,
herein I will perform the sacred work!' Thereby he makes blaze that fire
which has been established in his innermost soul.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:17">2:2:2:17</span></span>17. 'It
(or some one) might come between,--it might go away!' so (fear
some) <span id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_705); but, surely, as long as he
lives no one comes between him and that fire which has been established
in his innermost soul: let him, therefore, not heed this. And as to its
becoming extinguished:--surely, as long as he lives, that fire which has
been established in his innermost soul, does not become extinct in him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:18">2:2:2:18</span></span>18. The
(sacrificial) fires, assuredly, are those breaths: the Âhavanîya and
Gârhapatya are the out-breathing and the in-breathing; and the
Anvâhârya-pa*k*ana is the through-breathing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:19">2:2:2:19</span></span>19.
Now, attendance on (or, the worship of) that consecrated fire
(agnyâdheya) means (speaking) the truth. Whosoever speaks the truth,
acts as if he sprinkled that lighted fire with ghee; for even so does he
enkindle it: and ever the more increases his own vital energy, and day
by day does he become better. And whosoever speaks the untruth, acts as

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

if he sprinkled that lighted fire with water; for even so does he
enfeeble it: and ever the less becomes his own vital energy, and day by
day does he become more wicked. Let him, therefore, speak nothing but
the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2:2:2:20">2:2:2:20</span></span>20. Now
the kinsmen spake unto Aru*n*a Aupave*s*i, 'Thou art advanced in years:
establish thou the two fires!' He replied, 'Speak ye not thus! be thou a
restrainer of speech <span id="fr_710"></span>[1](sbe1246.htm#fn_706);
for he who has established the fires must not speak an untruth: let him
rather not speak at all, but let him not speak an untruth. Worship,
above all, is truthfulness.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_700"></span>[309:1](sbe1245.htm#fr_704) Viz. at the
tanûhavir-ish*t*is together, or at least three cows at each ish*t*i if
there are two ish*t*is. The greater the gift, the greater the merit.
According to the Paddhati on Katy. IV, so, he is also to entertain a
hundred Brâhmans at the end of the performance. See also Taitt. Br. I,
1, 7, 9-11.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[310:1](sbe1245.htm#fr_705) That is, 'they
convey him to the celestial world,' as reads the otherwise identical
passage in IV, 3, 4, 4.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[310:2](sbe1245.htm#fr_706) The Kâ*n*va text
has 'svarge loke.'

<span id="fn_703"></span>[311:1](sbe1245.htm#fr_707) 'Pra tv evâsurebhyo
bravâmeti.'--'Hantâsurebhya*h* pratiprabravâmeti,' Kâ*n*va text. ? 'Let
us talk them out of it!'

<span id="fn_704"></span>[311:2](sbe1245.htm#fr_708) See [p.
297](sbe1243.htm#page_297), note [4](sbe1243.htm#fn_684).

<span id="fn_705"></span>[312:1](sbe1245.htm#fr_709) This paragraph is
somewhat obscure. The Kâ*n*va recension has the following more explicit
paragraphs instead:--As to this, there is a source of anxiety (âgas) to
some, fearing that 'it (that fire) might go out (anvagan).' But let him
not heed this, for, assuredly, that fire of his, which has been
established in his innermost soul, does not go out. 'The carriage might
pass through (vyayâsît), the cart might pass through;--it (or some one)
may come between (me and the fire)!' such is another source of anxiety
to some; but let him not heed this either; for, assuredly, the carriage
does not pass through, the cart does not pass through that fire of his
which has been established in his innermost soul. Cf. XII, 4, 1, 2-3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe1246)
