[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1202) 
[Next](sbe1204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1">1:1:1</span></span>

# SATAPATHA-BRÂHMA*N*A.

## FIRST KÂ*ND*A.

### THE DAR*S*APÛR*N*AMÂSA-ISH*T*Î OR NEW AND FULL-MOON SACRIFICES.

### FIRST ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### A. THE VOW OF ABSTINENCE.

EACH of the two half-monthly sacrifices, the regular performance of
which is enjoined on the Brâhma*n*ical householder for a period of
thirty years from the time of his performance of the ceremony of
agny-âdhâna, or setting up of a fire of his own,--according to some
authorities even for the rest of his life--usually occupies the greater
part of two consecutive days. Whilst the first day--the upavasatha or
fast-day--is chiefly taken up with preparatory rites, such as the
sweeping and trimming of the fire-places and lighting of the fires; and
the formal taking of the vow of abstinence (vrata) by the sacrificer and
his wife; the second day is reserved for the main performance of the
sacrifice. As to the exact days of the month appointed for these
ceremonies, there is some difference of opinion among native
authorities, some of them deciding in favour of the last two days of
each half of the lunar month, whilst the generality of ritualistic
writers consider the first day of the half-month--or the first and
sixteenth day of the month respectively--to be the proper time for the
main performance. The personal restrictions involved in the
householder's entering on the vrata include chiefly the abstention from
certain kinds of food, especially meat, and from other carnal pleasures;
the cutting (optional, according to some) of the beard and hair, except
the crest-lock; the sleeping on the ground in one of the chief
fire-houses; and the observance of silence during the ceremonies. It
was, however, permitted to compress the two-days'

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

rites of the Full-moon sacrifice into one single day, in which case some
of these restrictions would of course not be applicable.

The ceremonies begin with the preparation of the sacrificial fires.
\[First, the fivefold lustration successively of the Âhavanîya and
Dakshi*n*âgni fire-places, to render them fit for receiving the fire
from the Gârhapatya or householder's fire, viz. by thrice sweeping the
hearths; thrice besmearing them with gomaya; drawing three lines across
them from west to east, or south to north, with the wooden sword
(sphya); removing the dust from the lines with the thumb and
ring-finger; and thrice sprinkling the lines with water <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83).\] Then the Adhvaryu performs the
agny-uddhara*n*a, or twice taking out of the fire from the Gârhapatya,
and putting it successively on the forepart of the Âhavanîya and
Dakshi*n*âgni hearths. After this takes place the agny-anvâdhâna, or
putting (fuel) on the fires, by either the householder or the Adhvaryu;
two logs being put on each of the three fires. This may be done in three
different ways, viz. first on the Âhavanîya, then on the Gârhapatya, and
last on the Dakshi*n*âgni, in which case the first log is put on by him
whilst muttering the verse Rig-veda X, 128, 1 (Taitt. S. IV, 7, 14, 1),
'Let there be lustre, O Agni, at my invocations!' &c., the second log
silently. Or the first logs are put on with one of the three mystical
words 'bhûr, bhuva*h*, svar' on the Gârhapatya, Dakshi*n*âgni, and
Âhavanîya successively, and the second logs again silently. Or both logs
may be put on silently, the order of fires being in that case the one in
which they originate, viz. Gârhapatya, Âhavanîya, and Dakshi*n*âgni.

In the afternoon the householder and his wife partake of the vratopanîya
or fast-day food (prepared chiefly of rice, barley, or mudga beans) with
clarified butter; whereupon they take the vow in the manner prescribed
in the Brâhma*n*a. In the evening, immediately after sunset, and on the
following morning just before sunrise, the householder has, as usual, to
perform the Agnihotra, a burnt-offering of fresh milk, which has to be
made by him twice daily, with certain exceptions, from the Agnyâdhâna to
the end of his life.

 

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:1">1:1:1:1</span></span>1. He who
is about to enter on the vow, touches water <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) whilst standing between the Âhavanîya

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

and Gârhapatya fires, with his face turned towards east. The reason why
he touches water is, that man is (sacrificially) impure on account of
his speaking untruth; and because by that act an internal purification
(is effected),--for water is indeed (sacrificially) pure. 'After
becoming sacrificially pure, I will enter on the vow,' thus (he thinks);
for water is indeed purifying. 'Having become purified through the
purifying one, I will enter on the vow,' thus (he thinks, and) this is
the reason why he touches water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:2">1:1:1:2</span></span>2.
Looking towards the (Âhavanîya) fire <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85), he enters on the vow, with the text
(Vâ*g*. S. I, 5 a): 'O Agni, Lord of Vows! I will keep the vow! may I be
equal to it, may I succeed in it!' For Agni is Lord of Vows to the gods,
and it is to him therefore that he addresses these words. In the words,
'I will observe the vow; may I be equal to it; may I succeed in it,'
there is nothing that requires explanation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:3">1:1:1:3</span></span>3. After
the completion (of the sacrifice) he divests himself (of the vow), with
the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 28 a), 'O Agni, Lord of Vows! I have kept the
vow; I have been equal to it; I have succeeded in

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

it;' for he who has attained the completion of the sacrifice, has indeed
been equal to it; and he who has attained the completion of the
sacrifice, has succeeded in it. It is in this way that most
(sacrificers) will probably enter on the vow; but one may also enter on
it in the following way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:4">1:1:1:4</span></span>4.
Twofold, verily, is this, there is no third, viz. truth and untruth. And
verily the gods are the truth, and man is the untruth. Therefore in
saying (Vâ*g*. S. I, 5 b), 'I now enter from untruth into truth,' he
passes from the men to the gods <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:5">1:1:1:5</span></span>5. Let
him then only speak what is true; for this vow indeed the gods do keep,
that they speak the truth; and for this reason they are glorious:
glorious therefore is he who, knowing this, speaks the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:6">1:1:1:6</span></span>6. After
the completion (of the sacrifice) he divests himself (of the vow), with
the text (Vâ*g*. S. II, 28 b): 'Now I am he who I really am.' For, in
entering upon the vow, he becomes, as it were, nonhuman; and as it would
not be becoming for him to say, 'I enter from truth into untruth;' and
as, in fact, he now again becomes man, let him therefore divest himself
(of the vow), with the text: 'Now I am he who I really am.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:7">1:1:1:7</span></span>7. Now
then of the eating (or) fasting <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87). And
on this point Âshâ*dh*a Sâvayasa, on the one hand, was of opinion that
the vow consisted in fasting. For assuredly, (he argued,) the gods see
through the mind of man; they know that, when he enters on this

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

vow, he means to sacrifice to them the next morning. Therefore all the
gods betake themselves to his house, and abide by (him or the fires,
upa-vas) in his house; whence this (day) is called upa-vasatha <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:8">1:1:1:8</span></span>8. Now,
as it would even be unbecoming for him to take food, before men (who are
staying with him as his guests) have eaten; how much more would it be
so, if he were to take food before the gods (who are staying with him)
have eaten: let him therefore take no food at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:9">1:1:1:9</span></span>9.
Yâ*gñ*avalkya, on the other hand, said: 'If he does not eat, he thereby
becomes a sacrificer to the Manes; and if he does eat, he eats before
the gods have eaten: let him therefore eat what, when eaten, counts as
not eaten.' For that of which no offering is made, even though it is
eaten, is considered as not eaten. When he therefore eats, he does not
become a sacrificer to the Manes; and by eating of that of which no
offering is made, he does not eat before the gods have eaten.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:10">1:1:1:10</span></span>10. Let
him therefore eat only what grows in the forest, be it forest plants or
the fruit of trees. And in regard to this point Barku Vârsh*n*a said:
'Cook ye beans for me, for no offering is made of them!' This, however,
he should not do; for pulse

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

serves as an addition to rice and barley; and hence he increases the
rice and barley by means of it: let him therefore eat only what grows in
the forest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:11">1:1:1:11</span></span>11. Let
him sleep that night in the house of the Âhavanîya fire or in the house
of the Gârhapatya fire. For he who enters on the vow approaches the
gods; and he sleeps in the midst of those very gods whom he approaches.
Let him sleep on the ground <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89); for
from below, as it were, one serves one's superior.

B. THE PREPARATION OF THE OFFERINGS.

After the morning's performance of the Agnihotra and the subsequent
rising of the sun, the sacrificer chooses his Brahman, or superintending
priest. \[In the first place he gets six seats ready, covered with
sacrificial grass: two of these, to be used by the Brahman and
sacrificer during the ceremony of election, are placed somewhere on the
north side of the sacrificial ground; another south of the Âhavanîya
fire, to serve for the Brahman's permanent seat (brahmasâdanam), and
west of the latter (placed so as to be quite close to the altar to be
constructed hereafter, cf. Kâty. *S*r. I, 8, 28), the sacrificer's
permanent seat; finally a seat north of each of the two fires, the
Gârhapatya and the Âhavanîya, to be used by the Adhvaryu on certain
occasions. The sacrificer and future Brahman then having seated
themselves on the two first-mentioned seats on the north side, the
former with his face turned northward, and the latter looking toward
east; the sacrificer, holding the wooden sword (sphya) in his left hand,
touches the right knee of the Brahman with his right hand, in which he
holds barley-corns and\] chooses him for his Brahman with the formula:
\['Thou, of such and such a family, N.N. *S*arman! we are about to
perform the Full-moon sacrifice,'\] 'O Lord of the earth! Lord of the
world! Lord of the great universe! we choose thee for our Brahman!' The
chosen one then mutters (cf. Vâ*g*. S. p. 57): 'I am the lord of the
earth, I lord of the world, I lord of the great universe (mahâbhûta)!
earth! ether! heaven! O God Savit*ri*, thee they choose for their
Brahman, their lord of prayer (B*ri*haspati)!' &c., 'B*ri*haspati is
Brahman to the gods, I to the men!' He (or, according

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to some, the sacrificer) further says, 'O Lord of speech, protect the
sacrifice!' after which he betakes himself to the Brahman's seat (south
of the Âhavanîya), and whilst \[standing north of it, with his face
turned eastward and\] looking on it, he mutters: 'Avaunt! unholy one
(daidhishavya, lit. son of a re-married woman)! take thee away from here
and seat thee on another's seat who is less exalted (pâkatara) than we!'
He takes one blade of grass from the seat and flings it towards
south-west (the region of the Rakshas or evil spirits) with the formula:
'Expelled is sin with him whom we detest!' and then sits down with the
formula 'Here I sit on the seat of B*ri*haspati, at the command of the
divine Savit*ri*! This I proclaim to the fire, this to the wind, this to
the earth!' Here he remains seated, with his face towards the Âhavanîya
fire, to watch the progress of the ceremony and give directions,
whenever he is appealed to. When the full or new-moon sacrifice is
performed for the first time, it should be preceded by the
Anvârambha*n*îyâ offering, performed in much the same way as the
Paur*n*amâsî, except that the oblations themselves consist of a rice
cake on eleven potsherds for Agni and Vish*n*u, a potful of boiled
(rice) grains (*k*aru) for Sarasvati; and a rice cake on twelve
potsherds for Sarasvat; the priest's fee on this occasion consisting of
a cow four years old, or a pair of cattle, instead of the Anvâhârya
mess. Kâty. *S*r. IV, 5, 22-23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:12">1:1:1:12</span></span>12. By
way of his first act on the following morning he (the Adhvaryu priest)
betakes himself to the water, and brings water forward <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90): for

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

water is (one of the means of) sacrifice. Hence by this his first act he
approaches (engages in) the sacrifice; and by bringing (water) forward,
he spreads out (prepares) the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:13">1:1:1:13</span></span>13. He
brings it forward with those mysterious words (Vâ*g*. S. I, 6): 'Who (or
Pra*g*âpati) joins (or yokes) thee (to this fire) <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)? He joins thee. For what (or, for
Pra*g*âpati) does he join thee? For that (or him) he joins thee!' For
Pra*g*âpati is undefined <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92)
(mysterious); Pra*g*âpati is the sacrifice: hence he thereby yokes (gets
ready for the performance) Pra*g*âpati, this sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:14">1:1:1:14</span></span>14. The
reason why he brings forward water is, that all this (universe) is
pervaded by water <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93); hence by this his
first act he pervades (or gains) all this (universe).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:15">1:1:1:15</span></span>15. And
whatever here in this (sacrifice) the Hot*ri*, or the Adhvaryu, or the
Brahman, or the Âgnîdhra, or the sacrificer himself, does not succeed in
accomplishing, all that is thereby obtained (or made good).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:16">1:1:1:16</span></span>16.
Another reason why he brings forward water is this: whilst the gods were
engaged in performing sacrifice, the Asuras and Rakshas forbade (raksh)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

them, saying, 'Ye shall not sacrifice!' and because they forbade
(raksh), they are called Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:17">1:1:1:17</span></span>17. The
gods then perceived this thunderbolt, to wit, the water: the water is a
thunderbolt, for the water is indeed a thunderbolt; hence wherever it
goes, it produces a hollow (or depression of ground); and whatever it
comes near, it destroys (lit. it burns up). Thereupon they took up that
thunderbolt, and in its safe and foeless shelter they spread (performed)
the sacrifice. And thus he (the Adhvaryu priest) likewise takes up this
thunderbolt, and in its safe and foeless shelter spreads the sacrifice.
This is the reason why he brings forward water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:18">1:1:1:18</span></span>18.
After pouring out some of it (into the jug) he puts it down north of the
Gârhapatya fire. For water (ap) is female and fire (agni) is male; and
the Gârhapatya is a house: hence a copulation productive of offspring is
thereby effected in this house. Now he who brings forward the water,
takes up a thunderbolt; but when he takes up the thunderbolt, he cannot
do so unless he is firmly placed; for otherwise it destroys him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:19">1:1:1:19</span></span>19. The
reason then why he places it near the Gârhapatya fire is, that the
Gârhapatya is a house, and a house is a safe resting-place; so that he
thereby stands firmly in a house, and therefore in a safe resting-place:
in this way that thunderbolt does not destroy him,--for this reason he
places it near the Gârhapatya fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:20">1:1:1:20</span></span>20. He
then carries it north of the Âhavanîya fire <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94). For water is female and fire is male:
hence

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

a copulation productive of offspring is thereby effected. And in this
way alone a regular copulation can take place, since the woman lies on
the left (or north) side of the man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:21">1:1:1:21</span></span>21. Let
nobody pass between the water (and the fire), lest by passing between
them he should disturb the copulation which is taking place. Let him set
the water down without carrying it beyond (the north side of the fire,
i.e. not on the eastern side); nor should he put it down before reaching
(the north side, i.e. not on the western side). For, if he were to put
the water down after carrying it beyond,--there being, as it were, a
great rivalry between fire and water,--he would cause this rivalry to
break forth on the part of the fire; and when they (the priests and the
sacrificer) touch the water of this (vessel), he would, by carrying it
and setting it down beyond (the northern side), cause the enemy to rise
(spirt) in the fire. If, on the other hand, he were to put it down
before gaining (the northern side), he would not gain by it the
fulfilment of the wish for which it has been brought forward. Let him
therefore put it down exactly north of the Âhavanîya fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:1:1:22">1:1:1:22</span></span>22. He
now strews sacrificial grass all round (the fires) <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95), and fetches the utensils, taking two at a

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

time, viz. the winnowing basket and the Agnihotra ladle, the wooden
sword and the potsherds, the wedge and the black antelope skin, the
mortar and the pestle, the large and the small mill-stones. These are
ten in number; for of ten syllables consists the Virâ*g* (metre), and
radiant (virâ*g*) <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](sbe1204.htm#fn_96) also is
the sacrifice: so that he thereby makes the sacrifice resemble the
Virâ*g*. The reason why he takes two at a time is, because a pair means
strength; for when two undertake anything, there is strength in it.
Moreover, a pair represents a productive copulation, so that a
productive copulation (of those respective objects) is thereby effected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[2:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_83) The statements enclosed
in brackets \[ \] are drawn from the comments and Paddhati on
Kâtyâyana's *S*rauta-sûtra.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[2:2](sbe1203.htm#fr_84) I.e. 'he dips his hand
into water contained in a vessel,' Schol. Kâty. *S*r. S. I, 10, 14.
According to the general rule there given, <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>
the same purificatory act has to be repeated whenever, in the course of
ceremonial performances, a sacrificial formula or prayer has been used,
which is addressed to, or directed against, Rudra, the Rakshas and
Asuras, and the Manes; or one directed against some specified enemy of
the sacrificer with the view of exorcising or averting the evil
influences with which the latter is supposed to be threatened from that
quarter; or lastly, when a touching of one's self has taken place,
either accidentally or as part of the ceremonial.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[3:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_85) 'Stepping between the
Gârhapatya and Dakshi*n*a fires (aparâgnî), and standing west of the
Âhavanîya, with his face turned eastward and looking at the fire.' Kâty.
*S*r. S. II, 1, 11.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[4:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_86) I.e. 'he obtains a
divine body (devatâ*s*arîram),' Mahîdh.; man's existence is untruth on
account of its perishableness,' id.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[4:2](sbe1203.htm#fr_87) The discussion which
here follows refers to the evening meal which the sacrificer is allowed
to take after he has performed the Agnihotra. Cf. Kâty. *S*r. S. II, 1,
13.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[5:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_88) The primary meaning of
upa-vas probably is 'to dwell or abide near (? the gods or fires);' its
secondary and technical meaning being 'to fast,' whence upavasatha, 'a
fasting or fast-day,' literally 'the abiding near (? or honouring, the
gods or fires).' Cf. III, 9, 2, 7. The term is more usually applied to
the preliminary fast-day of the Soma-sacrifice; but the latter being
considered the most solemn and efficacious of sacrificial rites, a
strong tendency prevails to establish some kind of connection between it
and the other ceremonies. Cf. Kâty. *S*r. S. IV, 15, 36.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[6:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_89) A shake-down of grass
(âstara*n*am,? a blanket) is not forbidden. Paddh. on Kâty. *S*r. II, 1.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[7:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_90) He, in the first place,
pours water into a jug \[usually made of vara*n*a wood (Cratæva
Roxburghii), four-cornered, about a span or twelve fingers' breadths
deep and four fingers' breadths square, and furnished with a handle\],
puts it down north of the Gârhapatya fire, and touches it with the
formula: 'I, the existent, will operate with thee (?tvâ karishyâmi), O
existent one!' He then addresses himself to the Brahman: 'O Brahman!
shall I bring the water forward?' and to the patron or sacrificer:
'Sacrificer, restrain thy speech!' The Brahman,---after muttering the
mantra (as he does, with certain modifications, on similar occasions
when his permission is asked in the course of the performance): 'Lead on
the sacrifice! gladden the deities! May the sacrificer be on the vault
of heaven! Where the world of the seven pious *Ri*shis is, thither do
thou lead this sacrifice and sacrificer!'--replies aloud: 'Hail (õm)!
bring forward!'

<span id="fn_91"></span>[8:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_91) 'Ka (i.e. who? or
Pra*g*âpati) joins thee (i.e. places thee, O water, by the side of the
Âhavanîya fire)? (I) . . *K*asmai (i.e. for what purpose? or, for whom?
or, for Pra*g*âpati) does he join thee? (!)' Mahîdh. Dark is the meaning
of these words because of the ambiguity of ka, the interrogative
pronoun, which speculative theology also takes for a mystic name of
Pra*g*âpati. Cf. XI, 5, 4, seq.; Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit
Literature, p. 433.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[8:2](sbe1203.htm#fr_92) Cf. also I, 6, 1, 20,
where Sâya*n*a says that Pra*g*âpati is anirukta, because he represents
all deities.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[8:3](sbe1203.htm#fr_93) A play on the word
âpa*h* (ap), 'water,' and the root âp, 'to obtain, to pervade.'

<span id="fn_94"></span>[9:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_94) After the water has
been brought forward by the Adhvaryu from the house of the Gârhapatya
fire, its technical name is Pra*n*îtâ*h*, <span id="page_10">p.
10</span> 'brought forward.' On putting it down north of the Âhavanîya,
he covers the jug over with sacrificial grass.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[10:1](sbe1203.htm#fr_95) Kâty. *S*r. II, 3, 6:
'Having strewn sacrificial grass around the fires, beginning on the east
side,' which the Comm. interprets: 'He strews eastward and
northward-pointed grass around first the Âhavanîya, then the Gârhapatya,
and last the Dakshi*n*âgni, beginning each time on the eastern side, and
then moving around from left to right, and turning his right side
towards the fire, so as to end on the north side' (cf. Kâty. IV, 13,
15). The Paddhati, on <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> the other hand,
following Âpastamba, interprets it to the effect that on the eastern and
western sides he strews the grass with its tops turned northward, and on
the southern and northern sides with the tops turned eastward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe1204)
