[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1225) 
[Next](sbe1227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1">1:6:1</span></span>

### SIXTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:1">1:6:1:1</span></span>1. Now
the Seasons were desirous to have a share in the sacrifice among the
gods, and said, 'Let us share in the sacrifice! Do not exclude us from
the sacrifice! Let us have a share in the sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:2">1:6:1:2</span></span>2. The
gods, however, did not approve of this. The gods not approving, the
Seasons went to the Asuras, the malignant, spiteful enemies of the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:3">1:6:1:3</span></span>3. Those
(Asuras) then throve in such a manner that they (the gods) heard of it;
for even while the foremost (of the Asuras) were still ploughing and
sowing, those behind them were already engaged in reaping and threshing:
indeed even without tilling the plants ripened forthwith for them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:4">1:6:1:4</span></span>4. This
now caused anxiety to the gods: 'That owing to that (desertion of the
Seasons), enemy

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (viz. the Asuras)
seeks to injure enemy (viz. us) is of little consequence; but this
indeed goes too far: try to find out how henceforth this may be
different <span id="fr_370"></span>[1](#fn_367)!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:5">1:6:1:5</span></span>5. They
then said, 'Let us invite the Seasons!'--'How? Let us offer prayer to
them first of all at the sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:6">1:6:1:6</span></span>6. Agni
then said, 'But whereas hitherto you used to offer prayer to me in the
first place, what is now to become of me?' 'We will not remove you from
your place!' said they. And since, in inviting the Seasons, they did not
remove Agni from his place, for that reason Agni is immutable <span
id="fr_371"></span>[2](#fn_368); and verily, he who knows that Agni to
be immutable, does not move from the place where he bides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:7">1:6:1:7</span></span>7. The
gods said to Agni, 'Go and invite them hither!' Agni went to them and
said, 'O Seasons, I have obtained for you a share in the sacrifice among
the gods.' They said, 'In what form hast thou obtained it for us?' He
replied, 'They will offer prayer to you first at the sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:8">1:6:1:8</span></span>8. The
Seasons said to Agni, 'We will let thee share along with us in the
sacrifice who hast obtained for us a share in the sacrifice among the
gods!' And because Agni has been allowed a share along with the Seasons
(the offering-prayers are): 'The Samidhs, O Agni, (may accept the
butter) <span id="fr_372"></span>[3](#fn_369) . . . !'

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Tanûnapât, O Agni
. . .!' 'The I*d*s, O Agni . . .!' 'The Barhis, O Agni. . .!' 'Svâhâ
Agni!' And verily, whosoever knows that Agni is thus allowed to share
(in the sacrifice) along with the Seasons, he is allowed to participate
in whatever auspicious rite is performed by one who professes to be
equal (in that knowledge) to him;--for him, being possessed of Agni, the
Seasons, themselves possessed of Agni, ripen the plants and everything
here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:9">1:6:1:9</span></span>9. Now,
as to this point, some raise the objection, 'But since they invite the
fore-offerings last of all (at the two libations of butter) <span
id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_370), why do they offer prayer to them first
of all?'--Because they established them last of all in the
sacrifice <span id="fr_374"></span>[2](#fn_371); and because they said,
'we will offer prayer to you first:' for that reason they invite them
last, and offer prayer to them first.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:10">1:6:1:10</span></span>10. By
the fourth fore-offering the gods, assuredly, obtained the sacrifice,
and by the fifth they firmly established it; and by what part of the
sacrifice after that remained unaccomplished they gained the world of
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:11">1:6:1:11</span></span>11. In
going to heaven they were afraid of an attack from the Asuras and
Rakshas. They placed Agni at their head, as the Rakshas-killer, the
repeller of the Rakshas; they placed Agni in their midst, as the
Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas; they placed Agni in their
rear, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:12">1:6:1:12</span></span>12. And
if the Asuras and Rakshas wished to attack them in front, Agni repelled
them, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas; if they wished
to attack in the centre, Agni repelled them, as the Rakshas-killer, the
repeller of the Rakshas; and if they wished to attack in the rear, Agni
repelled them, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas: being
thus guarded on all sides by Agnis, they reached the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:13">1:6:1:13</span></span>13. And
in the same way this one now obtains the sacrifice by means of the
fourth fore-offering, and by means of the fifth he establishes it; and
by what part of the sacrifice after that remains un-accomplished, he
gains the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:14">1:6:1:14</span></span>14. Now
when he pronounces the offering-prayer over Agni's butter-portion, he
thereby places Agni in front, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the
Rakshas; and when Agni's sacrificial cake is (offered), he thereby
places Agni in the midst, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the
Rakshas; and when he pronounces the offering-prayer to Agni
Svish*t*ak*ri*t (the maker of good offering), he thereby places Agni in
the rear, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:15">1:6:1:15</span></span>15. And
if the Asuras and Rakshas try to attack him (the sacrificer) in front,
Agni repels them, as the Rakshas-killer, the Repeller of the Rakshas: if
they try to attack him in the centre, Agni repels them, as the
Rakshas-killer, the repeller of the Rakshas; and if they try to attack
him from behind, Agni repels them, as the Rakshas-killer, the repeller
of the Rakshas: being thus guarded on every side by Agnis, he gains the
world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:16">1:6:1:16</span></span>16. And
if any one were to imprecate evil on him

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

previously to (or, in the fore-part of) the (chief) sacrifice, let him
be thus spoken to, 'Thou shalt suffer some disease of the face! thou
shalt become either blind or deaf!' for these, in truth, are diseases of
the face: and thus it would indeed fare with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:17">1:6:1:17</span></span>17. If
any one were to imprecate evil on him in the middle of the sacrifice,
let him be thus spoken to, 'Thou shalt be without offspring, without
cattle!' for offspring and cattle, indeed, constitute the centre (i.e.
the substantial possession of man): and thus it would indeed fare with
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:18">1:6:1:18</span></span>18. If
any one were to imprecate evil on him after the completion of the
(chief) sacrifice, let him be thus spoken to, 'Unstable and poor, thou
shalt swiftly go to yonder world!' for thus it would indeed fare with
him. One should not therefore utter imprecations: for whosoever thus
understands this has the advantage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:19">1:6:1:19</span></span>19. He
who gains by means of the fore-offerings, assuredly, gains the
year <span id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_372). But he alone gains it who
knows its doors; for what were he to do with a house who cannot find his
way inside? Even as those (fore-offerings) are (the doors) of this
(sacrifice), so is the spring a door, and so is the winter a door, of
that (year). This same year he enters, as the world of heaven; for,
assuredly, the year is all, and the All (universe) is imperishable: his
thereby becomes imperishable merit, the imperishable world.

#### THE TWO BUTTER-PORTIONS (Â*G*YABHÂGA) TO AGNI AND SOMA.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:20">1:6:1:20</span></span>20.
Here now some say, 'To what deity belong the butter-portions?' Let him
reply, 'To Pra*g*âpati;'

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

for, assuredly, Pra*g*âpati is undefined <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](sbe1227.htm#fn_373) (mysterious); and undefined
are the butter-portions, because they have the sacrificer for their
deity; for the sacrificer is Pra*g*âpati at his own sacrifice, since it
is by his order that the priests spread and produce it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:6:1:21">1:6:1:21</span></span>21.
Having basted the havis with butter and made two cuttings from it, he
pours some of the butter thereon: thus the oblation is offered combined
with butter, and thereby indeed it is offered combined with the
sacrificer; and for one who knows this,--whether he has a sacrifice
performed for him while he is far away, or while he is near,--the
sacrifice is performed in the same way as it would be performed if he
were near; and he who knows this, even though he do much evil, is not
shut out from the sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_367"></span>[156:1](sbe1226.htm#fr_370) 'Kanîya in nv ato
dvishan dvishate ’râtîyati kim v etâvanmâtram upa*g*ânîta yathedam ito
’nyathâsad iti.' The Kâ*n*va MS. has, 'tad u vai devânâm atathâsa kanîya
in nu tam dvishan dvishate ’râtîyed atha ki*m* tâvanmâtram. Te ho*k*u*h*
katham idam ito no ’nyathâ syâd iti.'

<span id="fn_368"></span>[156:2](sbe1226.htm#fr_371) A*k*yuta, literally
'not fallen,' hence invariable, indispensable is an epithet frequently
applied to Agni's sacrificial cake; cf. I, 4, 2, 16; I, 6, 2, 5.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[156:3](sbe1226.htm#fr_372) See [p.
148](sbe1224.htm#page_148), note [2](sbe1224.htm#fn_360).

<span id="fn_370"></span>[157:1](sbe1226.htm#fr_373) In the devatânâm
âvahanam or invitation of the deities, the last formula, addressed to
the butter-drinking deities, is supposed to refer to the fore- and
after-offerings. Cf. I, 4, 2, 16-17.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[157:2](sbe1226.htm#fr_374) See I, 5, 3, 23.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[159:1](sbe1226.htm#fr_375) See I, 5, 3, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 6, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe1227)
