[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1209) 
[Next](sbe1211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080113X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4">1:2:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:1">1:2:4:1</span></span>1. When
Indra hurled the thunderbolt at V*ri*tra, that hurled one became
fourfold. Of (three parts of) it the wooden sword (sphya) represents
one-third or thereabouts, the sacrificial post one-third or thereabouts,
and the chariot one-third or thereabouts. That piece, moreover, with
which he struck him, was broken off (*sri*); and on falling down it
became an arrow (*s*ara): hence the designation arrow, because it was
broken off. And in this way the thunderbolt became fourfold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:2">1:2:4:2</span></span>2. In
consequence of this, the priests make use of two (of these pieces) at
the sacrifice, and men of the military caste (râ*g*anyabandhu) also make
use of two of them in battle: viz. the priests make use of the
sacrificial post and the wooden sword, and the men of the military caste
of the chariot and the arrow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:3">1:2:4:3</span></span>3. Now
when he takes up the wooden sword <span id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181),
he raises that thunderbolt against the wicked, spiteful enemy, even as
Indra at that time raised the thunderbolt against V*ri*tra: that is the
reason why he takes the wooden sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:4">1:2:4:4</span></span>4. He
takes it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 24): 'At the impulse of the divine
Savit*ri*, I take thee with

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the arms of the A*s*vins, with the hands of Pûshan; thee that performs
sacred rites to the gods!' Savit*ri*, namely, is the impeller of the
gods: thus he thereby takes that (wooden sword) as one impelled by
Savit*ri*. 'With the arms of the A*s*vins,' he says, because the
A*s*vins are the two Adhvaryu priests (of the gods): with their arms he
therefore takes it, not with his own. Pûshan is distributer of portions
(to the gods): with his hands he therefore takes it, not with his own;
for it is the thunderbolt, and no man can hold that: he thus takes it
with (the assistance of) the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:5">1:2:4:5</span></span>5. 'I
take (thee) that performs sacred rites to the gods,' he says, because a
sacred rite means a sacrifice: 'that performs sacrifices to the gods,'
he thereby says. After taking it in his left hand and touching it with
his right, he murmurs--by what he murmurs he makes it sharp,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:6">1:2:4:6</span></span>6. He
murmurs (Vâ*g*. S. I, 24): 'Thou art Indra's right arm!' for Indra's
right arm no doubt is the most powerful one, and for that reason he
says: 'Thou art Indra's right arm!' 'The thousand-spiked, hundred-edged!
he adds, for a thousand spikes and a hundred edges had that thunderbolt
which he hurled at V*ri*tra: he thereby makes it to be that
(thunderbolt).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:7">1:2:4:7</span></span>7. 'The
sharp-edged Vâyu (wind) art thou!' he adds; for that indeed is the
sharpest edge, to wit, that (wind) which here blows: for that one sweeps
right across these worlds. He thereby makes it sharp. When he (further)
says: 'The killer of the enemy!' let him, whether he wishes to exorcise
or not, say: 'The killer of so and so!' When it has been sharpened, he
must not touch either himself or the earth with it: 'Lest I should hurt
either myself or the earth with that sharp thunderbolt,' thus he thinks,
and for

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

that reason he does not touch either himself or the earth with it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:8">1:2:4:8</span></span>8. The
gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati <span
id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182),were contending for superiority. The
gods vanquished the Asuras; and yet these afterwards harassed them
again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:9">1:2:4:9</span></span>9. The
gods then said: 'We do, no doubt, vanquish the Asuras, but nevertheless
they afterwards again harass us. How then can we vanquish them so that
we need not fight them again?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:10">1:2:4:10</span></span>10.
Agni then said: 'By fleeing northwards they escape from us.' By fleeing
northwards they had indeed escaped from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:11">1:2:4:11</span></span>11.
Agni said: 'I will go round to the northern side, and you will then shut
them in from here <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183); and whilst
shutting them in, we will put them down by these (three) worlds; and
from what fourth world there is beyond these (three) they will not be
able to rise again.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:12">1:2:4:12</span></span>12.
Agni thereupon went round to the northern side; and they (the other
gods) shut them in from here; and whilst shutting them in, they put them
down with these(three)worlds; and from what fourth world

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

there is beyond these (three) they did not rise again. Now this same
(expulsion of the Asuras) is virtually the same act as the flinging away
of the grass-bush <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_184).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:13">1:2:4:13</span></span>13. The
Âgnîdhra goes round to the north, for he is virtually the same person as
Agni himself. The Adhvaryu then shuts them in from here,; and whilst
shutting them in, he puts them down by means of these (three) worlds;
and from what fourth world there is beyond these (three) they do not
rise again. Thus now also they do not rise again, for by the same means
by which the gods kept them off, the priests now also keep them off
during the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:14">1:2:4:14</span></span>14. And
whoever has evil designs upon the sacrificer and hates him, him he
thereby puts down by means of these (three) worlds, and what fourth
world there is beyond these. And in putting him down with these (three)
worlds, and what fourth world there is beyond these, he flings
everything away from this (earth), for on it all these worlds rest: for
what would he fling away, if he were to fling (the grass-bush) away with
the words, 'The air I throw away, the heaven I throw away!' therefore he
flings everything away from this (earth) <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_185).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:15">1:2:4:15</span></span>15.
Thereupon, after putting the grass-bush between <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_186), he flings (the wooden sword at it).
'Lest I

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

should injure the earth with this sharp thunderbolt!' thus (he thinks,
and) for that reason he flings after putting the grass-bush between.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:16">1:2:4:16</span></span>16. He
flings it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I, 25): 'O earth, that affordest the
place for making offerings to the gods! may I not injure the root of thy
plant!' He thereby makes her, as it were, with roots remaining in
her <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187). Whilst he takes up (the earth
dug up by the sword), he thus addresses her: 'May I not injure the roots
of thy plants!'--And in further saying, 'Go to the fold, the abode of
the cows!' when he is about to throw it away (on the heap of rubbish),
he causes it not to forsake him; for that which is within the fold <span
id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188) does not forsake him: for that reason he
says, 'Go to the fold, the abode of the cows!' He further says (whilst
looking at the hole in the ground): 'May the sky rain on thee!'
Wherever, in digging into her, they wound and injure her--water being (a
means of) expiation--that he thereby expiates by the water which is (a
means of) expiation; that he thereby makes good by means of the water:
that is the reason why he says: 'May the sky rain on thee!'--'Tie him
down, O divine Savit*ri*, to the furthest end of the earth!' he says
(whilst throwing on the heap of rubbish the soil dug up); he thus

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

says to the divine Savit*ri*: 'Tie him down to blind darkness!' when he
says 'to the furthest end of the earth,'--'With a hundred fetters!' by
this he means to say, 'so that he cannot free himself.'--'Him who hates
us and whom we hate, do not release from there!' Whether or not he
wishes to exorcise, let him say: 'So and so . . . do not release from
there!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:17">1:2:4:17</span></span>17. He
then throws (the wooden sword) a second time, with the text (Vâ*g*. S.
I, 26): 'May I drive Araru away from the earth, the place of offerings!'
Araru <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189), namely, was an Asura and
Rakshas. Him the gods drove away from this (earth), and in the same way
he (the Adhvaryu) thereby drives him away from this (earth). He adds
(whilst repeating the several corresponding acts): 'Go to the fold, the
abode of the cows! May the sky rain on thee! Tie him down, O divine
Savit*ri*, to the furthest end of the earth, with a hundred fetters, him
who hates us and whom we hate, do not release him from there!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:18">1:2:4:18</span></span>18. The
Âgnîdhra presses it down (on the heap of rubbish), with the text (Vâ*g*.
S. I, 26): 'O Araru! thou shalt not fly up to heaven!' For when the gods
drove away Araru, the Asura-Rakshas, he wished to fly up to heaven. Agni
pressed him down, saying, 'O Araru, thou shalt not fly up to heaven!'
and he did not fly up to heaven. In the same way the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adhvaryu thereby
cuts him off from this world, and the Âgnîdhra from the side of heaven.
That is the reason why he does this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:19">1:2:4:19</span></span>19. He
then throws (the wooden sword) a third time, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. I,
26): 'Let thy drop not spring up to the sky!' Her (the earth's) drop no
doubt is that moisture of hers upon which the creatures subsist. 'Let
this thine (moisture) not fly away to the sky!' he thereby says.--He
adds (whilst again repeating the several acts): 'Go to the fold, the
abode of the cows! May the sky rain on thee! Tie him down, O divine
Savit*ri*, to the furthest end of the earth, with a hundred fetters, him
who hates us and whom we hate, do not release him from there!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:20">1:2:4:20</span></span>20.
Three times he throws it, with the sacrificial formula (Ya*g*us); for
three are these worlds, and with these worlds he thereby puts him (the
evil spirit) down <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190). And what these
worlds are, that in truth is the Ya*g*us: for that reason he throws it
thrice with the sacrificial formula.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1:2:4:21">1:2:4:21</span></span>21.
Silently (he throws) a fourth time <span
id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191). What fourth world there may or may not
be beyond these (three), by that one he thereby drives away the spiteful
enemy. For uncertain indeed is what fourth world there may or may not be
beyond these (three); and uncertain also is what (is done) silently: for
that reason (he throws) silently a fourth time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[52:1](sbe1209.htm#fr_180) A fabulous kind of
deer with eight legs, which was supposed to kill elephants and lions.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[52:2](sbe1210.htm#fr_181) See note on I, 1, 2,
8.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[54:1](sbe1210.htm#fr_182) Pra*g*âpati is
called the father of the gods and Asuras, I, 5, 3, 2; and they are
represented as entering on his inheritance, I, 7, 2, 22; IX, 5, 1, 12.
Not only the gods and Asuras, but also the men derive their origin from
Pra*g*âpati, XIV, 8, 2, 1. He has created all beings, I, 6, 3, 35; Ait.
Br. III, 36.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[54:2](sbe1210.htm#fr_183) I.e. 'from the
sacrificial ground,' Sâya*n*a. It seems doubtful to me whether it does
not rather mean 'you will then shut them in, or block them up, within
that place,' that is to say, north of the altar, where the utkara, or
heap of rubbish, lies. The four worlds by which he puts down the enemies
are represented by the loose soil which is dug up by the sphya being
flung four separate times at the grass-bush lying on the altar (vedi),
and which is then thrown on the utkara.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[55:1](sbe1210.htm#fr_184) The ceremony called
stambaya*g*us (-hara*n*am) consists in 'the throwing away of the
grass-bush after cutting it by the (flinging of the) wooden sword, with
the simultaneous reciting of Ya*g*us-texts' \[ya*g*urmantrako darbha*h*
stambaya*g*u*h*, ta*kk*a stambarûpa*m* sphyena bhittvotkarade*s*e haret,
Sây., Taitt. S. I, 1, 9\].

<span id="fn_185"></span>[55:2](sbe1210.htm#fr_185) This passage, in
which the author seems to argue against some other ritualistic
authority, is not quite clear to me. The Taitt. Br. has, 'from the
atmosphere he drives him away (by the second throw), from the sky he
drives him away (by the third throw).'

<span id="fn_186"></span>[55:3](sbe1210.htm#fr_186) That is, between
himself, or the wooden sword, and the altar. According to Katy. II, 6,
15, he lays the grass-bush down on the <span id="page_56">p. 56</span>
altar with its top pointing northwards, with the text: 'The armour of
the earth art thou!'

<span id="fn_187"></span>[56:1](sbe1210.htm#fr_187) Sâya*n*a explains it
by uttaramûlâm iva karoti; 'p*ri*thivîm uparibhâgâvasthitamûlayuktâm
ivâ' (? 'with the roots remaining in its (the earth's) upper part, or
surface'). Cf. also Sây. on Taitt. S. I, 1, 9 (p. 155).

<span id="fn_188"></span>[56:2](sbe1210.htm#fr_188) The Taitt. Br. (III,
2, 9, 3) identifies the fold (pen, stable) with the metres (? which
enclose the altar in the shape of the first set of lines), cf. *S*at.
Br. I, 2, 5, 6 seq. This identification rests on the double meaning of
go (in gosthânam) as 'cow' and 'metre.'

<span id="fn_189"></span>[57:1](sbe1210.htm#fr_189) Of this demon we
have no further particulars except that in Rig-veda X, 99, 10, he is
said to have four feet; see also Taitt. Br. III, 2, 9, 4 seq. Perhaps
there is some connection between Araru and the Arurmaghas in Ait. Br.
VII, 28, and the Arunmukhas in Kaushît. Up. 3, 1; both of them enemies
of Indra. Cf. M. Haug's and Max Müller's translations of these works;
and Weber, Ind. Stud. I, 411.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[58:1](sbe1210.htm#fr_190) In the corresponding
passage of the Black Ya*g*us (Taitt. Br. III, 2, 9, 5 seq.) the Adhvaryu
is represented as driving the enemy away from the four worlds by
throwing the sword four times.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[58:2](sbe1210.htm#fr_191) When, together with
the dug-out soil, he throws the grass-bush on the heap of rubbish. Kâty.
II, 6, 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2. 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe1211)
