[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07099)  [Next](sbe07101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

# XCVIII.

1\. When Vish*n*u had finished his speech<sup>\[1\]</sup>, the goddess
of the earth inclined her knees and her head before him and said:

2\. 'O Bhagavat! Four (out of the five) grosser elements<sup>\[1\]</sup>
are receiving their support from thee, and are constantly about thee:
the ether, in the form of the shell; the air, in the form of the discus;
the fire, in the form of the mace; and the water, in the form of the
lotus. Now I also desire to attend upon thee, in my own shape, as the
ground which Bhagavat's feet tread upon.'

\[21. <sup>1</sup> The 'field' has been discussed in XCVI, 43-97,
'knowledge' in XCVI, 43-97, 'knowledge' in XCVII, 1, and 'what should be
known' in XCVII, 2-20. (Nand.)

XCVII\. 1. <sup>1</sup> Vish*n*u's speech is contained in Chapters
II-XCVII. (Nand.)

2\. <sup>1</sup> The fifth grosser element is the earth. See XCVII, 1,
note.\]

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

3\. Having been addressed thus by the goddess of the earth, Bhagavat
answered, 'So be it.'

4\. And the goddess of the earth, her desire having been gratified, did
as she had said.

5\. And she praised the god of the gods (as follows):

6\. 'Om. Adoration be to thee.

7\. 'Thou art the god of the gods.

8\. 'Thou art Vâsudeva.

9\. 'Thou art the creator.

10\. 'Thou art the god (who, creates, preserves, and destroys) at will.

11\. 'Thou art the gratifier of human desires.

12\. 'Thou art the guardian of the earth.

13\. 'There is neither beginning, nor middle, nor end in thee.

14\. 'Thou art the lord (protector) of creatures.

15\. 'Thou art the strong lord of creatures.

16\. 'Thou art the exalted lord of creatures.

17\. 'Thou art the lord of strength.

18\. 'Thou art the lord of holy speech.

19\. 'Thou art the lord (creator and preserver) of the world.

20\. 'Thou art the lord of heaven.

21\. 'Thou art the lord of woods (who makes the trees grow).

\[10. 'Or Kâmadeva means the god (or brilliant one) who is sought by
those striving for religious merit, gain, love, or final liberation,'
(Nand.) The same interpretation is given by *S*a<u>n</u>kara in his
Commentary on the Vish*n*u-sahasranâma. The ordinary meaning of Kâmadeva
is 'the god of love.'

15, 16. Nand. renders the terms supra*g*âpati and mahâpra*g*âpati by
'the protector of those who have a splendid progeny (such as Ka*s*yapa)'
and the lord of him who has a large progeny (Brahman).'\]

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

22\. 'Thou art the lord (producer) of (mother's) milk.

23\. 'Thou art the lord of the earth (and causest it to yield its
produce)

24\. 'Thou art the lord of the waters.

25\. 'Thou art the lord of the (eight) quarters of the sky.

26\. 'Thou art the lord of (the principle) Mahat.

27\. 'Thou art the lord of the wind.

28\. 'Thou art the lord of happiness.

29\. 'Thou art Brahman personified.

30\. 'Thou art dear to Brâhma*n*as.

31\. 'Thou pervadest everything.

32\. 'Thou surpassest all conception.

33\. 'Thou art attainable by knowledge (meditation).

34\. 'Thou art invoked at many (offerings).

35\. 'Thou art praised with many (hymns of the Veda).

36\. 'Thou likest everything sacred.

37\. 'Thou art fond of Brahman (the Veda).

38\. 'Thou belongest to the (gods called) Brahmakâyas.

39\. 'Thy size is immense.

40\. 'Thou belongest to the Mahârâ*g*as.

\[26. See XCVII, 1, note.

28\. Lakshmîpati has been translated according to Nand.'s
interpretation. It usually denotes the husband of Lakshmî.

30\. Or 'Brâhma*n*as are dear to thee.' Both explanations of the term
brâhma*n*apriya are admissible, and mentioned by Nand. and by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara.

40, 41. Nand. interprets the two terms mahârâ*g*ika and
*k*aturmahârâ*g*ika by 'he whose series of transmigrations is immense,'
and 'he whose immense series of transmigrations is fourfold,' and
{footnote p. 394} he refers the latter epithet to the four parts, of
which Purusha is said to consist. He quotes Rig-veda X, 90, 4, where it
is said that Purusha ascended to the sky with three of his constituent
parts, and that the fourth remained in this world. But both terms cannot
be separated etymologically from Mahârâ*g*a, the name of a certain class
of deities in the Buddhistic system of religion.\]

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

41\. 'Thou belongest to the four Mahârâ*g*as.

42\. 'Thou art brilliant.

43\. 'Thou art most brilliant.

44\. 'Thou art the seven (parts of a Sâman, or the seven divisions of
the universe).

45\. 'Thou art most blessed.

46\. 'Thou art tone.

47\. 'Thou art Tushita (or "satisfied with the honours shown to thee by
faithful attendants").

48\. 'Thou art Mahâtushita (or "highly satisfied even without being
worshipped").

49\. 'Thou art the tormentor (destroyer of the world).

50\. 'Thou art wholly created.

51\. 'Thou art uncreated.

52\. 'Thou art obsequious (to thy followers).

53\. 'Thou art sacrifice.

54, 'Thou art the (recipient of the) great sacrifice.

55\. 'Thou art connected with sacrifices.

56\. 'Thou art the fit recipient of offerings.

57\. Thou art the consummation of offerings.

58\. Thou art invincible.

\[44. Thus Nand. Compare I, 56, note.

46\. Nand.'s interpretation of the epithet svara, 'tone' (or 'air
breathed through the nostrils'), as being a compound of the prefix su
and the root *ri* in the sense of 'acquisition, insight,' and meaning
'most wise,' is inadmissible.

54\. This epithet, according to Nand., refers to the sacrifice mentioned
in a text of the Vâ*g*asan. Sa*m*hitâ (XIX, 12), which begins with the
words 'The gods prepared a sacrifice'\]

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

59\. 'Thou art Vaiku*nth*a.

60\. 'Thou art unbounded (both in time and space).

61\. 'Thou surpassest (the organs of sense, mind, and intelligence).

62\. 'Thou art of old.

63\. 'Thou art friendly to the gods.

64\. 'Thou art the protector of living beings.

65\. 'Thou wearest radiant locks of hair.

66\. 'Thou takest thy share of acts of worship.

67\. 'Thou takest thy sacrificial cake.

68\. 'Thou art lord over everything.

69\. 'Thou art the support of all.

70\. 'Thy ears are pure.

71\. 'Never ceasing homage is paid to thee.

72\. 'Thou art blazing fire (or "Thou art shining with clarified butter
offered up to thee").

73\. 'Thou cuttest (foes) to pieces with thy axe.

74\. 'Thou hast a lotus springing from thy navel.

75\. 'Thou holdest a lotus (in thy hand).

76\. 'Thou wearest a garland of lotus-flowers.

77\. 'Thou art the lord of the senses.

78\. 'Thou hast one horn.

\[59. Nand. proposes two interpretations of this epithet: 2. the
producer of Mâyâ (the power of illusion); 2. the son of Vikun*th*â, the
mother of Vish*n*u in one of his Avatâras. Vaikun*th*a is also the name
of Vish*n*u's paradise.

70\. 'I.e. "thou hearest the sacred revelation." Or *s*u*k*i*s*rava =
"he whose names are pure."' (Nand.) The same interpretation is given by
*S*a<u>n</u>kara. See also Mahâbhârata XII, 13250.

73\. 'The epithet kha*nd*apara*s*u refers either to Vish*n*u's slaying
the Daityas in the form of *S*iva, or to his wearing an axe as the
slayer of the Kshatriyas in the form of Para*s*urâma.' (Nand.) The
latter interpretation is proposed by *S*a<u>n</u>kara also, and
kha*nd*aparasu is a very common epithet of Para*s*urâma.

78\. The one horn is meant, by which Vish*n*u, in his descent as
{footnote p. 296} a fish, is said to have dragged the ship of Manu
behind him. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

79\. 'Thou art the great boar.

80\. 'Thou art the tormentor (of the Asuras, or of the righteous and the
unrighteous).

81\. 'Thou art eternal.

82\. 'Thou art infinite. 83. Thou art Purusha. 84. Thou art the great
(unbounded) Purusha. 85. Thou art (the sage) Kapila. 86. Thou art the
teacher of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya. 87. Thy powers are everywhere. 88. Thou
art virtue. 89. Thou art the giver of virtue. go. Thy body is virtue
(law). 91. Thou art the giver of both virtue and wealth. 92. Desires are
gratified by thee. 93. Thou art Vish*n*u. 94. Thou art triumphant
everywhere. 95. Thou art capable of bearing (the extremities of heat and
cold and any others). 96. Thou art K*ri*sh*n*a. 97. Thou art the
lotus-eyed god. 98. Thou art Nârâya*n*a (the son of Nara). 99. Thou art
the final aim. 100. Thou art the resort of all beings. 101. Adoration,
adoration (be to thee)!'

102\. The goddess of the earth, after her desire had been gratified, and
after she had thus praised

\[79. This epithet refers to Vish*n*u's boar-incarnation. See I, 1 seq.

85, 86. See Introduction.

101\. Nand. observes that the divers epithets which are given to
Vish*n*u in this chapter are precisely equal in number to the ninety-six
chapters, of which the law part of the Vish*n*u-sûtra is composed. This
coincidence is curious enough, though it is not quite perfect. For it is
by a highly artificial interpretation only that Nand. makes out Sûtra
101 to contain an epithet of Vish*n*u, viz. by interpreting the two
separate words namo nama as a compound, meaning 'he who is worshipped by
the worshipful, i. e. by Brahman and the other gods;' and Sûtra 6
contains no epithet at all.\]

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

(Vish*n*u) with a cheerful mind I addressed herself to the goddess
(Lakshmî).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XCIX.](sbe07101)
