[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07055)  [Next](sbe07057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

# LIV.

1\. If a man associates with one guilty of a crime, he must perform the
same penance as he.

2\. A Brâhma*n*a who has drunk water from a well in which a five-toed
animal has perished, or which has been defiled in the highest degree,
must fast for three days.

3\. A Kshatriya (must fast) for two days (in the same case).

4\. A Vai*s*ya (must fast) for one day (and one night).

5\. A *S*ûdra (must fast) for a night only.

6\. And all (the former, but not a Sûdra) must drink Pañ*k*agavya, when
their penance has been completed.

7\. If a *S*ûdra drinks Pañ*k*agavya, or if a Brâhma*n*a drinks
spirituous liquor, they both go to the hell called
Mahâraurava<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

\[LIV. 1. M. XI, 182.--10. M. XI, 203.--11. M. II, 220; Âpast. II, 5,
12, 22; Gaut. XXIII, 21.--12. M. XI, 200; Y. III, 277; Gaut. XXIII,
7.--23. M. XI, 202; Y. III, 291.--24. M. XI, 195; Y. III, 290.--25. M.
XI, 198; Y. III, 289.--26. M. XI, 192.--27. M. XI, 193.--28. M. XI,
294.--29, M. XI, 204.--30. M. XI, 209; Y. III, 293.--31. M. XI,
190.--32. M. XI, 191; Y. III, 299.--34. M. XI, 210; Y. III, 294.

7\. <sup>1</sup> See XLIII, 5. Nand. infers from an anonymous Sm*ri*ti
passage, that the first part of this Sûtra refers not only to *S*ûdras,
but to women also, and not only to the drinking of Pañ*k*agavya,
{footnote p. 176}but also to the offering of burnt-oblations and the
muttering of prayers.\]

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

8\. If a man has not connection with his wife in the natural season,
unless it be on the days of the full and new moon, or because she is
ill, he must fast for three days.

9\. A false witness<sup>\[1\]</sup> must perform the penance ordained
for killing a Brâhma*n*a.

10\. He who has (unawares) voided excrements without water (being near),
must bathe in his clothes, pronounce the 'great words<sup>\[1\]</sup>,'
and offer a burnt-oblation<sup>\[2\]</sup>.

11\. One who has been surprised asleep by the sun rising or setting,
must bathe in his clothes and mutter the Gâyatrî one hundred -and eight
times.

12\. He who has been bitten by a dog, a jackal, a tame pig, an ass, an
ape, a crow, or a public prostitute, shall approach a river and
(standing in it, shall) stop his breath sixteen times.

13\. One who forgets the Vedic texts which he has studied, or who
forsakes the sacred fires, must subsist upon alms for a year, bathing at
the tree Savanas (morning, noon, and evening, sleeping upon the ground,
and eating one meal a day.

14\. For setting one's self up by false statements, and for falsely
accusing or abusing a Guru, he must subsist upon milk for a month.

15\. An atheist, one who leads the life of a member of the *K*a*nd*âla
or of other low castes that

\[9. <sup>1</sup> According to Nand., this particular species of
criminals is only quoted as an instance of anupâtakina*h* (criminals in
the third degree, see XXXVI), who are all intended in this Sûtra.

10\. <sup>1</sup> See LV, 10.--<sup>2</sup> The particle *k*a implies
that he must touch a cow besides, as Manu directs (XI, 203).' (Nand.)

14\. See XXXVII, 1, 3.\]

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

dwell outside the village (Bâhyas)<sup>\[1\]</sup> an ungrateful man,
one who buys or sells with false weights, and one who deprives
Brâhma*n*as of their livelihood (by robbing them of a grant made to them
by the king or private persons, or by other bad practices), all those
persons<sup>\[2\]</sup> must subsist upon alms for a year.

16\. An unmarried elder brother whose younger brother is married, a
younger brother married before the elder, an unmarried elder sister
whose younger sister is married, the relative who gives such a damsel in
marriage, and the priest who officiates at such a marriage, must perform
the *K*ândrâya*n*a.

17, He who sells living beings, land, religious merit (obtained by a
sacrifice or otherwise), or Soma, must perform the Taptak*rikkh*ra.

18\. He who sells fresh ginger<sup>\[1\]</sup>, (edible) plants (such as
rice or barley), perfumes, flowers, fruits, roots, skins, canes,
(winnowing baskets or fans and the like) made of split bamboo, chaff,
potsherds, hair, ashes, bone, cow-milk or curds, oil-cakes, sesamum, or
oil, must perform the Prâ*g*âpatya.

19\. He who sells the fruit of the *S*leshmâtaka tree, lac, bees-wax,
shells, mother-of-pearl, tin, lead, iron, copper, or, (sacrificial)
vessels made of the horn of the rhinoceros, must perform the
*K*ândrâya*n*a.

20\. He who sells dyed cloth, tin<sup>\[1\]</sup>, precious

\[15. <sup>1</sup> 'Or nâstikav*ri*tti means "one who receives his
substance from an atheist."' See also Gaut. XV, 16.--<sup>2</sup> 'The
use of the particle *k*a implies that calumniators are also intended.'
(Nand.)

17\. See XLVI, 11.

18\. <sup>1</sup> The term ârdra, which Nand. interprets by ârdrakam,
might also be connected with the following word, and both together be
translated by 'fresh plants.' See Y. III, 38.

20\. <sup>1</sup> Tin, perfumes, and, of the articles enumerated in
Sûtra 21, {footnote p. 178} lac, and milk have already been mentioned in
Sûtras 18 and 19. Nand. tries to remove the difficulty in the second
case, by stating the perfumes mentioned here to be perfumes of a
different kind, and in the fourth case, by asserting that the milk of
female buffalos, &c. is meant in Sûtra 2 1. But he interprets the two
other terms as given above. Probably the passage is interpolated.\]

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

stones, perfumes, sugar, honey, liquids or condiments (other than sugar,
salt, and the like), or wool, must fast for three days.

21\. He who sells meat, salt, lac, or milk, must perform the
*K*ândrâya*n*a.

22\. And<sup>\[1\]</sup> all those persons (mentioned in Sûtras 17-21)
must be initiated a second time.

23\. He who has been riding (voluntarily) upon a camel<sup>\[1\]</sup>,
or upon an ass, and he who has (purposely) bathed, or slept, or eaten,
quite naked, must stop his breath three times.

24\. By muttering attentively the Gâyatrî three thousand times, (by
dwelling) upon the pasture of cows, (and) by subsisting on milk for a
month, he becomes free from the sin of accepting unlawful presents.

25\. He who has (knowingly) offered a sacrifice for an unworthy person
(such as a low-caste person, or an outcast), he who has performed the
funeral rites for a stranger, he who has practised magic rites (in order
to destroy an enemy), and he who has performed a sacrifice of the kind
called Ahîna<sup>\[1\]</sup>, (all those persons) may rid themselves of
their

\[22. <sup>1</sup> Nand. infers from the use of the particle *k*a that
this rule applies equally to the persons mentioned in the next Sûtra.

23\. <sup>1</sup> 'The use of the particle vâ, "or," implies that riding
upon a cow, and other such animals, is also intended here.' (Nand.)

25\. <sup>1</sup> This kind of sacrifice is defined by Nand. as one
connected with repeated drinking of the Soma juice, and lasting from two
to twelve days. Medhâtithi (on Manu XI, 198) simply defines {footnote p.
179} it as a sacrifice extending over two days or more; Kullûka (ibid.)
states that it lasts three days or more, and that it is said in the Veda
to cause impurity. See also Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 355.\]

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

sins by performing three K*rikkh*ra (Prâ*g*âpatya) penances.

26\. Those twice-born men, by whom the Gâyatrî has not been repeated
(and the other initiatory ceremonies performed), as the law directs,
must be made to perform three (Prâ*g*âpatya) penances and must be
initiated according to custom.

27\. Those twice-born men who are anxious to make an atonement for
having committed an illegal act<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or for having neglected
the study of the Veda, must be made to perform the same penance.

28\. Those Brâhma*n*as who have acquired property by base acts (such as
living by the occupations of a lower caste, or accepting unlawful
presents) become free from sin by relinquishing it, and by muttering
(Veda texts) and practising austerities.

29\. For omitting one of the regular acts enjoined in the revealed (and
traditional) law, and for a breach of the rules laid down for a
Snâtaka<sup>\[1\]</sup>, a fast is ordained as atonement.

\[26. The recitation and repetition of the Gâyatrî is one of the chief
elements of the ceremony of initiation. The words with which the pupil
must address his teacher on this occasion are given by Nand.; they are
quoted from Â*s*v. I, 21, 4, and *S*â<u>n</u>kh. II, 5, 10-11. See also
Gaut. I, 46, with Dr. Bühler's note.

27\. <sup>1</sup> 'I.e. Brâhma*n*as and others who have gained their
livelihood (in times of distress) by such occupations as are lawful for
other castes only, and who, when the times of distress are over, wish to
atone for those actions.' (Nand.)

29\. <sup>1</sup> Regarding the meaning of this term, see above, XXVIII,
42, note. The rules to be observed by a Snâtaka are given in Chapter
LXXI.\]

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

30\. For attacking a Brâhma*n*a (by raising a stick or a weapon against
him), the K*rikkh*ra (Prâ*g*âpatya) penance must be performed; for
striking him, the Atik*rikkh*ra; and for fetching blood from him, the
K*rikkh*râtik*rikkh*ra.

31\. With sinners, who have not expiated their crime, let a man not
transact business of any kind. But a man who knows the law must not
blame (or shun) those who have expiated it.

32\. Let him not, however, live (or have any intercourse) with those who
have killed children, or with ungrateful persons, or with those who have
slain one come for protection, or a woman, even though such sinners may
have obtained their absolution, as directed by the law.

33\. (An old man) who has passed his eightieth year, a youth under the
age of sixteen, women, and sick persons have only to perform half of
every penance<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

34\. In order to remove those sins for which no particular mode of
expiation has been mentioned, penances must be prescribed, which shall
be in accordance with the ability of the offender, and with the
heaviness of his offence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LV.](sbe07057)
