[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07053)  [Next](sbe07055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

# LII.

1\. He who has stolen the gold (of a Brâhmana), must bring a club to the
king, proclaiming his deed.

2\. Whether the king kills him with it, or dismisses him unhurt, he is
purified.

3\. Or (in case he committed the theft unawares), he must perform the
Mahâvrata<sup>\[1\]</sup> for twelve years.

4\. He who appropriates (knowingly) a deposit, (must perform the same
penance.)

5\. He who steals (knowingly) grain or valuable objects<sup>\[1\]</sup>,
(or prepared food belonging to a Brâhma*n*a,) (must perform) the
K*rikkh*ra<sup>\[2\]</sup> for a year.

6\. For stealing male or female slaves (not belonging to a Brâhma*n*a,
and for seizing) a well or pool (actually containing water), or a field,
the *K*ândrâya*n*a (penance must be performed).

7\. (For stealing) articles of small value (such as tin or lead, not
exceeding twenty-five Pa*n*as in value), the Sântapana (penance must be
performed).

8\. (For stealing) sweetmeats, (rice or other) food,

\[LII. 1, 2. M. VIII, 314-316; XI, 100-101; Y. III, 257; Âpast. I, 9,
25, 4-5; Gaut. XII, 43, 44.--3. M. XI, 102.--5-13. M. XI, 163-169.

3\. <sup>1</sup> See L, 1-5.

5\. <sup>1</sup> By dhana, 'valuable objects,' the objects mentioned
below (in 10.), copper and the rest, are meant. (Nand.)--<sup>2</sup>
Nand. does not explain the meaning of K*rikkh*ra, which is a general
term for 'a heavy penance.' It probably denotes the Prâ*g*âpatya penance
here, as in a number of other law texts (e. g. below, LIV, 26), and in
the corresponding text of Manu in particular. See Kullûka on M. XI, 163.

8-13. Nand. explains that these Sûtras refer to a small amount of those
articles which are mentioned in them.\]

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

(milk or other) drinks, a bed, a seat, flowers, roots, or fruit,
drinking Pañ*k*agavya (is ordained as penance).

9\. (For stealing) grass, firewood, trees, rice in the husk, sugar,
clothes, skins, or flesh, the thief must fast for three days.

10\. (For stealing knowingly) precious stones, pearls or coral, copper,
silver, iron, or white copper. he must eat grain separated from the husk
for twelve days.

11\. For stealing (unawares) cotton, silk, wool or other (stuffs), he
must subsist for three days upon milk.

12\. For stealing two-hoofed or one-hoofed animals, he must fast for
three days.

13\. For stealing birds, or perfumes, or medicinal herbs, or cords, or
basket-work, he must fast for one day.

14\. Though a thief may have restored to the owner the stolen property
(either openly or) in some indirect manner<sup>\[1\]</sup>, he must
still perform a penance, in order to purify himself from guilt.

15\. Whatever a man takes from others, unchecked (by the dictates of
religion), of that will he be bereft in every future birth.

16\. Because life, religious merit, and pleasure depend upon wealth,
therefore let a man take care not to injure the wealth (of others by
robbing them) by any means.

17\. Among those two, he who injures animal life, and be who injures
wealth, the one who injures wealth shall incur the heavier penalty.

\[14. <sup>1</sup> As under pretext of handing over to him the dowry, of
a wife.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIII.](sbe07055)
