[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07052)  [Next](sbe07054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

# LI.

1\. A drinker of spirituous liquor must abstain from all religious rites
and subsist on grains separated from the husk for a year.

2\. If a man has (knowingly) tasted any of the (twelve) unclean
excretions of the body, or of the (twelve) intoxicating drinks, he must
perform the *K*ândrâya*n*a penance.

3\. Likewise, if he has (knowingly) eaten garlic, or onions, or red
garlic, or any plant which has a similar flavour (to that of garlic or
onions), or the meat of village pigs, of tame cocks (and other tame
birds), of apes, and of cows.

4\. In all those cases men belonging to a twice-born caste have to be
initiated a second time, after the penance is over.

5\. On their second initiation, the tonsure, the girding with the sacred
string, the wearing of the staff, and the begging of alms shall be
omitted.

\[LI. 1. M. XI; 93; Y. III, 254.--3. M. V, 19; Y. I, 176.--4, 5. M. XI,
151, 152; Y. III, 255; Gaut. XXIII, 2.--6. M.V, 18; Y. I, 177; Âpast. I,
5, 17, 37; Gaut. XVII, 27.--7-20. M. IV, 205-217; Y. I, 161-168; Âpast.
I, 5, 16, 27, 29; 17, 4, 5; 18, 21-23; 19, 1, 15; 11, 6, 15, 14; Gaut.
XVII, 10-12, 17, 19, 21, 31.--21. M. V, 16; Y. I, 177,178.--23. M. XI,
148.--25. M. XI, 150; Gaut. XXIII, 6.--26-42. M. V, 5-21, 24, 25; XI,
152-157; Y. I, 169-178; Âpast. I, 5, 17, 17-20, 22-26, 28, 29, 33-36;
Gaut. XVII, 14, 16, 22-26, 28, 29, 32-34.--43-46. M. XI, 158-160.--59.
M. V, 36; Y. I, 179; Âpast. I, 5, 17, 31.--60. M. V, 38; Y. I, 180.--61.
M. V, 39.--62. M. V, 34--63-78. M. V, 40-55.--64. *S*â<u>n</u>kh. II,
16, 1. See also Bühler, Introd. to Digest, p. xxxi, note.--76, 77. Y. I,
181.\]

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

6\. If a man has (unawares) eaten meat of a fivetoed animal, with the
exception of the hare, the porcupine, the iguana, the rhinoceros, and
the tortoise, he must fast for seven days.

7\. If he has eaten the food of a multitude of persons, of a harlot, of
a thief, or of a singer, he must subsist upon milk for seven days.

8\. And<sup>\[1\]</sup> (if he has eaten) the food of a carpenter or of
a leather manufacturer;

9\. Or of a usurer, of a miser, of one who has performed the initiatory
ceremony of a Soma-sacrifice, of a jailer, of an Abhi*s*asta, or of a
eunuch;

10\. Or of a dissolute woman, of a hypocrite, of a physician, of a
hunter, of a hard-hearted or cruel person, and of one who eats the
leavings of food;

11\. Or of a woman who has neither husband nor son, of a goldsmith, of
an enemy, or of an outcast:

12\. Or of a malignant informer, of a liar, of one who has transgressed
the law, and of one who sells himself, or who sells (molasses or other)
liquids and condiments;

13\. Or of a public dancer, of a weaver, of an ungrateful man, or of a
dyer of clothes;

14\. Or (the food) of a blacksmith, of a man of the Nishâda tribe (who
subsist by fishing), of a stage-player<sup>\[1\]</sup>, of a worker in
cane, or of a seller of weapons;

\[8. <sup>1</sup> 'As shown by *k*a, "and," other persons who have a
dishonourable profession, such as fishermen, have also to be
understood.' (Nand.)

9\. Abhi*s*asta means 'accused of a heinous crime,' i.e. 'a person of
bad repute.' (Nand.) See also Dr. Bühler's notes on Âpast. I, 9, 24, 6,
and on Gaut. XVII, 17.

14\. 'This is the usual meaning of the term ra<u>n</u>gâvatârin. Nand.
explains it by 'wrestlers and the like.'\]

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

15\. Or of a trainer of dogs, of a distiller of spirituous liquor, of an
oil manufacturer, or of a washerman;

16\. Or (the food) of a woman in her courses (whether belonging to her,
or dressed for her), or of one who lives under one roof with the
paramour of his wife;

17\. Or (food) which has been looked at by the killer of an embryo (of a
Brâhma*n*a), or which has been touched by a woman in her courses, or
nibbled by a bird<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or touched by a dog, or smelt at by a
cow;

18\. Or that which has been designedly touched with the foot, or that
which has been sneezed at;

19\. Or the food of insane, or wrathful, or sick persons;

20\. Or (food that is given) in a disrespectful manner, or the meat (of
animals killed) for no sacred purpose.

21\. After having (unawares) eaten the flesh of any sort of fish,
excepting the Pâ*th*îna, Rohita, Râ*g*îva, Si*m*hatu*nd*a, and *S*akula
fishes, he must fast for three days.

22\. Likewise, after having (unawares) eaten the flesh of (any other)
aquatic animal (such as the alligator, or the Gangetic porpoise).

23\. After having (knowingly) drunk water from a vessel in which
spirituous liquor had been kept, he must drink for seven days milk
boiled together with the *S*a<u>n</u>khapushpî plant.

\[17. Nand. considers the term patatrin to refer to crows only in this
place. Kullûka (on M. IV, 208) interprets it by 'crows and the like.'
See also Gaut. XVII, 10.

20\. See Dr. Bühler's notes on Gaut. XVI 19, 31.\]

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

24\. After having (knowingly drunk water) from a vessel in which an
intoxicating beverage had been kept, (he must drink the same) for five
days.

25\. A Soma-sacrificer, who has (unawares) smelt the breath of a man who
had been drinking spirituous liquor, must plunge into water, (suppress
his breath) and mutter the Aghamarsha*n*a three times. and eat clarified
butter afterwards.

26\. For eating (designedly) the flesh of an ass, of a camel, or of a
crow<sup>\[1\]</sup>, he must perform the *K*ândrâya*n*a penance.

27\. Likewise, for eating (knowingly) the flesh of an unknown (beast or
bird), meat kept in a slaughterhouse, and<sup>\[1\]</sup> dried meat.

28\. For eating (unawares) the flesh of carnivorous beasts; (tigers- and
others), or birds (hawks and others), he must perform the
Taptak*rikkh*ra.

29\. For (knowingly) eating a sparrow, or (the heron called) Plava, or a
Brâhma*n*î duck, or a Ha*m*sa, or the (wild cock called) Ra*gg*udâla, or
a Sârasa crane, or a Dâtyûha, or a male or female parrot, or a crane, or
a heron, or a cuckoo, or a wagtail, he must fast for three days.

30\. Likewise, for eating (unawares the flesh of) animals whose hoof is
not cloven (such as horses),

\[26. Nand. argues from a passage of Pra*k*etas, that the flesh of the
following other animals, dogs, jackals, cocks, boars, carnivorous
animals in general, Gangetic porpoises, apes, elephants, horses, tame
hogs, cows, and human beings, is also implied here. But if that were the
case, Sûtra 26 would be partly a mere repetition of, and partly opposed
to, the rules laid down in Sûtras 33 and 22.

27\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. infers from a passage of the Brâhma-purâ*n*a,
that the use of the particle *k*a further implies a prohibition to eat
the flesh on the back, or flesh which had been interred in the ground,
or covered with earth, fried meat, and the flesh of the uterus.\]

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

or of animals having a double row of teeth (such as the Rohita deer).

31\. For eating (unawares) the flesh of any bird, excepting the
francoline partridge, the Kâpiñ*g*ala, the (quail called) Lâvaka, the
peahen, and the peacock, (he must fast) for a day and a night.

32\. For eating (knowingly) insects (ants and others), he must drink for
one day (water in which the plant) Brahmasuvar*k*alâ (has been boiled).

33\. For eating (unawares) the flesh of dogs, he must perform the same
penance<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

34\. For eating (unawares the mushroom called) *Kh*attrâka, or (the
mushroom called) Kavaka, he must perform the Sântapana penance.

35\. For eating (unawares) stale food, other than a mess prepared with
barley (such as cakes), or with wheat (such as, gruel), or with milk
(boiled with rice, or mixed with coagulated milk, or otherwise dressed),
and dishes sprinkled with fat (such as clarified butter), sour gruel,
and sweetmeats, he must fast (for one day).

36\. Likewise, (for eating unawares) the juice flowing from an incision
in a tree, (plants raised in) unclean substances (such as excrements and
the like), and the red exudation of trees.

37\. Also, (for eating unawares) the root of the water-lily; (and for
eating) rice boiled with sesamum. or with beans,
Sa*m*yâva<sup>\[1\]</sup>, rice boiled in milk with sugar, pastry,
*S*ashkulî (cakes), or food destined for

\[33. <sup>1</sup> 'And he must perform the Sântapana penance mentioned
in the next Sûtra, as the use of the particle *k*a implies.' (Nand.)

37\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. interprets this term by utkarikâ, which,
according to Wilson, is a sort of sweetmeat made with milk, treacle, and
clarified butter. Kullûka (on M. V, 7) has a somewhat different
interpretation.\]

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the gods, if those dishes have not been announced to the gods first; and
(for eating) food destined for burnt-oblations.

38\. Also, for tasting the milk of any animal, save the milk of cows,
goats, and buffalos (and for tasting any eatables made of such
milk)<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

39\. Also, (for tasting the milk) of those animals (cows and the rest)
within ten days after their giving birth to a young one.

40\. And (for tasting) the milk of a cow whose milk flows of itself, of
one that has just taken the bull<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or of one whose calf
is dead<sup>\[2\]</sup>.

41\. And (for tasting the milk of a cow) that has been feeding upon
ordures.

42\. And (for tasting) any such food as has turned sour (but not that
which is sour by nature, like sorrel), except sour milk (and what is
made with it).

43\. A student, who partakes (unawares) of a *S*râddha repast, must fast
for three days.

44\. And he must remain in water for a whole day (afterwards).

45\. If he eats honey or meat (at any time), he must perform the
Prâ*g*âpatya penance.

46\. If any one eats (unawares) the leavings of the

\[38. <sup>1</sup> Nand. infers from the use of the particle *k*a that
the same penance is ordained for tasting any other production of those
animals, as e. g. their excrements.

40\. <sup>1</sup> Sandhinî means 'a cow that has just taken the bull,'
or 'a female animal that gives milk once a day,' or 'a cow that is
milked by the calf of another cow.' (Nand.) Haradatta (see Âpast. I, 5,
17, 23; Gaut. XVII, 25) interprets it by 'an animal giving milk while
big with young.' For other interpretations, see the Petersburg
Dictionary.--<sup>2</sup> 'The particle *k*a indicates that animals
bearing twins have also to be included in this prohibition.' (Nand.) See
Gaut. loc. cit.\]

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

food of a cat, of a crow, of an ichneumon, or of a rat, he must drink
water in which the Brahmasuvar*k*alâ plant has been boiled.

47\. For eating (unawares) what has been left by a dog, he must fast for
one day, and drink Pañ*k*agavya (afterwards).

48\. For tasting (knowingly) the excrements of five-toed animals
(excepting human excrements), he must (fast) for seven days (and drink
Pañ*k*agavya on the eighth).

49\. If one (not a student) eats (unawares) of a *S*râddha repast
consisting of raw food, he must subsist on milk for seven days.

50\. If a Brâhma*n*a eats what has been left by a *S*ûdra, (he must also
subsist on milk) for seven days.

51\. If he eats what has been left by a Vai*s*ya, (he must subsist upon
milk) for five days.

52\. If he eats what has been left by a Kshatriya, (he must subsist upon
milk) for three days.

53\. If he eats what has been left by another Brâhma*n*a, (he must
subsist upon milk) for one day.

54\. If a Kshatriya eats what has been left by a *S*ûdra, (he must
undergo the same penance) for five days.

55\. If he eats what has been left by a Vai*s*ya, (he must undergo it)
for three days;

56\. And so must a Vai*s*ya, if he eats what has been left by a *S*ûdra.

\[50. Nand. explains that he should drink Pañ*k*agavya alternately with
milk. This explanation extends to the following Sûtras also (up to Sûtra
56). He further argues from another Smriti text that the term *S*ûdra
means '*S*ûdras and women' here.\]

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

57\. For (knowingly) eating (undressed) food, which has been left by a
*K*a*nd*âla (or Svapa*k*a or other member of the seven lowest castes),
he must fast for three days.

58\. For (unawares) eating dressed food (left by such), the Parâka
penance is ordained.

59\. Let no Brâhma*n*a ever eat (the flesh of) beasts which has not been
consecrated with Mantras; but if it has been consecrated with Mantras,
he may eat it, following the eternal rule (laid down in the Veda).

60\. As many hairs as the beast has, which he has slain in this world,
for so many days will the killer of a beast for other purposes than a
(*S*rauta or Smârta) sacrifice, suffer terrible pangs in this world and
in the next<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

61\. It is for sacrifices that beasts have been created by the
Self-existent (Brahman) himself. Sacrificing causes the whole universe
to prosper; therefore is the slaughter (of beasts) for a sacrifice no
slaughter.

62\. The sin of him who kills deer for the sake of gain, is not so great
(and visited less heavily) in the world to come, than the sin of him who
eats meat which has not been offered to the gods.

63\. Plants, cattle, trees, amphibious animals, and birds, which have
been destroyed for the purposes of sacrifice, obtain exaltation in
another existence (in which they are born as Gandharvas, or other beings
of a high rank).

\[60. <sup>1</sup> My translation follows Nand. It is, however,
doubtful, whether the reading is correct; see Manu V, 38.

62\. This is because the former kills animals in order to support his
family, whereas the latter eats meat merely in order to tickle his
palate. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

64\. When honouring a guest, at a sacrifice, or when worshipping the
manes, or the gods, a man may slay cattle, but not otherwise on any
account.

65\. That twice-born man who, knowing the exact truth (promulgated) in
the Veda, slays cattle for the sacrifices (ordained in the Veda), will
convey himself and the cattle (slain by him) to a blissful abode.

66\. A self-controlled<sup>\[1\]</sup> man of a twice-born caste,
whether he be a householder, or be dwelling with his spiritual teacher,
or in the forest, must never slay an animal in opposition to the
precepts of the Veda, even in cases of distress.

67\. That slaughter which is in accordance with the precepts of the
Veda, and has been fixed for this world of movable and immovable
creatures, should be considered as no slaughter at all; because it is
from the Veda that law shines forth.

68\. He who hurts animals that do not hurt any one, merely in order to
afford pleasure to himself, will never obtain happiness, whether living
or dead<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

69\. He who gives no living creature intentionally the pain of confining
or killing (or hurting) it, from benevolence towards all (creatures),
will enjoy everlasting happiness.

70\. Whatever he thinks of, whatever he strives for, and whatever he
desires in his heart, all that is easily obtained by him who does not
injure any created being.

71\. Meat cannot be obtained without injuring an

\[66. <sup>1</sup> Nand. interprets the term âtmavân by sa*m*nyâsî, 'an
ascetic, or member of the fourth order,' apparently because the first
three orders are mentioned in this *S*loka. I have followed Kullûka's
interpretation (on M.V, 43).

68\. <sup>1</sup> 'But it is no sin to kill tigers or other beasts of
prey.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

animal, and the murder of animals excludes the murderer from heaven,
therefore must meat be avoided.

72\. Reflecting upon the origin of flesh<sup>\[1\]</sup> and upon the
(sin of) hurting or confining animated creatures, he must abstain from
animal food of any kind.

73\. He who transgresses not the law and eats not flesh like a Pisâ*k*a,
is beloved by men and remains free from disease.

74\. He who gives his consent to the killing of an animal, he who cuts
it up, he who kills it, the purchaser and the seller, he who prepares
it, he who serves it up, and he who eats it, all these are denominated
slaughterers of an animal.

75\. There is no greater sinner than he who, without giving their share
to the manes and to the gods, wants to increase his own flesh with the
flesh of another creature.

76\. Those two, he who performs a horse-sacrifice annually for a hundred
years and he who does not eat meat, shall both obtain the same
recompense for their virtue.

77\. By eating (wild rice or other) sacred fruits or roots, and by
living upon such grains as are the food of hermits, a man does not reap
so high a reward as by avoiding meat

78\. (An eater of flesh must say within himself), Me he (mâ*m* sa) will
eat in the next world, whose

\[72. <sup>1</sup> The human soul is enveloped in six sheaths, three of
which come from the father, and three from the mother. The three that
come from the mother are skin, flesh, and blood. Now flesh is said in
the *S*ruti to be derived from the menstrual discharge, and the latter
is one of the species of forbidden food. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

flesh I am tasting here.<sup>\[1\]</sup> This, say the learned, is the
derivation of the word flesh (mâ*m*sa).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LII.](sbe07054.md)
