[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07001)  [Next](sbe07003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

   THE Vish*n*u-sm*ri*ti or Vaish*n*ava Dharma*s*âstra or Vish*n*u-sûtra
is in the main a collection of ancient aphorisms on the sacred laws of
India, and as such it ranks with the other ancient works of this class
which have come down to our time<sup>\[1\]</sup>. It may be styled a
Dharma-sûtra, though this ancient title of the Sûtra works on law has
been preserved in the MSS. of those Sm*ri*tis only, which have been
handed down, like the Dharma-sûtras of Âpastamba, Baudhâyana, and
Hira*n*yake*s*in, as parts of the respective Kalpa-sûtras, to which they
belong. The size of the Vish*n*u-sûtra, and the great variety of the
subjects treated in it, would suffice to entitle it to a conspicuous
place among the five or six existing Dharma-sûtras; but it possesses a
peculiar claim to interest, which is founded on its close connection
with one of the oldest Vedic schools, the Ka*th*as, on the one hand, and
with the famous code of Manu and some other ancient law-codes, on the
other hand. To discuss these two principal points, and some minor points
connected with them, as fully as the limits of an introduction admit of,
will be the more necessary, because such a discussion can afford the
only safe basis for a conjecture not altogether unsupported regarding
the time and place of the original composition of this work, and may
even tend to throw some new light on the vexed question as to the origin
of the code of Manu. Further on I shall have to speak of the numerous
interpolations traceable in the Vish*n*u-sûtra, and a few remarks
regarding the materials

\[1. This was first pointed out by Professor Max Müller, History of
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 134. His results were confirmed and
expanded by the subsequent researches of Dr. Bühler, Introduction to
Bombay Digest, I, p. xxii; Indian Antiquary, V, p. 30; Kasmir Report, p.
36.\]

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

used for this translation, and the principles of interpretation that
have been followed in it, may be fitly reserved for the last.

   There is no surer way for ascertaining the particular Vedic school by
which an ancient Sanskrit law-book of unknown or uncertain origin was
composed, than by examining the quotations from, and analogies with,
Vedic works which it contains. Thug the Gautama Dharma*s*âstra might
have originated in any one among the divers Gautama Kara*n*as with which
Indian tradition acquaints us. But the comparatively numerous passages
which its author has borrowed from the Sa*m*hitâ and from one Brâhma*n*a
of the Sâma-veda prove that it must belong to one of those Gautama
Kara*n*as who studied the Sâma-veda<sup>\[1\]</sup>. Regarding the code
of Yâ*g*ñavalkya we learn from tradition that a Vedic teacher of that
name was the reputed author of the White Ya*g*ur-veda. But this
coincidence might be looked upon as casual, if the
Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti did not contain a number of Mantras from that
Vedic Sa*m*hitâ, and a number of very striking analogies, in the section
on funeral ceremonies particularly, with the G*ri*hya-sûtra of the
Vâ*g*asaneyins, the Kâtiya G*ri*hya-sûtra of Pâraskara<sup>\[2\]</sup>.
In the case of the Vish*n*u-sûtra an enquiry of this kind is specially
called for, because tradition leaves us entirely in the dark as to its
real author. The fiction that the laws promulgated in Chapters II-XCVII
were communicated by the god Vish*n*u to the goddess of the earth, is of
course utterly worthless for historical purposes; and all that it can be
made to show is that those parts of this work in which it is started or
kept up cannot rival the laws themselves in antiquity.

   Now as regards, first, the Vedic Mantras and Pratîkas (beginnings of
Mantras) quoted in this work, it is necessary to leave aside, as being
of no moment for the present purpose, 1. very well-known Mantras, or,
speaking more

\[1. See Bühler, Introduction to Gautama (Vol. II of the Sacred Books of
the East), pp. xlv-xlviii.

2\. Bühler, Introduction to Digest, p. xxxii; Stenzler, On Pâraskara's
G*ri*hya-sûtra, in the journal of the German Oriental Society, VII, p.
527 seq.\]

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

precisely, all such Mantras as are frequently quoted in Vedic works of
divers *S*âkhâs; 2. the purificatory texts enumerated under the title of
Sarva-veda-pavitrâ*n*i in LVI. The latter can afford us no help in
determining the particular *S*âkhâ to which this work belongs, because
they are actually taken, as they profess to be, from all the Vedas
indiscriminately, and because nearly the whole of Chapter LVI is found
in the Vâsish*th*a-sm*ri*ti as well (see further on), which probably
does not belong to the same Veda as this work. Among the former class of
Mantras may be included, particularly, the Gâyatrî, the Purushasûkta,
the Aghamarsha*n*a, the Kûshmâ*nd*îs, the Vyâh*ri*tis, the Gyesh*th*a
Sâmans, the Rudras, the Tri*n*â*k*iketa, the Trisupar*n*a, the
Vaish*n*ava, *S*âkra, and Bârhaspatya Mantras mentioned in XC, 3, and
the Mantra quoted in XXVIII, 51 (= Gautama's 'Retasya'). Among the
twenty-two Mantras quoted in Chapters XLVIII, LXIV, LXV (including
repetitions, but excluding the Purushasûkta, Gâyatrî, Aghamarsha*n*a)
there are also some which may be referred to this class, and the great
majority of them occur in more than one Veda at the same time. But it is
worthy of note that no less than twelve, besides occurring in at least
one other Sâkhâ, are either actually found in the Sa*m*hitâ of the
Kârâya*n*îya-ka*th*as, the Kâ*th*aka<sup>\[1\]</sup> (or
*K*araka-sâkhâ?), or stated to belong to it in the Commentary, while one
is found in the Kâthaka alone, a second in the Atharva-veda alone, a
third in the Taittirîya Brâhma*n*a alone, and a fourth does not occur in
any Vedic work hitherto known<sup>\[2\]</sup>. A far greater number of
Mantras occurs in Chapters XXI, LXVII, LXXIII, LXXIV, LXXXVI, which
treat of daily oblations, *S*râddhas, and the ceremony of setting a bull
at liberty. Of all these Mantras, which,--including the Purushasûkta and
other such well-known Mantras as well as the short invocations addressed
to Soma, Agni, and other deities, but excluding the invocations
addressed to Vish*n*u in the spurious Sûtra, LXVII, 2,--are more than a
hundred in number, no more than forty or so are found in Vedic

\[1. In speaking of this work I always refer to the Berlin MS.

2\. XLVIII, 10. Cf., however, Vâ*g*as. Sa*m*h. IV, 12.\]

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

works hitherto printed, and in the law-books of Manu, Yâ*g*ñavalkya, and
others; but nearly all are quoted, exactly in the same order as in this
work, in the Kârâya*n*îya-kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra, while some of them
have been traced in the Kâthaka as well. And what is even more
important, the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya does not contain those Mantras alone,
but nearly all the Sûtras in which they occur; and it may be stated
therefore, secondly, that the Vish*n*u-sûtra has four long sections,
viz. Chapter LXXIII, and Chapters XXI, LXVII, LXXXVI, excepting the
final parts, in common with that work, while the substance of Chapter
LXXIV may also be traced in it. The agreement between both works is very
close, and where they differ it is generally due to false readings or to
enlargements on the part of the Vish*n*u-sûtra. However, there are a few
cases, in which the version of the latter work is evidently more genuine
than that of the former, and it follows, therefore, that the author of
the Vish*n*u-sûtra cannot have borrowed his rules for the performance of
Srâddhas &c. from the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra, but that both must have
drawn from a common source, i. e. no doubt from the traditions current
in the Ka*th*a school, to which this work is indebted for so many of its
Mantras as well.

   For these reasons<sup>\[1\]</sup> I fully concur in the view advanced
by Dr. Bühler, that the bulk of the so-called Vish*n*u-smriti is really
the ancient Dharma-sûtra of the *K*ârâya*n*îya-kâ*th*aka *S*âkhâ of the
Black Ya*g*ur-veda. It ranks, like other Dharma-sûtras, with the
G*ri*hya and *S*rauta-sûtras of its school; the latter of which, though
apparently lost now, is distinctly referred to in the Grihya-sûtra in
several places, and must have been in existence at the time when the
Commentaries on Kâtyâyana's *S*rauta-sûtras were composed, in which it
is frequently quoted by the name

\[1. For details I may refer the reader to my German paper, Das
Dharmasûtra des Vish*n*u und das Kâ*th*akag*ri*hyasûtra, in the
Transactions of the Royal Bavarian Academy of Science for 1879, where
the sections corresponding in both works have been printed in parallel
columns, the texts from the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra having been
prepared from two of the MSS. of Devapâla's Commentary discovered by Dr.
Bühler (Kasmir Report, Nos. 11, 12), one in Devanâgarî, and the other in
*S*âradâ characters.\]

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

of Ka*th*a-sûtra on divers questions concerning *S*rauta offerings, and
at the time, when the Ka*s*mîrian Devapâla wrote his Commentary on the
Kâ*th*aka Grihya-sûtra, which was, according to the Ka*s*mîrian
tradition, as explored by Dr. Bühler, before the conquest of Ka*s*mîr by
the Mahommedans. Devapâla, in the Introduction to his work, refers to
'thirty-nine Adhyâyas treating of the Vaitânika (= *S*rauta)
ceremonies,' by which the Grihya-sûtra was preceded, from which
statement it may be inferred that the Kâ*th*aka *S*rauta-sûtras must
have been a very voluminous work indeed, as the G*ri*hya-sûtra, which is
at least equal if not superior in extent to other works of the same
class, forms but one Adhyâya, the fortieth, of the whole Kalpa-sûtra,
which, according to Devapâla, was composed by one author. It does not
seem likely that the Vish*n*u-sûtra was composed by the same man, or
that it ever formed part of the Kâ*th*aka Kalpa-sûtra, as the
Dharma-sûtras of Baudhâyana, Âpastamba, and Hiranyakesin form part of
the Kalpa-sûtras of the respective schools to which they belong. If that
were the case, it would agree with the G*ri*hya-sûtra on all those
points which are treated in both works, such as e. g. the terms for the
performance of the Sa*m*skâras or sacraments, the rules for a student
and for a Snâtaka, the enumeration and definition of the K*rikkh*ras or
'hard penances,' the forms of marriage, &c. Now though the two works
have on those subjects a number of such rules in common as occur in
other works also, they disagree for the most part in the choice of
expressions, and on a few points lay down exactly opposite rules, such
as the Vish*n*u-sûtra (XXVIII, 28) giving permission to a student to
ascend his spiritual teacher's carriage after him, whereas the other
work prescribes, that he shall do so on no account. Moreover, if both
works had been destined from the first to supplement one another, they
would, instead of having several entire sections in common, exhibit such
cross-references as are found e. g. between the Âpastamba G*ri*hya and
Dharma-sûtras\[1\]; though the absence of such

\[1. Bühler, Introduction to Âpastamba, Sacred Books, II, pp. xi-xiv.\]

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

references might be explained, in the case of the Vish*n*u-sûtra, by the
activity of those who brought it into its present shape, and who seem to
have carefully removed all such references to other works as the
original Dharmasûtra may have contained. Whatever the precise nature of
the relations between this work and the other Sûtra works of the
*K*ârâyanîya-kâ*th*aka school may have been, there is no reason for
assigning to it a later date than to the Kâ*th*aka *S*rauta and
G*ri*hya-sûtras, with the latter of which it has so much in common, and
it may therefore claim a considerable antiquity, especially if it is
assumed, with Dr. Bühler, that the beginning of the Sûtra period
differed for each Veda. The Veda of the Ka*th*as, the Kâ*th*aka, is not
separated from the Sûtra literature of this school by an intermediate:
Brâhma*n*a stage; yet its high antiquity is testified by several of the
most eminent grammarians of India from Yâska down to
Kaiyata<sup>\[1\]</sup>. Thus the Kâ*th*aka is the only existing work of
its kind, which is quoted by the former grammarian (Nirukta X, 5;
another clear quotation from the Kâ*th*aka, XXVII, 9, though not by
name, may be found, Nirukta III, 4), and the latter places the Ka*th*as
at the head of all Vedic schools, while Patatañ*g*ali, the author of the
Mahâbhâshya, assigns to the ancient sage Ka*th*a, the reputed founder of
the Ka*th*a or Kâ*th*aka school of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda, the dignified
position of an immediate pupil of Vai*s*ampâyana, the fountain-head of
all schools of the older or Black Ya*g*ur-veda, and mentions, in
accordance with a similar statement preserved in the Râmâya*n*a (II, 32,
18, 19 ed. Schlegel), that in his own time the 'Kâlâpaka and the
Kâ*th*aka' were 'proclaimed in every village<sup>\[2\]</sup>.' The
priority of the Ka*th*as before all other existing schools of the
Yagur-veda may be deduced from the statements of the
*K*ara*n*avyûha<sup>\[3\]</sup>, which work assigns to them one of the
first places among the divers branches of

\[1. See Weber, Indische Studien XIII, p. 437 seq.

2\. Mahâbhâshya, Benares edition, IV, fols. 82 b, 75 b.

3\. See Weber, find. Stud. III, p. 256 seq.; Max Müller, Hist. Anc.
Sansk. Lit., p. 369. I have consulted, besides, two Munich MSS. of the
*K*aranavyûha (cod, Haug 45).\]

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

the *K*arakas, whom it places at the head of all schools of the
Ya*g*ur-veda. Another argument in favour of the high antiquity of the
Ka*th*as may be derived from their geographical
position<sup>\[1\]</sup>. Though the statements of the Mahâbhâshya and
Râmâya*n*a regarding the wide-spread and influential position of the
Ka*th*as in ancient times are borne out by the fact that the
Kara*n*avûtha mentions three subdivisions of the Ka*th*as, viz. the
Ka*th*as proper, the Prâ*k*ya Ka*th*as, and the Kapish*th*ala Ka*th*as,
to which the *K*ârâya*n*îyas may be added as a fourth, and by the
seeming identity of their name with the name of the {Greek Kaðaîoi} in
the Pañ*g*âb on the one hand, and with the first part of the name of the
peninsula of Kattivar on the other hand, it seems very likely
nevertheless that the original home of the Ka*th*as was situated in the
north-west, i. e. in those regions where the earliest parts of the Vedas
were composed. Not only the {Greek Kaðaîoi}, but the {Greek Kambísðoloi}
as well, who have been identified with the Kapish*th*ala
Ka*th*as<sup>\[2\]</sup>, are mentioned by Greek writers as a nation
living in the Pañ*g*âb; and while the Prâ*k*ya Ka*th*as are shown by
their name ('Eastern Ka*th*as') to have lived to the east of the two
other branches of the Ka*th*as, it is a significant fact that adherents
of the *K*ârâya*n*îya-kâ*th*aka school survive nowhere but in Ka*s*mîr,
where all Brâhma*n*as perform their domestic rites according to the
rules laid down in the G*ri*hya-sûtra of this school<sup>\[3\]</sup>.
Ka*s*mîr is moreover the country where nearly all the yet existing works
of the Kâ*th*aka school have turned up, including the Berlin MS. of the
Kâ*th*aka, which was probably written by a Ka*s*mîrian<sup>\[4\]</sup>.
It is true that some of the geographical and historical data contained
in that work, especially the way in which it mentions the Pañ*k*âlas,
whose ancient name, as shown by the *S*atapatha Brâhma*n*a (XIII, 5, 4,
7) and

\[1. See Weber, Über das Râmâya*n*a, p. 9: Ind. Stud. I, p. 189 seq.;
III, p. 469 seq.; XIII, pp. 375, 439; Ind. Litteraturgeschichte, pp. 99,
332; Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 102 seq.

2\. See, however, Max Müller, Hist. Anc, Sansk. Lit., p. 333.

3\. Bühler, Ka*s*mîr Report, p. 20 seq.

4\. This was pointed out to me by Dr. Bühler.\]

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

Rig-veda (VIII, 20, 24; VIII, 22, 12), was Krivi, take us far off from
the north-west, the earliest seat of Aryan civilization, into the
country of the Kuru-Pañ*k*âlas in Hindostân proper. But it must be borne
in mind that the Kâ*th*aka, if it may be identified with the
'*K*araka-*s*âkhâ,' must have been the Veda of all the *K*arakas except
perhaps the Maitrâya*n*îyas and Kapish*th*alas, and may have been
altered and enlarged, after the Kathas and Karakas had spread themselves
across Hindostân. The Sûtras of a *S*âkhâ which appears to have sprung
up near the primitive home of Âryan civilization in India, which was
probably the original home of the Ka*th*as at the same time, may be far
older than those of mere Sûtra schools of the Black Ya*g*ur-veda, which
have sprung up, like the Âpastamba school, in South India, i. e. far
older than the fourth or fifth century B. C.

\[1\]

   But sufficient space has been assigned to these attempts at fixing
the age of the Kâ*th*aka-sûtras which, besides remaining only too
uncertain in themselves, can apply with their full force to those parts
of the Vish*n*u-sûtra only, which have been traced in the Kâ*th*aka
G*ri*hya-sûtra. It will be seen afterwards that even these sections,
however closely connected with the sacred literature of the Ka*th*as,
have been tampered with in several places, and it might be argued,
therefore, that the whole remainder of the Vish*n*u-sûtra, to which the
Kâ*th*aka literature offers no parallel, may be a subsequent addition.
But the antiquity of the great majority of its laws can be proved by
independent arguments, which are furnished by a comparison of the
Vish*n*u-sûtra with other works of the same class, whose antiquity is
not doubted.

   In the foot-notes to my translation I have endeavoured to give as
complete references as possible to the analogous passages in the Smritis
of Manu, Yâ*g*ñavalkya, Âpastamba, and Gautama, and in the four
G*ri*hya-sûtras hitherto printed. A large number of analogous passages
might have been traced in the Dharma-sûtras of Vâsishtha

\[2\]

\[1. See Bühler, Introd. to Âpastamba, p. xliii.

2\. See the Benares edition (1878), which is accompanied with a
Commentary by K*ri*shnapa*nd*ita Dharmâdhikârin, I should have given
references to this {footnote p. xvii} work, the first complete and
reliable edition of the Vâsish*th*a-sm*ri*ti, in the footnotes to my
translation, but for the fact that it did not come into my hands till
the former had gone to the press. For Baudhâyana I have consulted a
Munich MS. containing the text only of his Sûtras (cod. Haug 163).\]

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

and Baudhâyana as well, not to mention Hira*n*yake*s*in's Dharma-sûtra,
which, according to Dr. Bühler, is nearly identical with the
Dharma-sûtra of Âpastamba. Two facts may be established at once by
glancing at these analogies, viz. the close agreement of this work with
the other Sûtra works in point of form, and with all the above-mentioned
works in point of contents. As regards the first point, the Sûtras or
prose rules of which the bulk of the Vish*n*u-sûtra is composed, show
throughout that characteristic laconism of the Sûtra style, which
renders it impossible in many cases to make out the real meaning of a
Sûtra without the help of a Commentary; and in the choice of terms they
agree as closely as possible with the other ancient law-books, and in
some cases with the G*ri*hya-sûtras as well. Numerous verses, generally
in the *S*loka metre, and occasionally designed as 'Gâthâs,' are added
at the end of most chapters, and interspersed between the Sûtras in
some; but in this particular also the Vish*n*u-sûtra agrees with at
least one other Dharma-sûtra, the Vâsish*th*a-sm*ri*ti, and it contains
in its law part, like the latter work, a number of verses in the ancient
Trish*t*ubh metre<sup>\[1\]</sup>. Four of these Trish*t*ubhs are found
in the Vâsish*th*a-smriti, and three in Yâska's Nirukta as well, and the
majority of the *S*lokas has been traced in the former work and the
other above-mentioned law-books, and in other Sm*ri*tis. In point of
contents the great majority both of the metrical and prose rules of the
Vish*n*u-sûtra agrees with one, or some, or all of the works named
above. The G*ri*hya-sûtras, excepting the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra,
naturally offer a far smaller number of analogies with it than the
Sm*ri*tis, still they exhibit several rules, in the Snâtaka-dharmas and
otherwise, that have not been traced in any other Sm*ri*ti except the
work here translated. Among the Sm*ri*tis again, each single one maybe
seen

\[1. XIX, 23, 24; XXIII, 61; XXIX, 9, 10; XXX, 47 (see Nirukta 11, 4;
Vâsish*th*a II, 8-10); LVI, 27 see Vâsish*th*a XXVIII, 15); LIX, 30;
LXXII, 7; LXXXVI, 16.\]

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

from the references to contain a number of such rules, as are only met
with in this work, which is a very important fact because, if the laws
of the Vish*n*u-sûtra were found either in all other Sm*ri*tis, or in
one of them only, its author might be suspected of having borrowed them
from one of those works. As it is, meeting with analogous passages now
in one work, and then in another, one cannot but suppose that the author
of this work has everywhere drawn from the same source as the other
Sûtrakâras, viz. from ancient traditions that were common to all Vedic
schools.

   There are, moreover, a number of cases in which this work, instead of
having borrowed from other works of the same class, can be shown to have
been, directly or indirectly, the source from which they drew, and this
fact constitutes a third reason in favour of the high antiquity of its
laws. The clearest case of this kind is furnished by the
Vâsish*th*a-smriti, with which this work has two entire chapters in
common, which are not found elsewhere. I subjoin in a note the text of
Vâsish*th*a XXVIII, 10-15, with an asterisk to those words which contain
palpable mistakes (not including blunders in point of metre), for
comparison with Chapter LVI of this work in the Calcutta edition, which
is exceptionally correct in this chapter and in Chapter LXXXVII, which
latter corresponds to Vâsish*th*a XXVIII, 18-22<sup>\[1\]</sup>. In both

\[1. \#\#\#

{footnote p. xix}

\#\#\#

Vish*n*u LVI, 15, 16, the best MSS. read \#\#\# but the Calc. ed. and
one London MS. have \#\#\# like Vâsish*th*a. Of Vish*n*u LXXXVII the
latter has an abridged version, which contains the faulty readings
\#\#\# ('the skin of a black antelope,' Comm.) and \#\#\# (as an epithet
of the earth = \#\#\# Vish*n*u LXXXVII, 9).\]

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

chapters Vish*n*u has mainly prose Sûtras and throughout a perfectly
correct text, whereas Vâsish*th*a has bad Slokas which, supported as
they are by the Commentary or by the metre or by both, can only be
accounted for by carelessness or clerical mistakes in some cases, and by
a clumsy versification of the original prose version preserved in this
work in others. Another chapter of the Vish*n*u-sûtra, the forty-eighth,
nowhere meets with a parallel except in the third Pra*s*na of the
Dharma-sûtra of Baudhâyana, where it recurs almost word for word. An
examination of the various readings in both works shows that in some of
the *S*lokas Baudhâyana has better readings, while in one or two others
the readings of Vish*n*u seem preferable, though the unsatisfactory
condition of the MS. consulted renders it unsafe to pronounce a
definitive judgment on the character of Baudhâyana's readings. At all
events he has a few Vedic Mantras more than Vish*n*u, which however seem
to be very well-known Mantras and are quoted by their Pratîkas only. But
he omits the two important Sûtras 9 and 10 of Vish*n*u, the latter of
which contains a Mantra quoted at full, which, although corrupted (see
Vâgas. Sa*m*h. IV, 12) and hardly intelligible, is truly Vedic in point
of language; and he adds on his part a clause at the end of the whole
chapter\[1\], which inculcates the worship of Ga*n*e*s*a or *S*iva or
both, and would be quite sufficient in itself to cast a doubt on the
genuineness and originality of his version. It is far from improbable
that both Vâsish*th*a and Baudhâyana may have borrowed

\[1. \#\#\#\]

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

the sections referred to directly from an old recension of this work, as
Baudhâyana has borrowed another chapter of his work from Gautama, while
Vâsish*th*a in his turn has borrowed the same chapter from
Baudhâyana<sup>\[1\]</sup>. It may be added in confirmation of this
view, that as far as Vâsish*th*a is concerned, his work is the only
Sm*ri*ti, as far as I know, which contains a quotation from the
'Kâ*th*aka'(in XXIX, 18). The Dharma-sûtras of Âpastamba and Gautama
have nowhere a large number of consecutive Sûtras in common with the
Vish*n*u-sûtra, but it is curious to note that the rule, which the
latter (X, 45) quotes as the opinion of 'some' (eke), that a
non-Brahmanical finder of a treasure, who announces his find to the
king, shall obtain one-sixth of the value, is found in no other law-book
except in this, which states (III, 61) that a *S*ûdra shall 'divide a
treasure-trove into twelve parts, two of which he may keep for himself.
Of the metrical law-books, one, the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti, has been
shown by Professor Max Müller<sup>\[2\]</sup> to have borrowed the whole
anatomical section (III, 84-104 including the simile of the soul which
dwells in the heart like a lamp (III, 109, III, 201), from this work
(XCVI, 43-96; XCVII, 9); and it has been pointed out by the same
scholar, that the verse in which the author of the former work speaks of
the Âra*n*yaka and of the Yoga-*s*âstra as of his own works (III, 110)
does not occur in the Vish*n*u-sûtra, and must have been added by the
versificator, who brought the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti into its present
metrical form. Several other *S*lokas in Yâ*g*ñavalkya's description of
the human body (111, 99, 105-108), and nearly the whole section on Yoga
(Y. III, 111-203, excepting those Slokas, the substance of which is
found in this work and in the code of Manu, viz. 131-140, 177-182, 190,
198-201) may be traced to the same source, as may be also the omission
of Vish*n*u's enumeration of the 'six limbs' (XCVI, 90) in the
Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti, and probably all the minor points on which it
differs from this work. Generally speaking, those

\[1. See Bühler, Introduction to Gautama, pp. l-liv.

2\. Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 331.\]

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

passages which have been justly noticed as marking the comparatively
late period in which that law-book must have been
composed<sup>\[1\]</sup>: such as the allusions to the astrology and
astronomy of the Greeks (Y. I, 80, 295), which render it necessary to
refer the metrical redaction of the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti to a later
time than the second century A. D.; the whole passage on the worship of
Ga*n*e*s*a and of the planets (I, 270-307), in which, moreover, a
heterodox sect is mentioned, that has been identified with the
Buddhists; the philosophical doctrines propounded in I, 349, 350; the
injunctions regarding the foundation and endowment of monasteries (II,
185 seq.)--all these passages have no parallel in this work, while it is
not overstating the case to say that nearly all the other subjects
mentioned in the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti are treated in a similar way,
and very often in the same terms, in the Vish*n*u-sûtra as well. Some of
those rules, in which the posteriority of the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti to
other law-books exhibits itself, do occur in the Vish*n*u-sûtra, but
without the same marks of modern age. Thus the former has two *S*lokas
concerning the punishment of forgery (II, 240, 241), in which coined
money is referred to by the term nâ*n*aka; the Vish*n*u-sûtra has the
identical rule (V, 122, 123; cf. V, 9). but the word nâ*n*aka does not
occur in it. Yâ*g*ñavalkya, in speaking of the number of wives which a
member of the three higher castes may marry (I, 57), advocates the
Puritan view, that no *S*ûdra wife must be among these; this work has
analogous rules (XXIV, 1-4), in which, however, such marriages are
expressly allowed. The comparative priority of all those Sûtras of
Vish*n*u, to which similar Slokas of Yâ*g*ñavalkya correspond, appears
probable on general grounds, which are furnished by the course of
development in this as in other branches of Indian literature; and to
this it may be added,

\[1. See Stenzler, in the Preface to his edition of Yâ*g*ñavalkya;
Jacobi, on Indian Chronology, in the Journal of the German Oriental
Society, XXX, 305 seq., &c. Vish*n*u's rules (III, 82) concerning the
wording &c. of royal grants, which agree with the rules of Yâ*g*ñavalkya
and other authors, must be allowed a considerable antiquity, as the very
oldest grants found in South India conform to those rules. See Burnell,
South Indian Palæography, 2nd ed., p. 95.\]

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

as far as the civil and criminal laws are concerned, that the former
enumerates them quite promiscuously, just like the other Dharma-sûtras,
with which he agrees besides in separating the law of inheritance from
the body of the laws, whereas Yâ*g*ñavalkya enumerates all the laws in
the order of the eighteen 'titles of law' of Manu and the more recent
law-books, though he does not mention the titles of law by name.

   However much the Vish*n*u-sûtra may have in common with the
Yâ*g*ñavalkya-smriti, there is no other law-book with which it agrees so
closely as with the code of Manu. This fact may be established by a mere
glance at the references in the foot-notes to this translation, in which
Manu makes his appearance far more frequently and constantly than any
other author, and the case becomes the stronger, the more the nature of
these analogies is inquired into. Of Slokas alone Vish*n*u has upwards
of 160 in common with Manu, and in a far greater number of cases still
his Sûtras agree nearly word for word with the corresponding rules of
Manu. The latter also, though he concurs in a very great number of
points with the other law authors as well, agrees with none of them so
thoroughly as with Vish*n*u. All the Smritis of Âpastamba, Baudhâyana,
Vâsish*th*a, Yâ*g*ñavalkya, and Nârada contain, according to an
approximate calculation, no more than about 130 Slokas, that are found
in the code of Manu as well. The latter author and Vish*n*u differ of
course on a great many minor points, and an exhaustive discussion of
this subject would fill a treatise; I must therefore confine myself to
notice some of those differences, which are particularly important for
deciding the relative priority of the one work before the other. In a
number of *S*lokas Manu's readings are decidedly older and better than
Vish*n*u's. Thus the latter (XXX, 7) compares the three 'Atigurus' to
the 'three gods,' i.e. to the post-Vedic Trimûrti of 'Brahman, Vish*n*u,
and *S*iva,' as the commentator expressly states, whereas Manu in an
analogous *S*loka (II, 230) refers to the 'three orders' instead. At the
end of the section on inheritance (XVIII, 44) Vish*n*u mentions among
other

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

indivisible objects 'a book,' pustakam; Manu (IX, 219) has the same
Sloka, but for pustakam he reads pra*k*akshate. Now pustaka is a modern
word<sup>\[1\]</sup>, and Varâhamihira, who lived in the sixth century
A. D., appears to be the first author, with a known date, by whom it is
used. It occurs again, Vish*n*u-sûtra XXIII, 56 (proksha*n*ena ka
pustakam), and here also Manu (V, 122) has a different reading
(puna*h*pâkena m*ri*nmayam). The only difference between Vish*n*u-sûtra
XXII, 93 and Manu V, 110 consists in the use of singular forms (te,
s*ri*nu) in the former work, and of plural forms (va*h*, s*ri*nuta) in
the latter. Now there are a great many other Sm*ri*tis besides the
Manu-sm*ri*ti, such as e. g. the Yâ*g*ñavalkya and Parâ*s*ara Sm*ri*tis,
in which the fiction is kept up, that the laws contained in them are
promulgated to an assembly of *Ri*shis; but there are very few Sm*ri*tis
of the least notoriety or importance besides the Vish*n*u-sûtra, in
which they are proclaimed to a single person. Other instances in which
Manu's readings appear preferable to Vish*n*u's may be found, LI, 60
(pretya *k*eha *k*a nishk*ri*tim) = Manu V, 38 (pretya
*g*anmani *g*anmani); LI, 64 (iti kathañ*k*ana) = M. V, 41 (ity
abravînmanu*h*); LI, 76 (tasya) = M.V, 53 (tayo*h*); LIV, 27
(brâhma*ny*ât) = M. XI, 193 (brahma*n*â); LVII, 11 (purastâd
anu*k*oditâm) = M. IV, 248; Vâsish*th*a XIV, 16; Âpastamba I, 6, 19, 14
(purastâd apra*k*oditâm); LXVII, 45 (sâyamprâtas tvatithaye) = M. III,
99 (samprâptâya tvatithaye), &c. But these instances do not prove much,
as all the passages in question may have been tampered with by the
Vish*n*uitic editor, and as in sonic other cases the version of Vish*n*u
seems preferable. Thus 'practised by the virtuous' (sâdhubhi*sk*a
nishevitam, LXXI, 90) is a very common epithet of 'â*k*âra,' and reads
better than Manu's nibaddha*m* sveshu karmasu (IV, 155); and
kri*kkh*râtik*rikkh*ram (LIV, 30) seems preferable to Baudhâyana's and
Manu's k*rikkh*râtik*rikkh*rau (XI, 209). What is more important, the
Vish*n*u-sûtra does not only contain a number of verses in the ancient
Trishtubh metre, whereas Manu has none, but it shows those identical
three Trish*t*ubhs of Vâsish*th*a and Yâska, which Dr. Bühler

\[1. See Max Müller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 512.\]

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

has proved to have been converted into Anush*t*ubh Slokas by Manu (II,
114, 115, 144)<sup>\[1\]</sup>; and Manu seems to have taken the
substance of his three *S*lokas from this work more immediately, because
both he (II, 144) and Vish*n*u, (XXX, 47) have the reading âv*ri*noti
for ât*ri*natti, which truly Vedic form is employed both by Vâsish*th*a
and Yâska. The relative antiquity of Vish*n*u's prose rules, as compared
to the numerous corresponding *S*lokas of Manu, may be proved by
arguments precisely similar to those which I have adduced above in
speaking of the Yâ*g*ñavalkya-sm*ri*ti. As regards those points in the
code of Manu, which are usually considered as marks of the comparatively
late date of its composition, it will suffice to mention, that the
Vish*n*u-sûtra nowhere refers to South Indian nations such as the
Dravi*d*as and Andhras, or to the Yavanas; that it shows no distinct
traces of an acquaintance with the tenets of any other school of
philosophy except the Yoga and Sâ<u>n</u>khya systems; that it does not
mention female ascetics disparagingly, and in particular does not
contain Manu's rule (VIII, 363) regarding the comparatively light
punishment to be inflicted for violation of (Buddhist and other) female
ascetics; and that it does not inveigh (see XV, 3), like Manu (IX,
64-68), against the custom of Niyoga or appointment of a widow to raise
offspring to her deceased husband. It is true, on the other hand, that
in many cases Vish*n*u's rules have a less archaic character than the
corresponding precepts of Manu, not only in the Slokas, but in the Sûtra
part as well. Thus written documents and ordeals are barely mentioned in
the code (if Manu (VIII, 114, 115, 168; IX, 232); Vish*n*u on the other
hand, besides referring in divers places to royal grants and edicts, to
written receipts and other private documents, and to books, devotes to
writings (lekhya) an entire chapter, in which he makes mention of the
caste of Kâyasthas, 'scribes,' and he lays down elaborate rules for the
performance of five species of ordeals, to which recourse should be had,
according to him, in all suits of some importance. But in nearly all
such cases the antiquity of Vish*n*u's

\[1. Introduction to Bombay Digest, I, p, xxviii seq.\]

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

rules is warranted to a certain extent by corresponding rules occurring
in the Sm*ri*tis of Yâgñavalkya and Nârada; and the evidence for the
modifications and entire transformations, which the code of Manu must
have undergone in a number of successive periods, is so abundant, that
the archaic character of many of its rules cannot be considered to
constitute a sufficient proof of the priority of the whole code before
other codes which contain some rules of a comparatively modern
character. To this it must be added that the Nârada-smriti, though taken
as a whole it is decidedly posterior to the code of
Manu<sup>\[1\]</sup>, is designated by tradition as an epitome from
another and more bulky recension of the code of Manu than the one which
we now possess; and if this statement may be credited, which is indeed
rather doubtful, the very particular resemblance between both works in
the law of evidence and in the rules regarding property (see LVIII) can
only tend to corroborate the assumption that the Vish*n*u-sûtra and the
Manu-smriti must have been closely connected from the first.

   This view is capable of further confirmation still by a different set
of arguments. The so-called code of Manu is universally assumed now to
be an improved metrical edition of the ancient Dharma-sûtra of the
(Maitrâya*n*iya-) Mânavas, a school studying the Black Ya*g*ur-veda; and
it has been shown above that the ancient stock of the Vish*n*u-sûtra, in
which all the parts hitherto discussed may be included, represents in
the main the Dharma-sûtra, of the Kârâya*n*îya-ka*th*as, another school
studying the Black Ya*g*ur-veda. Now these two schools do not only
belong both to that Veda, but to the same branch of it, as may be seen
from the *K*ârâ*n*avyûha, which work classes both the Ka*th*as and
Kârâya*n*îyas on the one hand, and the Mânavas

\[1. See the evidence collected in the Preface to my Institutes of
Nârada (London, 1876), to which the important fact may be added that
Nârada uses the word dinâra, the Roman denarius. It occurs in a large
fragment discovered by Dr. Bühler of a more bulky and apparently older
recension of that work than the one which I have translated; and I may
be allowed to mention, incidentally, that this discovery has caused me
to abandon my design of publishing the Sanskrit text of the shorter
recension, as it may be hoped that the whole text of the original work
will soon come to light.\]

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

together with the six or five other sections of the Maitrâya*n*îyas on
the other hand, as subdivisions of the *K*araka *S*akhâ of the Black
Ya*g*ur-veda. What is more, there exists a thorough-going parallelism
between the literature of those two schools, as far as it is known. To
begin with their respective Sa*m*hitâs, it has been shown by L.
Schröder<sup>\[1\]</sup> that the Maitrâya*n*î Sa*m*hitâ has more in
common with the Kâ*th*aka, the Sa*m*hitâ of the Ka*th*as, than with any
other Veda. As the Ka*th*as are constantly named, in the Mahâbhâshya and
other old works, by the side of the Kâlâpas, whereas the name of the
Maitrâya*n*îyas does not occur in any Sanskrit work of uncontested
antiquity, it has been suggested by the same scholar that the
Maitrâya*n*îyas may be the Kâlâpas of old, and may not have assumed the
former name till Buddhism began to prevail in India. However this may
be, the principal Sûtra works of both schools stand in a similar
relation to one another as their Sa*m*hitâs. Some of those Mantras,
which have been stated above to be common to the Vish*n*u-sûtra and
Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya only, and to occur in no other Vedic work hitherto
printed, have been traced in the Mânava *S*rauta-sûtra, in the chapter
on Pi*nd*a-pit*ri*ya*g*ña (I, 2 of the section on
Prâksoma)<sup>\[2\]</sup>, and the conclusion is, that if the
*S*rauta-sûtra of the Kâ*th*aka school were still in existence, it would
be found to exhibit a far greater number of analogies with the
*S*rauta-sûtra of the Mânavas. The Grihya-sûtra of this
school<sup>\[3\]</sup> agrees with the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra even
more closely than the latter agrees with the Vish*n*u-sûtra, as both
works have not only several entire chapters in common (the chapter on
the Vai*s*vadeva sacrifice among others, which is found in the
Vish*n*u-sûtra also), but concur everywhere in the arrangement of the
subject-matter and in the choice of expressions and Mantras. The
Brâhma*n*a stage of Vedic literature is not represented by a separate
work in either of the two schools, but a further argument in

\[1. On the Maitrâyanî Sa*m*hitâ, journal of the German Oriental
Society, XXXIII, 177 seq.

2\. Cod. Haug 53 of the Munich Library.

3\. Codd. Haug 55 and 56 of the Munich Library. For details, see my
German paper above referred to.\]

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

favour of their alleged historical connection may be derived from their
respective geographical position. If it has been rightly conjectured
above, that the original seats of the Ka*th*as were in the north-west,
whence they spread themselves over Hindostân, the Maitrâya*n*îyas,
though now surviving nowhere except in some villages 'near the Sâtpu*d*a
mountain, which is included in the Vindhyas<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' must have
been anciently their neighbours, as the territory occupied by them
extended 'from the Mayûra mountain into Gu*g*arât,' and reached 'as far
as the north-western country' (vâyavyade*s*a)<sup>\[2\]</sup>.
Considering all this evidence regarding the original connection between
the Ka*th*as and Mânavas, it may be said without exaggeration, that it
would be far more surprising to find no traces of resemblance between
their respective Dharma-sûtras, such as we possess them, than to find,
as is actually the case, the contrary; and it may be argued, vice versâ,
that the supposed connection of the two works with the Vedic schools of
the Ka*th*as and Mânavas<sup>\[3\]</sup>, respectively, is confirmed by
the kinship existing between these two schools.

   In turning now from the ancient parts of the Vish*n*u-sûtra to its
more recent ingredients, I may again begin by quoting Professor Max
Müller's remarks on this work, which contain the statement, that it is
'enlarged by modern additions written in *S*lokas<sup>\[4\]</sup>.'
After him, Dr. Bühler pointed out<sup>\[5\]</sup> that the whole work
appears to have been recast by an adherent of Vish*n*u, and that the
final and introductory chapters in particular are shown by their very
style to have been composed by another author than the body of the

\[1. Bhâû Dâjî, journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, X, 40.

2\. See a passage from the Mahâr*n*ava, as quoted by Dr. Bühler,
Introduction to Âpastamba, p. xxx seq. The same readings are found in a
Munich MS. of the *K*ara*n*avyûha-vyâkhyâ (cod. Haug 4.5). With the
above somewhat unclear statement Manu's definition of the limits of
Brahmâvarta (II, 17) may not unreasonably be compared.

3\. The code of Manu has very little in common with the Mânava
G*ri*hya-sûtra, both in the Mantras and otherwise. Both Vish*n*u and
Manu agree with the Kâ*th*aka in the use of the curious term
abhinimrukta or abhinirmukta; but the same term is used by Âpastamba,
Vâsish*th*a, and others.

4 Hist. Anc. Sansk. Lit., p. 134.

5\. Introduction to Bombay Digest. p. xxii.\]

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

work. If the latter remark were in need of further confirmation, it
might be urged that the description of Vish*n*u as 'the boar of the
sacrifice' (ya*g*ñavarâha) in the first chapter is bodily taken from the
Hariva*m*sa (2226-2237), while most of the epithets given to Vish*n*u in
I, 49-61 and XCVIII, 7-100 may be found in another section of the
Mahâbhârata, the so-called Vish*n*u-sahasranâma. Along with the
introductory and final chapters, all those passages generally are
distinctly traceable to the activity of the Vish*n*uitic editor, in
which Vish*n*u (Purusha, Bhagavat, Vâsudeva, &c.) is mentioned, or his
dialogue with the goddess of the earth carried on, viz. I; V, 193; XIX,
24; XX, 16-21; XXII, 93; XXIII, 46; XXIV, 35; XLVII, 10; XLIX; LXIV, 28,
29; LXV; LXVI; LXVII, 2; XC, 3-5,17-23; XCVI, 97,98; XCVII, 7-21;
XCVIII-C. The short invocation addressed to Vish*n*u in LXVII, 12 is
proved to be ancient by its recurrence in the corresponding chapter of
the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra, and Chapter LXV contains genuine Kâthaka
Mantras transferred to a Vishnuitic ceremony. Chapter LXVI, on the other
hand, though it does not refer to Vish*n*u by name, seems to be
connected with the same Vish*n*uitic rite, and becomes further suspected
by the recurrence of several of its rules in the genuine Chapter LXXIX.
The contents of Chapter XCVII, in which it is attempted to reconcile
some of the main tenets of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya system, as propounded in
the Sâ<u>n</u>khya-kârikâ, Sâ<u>n</u>khya-prava*k*anabhâshya, and other
works, with the Vaishnava creed and with the Yoga; the fact that the two
*S*lokas in XCVI (97, 98) and part of the Slokas in XCVII (15-21) have
their parallel in similar *S*lokas of the Bhagavad-gîtâ and of the
Bhâgavata-purâ*n*a; the terms Mahatpati, Kapila, and
Sâ<u>n</u>khyâ*k*ârya, used as epithets of Vish*n*u (XCVIII, 26, 85,
86); and some other passages in the Vish*n*uitic chapters seem to favour
the supposition that the editor may have been one of those members of
the Vish*n*uitic sect of the Bhâgavatas, who were conspicuous for their
leaning towards the Sâ<u>n</u>khya and Yoga systems of philosophy. The
arrangement of the Vish*n*u-sûtra in a hundred chapters is no doubt due
to the same person, as the Commentary points out that the number

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

of the epithets given to Vish*n*u in XCVIII is precisely equal to the
number of chapters into which the laws promulgated by him are divided
(II-XCVII); though the number ninety-six is received only by including
the introductory and final invocations (XCVIII, 6, 101) among the
epithets of Vish*n*u. It seems quite possible, that some chapters were
inserted mainly in order to bring up the whole figure to the round
number of a hundred chapters, and it is for this reason chiefly that the
majority of the following additions, which show no Vishnuitic
tendencies, may also be attributed to the Vishnuitic editor.

   1. Most or all of the *S*lokas added at the end of Chapters XX
(22-53) and XLIII (32-45) cannot be genuine; the former on account of
their great extent and partial recurrence in the
Bhagavad-gîtâ<sup>\[1\]</sup>, Mahâbhârata, and other works of general
note, and because they refer to the self-immolation of widows and to
Kâla, whom the commentator is probably right in identifying with
Vish*n*u; the latter on account of their rather extravagant character
and decidedly Purâ*n*ic style, though the Gâru*d*a-purâ*n*a, in its very
long description of the hells, offers no strict parallel to the details
given here. The verses in which the Brâhma*n*as and cows are celebrated
(XIX, 22, 23; XXIII, 57-61) are also rather extravagant; however, some
of them are Trish*t*ubhs, and the verses in XIX are closely connected
with the preceding Sûtras. The two final Slokas in LXXXVI (19, 20) may
also be suspected as to their genuineness, because they are wanting in
the corresponding chapter of the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra; and a number
of other verses in divers places, because they have no parallel in the
Smriti literature, or because they have been traced in comparatively
modern works, such as the Bhagavad-gîtâ, the Pañ*k*atantra, &c. 2. The
week of the later Romans and Greeks, and of modern Europe (LXXVIII,
1-7), the self-immolation of widows (XXV, 14; cf. XX, 39), and the
Buddhists and Pâ*s*upatas (LXIII, 36) are not mentioned in any ancient
Sanskrit work. Besides, the passages in question may be easily removed,
especially the Sûtras referring to the seven days of the week, which

\[1. Besides the passages quoted in the notes, 50-53 nearly Bhag.-gîtâ
II, 22-26.\]

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

form clearly a subsequent addition to the enumeration of the Nakshatras
and Tithis immediately following (LXXVIII, 8-50), and the rule
concerning the burning of widows (XXV, 14), which is in direct
opposition to the law concerning the widow's right to inherit (XVII, 4)
and to other precepts regarding widows. That the three terms kâshâyin,
pravra*g*ita, malina in LXIII, 36 refer to members of religious orders
seems clear, but it maybe doubted whether malina denotes the
Pâ*s*upatas, and even whether kâshâyin (cf. pravra*g*ita XXXVI, 7)
denotes the Buddhists, as dresses dyed with Kashâya are worn by
Brahmanical sects also, and prescribed for students, and for ascetics
likewise, by some of the G*ri*hya- and Dharma-sûtras. Still the
antiquity of the Sûtra in question can hardly be defended, because the
acquaintance of the Vish*n*uitic editor with the Buddhistic system of
faith is proved by two other Sûtras (XCVIII, 40, 41), and because the
whole subject of good and evil omens is not treated in any other ancient
Smriti. On the other hand, such terms as vedanindâ and nâstikatâ
(XXXVII, 4, 31, &c.) recur in most Sm*ri*tis, and can hardly be referred
to the Buddhists in particular. 3. The Tîrthas enumerated in LXXXV, some
of which are sacred to Vish*n*u and *S*iva, belong to all parts of
India, and many of them are situated in the Dekhan, which was certainly
not included within the limits of the 'Âryâvarta' of the ancient
Dharma-sûtra (LXXXIV, 4). As no other Sm*ri*ti contains a list of this
kind, the whole chapter may be viewed as a later addition. 4. The
ceremonies described in XC are not mentioned in other Smritis, while
some of them are decidedly Vish*n*uitic, or traceable in modern works;
and as all the Sûtras in XC hang closely together, this entire chapter
seems also to be spurious. 5. The repetitions in the list of articles
forbidden to sell (LIV, 18-22); the addition of the two categories of
atipâtakâni, 'crimes in the highest degree,' and prakîr*n*takam,
'miscellaneous crimes' (XXXIII, 3,5; XXXIV; XLII), to Manu's list of
crimes; the frequent references to the Ganges river; and other such
passages, which show a modem character, without being traceable in the
Smritis of Yâ*g*ñavalkya and Nârada, may have been added by the
Vish*n*uitic

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

editor from modern Sm*ri*tis, either for the sake of completeness, or in
order to make up the required number of chapters. 6. All the passages
hitherto mentioned are such as have no parallel in other ancient
Sm*ri*tis. But the Vish*n*uitic editor did evidently not confine himself
to the introduction of new matter into the ancient Dharma-sûtra. That he
did not refrain, occasionally, from altering the original text, has been
conjectured above with regard to his readings of some of those Slokas,
which are found in the code of Manu as well; and it can be proved quite
clearly by comparing his version of the V*ri*shotsarga ceremony (LXXXVI)
with the analogous chapter of the Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra. In one case
(LI, 64; cf. XXIII, 50 = M. V, 131) he has replaced the words, which
refer the authorship of the Sloka in question to Manu, by an unmeaning
term. The superior antiquity of Manu's reading (V, 41) is vouched for by
the recurrence of the same passage in the G*ri*hya-sûtra of
Sâ<u>n</u>khâyana (II, 16, 1) and in the Vâsish*th*a-sm*ri*ti (IV, 6),
and the reference to Manu has no doubt been removed by the Vish*n*uitic
editor, because it would have been out of place in a speech of Vish*n*u.
References to sayings of Manu and other teachers and direct quotations
from Vedic works are more or less common in all Dharma-sûtras, and their
entire absence in this work is apparently due to their systematical
removal by the editor. On the other hand, the lists of Vedic and other
works to be studied or recited may have been enlarged in one or two
cases by him or by another interpolator, namely, XXX, 37 (cf. V, 191),
where the Atharva-veda is mentioned after the other Vedas by the name of
'Âtharva*n*a' (not Atharvâ<u>n</u>girasas, as in the code of Manu and
most other ancient works), and LXXXIII, 7, where Vyâkara*n*a, 'Grammar,'
i. e. according to the Commentary the grammars of Pâ*n*ini and others,
is mentioned as distinct from the Vedâ<u>n</u>gas. The antiquity of the
former passage might indeed be defended by the example of Âpastamba,
who, though referring like this work to the 'three Vedas' both
separately and collectively, mentions in another place the
'Âtharva*n*a-veda<sup>\[1\]</sup>.' Besides the above works,

\[1. See Bühler, Introduction to Âpastamba, p. xxiv.\]

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

and those referred to in LVI, the laws of Vish*n*u name no other work
except the Purâ*n*as, Itihâsas, and Dharma*s*âstras. 7. As the
Vish*n*uitic editor did not scruple to alter the import of a certain
number of passages, the modernisation of the language of the whole work,
which was probably as rich in archaic forms and curious old terms as the
Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra and as the Dharma-sûtra of Âpastamba, may be
likewise attributed to him. As it is, the Vish*n*u-sûtra agrees in style
and expressions more closely with the Sm*ri*tis of Manu and
Yâ*g*ñavalkya than with any other work, and it is at least not inferior
to the former work in the preservation of archaic forms. Thus the code
of Manu has seven aorist forms<sup>\[1\]</sup>, while the Vish*n*u-sûtra
contains six, not including those occurring in Vedic Mantras which are
quoted by their Pratîkas only. Of new words and meanings of words the
Vish*n*u-sûtra contains also a certain number; they have lately been
communicated by me to Dr. von Böhtlingk for, insertion in his new
Dictionary.

   All the points noticed render it necessary to assign a comparatively
recent date to the Vish*n*uitic editor; and if the introduction of the
week of the Greeks into the ancient Dharma-sûtra has been justly
attributed to him, he cannot be placed earlier than the third or fourth
century A. D.<sup>\[2\]</sup> The lower limit must be put before the
eleventh century, in which the Vish*n*u-sûtra is quoted in the
Mitâksharâ of Vi*g*ñâne*s*vara, From that time downwards it is quoted in
nearly every law digest, and a particularly large number of quotations
occurs in Aparârka's Commentary, on Yâ*g*ñavalkya, which was composed in
the twelfth century<sup>\[3\]</sup>. Nearly all those quotations, as far
as they have been examined, are actually found in the Vish*n*u-sûtra;
but the whole text is vouched for only by Nandapa*nd*ita's Commentary,
called Vai*g*ayantî, which was composed in the

\[1. Whitney. Indische Grammatik, § 826.

2\. See Jacobi, journal of the German Oriental Society. XXX, 306. The
first author with a known date who shows an acquaintance with the week
of the Greeks, is Varâhamihira (sixth century A, D.)

3\. See Bühler, Ka*s*mîr Report. p. 52. The MSS. used are from the
Dekhan College, Pu*n*a.\]

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

first quarter of the seventeenth century. The subscriptions in the
London MSS. of the Vai*g*ayantî contain the statement, which is borne
out by the Introduction, that it was composed by Nandapa*nd*ita, the son
of Râmapa*nd*ita, Dharmâdhikârin, an inhabitant of Benares, at the
instigation of the Mahârâ*g*a Ke*s*avanâyaka, also called Tammasânâyaka,
the son of Ko*d*apanâyaka; and a passage added at the end of the work
states, more accurately, that 'Nanda*s*arman (Nandapa*nd*ita) wrote it
at Kâ*s*î (Benares) in the year 1679 of the era of Vikrâmabhâsvara (= A.
D. 1622), by Command of Ke*s*avanâyaka, his own king. These statements
regarding the time and place of the composition of the Vai*g*ayantî are
corroborated by the fact that it refers in several cases to the opinions
of Haradatta, who appears to have lived in the sixteenth
century<sup>\[1\]</sup>, while Nandapa*nd*ita is not among the numerous
authors quoted in the Vîramitrodaya of Mitrami*s*ra, who lived in the
beginning of the seventeenth century<sup>\[2\]</sup>, and who was
consequently a contemporary of Nandapa*nd*ita, if the above statement is
correct; and that he attacks in a number of cases the views of the
'Eastern Commentators' (Prâ*k*yas), and quotes a term from the dialect
of Madhyade*s*a.

   The subjoined translation is based upon the text handed down by
Nandapa*nd*ita nearly everywhere except in some of the Mantras, which
have been rendered according to the better readings preserved in the
Kâ*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra. The two Calcutta editions of the
Vish*n*u-sûtra, the second of which is a mere reprint of the first, will
be found to agree in the main with the text here translated. They are
doubtless based upon the Vai*g*ayantî, as they contain several passages
in which portions of Nandapa*nd*ita's Commentary have crept into the
text of the Sûtras. But the MS. used for the first Calcutta edition must
have been a very faulty one, as both Calcutta editions, besides
differing from the best MSS. of the Vai*g*ayantî on a very great number
of minor points, entirely omit the greater part of Chapter LXXXI

\[1. Bühler, Introduction to Âpastamba, p. xliii.

2\. Bühler loc. cit.\]

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

(3-22), the genuineness of which is proved by analogous passages in the
other Sm*ri*tis<sup>\[1\]</sup>. An excellent copy of the Vai*g*ayantî
in possession of Dr. Bühler has, together with three London MSS. of that
work and one London MS. containing the text only, enabled me to
establish quite positively nearly in every case the readings sanctioned
by Nandapa*nd*ita. I had hoped to publish a new edition of the text
prepared from those MSS., and long ready for the press, before
publishing my English version. This expectation has not been fulfilled,
but it is hoped that in the mean time this attempt at a translation will
be welcome to the students of Indian antiquity, and will facilitate the
understanding of the text printed in *G*ivânanda Vidyâsâgara's cheap
edition, which is probably in the hands of most Sanskrit scholars. The
precise nature of the relation in which the text of my forthcoming
edition stands to the Calcutta editions may be gathered from the large
specimens of the text as given in the best MSS., that have been edited
by Dr. Bühler in the Bombay Digest, and by myself in two papers
published in the Transactions of the Royal Bavarian Academy of Science.

   Nandapa*nd*ita has composed, besides the Vai*g*ayantî, a treatise on
the law of adoption, called Dattaka-mîmâ*m*sâ\[2\], a commentary on the
code of Parâ*s*ara, a work called Vidvanmanoharâ-sm*ri*tisindhu, one
called *S*râddhakalpa-latâ, and commentaries on the Mitâksharâ and on
Adityâ*k*ârya's Â*s*au*k*anir*n*aya. All these works belong to the
province of Hindu law, and both his fertility as a writer in that branch
of Indian science, and the reputation enjoyed by some of his works even
nowadays, must raise a strong presumption in favour of his knowledge of
the subject. The

\[1. The first edition of the 'Vaish*n*ava Dharma*s*âstra' was published
in Bengali type by Bhavânî*k*âra*n*a; the second, in Devanâgarî type, is
contained in *G*ivânanda Vidyâsâgara's Dharmashâstrasangraha (1816).

2\. This work has been published repeatedly at Calcutta and Madras, and
translated into English by Sutherland (1821), which translation has been
reprinted in Stokes' Hindu Law Books. The rest of the above list is made
up from an enumeration of Nandapandita's *T*ikâs at the end of Dr.
Bühler's copy of the Vai*g*ayantî, from an occasional remark in the
latter work itself (XV, 9), and from professor Weber's Catalogue of the
Berlin Sanskrit MSS.\]

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

general trustworthiness of his Commentary on the Vish*n*u-sûtra is
further confirmed by the frequent references which it contains to the
opinions of earlier commentators of that work; and the wide extent of
his reading, though he often makes an unnecessary display of it, has
been eminently serviceable to him in tracing the connection of certain
chapters and Mantras with the Kâ*th*aka literature\[1\]. On the other
hand, his very learning, combined with a strict adherence to the
well-known theory of Hindu commentators regarding the absolute identity
between the teaching of all Sm*ri*tis, has frequently misled him into a
too extensive method of interpretation. Even in commenting the *S*lokas
he assigns in many cases an important hidden meaning to such particles
as *k*a, vâ, tathâ, and others, and to unpretending epithets and the
like, which have clearly been added for metrical reasons
only<sup>\[2\]</sup>. This practice, besides being contrary to common
sense, is nowhere countenanced by the authority of Kullûka, in his
remarks on the numerous identical *S*lokas found in. the code of Manu.
With the Sûtras generally speaking the case is different: many of them
would be nearly or quite unintelligible without the explanatory remarks
added, in brackets from Nandapandita's Commentary<sup>\[3\]</sup>, and
in a number of those cases even, where his method jars upon a European
mind, the clauses supplied by him are probably correct\[4\]. The same
may be said of his interpretations of the epithets of Vish*n*u,
excepting those which are based on utterly fanciful etymologies\[5\],

\[1. See the notes on LXV, 2 seq.; LXXIII, 5-9; LXXXVI, 13. In his
Commentary on LXVII also Nandapandita states expressly that the
description of the Vai*s*vadeva is according to the rites of the
Ka*th*a-*s*âkhâ.

2\. For instances, see the notes on XX, 45; LXIV, 40.

3\. See e. g. Chapter V passim.

4\. Thus nearly all the 'intentionally's' and 'unintentionally's,' &c.,
as supplied in the section on penances might seem superfluous, or even
wrong; but as in several places involuntary crimes are expressly
distinguished from those intentionally committed (see e. g. XXVIII, 48,
51; XXXVIII, 7), and as in other cases a clause of this kind must needs
be supplied (see XXXIX, 2; LII, 3; LIII, 5, &c.), Nandapa*nd*ita is
probably right in supplying it from other Sm*ri*tis in most remaining
cases as well. This method has occasionally carried him too far, when
his explanations have not been given in the text.

5\. See I, 51, 55; XCVIII, 40, 41, 46, &c.\]

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

as the style of the introductory and final chapters is as artificial,
though in another way, as the Sûtra style. Though, however, in works
composed in the latter style, every *k*a, vâ, or iti, &c., which is not
absolutely required by the sense, was probably intended by their authors
to convey a special meaning<sup>\[1\]</sup>, it is a question of
evidence in every single case, whether those meanings which Nandapandita
assigns to these and other such particles and expletive words are the
correct ones. In several cases of this or of a similar kind he is
palpably wrong<sup>\[2\]</sup>, and in many others the interpretations
proposed by him are at least improbable, because the authoritative
passages he quotes in support of them are taken from modern works, which
cannot have been known to the author of the Vish*n*u-sûtra.
Interpretations of this class have, therefore, been given in the notes
only; and they have been omitted altogether in a number of cases where
they appeared quite frivolous, or became too numerous, or could not be
deciphered completely, owing to clerical mistakes in the MSS. But though
it is impossible to agree with some of his general principles of
interpretation, or with his application of them, Nandapa*nd*ita's
interpretations of difficult terms and Sûtras are invaluable, and I have
never deviated from them in my translation without strong reasons to the
contrary, which have in most cases been stated in the
notes<sup>\[3\]</sup>. Besides the extracts given in the notes, a few
other passages from the Commentary and several other additions will be
given in p. 312; and I must apologize to my readers for having to note
along with the Addenda a number of Corrigenda, which will be found in
the same page. In compiling the Index of Sanskrit words occurring in
this work, which it has been thought necessary to add to the General
Index, I have not aimed at completeness except as regards

\[1. For instances of this in the Dharma-sûtras of Âpastamba and
Gautama. see Bühler, Âpast. I, 2, 7, 24; 8, 5; Gaut. V, 5, 14, 17; IX,
44; XIV, 45; XIX, 13-15, 20; XXI, 9, &c.; and see also Dr. Bühler's
remarks on *G*ñâpaka-sûtras, Âpast. I, 3, II, 7; Gaut. I, 31, notes.

2\. See V, 117; VII, 7; XXVII, 10; LI, 26; LXXI, 88; LXXIII, 9; LXXIV,
1, 2, 7, &c.

3\. See e. g. XVII, 22; XVIII, 44; XXIV, 40; XXVIII, 5, II; LV, 20; LIX,
27, 29; LXIII, 36; LXIV, 18; LXVII, 6-8; XCII, 4; XCVII, 7.\]

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

the names of deities and of penances. My forthcoming edition of the
Sanskrit text will be accompanied by a full Index of words.

   In conclusion I have to express my thanks in the most cordial manner
to Dr. Bühler, who has constantly assisted me with his advice in the
preparing of this translation, and has kindly lent me his excellent copy
of the Vai*g*ayantî; and to Dr. von Böhtlingk and Professor Max Müller,
who have favoured me with valuable hints on divers points connected with
this work. My acknowledgments are due, in the second place, to K. M,
Chatfield, Esq., Director of Public Instruction, Bombay, to Dr. von
Halm, Chief Librarian of the Royal Library, Munich, to Professor R.
Lepsius, Chief Librarian of the Royal Library, of Berlin, and to Dr. R.
Rost, Chief Librarian of the India office Library, London, for the
valuable aid received from these gentlemen and the great liberality,
with which they have placed Sanskrit MSS. under their care at my
disposal.

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.](sbe07003)
