[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07021)  [Next](sbe07023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# XX.

1\. The northern progress of the sun is a day, with the gods.

2\. The southern progress of the sun is (with them) a night.

3\. A year is (with them) a day and a night;

4\. Thirty such are a month;

5\. Twelve such months are a year.

6\. Twelve hundred years of the gods are a Kaliyuga.

\[XX. 1-3. M. I, 67.--6-9. M. I, 69, 70.--10. M. I, 71.--11. M. I,
79.--12-14. M. I, 72.--30. Y. III, 11.

6\. The Kaliyuga itself consists of a thousand years only; but it is
both preceded and followed by a twilight lasting a hundred years. It is
similar with the three other Yugas. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

7\. Twice as many (or two thousand four hundred) are a Dvâpara (Yuga).

S. Thrice as many (or three thousand six hundred) are a Tretâ (Yuga).

9\. Four times as many (or four thousand eight hundred) are a K*ri*ta
Yuga.

10\. (Thus) twelve thousand years make a *K*aturyuga (or period of four
Yugas).

11\. Seventy-one *K*aturyugas make a Manvantara (or period of a Manu).

12\. A thousand *K*aturyugas make a Kalpa.

13\. And that is a day of the forefather (Brahman).

14\. His night also has an equal duration.

15\. If so many such nights and days are put together that, reckoned by
the month and by the year, they make up a period of a hundred years (of
Brahman) it is called the age of one Brahman.

16\. A day of Purusha (Vish*n*u) is equal in duration to the age of one
Brahman.

17\. When it ends, a Mahâkalpa is over.

18\. The night following upon it is as long.

19\. The days and nights of Purusha that have gone by are innumerable;

20\. And so are those that will follow.

21\. For Kâla (time) is without either beginning or end.

22\. Thus it is, that in this Kâla (time), in whom there is nothing to
rest upon, and who is everlasting, I can espy nothing created in which
there is the least stability.

23\. The sands in the Ganges and (the waters pouring down from the sky)
when Indra sends rain

\[21. 'Kâla means Vish*n*u in this place.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

can be counted, but not the number of 'Forefathers' (Brahmans) who have
passed away.

24\. In each Kalpa, fourteen chiefs of the gods (Indras) go to
destruction, as many rulers of the world (kings), and fourteen Manus.

25\. And so have many thousands of Indras and hundred thousands of
princes of the Daityas (such as Hira*n*yaka*s*ipu, Hira*n*yâksha, and
others) been destroyed by Kâla, (time). What should one say of human
beings then?

26\. 'Many royal *Ri*shis too (such as Sagara), all of them renowned for
their virtues, gods and Brahmanical *Ri*shis (such as Ka*s*yapas) have
perished by the action of Kâla.

27\. Those even who have the power of creating and annihilating in this
world (the sun, moon, and other heavenly bodies) continually perish by
the act of Kâla; for Kâla (time) is hard to overcome.

28\. Every creature is seized upon by Kâla and carried into the other
world. It is the slave of its actions (in a former existence). Wherefore
then should you wail (on its death)?

29\. Those who are born are sure to die, and those who have died are
sure to be born again. This is inevitable, and no associate can follow a
man (in his passage through mundane existence).

30\. As mourners will not help the dead in this world, therefore (the
relatives) should not weep, but perform the obsequies to the best of
their power.

31\. As both his good and bad actions will follow

\[27. Here also Kâla, the god of time, is another name for Vish*n*u.
(Nand.)

29\. The same proverb occurs in the Râmâya*n*a II, 84, 21, and in the
Bhagavadgitâ II, 27. See Böhtlingk, Ind. Sprüche, 2383.\]

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

him (after death) like associates. what does it matter to a man whether
his relatives mourn over him or no?

32\. But as long as his relatives remain impure, the departed spirit
finds no rest, and returns to visit (his relatives), whose duty it is to
offer tip to him the funeral ball of rice and the water libation.

33\. Till the Sapi*nd*îkara*n*a<sup>\[1\]</sup> has been performed, the
dead man remains a disembodied spirit (and is afflicted with hunger and
thirst). Give rice and a jar with water to the man who has passed into
the abode of disembodied spirits.

34\. Having passed into the abode of the manes (after the performance of
the Sapi*nd*îkara*n*a) he enjoys in the shape of celestial food his
portion of the *S*râddha (funeral oblation); offer the *S*râddha,
therefore, to him who has passed into the abode of the manes.

35\. Whether he has become a god, or stays in hell, or has entered the
body of an animal, or of a human being, he will receive the *S*râddha
offered to him by his relatives.

36\. The dead person and the performer of the *S*râddha are sure to be
benefitted by its performance. Perform the *S*râddha always, therefore,
abandoning bootless grief.

37\. This is the duty which should be constantly discharged towards a
dead person by his kinsmen; by mourning a man will neither benefit the
dead nor himself.

38\. Having seen that no help is to be had from this world, and that his
relations are dying (one after

\[33. <sup>1</sup> See XXI, 12.\]

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the other), you must choose virtue for your only associate, O ye men.

39\. Even were he to die with him, a kinsman is unable to follow his
dead relative: all excepting his wife are forbidden to follow him on the
path of Yama.

40\. Virtue alone will follow him, wherever he, may go; therefore do
your duty unflinchingly in this wretched world.

41\. To-morrow's business should be done to-day, and the, afternoons
business in the forenoon; for death will not wait, whether a person has
done it or not.

42\. While his mind is fixed upon his field, or traffic, or his house,
or while his thoughts are engrossed by some other (beloved) object,
death suddenly carries him away as his, prey, as a she-wolf catches a
lamb.

43\. Kâla (time) is no one's friend and no one's enemy: when the effect
of his acts in a former existence, by which his present existence is
caused, has expired, he snatches a man away forcibly.

44\. He will not die before his time has come, even though he has been
pierced by a thousand shafts; he will not live after his time is out,
even though he has only been touched by the point of a blade of Kusa
grass.

45\. Neither drugs, nor magical formulas, nor

\[39. This is an allusion to the custom of Sattee. (Nand.) See XXV, 14.

41\. This proverb is found in the Mahâbhârata also (XII, 6536. &c.) See
Böhtlingk, Ind. Sprüche, 6595.

43\. This proverb is also found in the Mahâbhârata XI, 68, and
Râmâya*n*a IV, 18, 28, and other works. See Böhtlingk, 3194.

45\. 'Neither will presents of gold (to Brâhma*n*as) or other such
{footnote p 82} acts of liberality save him, as the use of the particle
*k*a implies.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

burnt-offerings, nor prayers will save a man who is in the bonds of
death or old age.

46\. An impending evil cannot be averted even by a hundred precautions;
what reason then for you to complain?

47\. Even as a calf finds his mother among a thousand cows, an act
formerly done is sure to find the perpetrator.

48\. Of existing beings the beginning is unknown, the middle (of their
career) is known, and the end again unknown; what reason then for you to
complain?

49\. As the body of mortals undergoes (successively the vicissitudes of)
infancy, youth, and old age, even so will it be transformed into another
body (hereafter); a sensible man is not mistaken about that.

50\. As a man puts on new clothes in this world, throwing aside those
which he formerly wore, even so the self of man puts on new bodies,
which are in accordance with his acts (in a former life).

51\. No weapons will hurt the self of man, no fire burn it, no waters
moisten it, and no wind dry it up.

52\. It is not to be hurt, not to be burnt, not to be moistened, and not
to be dried up; it is imperishable, perpetual, unchanging, immovable,
without beginning.

\[47. This proverb is also found in the Mahâbhârata XII, 6760,
Pañ*k*atantra II, 134, and other works. See Böhtlingk, Ind. Sprüche,
5114.

48\. This proverb is also found in the Bhagavadgitâ. II, 28. See
Böhtlingk, Ind. Sprüche, 704.

50\. Regarding transmigration, see below, XLIV, XLV.\]

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

53\. It is (further) said to be immaterial, passing all thought, and
immutable. Knowing the self of man to be such, you must not grieve (for
the destruction of his body).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI.](sbe07023.md)
