[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07075)  [Next](sbe07077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

# LXXIV.

1\. After having worshipped, on each Ash*t*akâ, the gods and performed,
with vegetables, meat, and cakes respectively, a *S*râddha (according to
the rules given in the last chapter), he must, on each
Anvash*t*akâ<sup>\[1\]</sup>, worship the gods and offer a
burnt-oblation in the same way as on the Ash*t*akâ (i.e. reciting the
same three Pañ*k*akas successively), and entertain Brâhma*n*as in the
same way as (directed) before (in the preceding chapter), in honour of
his mother, his paternal grandmother, and his paternal
great-grandmother, honour them with presents, accompany them (as far as
the limits of his estate), and dismiss them

2\. Then he must dig (six) trenches.

3\. On the border of these trenches, to the northeast of them, he must
light fires and place balls of rice.

4\. On the border of three of the trenches (he must place balls) for the
men, and on the border of the other three (he must place balls) for the
women.

\[LXXIV. 1-8, Â*s*v. II, 5; Gobh. IV, 2; Pâr. III, 3, 10-12;
*S*â<u>n</u>kh. III, 13, 6; M. IV, 150. Regarding the corresponding
section of the *K*â*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra, see the Introduction.

1\. <sup>1</sup> See LXXIII, 8, 9; LXXVI, 1.--<sup>2</sup> Nand.
considers the use of the particle *k*a to imply that the father together
with the other paternal ancestors, and the maternal grandfather along
with the other maternal ancestors, should also be invoked, which would
make in all nine ancestors to be invoked. The first part of this
observation appears to be correct, but the maternal grandfather and the
rest are neither referred to in the following Sûtras, nor in the
*K*â*th*aka G*ri*hya-sûtra.

2\. Nand. gives it as his opinion, that nine trenches should be made,
three of which are to be for the maternal grandfather, &c. But Sûtra 4
refers to three trenches for the men only, and the *K*â*th*aka
G*ri*hya-sûtra expressly mentions the number of six trenches.\]

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

5\. He must fill the three trenches for the men with water mixed with
food.

6\. (He must fill) the three trenches for the women with milk mixed with
food.

7\. (And he must fill up) each triad of trenches singly with sour milk,
meat, and milk.

8\. After having filled (the trenches), he must mutter the Mantra, 'May
this (food) be imperishable for ye men and for ye women.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXV.](sbe07077.md)
