[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07020)  [Next](sbe07022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

# XIX.

1\. He must not cause a member of a twice-born caste to be carried out
by a *S*ûdra (even though he be a kinsman of the deceased);

2\. Nor a *S*ûdra by a member of a twice-born caste.

3\. A father and a mother shall be carried out by their sons (who are
equal in caste to their parents).

4\. But *S*ûdras must never carry out a member of a twice-born caste,
even though he be their father.

5\. Those Brâhma*n*as who carry out (or follow the corpse of) a
(deceased) Brâhma*n*a who has no relatives shall attain a mansion in
heaven.

6\. Those who have carried out a dead relative and burnt his corpse,
shall walk round the pile from left to right, and then plunge into
water, dressed in their clothes.

7\. After having offered a libation of water to the deceased, they must
place one ball of rice on blades of Kusa grass, (and this ceremony has
to be repeated on each subsequent day, while the period of impurity
lasts.)

8\. Then, having changed their dress, they must

\[XIX. 1. M. V, 104.--2. V. III, 26.--6 M.V, 103; Y. III, 26.--7, 8. Y.
III, 7, 12, 13.--14-17. M. V, 73; Y. III, 16. 'Chapters XIX-XXXII
contain the section on Â*k*âra, "Holy Usage." (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

bite Nimba leaves between their teeth, and having stepped upon the stone
threshold, they must enter the house.

9\. Then they must throw unbroken grains into the fire.

10\. On the fourth day they must collect the bones that have been left.

11\. And they must throw them into water from the Ganges.

12\. As many bones of a man are contained in the water of the Ganges, so
many thousands of years will he reside in heaven.

13\. While the term of impurity lasts, they must continually offer a
libation of water and a ball of rice to the deceased.

14\. And they must eat food which has been bought, or which they have
received unsolicited.

15\. And they, must eat no meat.

16\. And they must sleep on the ground.

17\. And they must sleep apart.

18\. When the impurity is over, they must walk forth from the village,
have their beards shaved, and having cleansed themselves with a paste of
sesamum, or with a paste of mustard-seed, they must change their dress
and re-enter the house.

19\. There, after reciting a propitiatory prayer, they must honour the
Brâhma*n*as.

\[13. The duration of the impurity varies according, to the caste &c. of
the deceased. See XXII.

14\. The particle *k*a, according to Nand., indicates that factitious
salt must also not be used by them, as stated in a Sm*ri*ti.

15\. Nand. refers the particle *k*a to an implied prohibition to eat
fish, which he quotes from a text of Gautama (not found in his
Institutes).\]

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

20\. The gods are invisible deities, the Brâhma*n*as are visible
deities.

21\. The Brâhma*n*as sustain the world.

22\. It is by the favour of the Brâhma*n*as that the gods reside in
heaven; a speech uttered by Brâhma*n*as (whether a curse or a
benediction) never fails to come true.

23\. What the Brâhma*n*as pronounce, when highly pleased (as, if they
promise sons, cattle, wealth, or some other boon to a man), the gods
will ratify; when the visible gods are pleased, the invisible gods are
surely pleased as well.

24\. The mourners, who lament the loss of a relative, shall be addressed
by men gifted with a tranquil frame of mind with such consolatory
speeches as I shall now recite to thee, O Earth, who art cherished to
my, mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX.](sbe07022)
