[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07069)  [Next](sbe07071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

# LXVIII.

1\. He must not eat during an eclipse of the moon or of the sun.

\[45. 'For the rules regarding the reception of a guest, see Â*s*v. I, 2
4, and the other G*ri*hya-sûtras; M. III, 119 seq., and the other
Dharma*s*âstras.

LXVIII\. 12. M. IV, 55.--14. M. IV, 45; Y. I, 131; Âpast. II, 8, 19,
18.--19. M. IV, 74.--20. M. IV, 65.--21. M. IV, 63; Gaut. IX, 56.--23.
M. IV, 74.--26. M. III, 106; Âpast. II, 4, 8, 4.--27. M. IV, 62; Âpast.
II, 8, 18, 1; II, 8, 20, 10; Gaut. IX, 58.--29, M. IV, 75.--34. M. IV,
76.--37. M. IV, 37; Y. {footnote p. 218} I, 135.--38. M. IV, 82.--40.
Âpast. I, 11, 31, 1.--42, 43. M. II, 54; Y. I, 31; Gaut. IX, 59.--46.
*S*â<u>n</u>kh. IV, 11, 10; M. IV, 43; Y. I, 131; Gaut. IX, 32.--47. M.
IV, 63; Y. I. 138; Âpast. II, 1, 1, 3; Gaut. IX, 9.--48. M. IV, 62.--49.
M. IV, 65; Gaut. XVII, 13. 'The injunctions regarding meals having been
given in the previous chapter, he now proceeds to propound some
prohibitions concerning the same subject.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

2\. He shall eat, after having previously bathed, when the eclipse is
over.

3\. If (the sun or moon) have set before the eclipse was over, he must
bathe, and on the next day he may eat again, after having seen (the sun
or moon rise),

4\. A cow or a Brâhma*n*a having met with a calamity, he must not eat on
that day.

5\. If the king has met with an accident, (he must not eat on that day).

6\. An Agnihotrin, who is absent on a journey, must eat at that time of
the day when the Agnihotra is supposed to be over.

7\. He may also eat at that time of the day when the Vai*s*vadeva is
supposed to be over.

8\. On the days of new and full moon (he may eat at that time) when he
supposes the sacrifice customary on those days to have been performed.

\[2, 3. Nand. states that in both of these Sûtras it has to be
understood, that the bath occasioned by the eclipse must be followed by
the ordinary bath, which precedes every meal.

6\. An Agnihotrin is one who daily performs the Agnihotra. Regarding the
Agnihotra and the times for its performance, see LIX, 2.

7\. The term Vai*s*vadeva includes not only the oblation to the
Vi*s*vedevâs (LXVII, 3), but also the Bali-offerings and the
entertainment of a guest, &c., as prescribed in LXVII, 4 seq. (Nand.)

8\. According to Nand., the use of the particle *k*a implies, that this
rule applies equally to the first days of the moon's increase and
wane.\]

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

9\. He must not eat during an indigestion;

10\. Nor at midnight; 11. Nor at noon;

12\. Nor in the twilight;

13\. Nor dressed in wet clothes;

14\. Nor without his upper garment;

15\. Nor naked;

16\. Nor in water (nor in a boat)

17\. Nor lying stretched out on the back;

18\. Nor sitting on a broken stool;

19\. Nor reclining on a couch;

20\. Nor from a broken dish;

21\. Nor having placed the food on his lap;

22\. Nor (having placed the food) upon the ground;

23\. Nor from the palm of his hand.

24\. That food which has been seasoned with salt (after having been
cooked) he must not eat.

25\. He must not abuse children (eating in the same row with him).

26\. (He must) not (eat) dainties alone.

27\. (He must) not (eat) substances from which the fat has been
extracted.

28, Nor (must he eat) roasted grain in the daytime.

29\. At night (he must not eat) anything mixed with sesamum-seeds.

\[9. According to Nand., the use of the particle *k*a implies a
prohibition to eat again, after having partaken of a *S*râddha meal.

15\. See note on LXIV, 5.

24\. Nand., quoting a passage of Vasish*th*a (XIV, 28), states the use
of the particle *k*a to imply, that food twice cooked and food cooked in
a frying-pan should also be avoided.

27\. This rule refers to skimmed milk and to a dough made of ground
sesamum, from which the oil has been extracted. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

30\. Nor (must he eat at night) sour milk or ground barley.

31\. Nor (must he eat) the leaves of the mountain ebony, or of the
banyan, or of the holy fig-tree, or of the hemp plant.

32\. (He must) not (eat) without having first given to eat (to the gods
and to the Brâhma*n*as); Nor without having made a burnt-offering first

34\. Nor without having sprinkled his feet;

35\. Nor without having sprinkled his hands and his face;

36\. While having the remains of food en his mouth or hands, he must not
take clarified butter.

37\. Nor must he look at the moon, or at the sun, or at the stars (while
unclean).

38\. Nor must he touch his head (while unclean).

39\. Nor must he recite the Veda (while unclean).

40\. He must eat facing the east;

41\. Or facing the south;

42\. And after having honoured his food<sup>\[1\]</sup>;

43\. And cheerfully, adorned with a garland of flowers, and anointed
with unguents.

\[42. 'Nand. describes the ceremony of 'honouring one's food' as
follows: 'He must first sprinkle the food, while reciting the Gâyatrî
and the Vyâh*ri*tis (see LV, 10). Then he must sprinkle water all around
it, with the Mantra, "Forsooth, I sprinkle righteousness around thee"
After that he must sip water with the Mantra, "Thou art an imperishable
basis" (Taitt. Âra*ny*. X, 32, rendered according to Sâya*n*a's
Commentary), and offer up five oblations to Prâ*n*a, &c. (see Dr.
Bühler's note on Âpast. II, 1, 1, 2). Finally he must eat in silence,
without blaming the food, and taking care to leave some remnant of it in
the dish, and sip water again, with the Mantra, "Thou art an
imperishable covering"' (Taitt. Âra*ny*. X, 35, according to
Sâya*n*a).\]

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

44\. He must not eat up his food completely;

45\. Unless it consist of sour milk, or honey, or (clarified) butter, or
milk, or ground barley, or meat, or sweetmeats.

46\. He must not eat together with his wife, nor in the open air, nor
standing, nor in the presence of many (hungry spectators), nor must many
eat in the presence of one (hungry spectator).

47\. Let him never eat in an empty house, in a house where the sacred
fires are preserved, or in a temple dedicated to the gods. Neither must
he drink water out of his joined hands, or satiate himself to repletion.

48, Let him not take a third meal (over and above the two regular meals
in the mornings and evenings), nor let him ever take unwholesome food.
He must eat neither too early, nor too late, and he must take no food in
the evening, after having fully satiated himself in the morning.

49\. He must not eat bad food (whether injurious to health or otherwise
reprehensible), nor from a bad dish (which is similar to the dishes used
by barbarians, or which has been defiled by a wicked man eating from
it), nor lying on the ground, nor with his feet raised upon a bench, nor
sitting on his hams with a cloth tied round his legs and knees.

\[46. Nand. thinks that this rule refers to those wives only who belong
to a lower caste than their husbands.

48\. 'Too early' means before sunrise; 'too late' means immediately
before sunset. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIX.](sbe07071.md)
