[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07007)  [Next](sbe07009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# VI.

1\. A creditor shall receive his principal back from his debtor exactly
as he had lent it to him.

2\. (As regards the interest to be paid), he shall take in the direct
order of the castes two, three, four, or five in the hundred by the
month (if no pledge has been given).

3\. Or let debtors of any caste pay as much interest as has been
promised by themselves.

4\. After the lapse of one year let them pay interest according to the
above rule, even though it have not been agreed on.

5\. By the use of a pledge (to be kept only) interest is forfeited.

\[VI. 2. M. VIII, 142; Y. II, 37.--1, 2. Colebrooke, Dig. I, 2,
XXXI.--3. M. VIII, 157; Y. II, 38.--4. Colebrooke, Dig. I, 2, LII.--5.
M. VIII, 143; Y. II, 59; Gaut. XII, 32; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 2,
LXXVIII.--6. Y. II, 59; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 3, LXXXII.--7. M. VIII, 151;
Gaut. XII, 31; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 3, CX.--8. Colebrooke loc. cit.--9.
Colebrooke, Dig. I, 3, CVII.--10. Y. II, 44; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 2,
LXXVII.--11-15. M. VIII, 151; Y. II, 39; Gaut. XII, 36; Colebrooke, Dig.
I, 2, LXIV.--16, 17. Colebrooke, Dig. I, 2, LXX.--18, 19. M. VIII, 50,
176; Y. II, 40; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 6, CCLII.--20, 21. M. VIII, 139; Y.
II, 42; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 6, CCLXXVII.--22. Y. II, 20-24, 25. Y. II,
94; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 6, CCLXXXIII.--26. Y. II, 93; Colebrooke, Dig.
I, 6, CCLXXXVI.--27. Y. II, 50; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 5, CLXVIII.--28.
Colebrooke, Dig. I, 5, CLXVIII.--29. Gaut. XII, 40.--29, 30. Y. II, 51;
Colebrooke, Dig. I. 5, CCXX,--31-33. Y. II, 46; Colebrooke, Dig. I. 5,
CCVIII.--34-36. M VIII, 166; Y. II, 45.--38, 39. M. VIII, 166, 167; Y.
II, 45; Colebrooke, Dig. I, 5, CXCII.--41. M. VIII, 158, 160; Y. II, 53;
Colebrooke, Dig. I, 4, CXLIV.--42, 43, Y. II, 55, 56; Colebrooke, Dig.
I, 4, CLVI, CLXI.

I, 2. Colebrooke loc. cit. seems to have translated a different
reading.\]

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

6\. The creditor must make good the loss of a, pledge, unless it was
caused by fate or by the king.

7\. (The pledge must) also (be restored to the debtor) when the interest
has reached its maximum amount (on becoming equal to the principal, and
has all been paid).

8 But he must not restore an immovable pledge without special agreement
(till the principal itself has been paid).

9\. That immovable property which has been delivered, restorable when
the sum borrowed is made good, (the creditor) must restore when the sum
borrowed has been made good.

10\. Property lent bears no further interest after it has been tendered,
but refused by the creditor.

11\. On gold the interest shall rise no higher than to make the debt
double;

12\. On grain, (no higher than to make it) threefold;.

13\. On cloth, (no higher than to make it) fourfold;

14\. On liquids, (no higher than to make it) eightfold;

15\. Of female slaves and cattle, the offspring (shall be taken as
interest).

16\. On substances from which spirituous liquor

\[7. Colebrooke loc. cit. connects this Sûtra with the next. My
rendering rests on Nand.'s interpretation.

8\. Nand. cites as an instance of an agreement of this kind one made in
the following form, 'You shall have the enjoyment of this or that mango
grove as long as interest on the principal lent to me has not ceased to
accrue.'\]

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

is extracted, on cotton, thread, leather, weapons, bricks, and charcoal,
the interest is unlimited.

17\. On such objects as have not been mentioned it may be double.

18\. A creditor recovering the sum lent by any (lawful) means shall not
be reproved by the king.

19\. If the debtor, so forced to discharge the debt, complains to the
king, he shall be fined in an equal sum.

20\. If a creditor sues before the king and fully proves his demand, the
debtor shall pay as a fine to the king a tenth part of the sum proved;

21\. And the creditor, having received the sum due, shall pay a
twentieth part of it.

22\. If the whole demand has been contested by the debtor, and even a
part of it only has been proved against him, he must pay the whole.

23\. There are three means of proof in case of a demand having been
contested, viz. a writing, witnesses, and proof by ordeal.

24\. A debt contracted before witnesses should be discharged in the
presence of witnesses.

25\. A written contract having been fulfilled, the writing should be
torn.

26\. Part only being paid, and the writing not being at hand, let the
creditor give an acquittance.

27\. If he who contracted the debt should die, or

\[17. Nand. infers from a passage of Kâtyâyana that this rule refers to
gems, pearls, coral, gold, silver, cotton, silk, and wool.

18\. The 'lawful means' are mediation of friends, and the four other
modes of compelling payment of an unliquidated demand (Nand.) See M.
VIII, 49.

22\. 'The particle api indicates that he must pay a fine to the king
besides, as ordained by Yâ*g*ñavalkya.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

become a religious ascetic, or remain abroad for twenty years, that debt
shall be discharged by his sons or grandsons;

28\. But not by remoter descendants against their will.

29\. He who takes the assets of a man, leaving or not leaving male
issue, must pay the sum due (by him);

30\. And (so must) he who has the care of the widow left by one who had
no assets.

31\. A woman (shall) not (be compelled to pay) the debt of her husband
or son;

32\. Nor the husband or son (to pay) the debt of a woman (who is his
wife or mother);

33.. Nor a father to pay the debt of his son.

34\. A debt contracted by parceners shall be paid by any one of them who
is present.

35\. And so shall the debt of the father (be paid) by (any one of) the
brothers (or of their sons) before partition.

36\. But after partition they shall severally pay according to their
shares of the inheritance.

37\. A debt contracted by the wife of a herdsman, distiller of spirits,
public dancer, washer, or hunter shall be discharged by the husband
(because he is supported by his wife).

38\. (A debt of which payment has been previously) promised must be paid
by the householder;

39\. And (so must he pay that debt) which was

\[38, 39. Regarding these two Sûtras see Jolly, Indisches Schuldrecht,
in the Transactions of the Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences, 1877, p.
309, note.\]

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

contracted by any person for the behoof of the family.

40\. He who on receiving the whole amount of a loan, promises to repay
the principal on the following day (or some other date near at hand),
but from covetousness does not repay it, shall give interest for it.

41\. Suretiship is ordained for appearance, for honesty, and for
payment; the first two (sureties, and not their sons), must pay the debt
on failure of their engagements, but even the sons of the last (may be
compelled to pay it).

42\. When there are several sureties (jointly bound), they shall pay
their proportionate shares of the debt, but when they are bound
severally, the payment shall be made (by any of them), as the creditor
pleases.

43\. If the surety, being harassed by the creditor, discharges the debt,
the debtor shall pay twice as much to the surety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII.](sbe07009)
