[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07028)  [Next](sbe07030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

# XXVII.

1\. The Nishekakarman (ceremony of impregnation)

\[XXVII. 1-14. Â*s*v. I, 4-18; Gobh. II, 1-9; Pâr. I, 4-11, 1;
*S*â<u>n</u>kh. I, 12-28; M. II, 29-35, 66, 67; Y. I, 11-13; Gaut. VIII,
14.--15-24, 26, 27. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 21; M. II, 38-47; Y. I,
{footnote p. 113} 14, 37, 38; Âpast. I, 1, 1, 18-21; I, 1, 25 33-3, 6;
Gaut. I, 5, 11-26.--25. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, 22; M. II, 49; Y. I, 30;
Âpast. I, 1, 3, 28-30; Gaut. II, 36.--28, 29. M. II, 174, 64.\]

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

must be performed when the season fit for procreating
children<sup>\[1\]</sup> distinctly appears (for the first time).

2\. The Pu*m*savana (ceremony to cause the birth of a male) must be
performed before the embryo begins to move.

3\. The Sîmantonnayana (ceremony of parting the hair) should take place
in the sixth or eighth month (of pregnancy).

4\. The *G*âtakarman (birth-ceremony) should take place on the birth of
the child.

5\. The Nâmadheya (naming-rite) must be performed as soon as the term of
impurity (caused by the birth of the child) is over.

6\. (The name to be chosen should be) auspicious in the case of a
Brâhma*n*a;

7\. Indicating power in the case of a Kshatriya;

8\. Indicating wealth in the case of a Vai*s*ya;

9\. Indicating contempt in the case of a *S*ûdra.

\[1. <sup>1</sup> 'Garbha' here means '*ri*tu,' i.e. the time favourable
for procreation, following immediately upon the menstrual evacuation,
and the above ceremony should be performed once only, in order to
consecrate the mother once for all. (Nand.)

2, 3. The embryo begins to move in the fourth month of pregnancy, and
the Pu*m*savana must be performed in the second or third month of every
pregnancy. Thus Nand., who combats expressly the opinion that this
ceremony has the consecration of the mother, and not the consecration of
the fœtus, for its object. Regarding the Sîmantonnayana he seems to
consider both views as admissible. According to the former view it would
have to be performed only once, like the Nishekakarman.

6-9. Nand. quotes as instances of such names: 1. Lakshmîdhara; 2.
Yudhish*th*ira; 3. Arthapati; 4. Lokadâsa or (observing, {footnote p.
116} at the same time, another rule regarding the second part of a
compound name), 1. Vish*n*u*s*arman; 2. Bhîmavarman; 3. Devagupta; 4.
Dharmadâsa.\]

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

10\. The Âdityadar*s*ana, (ceremony of taking the child out to see the
sun) should take place in the fourth month (after birth).

11\. The Annaprâ*s*ana (ceremony of first feeding) should take place in
the sixth month.

12\. The Kû*d*âkara*n*a '(tonsure rite) should take place in the third
year <sup>\[1\]</sup>.

13\. For female children the same ceremonies, (beginning with the birth
ceremony, should be performed, but) without Mantras.

14\. The marriage ceremony only has to be performed with Mantras for
them.

15\. The initiation of Brâhma*n*as (should take plate) in the eighth
year after conception<sup>\[1\]</sup>;

16\. Of Kshatriyas, in the eleventh year after
conception<sup>\[1\]</sup>;

17\. Of Vaisyas,, in the twelfth year after conception<sup>\[1\]</sup>;

18\. Their girdles should be made of Muñ*g*a grass, a bow-string, and
Balba*g*a (coarse grass) respectively.

19\. Their sacrificial strings and their garments should be made of
cotton, hemp, and wool respectively.

\[10. According to Nand., who quotes a passage of Yama in support of his
opinion, this Sûtra has to be divided into two, which would, however,
require several words to complete their sense, the import of the first
being, that the child should be taken out to see the sun in the third
month, and to see the moon in the fourth month. See the Introduction.

12\. <sup>1</sup> 'The third year,' i. e. either after conception, or
after birth. (Nand.)

15-17. <sup>1</sup> 'Nand., 'or after birth.' See Pâr. and Â*s*v. loc.
cit.\]

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

20\. The skins (which they wear) should be those of a black antelope, of
a tiger, and of a he-goat respectively.

2 1. Their staves should be made of Palâ*s*a, Khadira, and Udumbara wood
respectively.

22\. Their staves should be of such a length as to reach the hair, the
forehead, and the nose respectively.

23\. Or all (kinds of staves may be used for all castes
indiscriminately).

24\. And they should not be crooked, nor should the bark be stripped
off.

25\. In begging alms, they should put in the word 'Lady' at the
beginning, in the middle, and at the end of their request (according to
their caste).

26\. The ceremony of initiation must not be delayed beyond the sixteenth
year in the case of a Brâhma*n*a; beyond the twenty-second, in the case
of a Kshatriya; and beyond the twenty-fourth, in the case of a Vai*s*ya.

27\. After that, the youths belonging to any of those three castes, who
have not been initiated at the proper time, are excluded from
initiation, and contemned by the twice-born, and are called Vrâtyas.

28\. That skin, that cord, that girdle, that staff, and that garment
which has been given to any one (on his initiation), that he must for
ever wear when performing any religious observance.

29\. His girdle, his skin, his staff, his string, and his ewer he must
throw into the water when broken (or spoiled by use), and receive others
consecrated with Mantras.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII.](sbe07030)
