[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07079)  [Next](sbe07081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

# LXXVIII.

1\. By performing a *S*râddha on Sunday he procures everlasting freedom
from disease.

2\. (By performing a *S*râddha) on Monday he becomes
beloved<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

3\. (By performing it) on Tuesday (he procures) success in battle.

4\. (By performing it) on Wednesday (he enjoys) all his desires.

5\. (By performing it) on Thursday (he acquires) such religious
knowledge as he desires.

6\. (By performing it) on Friday (he acquires) wealth.

7\. (By performing it) on Saturday (he procures) longevity.

8\. (By performing it under the Nakshatra or constellation) K*ri*ttikâs
(he gains) heaven.

\[LXXVIII. 8-35. M. III, 277; Y. I, 264-267.--36-50. M. III, 276; Y. I,
261-263; Âpast. II, 7, 16, 8-22; Gaut. XV, 4.--52, 53. M. III, 273, 274.
Regarding Sûtras 1-7, see the Introduction.

1\. Nand. states that the *S*râddhas mentioned in this chapter are of
the kâmya sort, i.e. 'offered for the gratification of a special
desire.'

2\. <sup>1</sup> This is Nand.'s interpretation of the term saubhâgyam.
It might also be taken in its usual acceptation, as meaning 'happiness.'

8-35. Those names of the twenty-eight Nakshatras or lunar asterisms,
which I have included in parentheses, are from Nand.'s Commentary. Most
of the objects which are said to be gained by the *S*râddhas mentioned
in Sûtras 8-35 are connected etymologically, or through their import,
with the names of the particular Nakshatras under which they are
performed. Thus the term push*t*i, 'prosperity,' in Sûtra 13, is
etymologically connected with Pushya; the term mitra, 'friend,' in 22,
is connected with Maitra; the term râ*g*yam, 'royalty,' in 23, is
connected with *S*âkra, the name of that Nakshatra being derived from
*S*akra, a name of Indra, the king of the gods, &c.\]

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

9\. (By performing it under the constellation) Rohi*n*î (he obtains)
progeny.

10\. (By performing it under the constellation) Saumya (or
M*ri*ga*s*iras he procures) the superhuman power of a pious Brâhma*n*a.

11\. (By performing it under the constellation) Raudra (or Ârdrâ he
reaps) the fruit of his labours.

12\. (By performing it under the constellation) Punarvasu (he procures)
land.

13\. (By performing it under the constellation) Pushya (or Tishya he
procures) prosperity.

14\. (By performing it under the constellation) Sârpa (or Âsleshâs he
obtains) beauty.

15\. (By performing it under the constellation) Paitrya (or Maghâ he
enjoys) all his desires.

16\. (By performing it under the constellation) Bhâgya (or
Pûrvaphâlgunî) he becomes beloved<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

17\. (By performing it under the constellation) Âryama*n*a (or
Uttaraphâlgunî he procures) wealth.

18\. (By performing it under the constellation) Hasta (he acquires)
superiority among his kindred.

19\. (By performing it under the constellation) Tvâsh*t*ra (or *K*itrâ
he procures) handsome sons.

20\. (By performing it under the constellation) Svâti (he procures)
success in trade.

21\. (By performing it under the constellation) Vi*s*âkhâs (he acquires)
gold.

22\. (By performing it under the constellation) Maitra (or Anurâdhâ he
procures) friends.

23\. (By performing it under the constellation) *S*âkra (or Gyesh*th*â
he procures) royalty.

24\. (By performing it' under the constellation) Mûla (he procures good
results in) agriculture.

\[16. <sup>1</sup> See 2, note. 2\]

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

25\. (By performing it under the constellation) Âpya (or Pûrvâshâ*dh*âs
he procures) success in sea-voyages.

26\. (By performing it under the constellation) Vai*s*vadeva (or
Uttarâshâ*dh*âs he enjoys) all his desires.

27\. (By performing it under the constellation) Abhi*g*it (he procures)
superiority.

\[1\]

28\. (By performing it under the constellation) *S*rava*n*a (he enjoys)
all his desires.

29\. (By performing it under the constellation) Vâsava (or Dhanish*th*âs
he procures success in preparing) salt<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

30\. (By performing it under the constellation) Vâru*n*a (or
*S*atabhishâ he obtains) freedom from disease.

31\. (By performing it under the constellation) Â*g*a ( or
Pûrvabhâdrapadâ he obtains) copper vessels.

32\. (By performing it under the constellation) Âhirbudhnya (or
Uttarabhâdrapadâ he obtains) a house.

33\. (By performing it under the constellation) Paush*n*a (or Revatî he
acquires) cows.

34\. (By performing it under the constellation) Â*s*vina (or A*s*vinî he
obtains) a horse.

35\. (By performing it under the constellation) Yâmya (or Bhara*n*î he
procures) longevity,

36\. (By offering it) on the first day of a lunar fortnight (he
procures) a house and handsome wives.

\[29. <sup>1</sup> Lava*n*am means either 'salt' or beauty' or
'medicinal herbs and fruits.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

37\. (By offering it) on the second day (he procures) a beautiful
daughter (and sons-in-law).

38\. (By offering it) on the third day (he enjoys) all his desires.

39\. (By offering it) on the fourth day (he procures) cattle.

40\. (By offering it) on the fifth day (he procures) handsome sons.

41\. (By offering it) on the sixth day (he obtains) success in gaming.

42\. (By offering it) on the seventh day (he procures good results in)
agriculture.

43\. (By offering it) on. the eighth day (he procures success in) trade.

44\. (By offering it) on the ninth day (he procures)
cattle<sup>\[1\]</sup>.

45\. (By offering it) on the tenth day (he procures) horses.

46\. (By offering it) on the eleventh day (he procures) sons endowed
with the superhuman power of a pious Brâhma*n*a.

47\. (By offering it) on the twelfth day (he procures) gold and silver.

48\. (By offering it) on the thirteenth day he becomes beloved.

49\. (By offering it) on the fifteenth day (he enjoys) all his desires.

\[44. <sup>1</sup> Nand. infers from a passage of Yâ*g*ñavalkya (I, 266)
that the term 'cattle' here refers to horses and other one-hoofed
animals. See, however, the next Sûtra.

48\. The term saubhâgyam is stated by Nand. (with reference to Y. I, 2
64) to denote 'superiority among his kindred,' in this Sûtra. But there
is no cogent reason for deviating here from that interpretation of the
term which he proposes in his Commentary on Sûtras 2 and 16. See
above.\]

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

50\. For *S*râddhas for those who have been killed in battle the
fourteenth day is ordained.

51\. There are two stanzas on this subject recited by the manes.

52\. 'May that excellent man be born to our race, whosoever he may be,
who attentively offers a *S*râddha in the rainy season<sup>\[1\]</sup>
on the thirteenth of the dark half,

53\. 'With milk profusely mixed with honey; and (he who offers such
*S*râddhas) during the whole month Kârttika and (in the afternoon) when
the shadow of an elephant falls towards the east.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXIX.](sbe07081.md)
