[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07088)  [Next](sbe07090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

# LXXXVII.

1\. Now on the day of full moon in the month Vai*s*âkha he must spread
out upon a woollen blanket the skin of a black antelope (together with
the horns and hoofs), after having adorned the former with gold and the
latter with silver, and after having ornamented the tail with a string
of pearls.

2\. After that, he must cover (that part of the blanket which is not
covered by the skin) with sesamum.

3\. And he must adorn the navel with gold.

4\. He must cover (the skin) with a couple of new garments.

5\. He must place all sorts of perfumes and jewels upon it.

\[LXXXVII. 1, The particle atha, 'now,' indicates the beginning of a new
section, treating of gifts. It comprises Chapters LXXXVII-XCIII. (Nand.)
The commentator infers from a corresponding passage of the
Matsya-purâ*n*a, that the following further rules are implied in this
Sûtra. The ceremony may also take place on the full moon days in the
months Mâgha, Kârttika, and Âshâdha, on the twelfth day after the summer
solstice, and during an eclipse of the sun or moon. The silver on the
hoofs must weigh five Palas, And the gold on the horns ten Suvarnas (or
two Palas and a half). The place must be pure, smeared with cow-dung,
and covered with Ku*s*a grass.

3\. 'The Skânda-purâ*n*a states that the eyes must be adorned with
jewels.' (Nand.)

5\. 'And garlands of flowers and other objects must be placed upon it,
as *k*a indicates.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

6\. After having placed on its four sides (beginning with the eastern
side) four metallic dishes (of copper, silver, white copper, and gold
respectively) filled with milk, sour milk, honey, and clarified butter
respectively, (and having poured out water) he must give (the skin,
seizing it by the tail), to a Brâhma*n*a, who is an
Agnihotrin<sup>\[1\]</sup>, decked with ornaments, and clad in two
garments.

7\. There are (the following) stanzas in regard to this subject:

8\. 'He who bestows (upon a pious Brâhma*n*a) the skin of a black
antelope, together with the hoofs and horns, after having covered it
with seeds of sesamum and garments, and adorned it with all sorts of
jewels:

9\. 'That man doubtless obtains the same reward as if he were to bestow
the whole earth on him, bordered as it is on every side (by the oceans),
together with the oceans and caverns, and with rocks, groves, and
forests.

10\. 'He who places sesamum, gold, honey, and butter on the skin of a
black antelope and gives the whole to a Brâhmana, annihilates the
consequences of all his own evil actions.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXVIII.](sbe07090)
