[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07037)  [Next](sbe07039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# XXXVI.

1\. Killing a Kshatriya or Vai*s*ya engaged in a sacrifice, or a woman
in her courses, or a pregnant woman, or a woman (of the Brâhma*n*a
caste) who has bathed after temporary uncleanness<sup>\[1\]</sup>, or an
embryo

\[5. 'Intercourse of marriage' means sexual connection with an outcasted
man or woman, or giving a damsel in marriage to an outcasted man,
'Intercourse in sacrificing' means sacrificing for, or with, an outcast.
'Mouthly intercourse' means teaching, or being taught by, or studying
together with, an outcast. The present rule holds good in cases of
voluntary intercourse only; if the intercourse was involuntary, the loss
of caste does not follow till after a year. Others assert that the
immediate loss of caste is entailed by particularly intimate intercourse
only. (Nand.)

XXXVI\. 1. M. XI, 88; Y. III, 251; Âpast. I, 9, 24, 6, 8, 9.--2-7. M.
XI, 57-59, 171, 172; Y. III, 228-233.--2. Gaut. XXI, 10.--5. Gaut. XXI,
I.--7. Âpast. I, 7, 21, 9.

1\. <sup>I</sup> The term âtreyî (atrigotrâ) has been translated here
and in {footnote p. 134} other places in accordance with that
interpretation which is sanctioned by the majority among the
commentators of law works. Nand., on the other hand, gives the
preference to the opinion of those who tender it by 'a woman descended
from or married to a man of the race of Atri.'\]

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

of unknown sex, or one come for protection, are crimes equal to the
crime of killing a Brâhma*n*a.

2\. Giving false evidence and killing a friend: these two crimes are
equal to the drinking of spirituous liquor.

3\. Appropriating to one's self land belonging to a Brâhma*n*a or a
deposit (belonging to a Brâhma*n*a and not consisting of gold) are
crimes equal to a theft of gold (belonging to a Brâhma*n*a).

4\. Sexual connection with the wife of a paternal uncle, of a maternal
grandfather, of a maternal uncle, of a father-in-law, or of the king,
are crimes equal to sexual connection with a Guru's wife;

5\. And so is sexual intercourse with the father's or mother's sister
and with one's own sister;

6\. And sexual connection with the wife of a learned Brâhma*n*a, or a
priest, or an Upâdhyâya, or a friend;

7\. And with a sister's female friend (or with one's own female friend),
with a woman of one's own race, with a woman belonging to the Brâhma*n*a
caste, with a (Brâhma*n*a) maiden (who is not yet betrothed to a man),
with a low-caste woman, with a woman in her courses, with a woman come
for protection,

\[2. 'The term etau, "these," is used in order to include the forgetting
of Veda texts and other crimes, which are mentioned as equal to drinking
spirituous liquor by Manu (XI, 57) and Yâ*g*ñavalkya (III, 229).'
(Nand.)

5\. 'The particle *k*a in this Sûtra refers to little girls, as ordained
by Manu, XI, 59.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

with a female ascetic, and with a woman entrusted to one's own care.

8\. Such minor offenders become pure, like mortal sinners, by a
horse-sacrifice and by visiting Tîrthas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII.](sbe07039.md)
