[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07033)  [Next](sbe07035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

# XXXII.

1\. A king, a priest, a learned Brâhma*n*a, one who stops wicked
proceedings, an Upâdhyâya, a paternal uncle, a maternal grandfather, a
maternal uncle, a father-in-law, an eldest brother, and<sup>\[1\]</sup>
the parents-in-law of a son or a daughter are equal to a teacher;

2\. And so are their wives, who are equal in caste to them.

3\. And their mother's sister, their father's sister, and I their eldest
sister.

4\. A father-in-law, a paternal uncle, a maternal

\[XXXII. 1. M. II, 206.--2. M. II, 210.--3. M. II, 131.--4. M. II, 130;
Âpast. I, 4, 14, 11.--5, 6. M. II, 210, 211; Âpast. I, 2, 7, 27; Gaut.
II, 31, 32.--7. M. II, 129,--8, 9. M. XI, 205; Y. III, 292.--10. Âpast.
I, 1, 2, 20.--11, 12. M. II, 201; Âpast. I, 2, 8, 15.--13. M. II, 212;
Gaut. II, 34.--14. M. II, 20.--15. M. II, 217; Gaut. II, 33; VI, 2.--16.
M. II, 136; Gaut. VI, 20.--17. M. II, 135; Âpast. I, 4, 14, 25.--18. M.
II, 155.

1\. <sup>1</sup> The particle *k*a is used here, according to Nand., in
order to include a paternal grandfather and other persons mentioned in a
Smriti.

3\. <sup>1</sup> The particle *k*a here refers, according to Nand., to
the paternal grandmother and others mentioned in a Smriti.\]

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

uncle, and a priest he must honour by rising to meet and saluting them,
even though they be younger than himself.

5\. The wives of Gurus (superiors), who are of a lower class than their
husbands (such as Kshatriya or Vai*s*ya or Mûrdhâvasikta wives), shall
be honoured by (rising to meet and) saluting them from far; but he must
not embrace their feet.

6\. He should avoid to rub and anoint the limbs of Guru's wives, or to
anoint their eyes, or to arrange their hair, or to wash their feet, or
to do other such services for them.

7\. To the wife of another, even though he does not know her, he must
either say 'sister' (if she is of equal age with himself), or 'daughter'
(if she is younger than himself), or 'mother' (if she is older than
himself).

8\. Let him not say 'thou<sup>\[1\]</sup>' to his Gurus (superiors).

9\. If he has offended one of them (by saying 'thou' to him, or in some
other manner), he must keep a fast and not eat again till the end of the
day, after having obtained his forgiveness.

10\. He must avoid to quarrel with his spiritual teacher and to argue
with him (from emulation).

11\. And he must not censure him;

\[5. *S*ûdra wives are exempt from this rule; he should rise to meet,
but not salute them. (Nand.)

8\. <sup>1</sup> Other insulting language, as e. g. if he says hush or
pish to them, is also included in this term. The use of the particle
*k*a indicates that other persons entitled to respect are also intended
in this Sûtra. (Nand.)

10\. 'The particle *k*a is used in order to include Brâhma*n*as in
general in this prohibition.' (Nand.)

11\. 'The use of the particle *k*a shows that defamatory speeches are
also intended.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

12\. Nor act so as to displease him.

13\. (A pupil) must not embrace the feet of a Guru's young wife, if he
has completed his twentieth year, or can distinguish virtue from vice.

14\. But a young student may at pleasure prostrate himself before a
young wife of his Guru, (stretching out both hands) as ordained (see
XXVIII, 15), 'I, N. N. (ho! salute thee).'

15\. On returning from a journey he shall (once) embrace the feet of the
wives of his Gurus (superiors), and daily, salute them, remembering the
practice of the virtuous.

16\. Wealth, kindred, age, the performance of religious observances,
and, fifthly, sacred knowledge are titles to respect; each subsequent
one is superior to the one preceding in order.

17\. A Brâhma*n*a, though only ten years old<sup>\[1\]</sup>, and a
member of the kingly caste, though a hundred years old, must be
considered as father and son; and of these two, the Brâhma*n*a is the
father.

18\. The seniority of Brâhma*n*as is founded upon sacred knowledge; of
Kshatriyas, upon valour in arms; of Vaisyas, upon grain and (other)
wealth; of *S*ûdras, upon (priority of) birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIII.](sbe07035.md)
