[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07097)  [Next](sbe07099.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

# XCVI.

1\. After having passed through the first three orders and annihilated
passion, he must offer an oblation to Pra*g*âpati, in which he bestows
all his wealth (upon priests) as fee for the performance of the
sacrifice, and enter the order of ascetics.

2\. Having reposited the fires in his own mind, he must enter the
village, in order to collect alms, (but never for any other purpose).

3\. He must beg food at seven houses.

4\. If he does not get food (at one house), he must not grieve.

5, He must not beg of another ascetic.

6\. When the servants have had their meal, when the dishes have been
removed, let him beg food (consisting of the leavings).

7\. (He must receive the food) in an earthen vessel, or in a wooden
bowl, or in a vessel made of the bottle-gourd.

8\. He must cleanse those vessels with water.

9\. He must shun food obtained by humble salutation.

\[XCVI. 1. M. VI, 38; Y. III, 56.--2. M. VI; 38, 43; Y. III, 56, 58.--4.
M. VI, 57.--6. M. VI, 56; Y. III, 59; Gaut., III, 15.--7, 8. M. VI, 54,
53; Y. III, 60.--9. M. VI, 58.--11. M. VI, 44.--12. Gaut. III, 21.--13.
Gaut. III, 18.--14-17. M. VI, 46.--18. M. VI, 45.--19, 20. M. VI,
47.--23. Y. III, 53; Mahâbhârata I, 4605.--24. M. VI, 49; Y. III,
201.--25-42. M. VI, 61-64; Y. III, 63, 64.--43. Y. III, 72.--45-50. M.
VI, 76, 77.--51, 54-79. Y. III, 70, 84-90.--80-88. Y. III,
100-104.--80-89, 91. Y. III, 93-95.--92. Y. III, 96-99.--93-95. Y. III,
91, 92.--96. Y. III, 179.--97. M. XII, 12; Y. III, 178.--97, 98.
Bhagavad-gîtâ XIII, 1, 2. This chapter treats of ascetics. (Nand.)

4\. 'This implies that he must not rejoice if he does get it, as Manu
(VI, 67) says.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

10\. He must live in an empty house.

11\. Or (he must) live at the root of a tree.

12\. He must not stay for more than one night in one village (except
during the rainy season).

13\. His only dress must be a small piece of cloth worn over the
privities.

14\. He must set down his feet purified by looking down.

15\. He must drink water purified (by straining it) with a cloth.

16\. He must utter speeches purified by truth.

17\. He must perform acts purified by his mind.

18\. He must neither wish for death nor for (a long) life.

19\. He must bear abuse patiently.

20\. He must treat no one with contempt.

21\. He must not pronounce a benediction.

22\. He must not salute any one reverentially.

\[10. 'Empty' means 'inhabited by no one else,' and implies that the
house in question should be situated in a dark place, difficult of
access. (Nand.)

11\. 'The article vâ implies that he must live there alone.' (Nand.)

14, 15. Nand. assigns as the reason of both these rules, 'lest he should
not kill some insect.' Kullûka (on M. VI, 46) gives the same reason for
the second rule, but the looking down, according to him, is ordained in.
order that be may not accidentally tread upon a hair or other impure
substance.

17\. The sense of this Sûtra is, that in doubtful cases he must act as
his mind prompts him to do. (Nand.)

21\. 'The meaning is, that he must not utter a benediction when he has
been reverentially saluted by any one. He must confine himself to
saying, "O Nârâya*n*a." Others explain, that he must not utter a
benediction in begging food.' (Nand.)

22\. 'The sense is, that he must not salute any one reverentially who
has reverentially saluted him, nor return his greeting {footnote p. 281}
otherwise than by saying, "O Nârâya*n*a." Others explain, that he must
not make an obeisance in begging food.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

23\. Should one man chop his one arm with an axe, and another sprinkle
his other arm with sandal, he must neither curse the one in his mind,
nor bless the other.

24\. He must constantly be intent upon stopping his breath, upon
retention of the image formed in his mind, and upon meditation.

25\. He must reflect upon the transitoriness of the passage through
mundane existence;

26\. And upon the impure nature of the body;

27\. And upon the destruction of beauty by old age;

28\. And upon the pain arising from diseases bodily, mental, or due to
an excess (of the bile, &c.)

29\. And upon (the pain arising from) the (five) naturally inherent
(affections).

30\. On his having to dwell in an embryo, covered with everlasting
darkness;

\[24. Nand. quotes a passage of the Yoga*s*âstra, which states that one
Dhâra*n*â = three Prâ*n*âyâmas (stoppings or regulations of the breath).
A passage of the Gâru*d*a-pura*n*a quoted in the Petersburg Dictionary)
states that one Dhâra*n*â = sixteen Prâ*n*âyâmas. I have taken the term
dhâra*n*â in its ordinary acceptation of 'retention of an idea' (cf.
Wilson, Vish*n*u-purâ*n*a V, 237) with regard to an analogous passage of
Yâ*g*ñavalkya (III, 201), which is also quoted by Nand.,

28\. According to Nand,, the particle *k*a is used to include other
diseases, love, anxiety or wrath, caused by enemies, and other mental
pangs.

29\. They are, ignorance, egotism, love, wrath, and dread of temporal
suffering (Nand., according to Patañ*g*ali). The particle *k*a,
according to Nand., is used in order to imply meditation upon the
thousand births which man has to pass through, as stated by
Yâ*g*ñavalkya (III, 64).\]

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

31\. And on (his having to dwell) between urine and fæces;

32\. On his having to suffer, (as an embryo,) pain from the cold and
hot. (food and drink, which his mother happens to have taken);

33, On the dreadful pain which he has to suffer, at the time of his
birth, while the embryo is coming forth from the narrowness of the womb;

34\. On his ignorance and his dependency upon his (parents and other)
Gurus in childhood;

35\. On the manifold anxieties arising from the study of the Veda (and
from the other obligations of a student);

36\. And (on the anxieties arising) in youth from not obtaining the
objects of pleasure, and upon the abode in bell (ordained as punishment)
for enjoying them, after they have been obtained unlawfully;

37\. On the union with those whom we hate, and the separation from those
whom we love;

38\. On the fearful agonies of hell;

39\. And (on the agonies) that have to be suffered in the passage of the
soul through the bodies of animals (and of plants).

40\. (And let him reflect thus that) there is no pleasure to be met with
in this never-ceasing passage of the soul through mundane existence;

41\. '(And that) even what is called pleasure, on account of the absence
of pain, is of a transient nature;

42\. (And that) he who is unable to enjoy such pleasures (from sickness
or some such cause), or who is unable to procure them (from poverty),
suffers severe pangs.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

43\. He must recognise this human frame to consist of seven elements.
blood, flesh,

44\. Those elements are, adeps, scrum of flesh, bone, marrow, and semen.

45\. It is covered with skin.

46\. And it has a nasty smell.

47\. It is the receptacle of (the above-named) impure substances (adeps
and the rest).

48\. Though surrounded by a hundred pleasures, it is subject to change.

49\. Though carefully supported (by elixirs and the like), it is subject
to destruction.

50\. It is the stay of carnal desire, wrath, greed, folly, pride, and
selfishness.

51\. It consists of earth, water, fire, air, and ether.

52\. it is provided with bone, tubular vessels (carrying bile and phlegm
through the body), tubes (conducting the vital airs), and sinews.

53\. It is endowed with the quality of ra*g*as (passion).

54\. It is covered with six skins.

55\. It is kept together by three hundred and sixty bones.

56\. They are distributed (as follows):

57\. The teeth together with their receptacles are sixty-four in number.

\[46. The particle *k*a, according to Nand., refers to the fact that the
human body is defiled by the touch of impure objects.

48\. 'The meaning is that, though food and drink and other sensual
enjoyments abound, they may cause pain as well as pleasure by producing
phlegm, &c.' (Nand.)

51\. 'Earth,' i.e. the flesh and bone, &c.; 'water,' i.e. the blood;
'fire,' i. e. the digestive faculty, the eyesight, &c.; 'air,' i. e. the
five vital airs; 'ether,' i. e. the space enclosed by the airs, in the
mouth, in the belly, &c. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

58\. There are twenty nails.

59\. There are as many bones to the hands and feet (one at the root of
each finger and toe).

60\. There are sixty joints to the fingers and toes.

61\. There are two (bones) to the two heels.

62\. There are four to the ancles. {sic}

63\. There are four to the elbows.

64\. There are two to the shanks.

65\. There are two to the knees and two to the cheeks.

66\. (There are two) to the thighs and (two) to the shoulders.

67\. (There are two) to the lower part of the temples, (two) to the
palate, and (two) to the hips.

68\. There is one bone to the organs of generation.

69\. The backbone consists of forty-five (bones).

70\. The neck consists of fifteen (bones).

71\. The collar-bone consists of one (bone on each side).

72\. The jaw likewise.

73\. There are two (bones) at its root.

74\. There are two (bones) to the forehead, (two) to the eyes, and (two)
to the cheeks.,

75\. The nose has one bone, the nose-bone.

76\. The ribs together with the joints called 'arbuda,' and with the
joints called 'sthânaka,' consist of seventy-two (bones).

77\. The breast contains seventeen bones.

\[76. 'There are thirteen ribs to each flank, which makes in all
twenty-six ribs. There are twenty joints to them in the breast, called
"arbuda," and twenty-six joints in the back, called "sthânaka." which
makes a total of seventy-two bones.' (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

78\. There are two temporal bones.

79\. The head has four skull-bones. Thus (the bones have been
enumerated).

80\. There are in this human frame seven hundred tubular vessels
(carrying bile and phlegm through the body, or arteries).

81\. Of sinews, there are nine hundred.

82\. Of tubes (conducting the vital airs, or nerves), there are two
hundred.

83\. Of muscles, there are five hundred.

84\. Of tubular vessels (or arteries), the branches of the smaller
tubular vessels, there are twenty-nine Lakshas (two millions nine
hundred thousand) and nine hundred and fifty-six.

85\. Of hair-holes, of the hair of the beard and of the head, there are
three hundred thousand.

86\. Of sensitive parts of the body, there are one hundred and seven.

87\. Of joints, there are two hundred.

89\. Of (atoms of) hairs (of the body), there are fifty-four Ko*t*is (or
five hundred and forty millions) and sixty-seven Lakshas (making in all
five hundred and forty-six millions and seven hundred thousand).

89\. The navel, the principle of vital action (which dwells in the
heart), the anus, semen, blood, the temples, the head, the throat, and
the heart are the seats of the vital airs.

90\. The two arms, the two legs, the belly, and the bead are the six
limbs.

91\. Adeps, marrow, the left lung, the navel, the right lung, the liver,
the spleen, the small cavity of the heart, the kidneys, the bladder, the
rectum, the stomach, the heart, the large cavity (intestine), the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

anus, the belly, and the two bowels in it (are the inner parts of the
body).

92\. The pupils of the eye, the eyelashes<sup>\[1\]</sup>, the outer
parts of the cars, the ears themselves, the tragus of each ear, the
cheeks, the eyebrows, the temples, the gums, the lips, the cavities of
the loins, the two groins, the scrotum, the two kidneys and breasts of
females, which are composed of phlegm, the uvula, the hindparts, the
arms, the shanks, the thighs, the fleshy parts of the shanks and thighs,
the palate, the two bones (or muscles) at the upper end of the bladder,
the chin, the soft palate, and<sup>\[2\]</sup> the nape of the neck:
these are the 'places' (of vital energy) in the body.

93\. Sound, tangibility, form or colour, savour, and odour are the
(five) objects of sense.

94\. Nose, eye, skin, tongue, and ear are the (five) organs of
perception.

95\. Hands, feet, anus, parts of generation, and tongue are the (five)
organs of action.

96\. Mind, intellect, the individual Self, and the indiscrete' are 'that
which exceeds the senses.'

97\. This human frame, O Earth, is called 'field.' He who knows (how to
enter and how to leave) it is denominated, by those conversant with the

\[92. <sup>1</sup> Others interpret akshikû*t*e, 'the eyelashes,' by
'the joints between the eyes and the nose.' (Nand.) See also Böhtlingk's
new. Dictionary.--<sup>2</sup> The use of the particle *k*a implies,
according to Nand., that the feet, hands, and other limbs mentioned in
an analogous passage of Yâ*g*ñavalkya (III, 99) have also to be included
in this enumeration.

96\. <sup>1</sup> Nand. interprets avyaktam, 'the indiscrete,' by
pradhânam, 'the chief one.' Both terms are in the. Sâ<u>n</u>khya system
of philosophy synonyms of prak*ri*ti, 'that which evolves or produces
everything else.'\]

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

subject, 'the knower of the field' (i.e. Self or Soul).

98\. Know me, O illustrious one, to be the Self of all fields (whether
born from the womb, or arisen from an egg, or from sweat, or from a germ
or shoot). Those striving after final emancipation must constantly seek
to understand the 'field' and to obtain a knowledge of the knower of the
field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XCVII.](sbe07099.md)
