[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07049)  [Next](sbe07051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

# XLVIII.

1\. Now if a man feels his conscience charged with some guilty act (such
as performing a sacrifice for, or accepting a gift from, unworthy
persons, or eating excrements) committed by himself (or if his
conscience tells him that he has done more evil than good, or if he
thinks himself less pure than others), let him boil a handful of
barley-gruel for the sake of his own spiritual welfare.

2\. Let him not make the (customary) Vai*s*vadeva offering after that.

3\. Neither must he make the Bali offerings.

4\. Let him consecrate with Mantras the barley, before it has been put
to the fire, while it is being boiled, and after it has been boiled.

5\. Let him watch the barley, while it is being boiled (muttering at the
same time the following Mantra):

6\. 'Soma, who is the highest priest among priests (gods), leader among
the wise, *Ri*shi among bards, the falcon among rapacious birds, the
Svadhiti tree among trees, trickles murmuring through the
filter<sup>\[1\]</sup>.'

\[XLVIII. 1. Gaut. XIX, 13.

2, 3, Regarding the regular oblations which have to be offered at meal
times &c. to the Vi*s*vedevâs and to all beings (bhûtâni), see LIX, 22,
24; LXVIII, 1-22.

4\. The Mantras are given below, 17-22.

6\. <sup>1</sup> Rig-veda IX, 96, 6. Regarding the translation of this
verse, see Dr. Zimmer's remarks, Altindisches Leben, p. 207.\]

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

With these words he must fasten blades of Ku*s*a grass (round the neck
of the kettle).

7\. The pulse having been boiled, he must pour it into another vessel
and eat it.

8\. Let him help himself to it, while muttering the Mantra, 'The gods,
who have sprung up in the mind and satisfy the mind, who are gifted with
great energy, and whose father is Daksha, shall protect and help us. To
them be Nama*h* (adoration), to them be Svâhâ (hail).'

9\. Then, after having sipped water, let him seize the centre (of the
vessel) and mutter the Mantra:

10\. 'Be satisfied in our stomach, O ye waters, and ye barley-corns,
after having been bathed; they shall be salubrious to us, conferring
bliss, causing health, divine, causing immortality, and increasers of
*Ri*ta (truth and justice).'

11\. One desirous of wisdom (must perform this rite) for three days;

12\. A sinner, for six days.

13\. Any of the mortal sinners (killers of a Brâhma*n*a, stealers of
gold, and the rest) becomes purified by swallowing it for seven days.

14\. Swallowing it for twelve nights effaces even sins committed by an
ancestor;

15\. Swallowing it for a month, every sin (whether light or heavy, and
whether committed by himself or by an ancestor).

16\. And so does swallowing barley-corns dissolved in the excrements of
a cow for twenty-one days (efface every sin).

17\. 'Thou art barley, thou the king of grains,

\[8. Taittirîya Sa*m*hitâ I, 2, 3, 1. See also Vâ*g*asaneyi Sa*m*hitâ
IV, II, &c.\]

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

thou water mixed with honey; the *Ri*shis have proclaimed thee an
expeller of every kind of guilt and an instrument of purification.

18\. 'You are clarified butter and honey, O ye barley-corns; you are
water and ambrosia, O ye barley-corns. May you efface whatever sinful
acts I have committed:

19\. 'Sins committed by words, by acts, and by evil thoughts. Avert
distress and ill-fortune from me, O ye barley-corns.

20\. 'Purify food licked at by dogs or pigs, or defiled by leavings (of
food), and (purify me from the stain) of disobedience towards mother and
father, O ye barley-corns.

21\. 'Purify for me food given by a multitude of persons, the food of a
harlot, or of a Sûdra, food offered at a *S*râddha, food rendered impure
by the birth of a child in the house, the food of a thief, and food
offered at a Nava*s*râddha (or new *S*râddha, which takes place on the
first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh day after a person's
demise).

22\. 'Purify me, O ye barley-corns, from the sin of injuring a child or
of causing (a punishment) to be inflicted on some one by the king, from
theft of gold (or other high crimes), from the violation of a religious
duty, from performing a sacrifice for an unworthy person, and from
abusing a Brâhma*n*a.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIX.](sbe07051.md)
