[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07062)  [Next](sbe07064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

# LXI.

1\. A householder must not use<sup>\[1\]</sup> Palâ*s*a-wood for
cleaning his teeth.

2\. Nor (must he use the twigs of) the *S*leshmântaka

\[20, 'I. e. in an apartment on the roof or in any other such place.'
(Nand.)

LXI\. Âpast. I, 11, 32, 9; Gaut. IX, 44.

\[1. <sup>1</sup> Literally 'eat,' adyât. In 16 and 17 the synonymous
verbs bhaksh and a*s* are used. Nevertheless it can hardly be doubted
that both of the two modes of cleaning the teeth, which appear to have
been customary, are indicated in this chapter: the one consisting in
brushing them with little sticks or twigs provided with a brush (see
16), the other in chewing twigs. Unfortunately the reading of Nand.'s
gloss on the term sakûr*k*a in 16 is uncertain.

2\. Regarding the Vibhîtaka tree, see Dr. Bühler's Kashmir Report p.
8.\]

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

(or *S*elu) plant, nor of the soap plant, nor of the Vibhîtaka (or
Kalidruma) tree, nor of the Dhava plant, nor of the Dhâmani tree (for
that purpose).

3\. Nor (the twigs of) the Bandhûka (or Bandhu*g*îvaka) plant, nor of
the Nirgu*nd*î shrub, nor of the

Sigru, Tilva, and Tinduka trees.

4\. Nor (the twigs of) the Kovidâra (Yugapattraka) Samî, Pîlu
(Gu*d*aphala), Pippala (holy fig-tree), I<u>n</u>guda, or Guggula trees;

5\. Nor (the twigs of) the Pâribhâdraka (*S*akrapâdapa), or tamarind, or
Mo*k*aka, or Semul trees, nor those of the hemp plant;

6\. Nor sweet plants (such as liquorice sticks):

7\. Nor sour plants (such as Âmlikâs);

9\. Nor twigs that have withered on the stem;

9\. Nor perforated (or otherwise faulty) wood;

10\. Nor stinking wood;

11\. Nor smooth wood;

12\. He must not (use the sticks) facing the south or west.

13\. He must use them facing the north or east;

14\. He may use (the twigs of) the banyan or A*s*ana trees, or of the
Arka plant, or of the Khadira, or Karañ*g*a, or Badara (jujube), or
*S*al, or Nimb trees, or of the Arimeda, shrub, or of the Apâmârga or
Malatî plants, or of the Kakubha or Bèl trees;

15\. Or of the Kashâya tree, or of the Tikta or Ka*t*uka plants.

16\. Before sunrise let him silently clean his teeth with a stick, which
must be as thick as the top of the little finger, provided with one end
that may be chewed (or 'with a brush'), and twelve A<u>n</u>gulas long.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

17\. Having washed<sup>\[1\]</sup> and used the stick for cleaning the
teeth, he must take care to leave it in a clean place; he must never
make use of it on the day of new moon (or on the day of full moon).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXII.](sbe07064.md)
