[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07094)  [Next](sbe07096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

# XCIII.

1\. What is given to another than a Brâhma*n*a produces the same fruit
in the world to come.

2\. (What is given) to one who calls himself a Brâhma*n*a (because he
was born and initiated as such, but who does not perform his daily
duties) produces twice the same fruit.

3\. (What is given) to one who has studied the main portions of the Veda
produces a thousand times the same fruit.

\[XCIII. 1-4. M. VII, 85; Gaut. V, 20.--7. M. IV, 192.--8. M. IV,
195.--9-13. M. IV, 196-200.

1\. 'The term abrâhma*n*a (one not a Brâhma*n*a) refers to Kshatriyas
and the like. Kullûka on M. VII, 85. Dr. Bühler's rendering of Gautama
V, 20 agrees with this interpretation. Nand., on the other hand, refers
the term abrâhma*n*a to six kinds of Brâhma*n*as enumerated by
*S*âtâtapa, who have infringed the rule of their caste by taking their
substance from a king, or by selling or buying forbidden articles, or by
sacrificing for a multitude of persons, &c. The term 'the same fruit'
means that a person shall receive in a future world what he has given in
this. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

4\. (What is given) to one who has mastered the whole Veda, produces
infinite fruit.

5\. A domestic priest may claim gifts from his own employer (but from no
one else).

6\. And so may a sister, a daughter and sons-in-law (or other
connections claim gifts from their. brother, father, &c., but not from a
stranger).

7\. One who knows his duty must not give even water to a twice-born man
who acts like a cat, or to a Brâhma*n*a who acts like a crane, or to one
who has not studied the Veda.

8\. One who constantly hoists the flag of religion, and who is
avaricious, crafty, deceitful, pitiless, and a calumniator of everybody,
such a man is said to act like a cat.

9\. One who hangs his head, who is bent upon, injuring others and upon
his own gain, artful, and falsely demure, such a man is said to act
like, a crane.

10\. Those who act like cranes in this world, and those who act like
cats, fall into (the hell called) Andhatâmisra<sup>\[1\]</sup> on
account . of their wickedness.

11\. If a man has committed an offence and does penance for it, he must
not do so under pretext of performing an act of piety, covering his
crime under a (fictitious) vow, and imposing on women and *S*ûdras.

12\. A Brâhma*n*a who acts thus, is despised in the next life and in
this by those who know the Veda, and the penance performed by him under
such false pretence goes to the (demons called) Râkshasas.

\[10. <sup>1</sup> See XLIII, 3.\]

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

13\. One who gains his subsistence by wearing (a lock on the crown of
the head or other) distinguishing marks of a caste or religious order,
to which he does not belong, takes upon himself the (consequences of
the) sins committed by those who have a right to those marks, and enters
in a future birth the womb of an animal.

14\. He must not give (to a panegyrist) from vain-glory, or from fear,
or to a friend (from whom he hopes to obtain benefit), nor (must he
bestow gifts), with a view to acquire religious merit, upon dancers or
singers:, that is a fixed rule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XCIV.](sbe07096)
