[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe07059)  [Next](sbe07061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

# LVIII.

1\. The property of householders is of three kinds:

2\. White, mottled, and black.

3\. By those obsequies which a man performs with white property, he
causes (his departed ancestor) to be born again as a god.

4\. By performing them with mottled property, he causes him to be born
as a man.

5\. By performing them with black property, he causes him to be born as
an animal.

6\. What has been acquired by the mode of livelihood of their own caste,
by members of any caste, is called 'white.'

7\. What has been acquired by the mode of livelihood of the caste next
below in order to their own, is called 'mottled.'

8\. What has been acquired by the mode of livelihood of a caste by two
or more degrees lower than their own, is called 'black.'

9\. What has been inherited, friendly gifts, and

\[LVIII. 1, 2. Nârada 3, 46.--9-12. Nârada 3, 53, 47-49, 51.

1\. As the obligations of a householder, which will be discussed further
on (in LIX), cannot be fulfilled without a certain amount of wealth, he
discusses in the present chapter the origin of wealth. (Nand.)\]

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the dowry of a wife, that is called white property, for members of any
caste indiscriminately.

10\. What has been acquired as a bribe, as a fee (for crossing a river
and the like, or for a bride, &c.), or by the sale of forbidden articles
(such as lac, or salt), or as a return for a benefit conferred, is
denoted 'mottled wealth.'

11\. What has been acquired by servile attendance<sup>\[1\]</sup>, by
gambling, by thieving, by begging, by deceit (as if a man says that he
wants a present for another and takes it himself, or by forging gold or
other metals), by robbery, or by fraud (as if a man shows one thing to a
purchaser and delivers another to him instead), is called 'black
property.'

12\. Whatever a man may do (in this world) with anything (he has,
whether white, mottled, or black property) he will get his reward
accordingly; both in the next world and in this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIX.](sbe07061)
